INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the proceeding between

MR. TZA YAP SHUM
(Respondent)

REPUBLIC OF PERU
(Applicant)

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/6
(Annulment Proceeding)

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee

Judge Dominique Hascher (President)
Prof. Donald M. McRae
Prof. Kaj Hobér

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee

Ms. Luisa Fernanda Torres

Representing the Applicant Representing the Respondent
Mr. Stanimir Alexandrov Mr. Carlos Paitan
Ms. Marinn Carlson Estudio Paitan & Abogados
Sidley Austin LLP Lima, Peru
Washington, D.C.
USA

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 12 February 2015

IL.

Il.

<
eS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 3
A. The Ad Hoc Cc 4
B. The Stay of Enforcement 6
7
8
9

 

C. The First Session
D. The Parties’ Pleadings
E. The Hearing on Annul
FACTUAL BACKGROUND 12
DECISION ON JURISDICTION AND COMPETENCE OF 19 JUNE 2009............0. 14
A. The Parties' Submissions
a. The Applicant’s Submissions
b. The Respondent’s Submissions
B. The Committee's Analysis
a. Article 52(1)(B): Manifest Excess of Powers
b. Article 52(1)(E): Failure to State Reasons ...
c. Article 52(1)(D): Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure ..43
THE AWARD OF 7 JULY 2011
A. The Parties' Submissions
a. The Applicant’s Submissions
b. The Respondent’s Submissions
B. The Committee's Analysis
a. Article 52(1)(B): Manifest Excess of Powers
b. Article 52(1)( E): Failure to State Reasons ..
c. Article 52(1)(D): Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure ..81
COSTS 83

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. DECISION 84

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 3 November 2011, the Republic of Peru (or the “Applicant”) filed a timely
application for annulment of the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence rendered
on 19 June 2009 (‘the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence”), or, alternatively, of
the Award rendered on 7 July 2011 (‘the Award’) in ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/6 in
favor of Mr. Tza Yap Shum, a Chinese national, by an Arbitral Tribunal composed of
Mr. Judd L. Kessler (President), Professor Juan Fernandez Armesto and Mr. Hernando
Otero (Co-Arbitrators) (“the Application for Annulment”). The Application for
Annulment was filed in accordance with Article 52 of the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and National of Other States (“the
ICSID Convention”), and Rule 50 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (“the ICSID Arbitration Rules”).

The Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence of 19 June 2009 decided: (A) that the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) did have
jurisdiction and the Tribunal competence to try the expropriation dispute filed by Mr.
Tza Yap Shum under the Agreement Between the Government of the Republic of Peru
and the Government of the People’s Republic of China Concerning the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments of 9 June 1994 (“the Peru-
China BIT”); (B) to schedule the subsequent proceedings after hearing both Parties, in
accordance with Rule 41(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules; and (C) to postpone a

decision on costs and expenses to a later time of the proceedings.

The Award of 7 July 2011 decided: (1) to declare the existence of a measure
tantamount to expropriation breaching the terms of Article 4 of the Peru-China BIT,
taken by the Republic of Peru against Mr. Tza Yap Shum’s investment; (2) to order
the Republic of Peru to pay Mr. Tza Yap Shum the sum of US$ 786,306.24 as
compensation for the application of the measure tantamount to expropriation; (3) to
order the Republic of Peru to pay interest on the amount determined in the previous
part, accruing from 28 January 2005 until the date of effective payment, at the average
monthly rate published by the United States Federal Reserve for ten-year Treasury
Bonds compounded semi-annually, which as of the date of the Award amounted to

US$ 227,201.30; (4) to order that the amounts indicated in parts 2 and 3 be paid to an
3

account of Mr. Tza Yap Shum at his discretion, net of taxes or other charges; (5) to
order each party to bear its own costs and attorneys’ fees and that common expenses
incurred in connection with the arbitration be divided equally between the Parties; and

(6) to dismiss all other claims presented by the Parties.

4. The Application for Annulment is based on the grounds enumerated in Article
52(1)(b), (d) and (e) of the ICSID Convention, namely that the Arbitral Tribunal (i)
manifestly exceeded its powers, (ii) seriously departed from a fundamental rule of
procedure and (iii) failed to state reasons on which the Decision on Jurisdiction and
Competence or the Award are based. In the Application for Annulment, the Republic
of Peru requested annulment of the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence “in its

entirety” with the consequent annulment of the Award “in its entirety,” or in the
alternative, in the event that the Committee did not grant the annulment of the
Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, the Republic of Peru asked for independent
annulment of the Award in its entirety.!_ The Republic of Peru later made clear that it
was only seeking “partial annulment of the Decision on Jurisdiction with respect to
the Tribunal’s conclusion that all of Claimant’s expropriation claims were within the

scope of Article 8(3) of the BIT.”

5. On 9 November 2011, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application for
Annulment of the Award and, in accordance with Rule 50(2) of ICSID Arbitration
Rules, transmitted the Notice of Registration to the Parties. In the Notice of
Registration, the Secretary-General advised the Parties that the Chairman of the
ICSID Administrative Council would be asked to appoint the ad hoc Committee that

would consider the application.

A. THE AD Hoc COMMITTEE

6. On 11 January 2012, the Secretary-General of ICSID notified the Parties of the

constitution of the ad hoc Committee composed of Judge Dominique Hascher, a

 

' Republic of Peru’s ication for i GB 2011) [ ication for ]
paras. 3-5.

2 Reply on Annulment (2 November 2012) [hereinafter Reply], para. 85. The Republic of Peru explained it was
not challenging the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence “insofar as it held that the Claimant can be
considered an investor pursuant to the BIT, that he had an investment at the time the dispute arose, that he
made a sufficient prima facie case of expropriation, and that the MFN clause of Article 3(2) of the BIT cannot
be used to extend the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.” Id.,n. 177.

4

national of France, as President, Professor Donald M. McRae, a national of Canada
and New Zealand, and Professor David A.R. Williams, a national of New Zealand, as
Members. The Parties were also informed that Ms. Anneliese Fleckenstein, Counsel,

ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the ad hoc Committee.

On 8 November 2012, the Secretary of the Committee notified the Parties that
Professor Williams had informed the Secretary-General of ICSID of a potential
conflict of interest arising after Sidley Austin, the law firm representing the Republic
of Peru in this annulment proceeding, including Mr. Stanimir Alexandrov, was
retained to act as co-counsel with Professor Williams in another arbitration
proceeding. In his communication to the Secretary-General of ICSID, Professor
Williams offered to resign if either Party had any concerns about his situation. The
Parties were asked to submit any observations on Professor William’s disclosure by

14 November 2012.

On 10 November 2012, Mr. Tza Yap Shum requested an extension of the deadline to
provide observations on Mr. William’s disclosure. On 12 November 2012, the
Republic of Peru replied expressing confidence that Professor Williams would be able
to act impartially. On 14 November 2012, the Committee extended the deadline for
observations until 30 November 2012, at Mr. Tza Yap Shum’s request. On 26
November 2012, Mr. Tza Yap Shum expressed disagreement with Professor Williams’
continuing involvement in this annulment proceeding. In consequence, on 3
December 2012, Professor Williams resigned and the proceeding was suspended in

accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rules 10(2) and 53.

On 4 December 2012, the Secretary-General of ICSID informed the Parties that it
would proceed to recommend to the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council
the appointment of Professor Michael C. Pryles, a national of Australia. On 11
December 2012, the Parties were informed that Professor Pryles had accepted his
appointment and that the vacancy in the Committee was filled. The Committee was
thus reconstituted and the proceeding resumed on that same day, pursuant to ICSID

Arbitration Rules 12 and 53.

On 30 May 2013, Professor Michael Pryles tendered his resignation due to health

reasons, and the proceeding was suspended a second time in accordance with ICSID
5

Arbitration Rules 10(2) and 53.

On 5 June 2013, the Secretary-General of ICSID informed the Parties that it would
recommend to the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council the appointment of
Professor Kaj Hobér, a national of Sweden. On 10 June 2013, the ICSID Secretariat
informed the Parties that Professor Hobér had accepted his appointment, and that the
vacancy in the Committee was filled. The Committee was thus reconstituted and the

proceeding resumed on that same day, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rules 12 and 53.

On 15 January 2014, the Secretary-General of ICSID informed the ad hoc Committee
and the Parties that Ms. Luisa Fernanda Torres, Counsel, ICSID, had been appointed

to serve as Secretary to the ad hoc Committee.

B. THE STAY OF ENFORCEMENT

The Application for Annulment contained a request (paragraph 86), pursuant to
Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention, for a stay of enforcement of the Award
pending the ad hoc Committee’s decision on the Application for Annulment. In
accordance with Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, enforcement of the Award

was provisionally stayed on 9 November 2011 by the Secretary-General of ICSID.

On 20 March 2012, Mr. Tza Yap Shum requested the lifting of the provisional stay of
enforcement of the Award by the ad hoc Committee, or, in the alternative, an order
that the Republic of Peru issued a guaranty to ensure compliance with its monetary

obligation under the Award.

On 26 March 2012, the ICSID Secretariat informed the Parties that the ad hoc
Committee had decided to continue the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award
until it had given each Party an opportunity to present its observations, as envisaged
in Rule 54(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. In the same letter, the ad hoc
Committee also invited the Republic of Peru to submit its observations on Mr. Tza
Yap Shum’s application for the lifting of the provisional stay of enforcement of the
Award by 9 April 2012. The Parties were also informed that the Committee would
hear oral submissions on the stay of enforcement during the First Session of the

Committee scheduled for 21 April 2012.

6

On 9 April 2012, the Republic of Peru filed its reply to Mr. Tza Yap Shum’s request
for the lifting of the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award. The Republic of
Peru requested that the stay of the enforcement of the Award be continued during the
pendency of the annulment proceeding, without any conditions. This communication
was accompanied by a letter of the President of the Special Commission that
Represents the State in International Investment Disputes, Mr. Carlos José Valderrana
Bernal, addressed to the President of the ad hoc Committee, in which the Republic of
Peru committed itself unconditionally to make full payment of its pecuniary
obligation under the Award within 30 days from the notification of the Decision on
Annulment, in the event that the Award were not annulled. The communication of 9
April 2012 was also accompanied by a Memorandum of Law in support of the

Republic of Peru’s request for continuation of the stay of enforcement.

A hearing on the stay of enforcement of the Award was scheduled to take place in
Washington, DC on 21 April 2012. At the First Session on 21 April 2012, Mr. Tza
Yap Shum stated that it would no longer pursue the application to terminate the stay
of enforcement of the Award, in light of the letter sent by the Republic of Peru to the
President of the Committee on 9 April 2012. The Committee took note of Mr. Tza
Yap Shum’s statement in the Minutes of the First Session of the Committee. The
Committee also took note that the stay was to continue until it issued its decision on
the Application for Annulment. The Republic of Peru made an application for costs
and fees relating to the application for termination of the stay of enforcement. The
Committee decided to reserve the issue of costs regarding the application for

termination of the stay of enforcement until the end of the annulment proceeding.

On 25 April 2012, the Republic of Peru filed a written document to memorialize its
application for an award on costs and fees relating to the First Session. On 30 April
2012, Mr. Tza Yap Shum filed a reply. On 11 May 2012, the Parties were informed
that, in accordance with the Minutes of the First Session, the Committee would

consider the issue of costs at the end of the annulment proceeding.

Cc. THE FIRST SESSION

As required by Rules 13 and 53 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, and by agreement of

20.

21.

22.

the Parties, the First Session was held on Saturday, 21 April 2012, in Washington DC,
at the Park Hyatt Hotel, located at 1201 24" Street, NW Washington DC 20037, from
9:00 a.m. until 11:11 a.m. Participating in the session were:

Members of the ad hoc Committee:

Judge Dominique Hascher, President of the Committee

Prof. Donald McRae, Member
Prof. David Williams, Member (joined by video conference)

ICSID Secretariat
Ms. Anneliese Fleckenstein, Secretary of the Committee

Representing Mr. Tza Yap Shum:
Mr. Carlos Paitan Contreras, Estudio Paitan & Abogados
Mr. Christian Carbajal Valenzuela, Estudio Paitan & Abogados

Representing the Republic of Peru:

Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Sidley Austin LLP

Ms. Marinn Carlson, Sidley Austin LLP

Mr. Andrew C. Blandford, Sidley Austin LLP

Mr. Carlos José Valderrama Bernal, Ministry of Economy and Finance of Peru
Ms. Yesenia Cabezas, Counselor-Diplomatic Officer Embassy of Peru

Interpreters
Mr. Charles Roberts

Ms. Nancy Rocha

During the session, the Committee and the Parties discussed a number of procedural
matters, including the schedule for the written pleadings. The Parties confirmed their
agreement on certain procedural matters and made oral submissions on certain points

of disagreement.

On 23 April 2012 the President of the ad hoc Committee issued the Minutes of the
First Session of the ad hoc Committee recording the procedural rules that would

govern the Annulment Proceeding.

D. THE PARTIES’ PLEADINGS

In accordance with the agreed schedule for the written pleadings recorded in the
Minutes of the First Session, the Republic of Peru filed its Memorial on Annulment
on 29 June 2012, and Mr. Tza Yap Shum filed his Counter-Memorial on the Request
for Annulment on 7 September 2012. The Republic of Peru filed its Reply on

8

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

Annulment on 2 November 2012.

On 11 December 2012, Mr. Tza Yap Shum inquired whether the deadline to file its
Rejoinder on Annulment, due on 28 December 2012, was affected as a result of the
suspension of the proceeding between the resignation of Professor Williams and the
appointment of Professor Pryles. On that same day, the Republic of Peru opposed to
any extension, on the ground that the suspension had not impaired Mr. Tza Yap
Shum’s ability to prepare its Rejoinder. By letter of 12 December 2012, the ICSID
Secretariat communicated to the Parties that the ad hoc Committee had granted Mr.
Tza Yap Shum a six-day extension to file its Rejoinder on Annulment, in light of the
suspension of the proceeding resulting from the vacancy in the ad hoc Committee

created by Professor Williams’ resignation.

Mr. Tza Yap Shum filed his Rejoinder on Annulment on 3 January 2013.

E. THE HEARING ON ANNULMENT

The Hearing on Annulment was initially scheduled to take place in February 2013
(20-22 or 25-27 February 2013) at the seat of the Centre in Washington, DC. (See
point 16.1 of the Minutes of the First Session). On 31 May 2012, the Parties agreed

on a two-day hearing.

On 27 June 2012, prior consultation with the Parties, the ICSID Secretariat confirmed
that, due to the unavailability of one Committee Member, the Hearing on Annulment

was now scheduled for 14-15 February 2013.

On 12 December 2012, the ICSID Secretariat informed the Parties that, due to the
unavailability of one Committee Member, the Hearing on Annulment had to be
rescheduled. On 4 February 2013, following consultation with both Parties, the
ICSID Secretariat informed the Parties that the Hearing on Annulment was postponed

to 28-29 August 2013.

On 12 March 2013, following exchanges between the Parties, the ad hoc Committee

decided on the agenda for the Hearing on Annulment.

On 20 June 2013, as a result of the unavailability of one Committee Member, the

9

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

ICSID Secretariat informed the Parties that the Hearing on Annulment had to be

rescheduled to September 2013.

On 26 June 2013, the Parties wrote a joint letter informing of their unavailability on
the proposed new dates, and indicating they would only be available for a Hearing on

Annulment on 16-18 January 2014, 6-9 February 2014 or 19-23 March 2014.

By letter of 8 July 2013, the ICSID Secretariat informed the Parties that the Hearing

on Annulment was rescheduled to 17-18 January 2014.

On 22 November 2013, as a result of health concerns of one Committee Member, the
Parties jointly agreed to postpone the Hearing on Annulment to two days within the
window of 20-23 March 2014. Accordingly, on 16 January 2014, the ICSID
Secretariat confirmed to the Parties that the Hearing on Annulment would take place
on Friday, 21 March and Saturday 22 March 2014, at the seat of the Centre in
Washington, DC.

On 25 February 2014, the ICSID Secretariat reminded the Parties that, pursuant to the
ad hoc Committee’s decision of 12 March 2013, the agenda for the Hearing on
Annulment would be as follows:

Day 1

9:00-9:30  — Introductions

9:30 -12:30 —Respondent’s Opening (3 hours)

12:30 - 1:30 —Lunch

1:30-4:30 | —Claimant’s Opening (3 hours or less)
4:30 - 6:30 | — Expert Testimony of Prof. Reisman (1 hour per party)

Day 2

9:30-12:00  — Respondent’s Closing (2.5 hours)
12:00-1:00 = —Lunch

1:00-3:30 — Claimant’s Closing (2.5 hours or less)
3:30-5:30 — Questions from the Committee

The Parties were invited to provide any further observations regarding the agenda for

the Hearing on Annulment by 28 February 2014, and to inform the ad hoc Committee

whether a teleconference on the organization of the hearing would be necessary.

On 25 and 26 February 2014, the Parties confirmed their agreement to preserve the

established agenda for the Hearing on Annulment, and informed the Committee that

10

35.

36.

37.

there would be no need for a teleconference on the organization of the hearing.

On 12 March 2014, the Republic of Peru submitted three additional legal authorities
that it intended to use at the Hearing on Annulment, which had not yet been referred

to in the Parties’ written submissions.

The Hearing on Annulment was held at the World Bank Headquarters on Friday, 21
March — Saturday, 22 March 2014. Present at the Hearing were:

Members of the ad hoc Committee:

Judge Dominique Hascher, President of the Committee
Prof. Donald McRae, Member

Prof. Kaj Héber, Member

ICSID Secretariat
Ms. Luisa Fernanda Torres, Secretary of the Committee

Representing Mr. Tza Yap Shum:

Mr. Carlos Paitan Contreras, Estudio Paitan & Abogados

Mr. Christian Carbajal Valenzuela, Estudio Paitan & Abogados
Mr. José Salcedo, Estudio Paitén & Abogados

Representing the Republic of Peru:

Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Sidley Austin LLP

Ms. Marinn Carlson, Sidley Austin LLP

Mr. Andrew C. Blandford, Sidley Austin LLP

Mr. Gavin Cunningham, Sidley Austin LLP (support team)

Mr. Carlos José Valderrama Bernal, President of the Special Commission that
Represents the State in International Investment Disputes. Ministry of
Economy and Finance

Ms. Erika Lizardo, Embassy of the Republic of Peru in the United States

Experts
Professor Michael Reisman, McDougal Professor of International Law, Yale
Law School, expert on behalf of the Republic of Peru

Interpreters

Ms. Silvia Colla
Ms. Daniel Giglio
Ms. Judith Letendre

Court Reporters

Mr. Leandro Iezzi

Mr. Dionisio Rinaldi

Ms. Gail Inghram Verbano

Mr. Alexandrov and Ms. Carlson addressed the Committee on behalf of the Republic

11

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

of Peru. Mr. Paitan and Mr. Carvajal argued on behalf of Mr. Tza Yap Shum. The

hearing was recorded and a verbatim transcript was made and circulated to the Parties.

At the conclusion of the Hearing of Annulment, the President of the ad hoc
Committee indicated that the Parties would be notified of the Decision on Annulment

through the ICSID Secretariat.

On 9 April 2014, the Parties submitted joint corrections to the transcript of the

Hearing on Annulment.

On 14 April 2014, the ICSID Secretariat was informed that, as of 31 March 2014, Mr.

Christian Carbajal was no longer representing Mr. Tza Yap Shum in this proceeding.

The ad hoc Committee met to deliberate in Washington, D.C. on 23 March 2014 and

continued its deliberations thereafter by various means of communication.

On 23 December 2014, pursuant to Rule 28 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the ad
hoc Committee invited the Parties to submit their respective statements of costs by 9
January 2015. The Republic of Peru filed and Mr Tza Yap Shum filed their respective
statements on that date, and in response to questions from the ad hoc Committee, the

Republic of Peru filed a correction on 14 January 2015.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rules 38(1) and 53, the annulment proceeding

was declared closed on 15 January 2015.

II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The dispute between Mr. Tza Yap Shum, a Chinese national, and the Republic of Peru
arises from alleged violations of the Peru-China BIT that affected Mr. Tza Yap
Shum’s investment in TSG Pert S.A.C. (or “TSG”), a company incorporated in Peru
in 2001 which engaged in the manufacturing of food products derived from fish and

their exportation to Asian markets.

In 2004, the National Superintendence of Tax Administration (“SUNAT”) started to
conduct a series of actions that, according to Mr. Tza Yap Shum, destroyed the

commercial operations and the economic viability of TSG. SUNAT considered TSG

12

46.

47.

48.

49.

as an industrial company rather than as a service company operating as a financing
source for the Peruvian industrial fisheries, as claimed by Mr. Tza Yap Shum. As it
was claimed, the immediate cause of the impact on TSG was the illegal and arbitrary
attachment of the company’s accounts that prevented it from operating

uninterruptedly.

The audit of TSG conducted by SUNAT in 2004 resulted in the issuance in 2005 of 95
retroactive taxation decisions, resolutions and fines arising from breaches of the
income tax (“IT”) and general sales tax (“GST”) laws totaling approximately US$ 45
million. The administrative complaints made by TSG before SUNAT against these
decisions led to a reduction of TSG’s tax debt by 13,5%. On appeal, the Peruvian Tax
Court reduced TSG’s debt by 31,3%.

On 28 January 2005, SUNAT issued an Enforcement Resolution to freeze TSG’s bank
accounts up to the amount of S/. 3,535,791 and notified fifteen Peruvian banks of its
decision. On the same day, SUNAT also issued two other Enforcement Resolutions to
attach three vehicles and to freeze, in the form of withholdings by third parties, up to
S/. 8,000,000. These Enforcement Resolutions were notified to seven companies

which were customers of TSG.

The administrative complaint by TSG before SUNAT against these bank seizures was
rejected, and so was the appeal before the Peruvian Tax Court against the
administrative decision. While this appeal was pending, TSG applied for a

declaration of preventive bankruptcy in March 2005.

Under the circumstances described, on 29 September 2006, Mr. Tza Yap Shum
together with TSG submitted a Request for Arbitration against the Republic of Peru
before ICSID. The Request for Arbitration claimed that the following provisions of
the Peru-China BIT had been violated:

. “Obligation to accord investments fair and equitable treatment”;
. “Obligation to protect investments”;
. “Obligation to compensate in the event of adopting expropriatory or similar

measures”;

13

50.

51.

52.

4

. “Obligation to allow the transfer of capital and returns”.

On 12 February 2007, following TSG’s withdrawal from the Request in January 2007,
the Secretary-General of ICSID registered Mr. Tza Yap Shum’s Request for
Arbitration against the Republic of Peru. The Arbitral Tribunal was constituted on 1
October 2007, and it rendered its Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence on 19

June 2009 and its Award on 7 July 2011.

If. DECISION ON JURISDICTION AND COMPETENCE OF 19 JUNE 2009

A. THE PARTIES' SUBMISSIONS

a. The Applicant’s Submissions

i. Manifest Excess of Powers

The Republic of Peru first claims that the Arbitral Tribunal committed a manifest
excess of powers under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention by finding
jurisdiction. The Applicant contends that the Arbitral Tribunal disregarded the plain
meaning of the Peru-China BIT to assume jurisdiction over expropriation-related
claims beyond “the amount of compensation for expropriation” to which Article 8(3)

of the Peru-China BIT limits the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal.*

The Republic of Peru explains that the Arbitral Tribunal manifestly erred in

interpreting the arbitration clause of Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT by:

. “ignoring the plain meaning of the text to assume jurisdiction over claims

beyond ‘the amount of compensation for expropriation’;

. noting, but then disregarding, the unrebutted testimony of the Chinese and
Peruvian negotiators of the [Peru-China] BIT, both of whom agreed that the
Contracting Parties intended to limit ICSID jurisdiction to disputes about the

‘amount of compensation’;

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 31.
Respondent’s Memorial on Annulment (29 June 2012) {hereinafter Memorial], para. 162.

14

53.

5
6

. considering, but then disregarding, China’s notification to ICSID
(contemporaneous with its negotiations of the [Peru-China] BIT) that

confirmed the narrow scope of its consent to jurisdiction;

. misrepresenting the jurisprudence that it claimed supported its interpretation

of the term ‘the amount of compensation’; and

. basing its interpretation of the arbitration clause not on the arguments
developed by the parties, but rather on its own undeveloped theories that the
parties had no opportunity to address -e.g., the Tribunal’s sua sponte
contextual analysis of the [Peru-China] BIT’s fork-in-the-road provision,
which was (mis)represented so broadly that it necessarily would have barred
this very dispute (had the Tribunal applied its own logic to the case before

ins

According to the Republic of Peru, each of these errors is manifest, and taken
together, they constitute an “unmistakable case of manifest excess of powers because
the [Arbitral] Tribunal founded its jurisdiction on multiple patent errors and

misrepresentations.”®

ii. Failure to State Reasons

Second, the Republic of Peru argues that, under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention, in the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence the Arbitral Tribunal
fails to state reasons with respect to the ordinary meaning of Article 8(3) of the Peru-
China BIT for:
. “why it sua sponte decided to focus solely on a single treaty term -
‘involving’- and largely ignored ‘the amount of compensation’;
. why it ignored other possible definitions for ‘involving,’ and seized on only
one possible definition, ‘to include’;
. why it construed ‘including’ as ‘including but not limited to’; and
Reply, para. 2.
Reply, para. 2.

. why only expropriation claims — and not, for example, fair and equitable
treatment claims — would be included in disputes ‘including but not limited to’

the amount of compensation for expropriation.””

54. The Republic of Peru adds that, with respect to the context of Article 8(3), the Arbitral

Tribunal failed to state reasons for:

. “why it sua sponte decided to focus on the fork-in-the-road provision when
neither party had argued that the provision was relevant to the interpretation of

the arbitration clause;

. why it interpreted the term ‘dispute’ so broadly that the fork-in-the-road
provision would have barred even Claimant’s [Mr. Tza Yap Shum’s] claims
here (if the Tribunal had considered the question) — constituting a clear

contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning;

. why it did not consider the standard jurisprudence applying a fork-in-the-road
provision to bar only an identical dispute in which the parties and claims are

the same; and

. why it presumed that all disputes about compensation for expropriation
necessarily involve a judicial determination of whether or not expropriation
has taken place - failing to consider at all situations where, for example, an
expropriation might arise from Peru’s Expropriation Act, which Claimant [Mr.

Tza Yap Shum] had quoted in its written submission.”*

55. The Republic of Peru further contends that the Arbitral Tribunal failed to state reasons

with respect to the Peru-China BIT’s object and purpose for:

. “taking a policy-based approach to override the plain meaning of Article
83)"
. “erecting a presumption that the arbitration clause in particular, had the sole

Reply, para. 95.
Reply, para. 96.
Reply, para. 97.

8
9

56.

57.

objective to benefit investors”,'? or put another way, for the Tribunal’s

“skepticism about whether such a [limited dispute settlement] mechanism

could possibly help to attract foreign investors”,!! and

. “ignoring the absurd result that either all early Chinese BITs have essentially
no object and purpose or the arbitration provision in all of them must be read

broadly regardless of the plain meaning of their texts.”!”

The Republic of Peru further argues that, while the Arbitral Tribunal invoked Article
32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (“WCLT”) and looked at the
circumstances of the Peru-China BIT’s negotiations, it failed to state reasons with

respect to the circumstances of the Peru-China BIT’s negotiations for:

. “why it ignored all of the unrebutted evidence regarding the Contracting
Parties’ intentions, as provided by the Chinese and Peruvian negotiators’

identical accounts of their communications and shared intention;

. contradicting itself by first emphasizing the importance of engaging the

travaux and then ignoring the clear outcome of that inquiry; and

. why it refused to examine the significance of China’s 1993 notification under
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, which was the basis for the Tribunal’s

own jurisdiction in this ICSID case.”'?

The Applicant also contends that, with respect to its “interpretation of Article 8 on the
basis of other decisions and arbitral awards”, the Arbitral Tribunal failed to state

reasons for:

. “rejecting prior decisions cited by Peru due to lack of travaux, even while
disregarding the clear and unrebutted evidence submitted to it regarding the

travaux of the China-Peru BIT;

. misrepresenting three inapt decisions as supporting its interpretation of Article

Reply, para. 97.
Reply, para. 19 (quoting Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence para. 153).
Reply, para. 97.
Reply, para. 98.
17

58.

59.

60.

1”

8(3); and

. why it considered European Media Ventures to be persuasive when, in fact, the
English High Court’s focus on the preparatory work and the term ‘amount’

favors Respondent.” !+

iii. | Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

Third, the Republic of Peru claims that, under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention, the Arbitral Tribunal committed a serious breach of a fundamental rule of

procedure by assuming jurisdiction where jurisdiction was lacking. !°

The Applicant also contends that the Arbitral Tribunal committed a serious breach of a
fundamental rule of procedure by deciding in the face of extensive evidence to the
contrary that had not been rebutted by the opposing party, and doing so without giving
any appropriate explanation.'° The Republic of Peru also alleges that the failure of
the Arbitral Tribunal to state reasons for its Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence
constitutes a serious breach of the fundamental rule of procedure that a tribunal must

address the material questions presented by the parties. '7

The Republic of Peru further alleges that it was denied the opportunity to express its
views regarding two distinct issues that the Arbitral Tribunal considered critical, but
which neither party raised in their written submissions or during the hearing.

According to the Applicant:

. “First, the Tribunal formulated its broad interpretation of the term ‘involving’
in a sua sponte manner, as Claimant [Mr. Tza Yap Shum] did not advocate

such an interpretation. Instead, Claimant [Mr.Tza Yap Shum] had conceded

Reply, para. 99.
Reply, para. 101. The word “fundamental” / “fondamentale” present in the English and French texts of
Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention does not appear in the Spanish text of said provision. The
Committee notes, however, that both Parties have used the word “fundamental” in their pleadings, and
neither Party has raised this as an issue with the Committee. See Memorial, §$IV(C), V(B)(3) and VI(B)(3)
(English); Counter-Memorial, §§II(D) and II(C) (Spanish and English); Reply §1(B)(3) and II(B)(3)
(English); Rejoinder §§1(C) and IV(C) (English). In light of the Parties’ conduct and considering the use of
the word “fundamental” in both the English and French texts of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention,
the Committee will use it in its discussion of this ground for annulment in both the English and Spanish
language texts of its Decision on Annulment.

Reply, para. 102.

Reply, para. 103.

 

61.

62.

that, in Article 8 as read literally, Peru consented only to jurisdiction over

disputes about the amount of compensation for expropriation.

e Second, the Tribunal decided sua sponte that the BIT’s fork-in-the-road
provision required a broad interpretation of the arbitration clause, because
(according to the Tribunal), it necessarily barred all ICSID arbitration after any
related litigation occurred in domestic court. Had Peru been given the
opportunity to address this issue, it would have pointed out the numerous
flaws in the Tribunal’s haphazard interpretation of the fork-in-the-road

provision.” !®

The Republic of Peru concludes that the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence
must be annulled “insofar as it held that the dispute with respect to the existence of an
expropriation was within the scope of Article 8(3) of the BIT.”'° The Republic of
Peru asks the Committee to require Mr. Tza Yap Shum to “bear all costs and fees,

including attorney fees, associated with this annulment proceeding.””°

b. The Respondent’s Submissions

i. No Manifest Excess of Powers

Mr. Tza Yap Shum stresses that the scope of review of an annulment committee does
not entitle it to re-examine the conclusions reached by the Tribunal in light of the
tules of interpretation in the VCLT, nor should an ad hoc committee impose its own

assessment of the evidence.”!

He argues that the sequence of interpretation followed
by the Tribunal observed the order required by the VCLT and included all relevant
factors. For Mr. Tza Yap Shum, the Arbitral Tribunal interpreted Article 8(3) of the
Peru-China BIT according to the methodology established in the VCLT, finding the
ordinary meaning of the term “involving the amount of compensation for
expropriation”, examining the context, object and purpose of the Peru-China BIT, and

confirming the interpretation adopted by supplementary means such as: (i) China’s

Reply, para. 104.

Memorial, para. 260. See also, Reply, para. 181.

Memorial, para. 260.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on the Request for Annulment (7 September 2012) [hereinafter Counter
Memorial], para. 63-64. See also, Claimant’s Rejoinder on Annulment (3 January 2013) [hereinafter
Rejoinder], para. 20.

19

63.

64.

65.

66.

2
23
a4
25

notification to ICSID when it submitted the ratification instruments on 7 January
1993, (ii) the evidence on the preparatory work and the circumstances under which
the final Peru-China BIT was drafted contained in the witnesses statements of Mr.
Fan and Ms. Vega, (iii) the investment treaties signed by China before the Peru-China
BIT and (iv) the declaration of Professor Chen, the Republic of Peru’s Chinese legal

expert.”

Mr. Tza Yap Shum further contends that the Tribunal also responded to the Republic

of Peru’s arguments on the interpretation of Article 8(3).7°

He argues that “the
interpretation by the Tribunal is valid and reasonable, is supported by appropriate
grounds, and [...] cannot be regarded as an error of interpretation of the law on the
Treaty, and certainly not a manifest error that would warrant the annulment of the

Decision on Jurisdiction.”*4

ii. No Failure to State Reasons

Mr. Tza Yap Shum contends that the Tribunal did state the reasons for its Decision on

Jurisdiction and Competence.

On the sua sponte approach to the term “involving”, Mr. Tza Yap Shum says that,
faced with conflicting interpretations from the Parties in relation to the meaning of
“involving the amount of compensation”, it was fair for the Tribunal to exercise its
competence to review the Treaty. Mr. Tza Yap Shum stresses that an ad hoc
committee is not entitled to examine whether a tribunal should have chosen one
possible meaning over others or to conduct a re-examination of the possible meanings
of an ambiguous term of the Treaty, as doing so would involve revising the merits
which have been decided by the tribunal. He adds that an interpretation of Article
8(3) of the Peru-China BIT as that made by the Tribunal is a valid option in
accordance with international case law, and allows the reader to understand the

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence.”>

On the sua sponte approach to the fork-in-the-road provision that, according to the

Counter Memorial, paras. 43-48, 55-58. See also id., 63-64, 79, 141-145.
Counter Memorial, paras. 49-54.
Rejoinder, para. 21.
Counter-Memorial, paras. 67, 70-71; Rejoinder, paras. 38-43.

20

67.

68.

Applicant, had not been subject to discussion between the Parties, Mr. Tza Yap Shum
remarks that: (i) although the term was not expressly referred to by the Parties, it was
the Republic of Peru and its expert, Prof. Chen, who raised the issue before the
Tribunal and (ii) its concept, scope and consequences were subject to debate between

the Parties during the arbitration process.”°

In respect of the Republic of Peru’s allegation that the Decision on Jurisdiction and
Competence was contradictory because the broad interpretation of the term
“involving” adopted by the Tribunal would have allowed inclusion of disputes
concerning the fair and equitable treatment standard for which the Tribunal had
declined jurisdiction, Mr. Tza Yap Shum notes that as “it is evident from a simple
reading of Article 8 (3), the standard applies specifically to the case of expropriation,

27 and adds that the Decision on Jurisdiction

and not to other protection standards
and Competence details at paragraph 152 “the other assumptions related to
expropriation claims on which the Tribunal would have jurisdiction,” such as “illegal
expropriation, the [existence of] public interest as [a] basis for expropriation, the
non-existence of discrimination, and the payment of compensation for
expropriation.”?8

In respect of the alleged disregard of evidence presented by the Applicant relating to
the preparatory work for the negotiation of the Peru-China BIT and the witness
statements of the negotiators, Mr. Tza Yap Shum underlines that the Tribunal noted
that the travaux préparatoires and the witness statements were not conclusive
evidence that Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT limited jurisdiction to claims for
compensation for expropriation, and argues that the Tribunal’s conclusion is a valid
and reasonable conclusion adopted in full exercise of its autonomy to give probative
value to the evidence produced by the Parties.?? Further, for Mr. Tza Yap Shum, the
Arbitral Tribunal’s examination of China’s notification pursuant to Article 25(4) of the
ICSID Convention in the exercise of its autonomy to assess evidence is also fully

reasonable and properly grounded.”°

Counter-Memorial, paras. 77-78; Rejoinder, paras. 45-47.
Counter-Memorial, para. 73.

Counter-Memorial, para. 74.

Counter-Memorial, paras. 81-82; Rejoinder, paras. 60-65.
Rejoinder, paras. 68-73.

21

69.

70.

31
32
3

Concerning the Applicant’s contention that the Decision on Jurisdiction and
Competence relied on inapt awards, Mr. Tza Yap Shum points out that “the different
interpretation of arbitration case law is [also] subject to the autonomy the Tribunal
enjoys to assess the various evidence submitted by the parties; [and] therefore it does

not constitute grounds for annulment.”*!

In any case, the Respondent points out that
each of the decisions relied upon by the Republic of Peru in its submissions on
annulment (RosInvest, Berschader and Austrian Airlines) deals with jurisdiction
clauses which differ in an evident and essential manner from Article 8(3) of the Peru-
China BIT. For Mr. Tza Yap Shum, the interpretation of other arbitration case law by

the Arbitral Tribunal supports the broad interpretation of Article 8(3).*?

All in all, Mr. Tza Yap Shum asserts that:3?

a. “The Tribunal did state the reasons for [its] interpretation of the terms ‘involving’
and the derived concept ‘involving but not limited to’, as had been discussed by

the parties during the arbitration process;

b. The Tribunal did state the reasons for why [it] chose a broad meaning of the term
‘involving’ in accordance with a contextual and teleological interpretation of the

BIT;

c. The Tribunal did state the reasons [for] why [it] is competent only for disputes
concerning expropriation and not for other disputes, such as those concerning fair

and equitable treatment;

d. The Tribunal did state the reasons for [its] interpretation of the ‘fork-in-the-road’
clause contained in Article 8(3) of the BIT and its relation to the arguments of

both parties;

e. The Tribunal did conduct a valid interpretation of Article 8(3) of the BIT, without
overlooking an alleged ‘plain meaning’ of this article [...], because the term

‘involving’ was ambiguous and needed to be interpreted by the Tribunal;

f. The Tribunal did not rely on an alleged presumption that arbitration, and the

Counter-Memorial, para. 87. See also, Rejoinder, para. 74.
Rejoinder, paras. 80-83.
Rejoinder, para. 90.

22

71.

arbitration clause in particular, only benefits the investor; since it favors the

promotion of investments in general, it benefits both investors and States;

The Tribunal stated the reasons why the various clauses in other China’s BITs
may be interpreted differently, namely, because they contain a very different

wording from that contained in the BIT Peru-China;

The Tribunal did not overlook the travaux préparatoires or the witness
statements deposed by the negotiators of the BIT; in fact, they were discussed at
length. They just did not persuade the Tribunal to adopt [the Republic of Peru’s]
restrictive interpretation, and the Tribunal did state the reasons for such

disagreement;

The Tribunal did not overlook China’s notification to ICSID in 1993, but the
Tribunal only held, pursuant to the ICSID Convention, that such act did not
condition the consent and had no direct legal consequences on the BIT signed

eventually, and adequately stated the reasons;

Having stated that arbitral case law is not binding, the Tribunal interpreted
properly the arbitration case law cited by the parties, as well as that brought by
the Tribunal, and assessed them as [it] deemed appropriate and the conclusions
reached had adequate grounds, wherewith [the Republic of Peru] just did not

agree.”

iii. | No Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

Mr. Tza Yap Shum finally takes the view that in the Decision on Jurisdiction and
Competence the Tribunal did not seriously depart from any fundamental rule of
procedure. He argues that interpretation of the term “involving” to mean “including
but not limited to” may not be dissociated from the Parties’ arguments during the
hearing. He adds that the reference by the Tribunal to the fork-in-the-road matter was
made for explanatory and supplementary purposes in light of all the circumstances of
the case and although an explicit reference to the fork-in-the-road issue was not

formally mentioned, the subject was fully elaborated on by the Parties during the

23

debates.*+ He finally notes that the Republic of Peru’s allegation that there is a breach
of a fundamental rule of procedure as a direct consequence of a its challenge under
the other grounds for annulment (manifest excess of power and failure to state

reasons) fails because those other grounds have not been established either.*>
B. THE COMMITTEE'S ANALYSIS

a. Article 52(1)(B): Manifest Excess of Powers

72. The challenge to the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence hinges upon the
interpretation by the Arbitral Tribunal of the dispute settlement clause at Article 8 of

the Peru-China BIT, which reads in pertinent part:

“7. Any dispute between an investor of one Contracting Party and
the other Contracting Party in connection with an investment in the
territory of the other Contracting Party shall, as far as possible, be
settled amicably through negotiations between the parties to the
dispute.

2. If the dispute cannot be settled through negotiations within six
months, either party to the dispute shall be entitled to submit the
dispute to the competent court of the Contracting Party accepting
the investment.

3. If a dispute involving the amount of compensation for
expropriation cannot be settled within six months after resort to
negotiations as specified in Paragraph I of this Article, it may be
submitted at the request of either party to the international
arbitration of the International Center for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID), established by the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States,
signed in Washington D.C. on March 18, 1965. Any disputes
concerning other matters between an investor of either Contracting
Party and the other Contracting Party may be submitted to the
Center if the parties to the dispute so agree. The provisions of this
Paragraph shall not apply if the investor concerned has resorted to
the procedure specified in Paragraph 2 of this Article.

4 Counter-Memorial, paras. 93, 96-97.
38 Rejoinder, paras. 92-93.
24

723.

74.

4. [7

The Republic of Peru essentially challenges the Decision on Jurisdiction and
Competence for manifest excess of powers on the ground that the Arbitral Tribunal
disregarded the plain meaning of the Peru-China BIT to assume jurisdiction for
expropriation-related claims beyond “the amount of compensation for expropriation”
set out in the arbitration provision of Article 8(3) of the BIT.*” The Republic of Peru
argues that the terms of its offer to arbitrate in Article 8 are clear and unambiguous.
As a result, only disputes about the amount of compensation owed to an investor after

a finding of wrongful expropriation can be submitted to ICSID arbitration.**

The Republic of Peru challenged the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal precisely
because the dispute with Mr. Tza Yap Shum over the principle of indirect
expropriation required an additional expression of consent which the Republic of Peru

did not give.*? This notwithstanding, the Arbitral Tribunal found the ordinary

meaning of the arbitration clause to be ambiguous and interpreted the words “a

dispute involving the amount of compensation for expropriation” in the first sentence
of Article 8(3) as granting it jurisdiction over a dispute including, but not limited to,

the amount of compensation for expropriation. The Arbitral Tribunal held:

“Firstly, the Tribunal refers to the specific words used by the third
paragraph of Article 8. The BIT uses the word ‘involucra’, which
according to the definition given by the Dictionary of the Real
Academia Espanola, means ‘abarcar, incluir, comprender’. A good
faith interpretation of this term indicates that the only requirement in
the BIT is that the dispute should ‘include’ the determination of an
amount of compensation and not that the dispute should be restricted
to this element. Obviously, other formulations were available such
as: ‘limited to’ or ‘exclusively’, but the wording used in this
provision says ‘involving’”*®

According to the Republic of Peru, the Arbitral Tribunal rendered meaningless the

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Peru and the Government of the People’s Republic
of China Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment, signed 9 June 1994,
entered into force | February 1995 [hereinafter Peru-China BIT], Art. 8 (Exh. RA-004).

Memorial, para. 162.

See Memorial, paras. 89-120. See also, Republic of Peru’s Post-Hearing Submissions on Objections to
Jurisdiction (18 November 2008), paras. 81-85.

Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Admissibility (28 March 2008), paras. 105-145, cited at Decision
on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 129.

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 151.

25

limiting words “amount of compensation for expropriation” in the arbitration clause.
It also rendered meaningless the second sentence of Article 8(3) according to which
arbitration for “fa]ny disputes concerning other matters” requires the consent of the
parties to the dispute, because in the Arbitral Tribunal’s interpretation, such “other
matters” would already be within the Arbitral Tribunal’s automatic jurisdiction so

long as it was presented alongside an expropriation claim.*!

The Republic of Peru’s allegations that the Arbitral Tribunal decided sua sponte on
the interpretation of Article 8(3) on the basis of theories that the Parties had no
opportunity to address will be dealt with in the section below on the serious departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure. In the context of Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention, the Committee is only concerned with the Republic of Peru’s arguments
that the analysis of the Arbitral Tribunal discarded the Contracting Parties’ mutually

agreed text and altered in this manner the legal regime of the Peru-China BIT.*?

The Committee agrees with the Republic of Peru that, because jurisdiction of an
arbitral tribunal rests on the parties’ consent, ignoring the terms of the parties’
agreement as expressed in the arbitration clause constitutes an excess of powers.
More generally, an excess of powers occurs every time the powers exercised by the
arbitrators are not those which have been granted to them. It follows that an arbitral
tribunal usurps its powers whenever it attributes to the parties agreements and

declarations which they have not made.

The Republic of Peru points out that “/cJertain types of egregious errors made by a
tribunal with respect to the scope of its jurisdiction may, if the facts warrant it, be

characterized as a ground of annulment.”®

At the hearing, the standards of
annulment were discussed at the Republic of Peru’s initiative. Its Expert-Witness,
Professor Reisman, was examined and cross-examined by the Parties, and questioned

by Members of the Committee.**

The Committee notes that the text of Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention makes

Reply, para. 15.
Memorial, para. 87.

Memorial, para. 161 (citing W. Michael Reisman, Opinion on Annulment on the Grounds of Excés de
Pouvoir and Failure to States Reasons of the Decision on Jurisdiction (27 June 2012) [hereinafter Reisman
Opinion] (Exh. RA-001), para. 15).

Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 208:19 — 287:14.

26

no distinction between decisions of the arbitral tribunal on competence or substance.*>
This has also been recognized with consistency by decisions of other ad hoc

committees.

79. In Soufraki v. UAE, the ad hoc Committee held that it saw

“no reason why the rule that an excess of power must be manifest in
order to be annullable should be disregarded when the question
under discussion is a jurisdictional one. Article 52(1)(b) of the
Convention does not distinguish between findings on jurisdiction and
findings on the merits [...]. It follows that the requirement that an
excess of power must be ‘manifest’ applies equally if the question is
one of jurisdiction. A jurisdictional error is not a separate category
of excess of power. Only if an ICSID tribunal commits an excess of
power, whether on a matter related to jurisdiction or to the merits, is
there a basis for annulment.” ©

In Lucchetti v. Peru, the ad hoc Committee observed that:

“[...] the requirement in Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention is
not only that the Tribunal has exceeded its powers but that it has
done so ‘manifestly’. From the writings of legal scholars it appears
that there are divergent views on the impact of this additional
requirement of ‘manifestness’. On the one hand, the view has been
expressed that where an ad hoc committee finds that a tribunal has
wrongly either exercised or failed to exercise jurisdiction, the award
should be annulled, wholly or partly, without any further
examination of whether the excess was manifest. On the other hand,
it has been held by others that there should be no annulment when
the tribunal has wrongly assumed, or failed to assume, jurisdiction,
but its decision on this point was tenable, since in such a case the
tribunal would not have manifestly acted contrary to the BIT.

The Ad hoc Committee, for its part, attaches weight to the fact that
the wording of Article 52(1)(b) is general and makes no exception
for issues of jurisdiction. Moreover, a request for annulment is not an
appeal, which means that there should not be a full review of the
tribunal's award. One general purpose of Article 52, including its
sub-paragraph (1)(b), must be that annulment should not occur
easily. From this perspective, the Committee considers that the word
‘manifest’ should be given considerable weight also when matters of

45 See also, Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 269: 3-11 (Reisman examination).
46 Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. The United Arab Emirates, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision on Annulment
(5 June 2007) [hereinafter Soufraki v. UAE], paras 118-119 (Exh, RA-LA-041).
27

80.

81.

jurisdiction are concerned.”*"

Deference to the legal and factual findings of an arbitral tribunal is the same for any
decision. It follows that the standards of the review are the same for competence as
those which ad hoc committees apply when they review any other matters decided by

an arbitral tribunal.**

The Committee recognizes that there would not be a binding award in the meaning of
Article 53 of the ICSID Convention if an award could be annulled because the arbitral
tribunal misinterpreted the language of the treaty. As one ad hoc Committee
remarked, “[t]/reaty interpretation is not an exact science, and it is frequently the case
that there is more than one } ible inter ion of a disputed provision,

even several.”*? In the view of the Committee, misinterpretation of the arbitration
clause does not amount to a manifest excess of powers. Interpretation, as it has been

said, leaves room for discussion:

“When a tribunal engages in interpretation of a written instrument
of consent in light of the surrounding circumstances or in the context
of other documents, its final construction of the meaning of the
document in the light of all the evidence and submissions of the
parties is unlikely to amount to a manifest excess of powers.
Interpretation, which leaves room for discussion [...], is not likely to
give rise to a manifest excess of powers.”*°

Among the annulment cases which have been cited by the Parties in their respective

submissions, the Committee identifies the decision of the Kléckner v. Cameroon I

Committee which early on underlined that:

“since the answers seem tenable and not arbitrary, they do not
constitute the manifest excess of powers which alone would justify
annulment under Article 52(1)(b).””>!

Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Peru, S.A. (formerly Empresas Lucchetti, S.A. and
Lucchetti Peru, S.A.) v. Republic of Peru, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/4, Decision on Annulment (5 September
2007) [hereinafter Lucchetti v. Peru], paras. 100-101 (Exh. RA-LA-045).

M.C.1. Power Group L.C. and New Turbine Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/6,
Decision on Annulment (19 October 2009) [hereinafter MCT v. Ecuador], para. 55 (Exh. CA-LA-2.14)
Lucchetti v. Peru, para, 112 (Exh, RA-LA-045).

Duke Energy International Peru Invesments No. 1 Limited v. Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/28,
Decision on Annulment (1 March 2011) [hereinafter Duke v. Peru], para. 160 (Exh. CA-LA-2.4).

Klockner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others v. United Republic of Cameroon and Société Camerounaise

28

The CDC v. Seychelles Committee confirmed that:

“Any excess apparent in a Tribunal’s conduct, if susceptible of
argument ‘one way or the other,’ is not manifest.”>

And the Lucchetti v. Peru Committee stressed that an ad hoc committee should not

substitute its own decision for that of the arbitral tribunal:

“[...] The interpretation [...] adopted by the Tribunal is clearly a
tenable one. Clearly also there are other tenable interpretations. The
Committee is not charged with the task of determining whether one
interpretation is ‘better’ than another, or indeed which among
several interpretations might be considered the ‘best’ one [...]”>*

In a similar vein, the Duke v. Peru Committee expressed that:

“An ad hoc committee will not therefore annul an award if the
tribunal’s disposition on a question of law is tenable, even if the
committee considers that it is incorrect as a matter of law. The
existence of a manifest excess of powers can only be assessed by an
ad hoc committee in consideration of the factual and legal elements
upon which the arbitral tribunal founded its decision and/or award
based on the parties’ submissions. Without reopening the debates on
questions of fact, a committee can take into account the facts of the
case as they were in the record before the tribunal to check whether
it could come to its solution, however debatable. Is the opinion of
the tribunal so untenable that it cannot be supported by legal
arguments? A debatable solution is not amenable to annulment,
since the excess of powers would not then be ‘manifest.’”™4

The Fraport v. Philippines Committee was also:

“convinced that the jurisprudence of ICSID ad hoc Committees on
the ‘tenable’ standard for review on issues of jurisdiction is to be
interpreted to like effect.”*°

 

des Engrais, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2, Decision on Annulment (3 May 1985) [hereinafter Kléckner v.
Cameroon I], para. 52(e) (Exh. RA-LA-055).
CDC Group ple v. Republic of the Seychelles, CSID Case No. ARB/02/14, Decision on Annulment (29 June
2005) [hereinafter CDC v. Seychelles], para. 41 (Exh. CA-LA-2.2).
Lucchetti v. Peru, para.112 (Exh, RA-LA-045).
Duke v. Peru, para. 99 (Exh, CA-LA-2.4).
Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/25, Decision on Annulment (23 December 2010) [hereinafter Fraport v. Philippines], para. 44 (Exh.
CA-LA-2.8).

29

The existence of a clear and unambiguous textual meaning must be evident, in
compliance with the standards adopted by decisions of ad hoc committees for
manifest excess of powers. As remarked, “manifest” does not refer to the gravity of
the excess but to the clarity with which the excess of powers can be ascertained. The
Committee in Soufraki v. UAE held that “a manifest excess of power implies that the
excess of power should at once be textually obvious and substantively serious.”*° The
prevailing practice of ad hoc committees is explicit as appears from the decisions
which the Parties have brought forward in support of their argumentation. In Wena v.

Egypt, the ad hoc Committee ruled that:

“[t]he excess of powers must be self-evident rather than the product
of elaborate interpretations one way or the other. When the latter
happens the excess of powers is no longer manifest.”*"

In CDC v. Seychelles, the ad hoc Committee similarly reminds us that:

“the term ‘manifest’ means clear or ‘self-evident.’ Thus, even if a
Tribunal exceeds its powers, the excess must be plain on its face for
annulment to be an available remedy.”**

The same approach has been adopted by the ad hoc Committee in Patrick Mitchell v.

Congo:

“Ti]f an excess of powers is to be the cause of an annulment, the ad
hoc Committee must so find with certainty and immediacy, without it
being necessary to engage in elaborate analyses of the award.”*”

The Committee in MCI v. Ecuador underlined that:

“the manifest excess requirement in Article 52(1)(b) suggests a
somewhat higher degree of proof than a searching analysis of the
findings of the Tribunal.”

Soufraki v, UAE, para. 40 (Exh, RA-LA-041).
Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No ARB/98/4, Decision on Annulment (8
December 2000) [hereinafter Wena v. Egypt], para. 25 (Exh. RA-LA-096).
CDC v. Seychelles, para. 41 (Exh, CA-LA-2.2).
Patrick Mitchell v, Democratic Republic of Congo, 1CSID Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision on Annulment (1
November 2006), para. 20 (Exh. RA-LA-070).
MCI vy. Ecuador, para. 49 (Exh. CA-LA-2.14).

30

83.

84.

85.

86.

The Republic of Peru alleges that the Arbitral Tribunal misapplied the VCLT at every
step of its interpretative analysis of Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT, leading to an
untenable broadening of its jurisdiction beyond the consent of the Contracting Parties

to the Treaty.°!

The Republic of Peru criticizes the application by the Arbitral Tribunal of Article
31(1) of the VCLT. This provision sets out four interpretative criteria: good faith, the
ordinary meaning of the treaty’s terms and the context of such terms, the object and

purpose of the Treaty:

“A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the
ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose.”

The Arbitral Tribunal considered the interaction of the last sentence of Article 8(3) of
the Peru-China BIT® with the provisions of Article 8(2). In reading these two
provisions together,“ as a result of its contextual approach, the Arbitral Tribunal
found that if a party chooses to submit a claim to a competent court, as envisaged by

Article 8(2), access to ICSID arbitration would be barred:

“TiJn fact, the last sentence [of Article 8(3)] leaves no doubt that an
investor (of any Contracting Party), when trying to choose a course
of action to settle a dispute in accordance with Article 8, finds
himself with an irrevocable forum selection clause, also known by
the phrase ‘fork in the road’. An investor ‘shall be entitled to submit
the dispute to the competent court of the Contracting Party’
(emphasis added) in accordance with Paragraph 8(2), but if the
investor does so, in accordance with Paragraph 8(3), such investor
could not under any circumstances resort to ICSID arbitration to
settle a dispute ‘involving the amount of compensation for
expropriation.”

The Republic of Peru argues that the Arbitral Tribunal committed a grave error in

asserting jurisdiction on the basis of an incorrect reading of the fork-in-the-road

Memorial, para. 164.

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969) [hereinafter VCLT], Art. 31(1) (Exh. RA-LA-088).

Peru-China BIT, Art. 8(3) (Exh. RA-004) (“The provisions of this Paragraph shall not apply if the investor

concerned has resorted to the procedure specified in Paragraph 2 of this Article.”)
Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, paras. 155-157.
Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 159.

31

 

provision in the last sentence of Article 8(3).° The decision of the Arbitral Tribunal,
the Republic of Peru contends, ignored the fact that domestic litigation regarding the
existence of an expropriation does not necessarily involve the amount of
compensation. For the Applicant, the Arbitral Tribunal also wrongly assumed that
only the Peruvian judiciary could establish an expropriation when, quite to the
contrary, complaints under the BIT about non-judicial expropriations (legislative or
executive actions) would not be barred by the fork-in-the-road provision of Article

8(3) because they would not have been submitted to a domestic court.®”

In the Applicant’s view, the Arbitral Tribunal also misinterpreted the object and
purpose of the Peru-China BIT in order to advance the objective of helping investors.

The Arbitral Tribunal stated:

“Presumably, in conformity with the wording of the preamble of the
BIT, the objective sought when including the right to refer certain
disputes to ICSID arbitration is to confer certain benefits for
investment promotion. In the event that the Contracting Parties
really had the intention to exclude the important issues listed in
Article 4 from the arbitration process, the Tribunal of course would
so determine, although with a certain level of scepticism [sic] about
whether such a mechanism could possibly help to attract foreign
investors.”

According to the Republic of Peru, the Tribunal’s analysis leads to an absurd result
because either all Chinese BITs have essentially no object and purpose, or the
arbitration provision in all of them must be read expansively regardless of the plain
meaning of their texts. The Applicant notes that until 2003, most Chinese
contemporaneous BITs restricted jurisdiction of investment arbitration tribunals to

disputes concerning the amount of compensation for expropriation.°?

The Republic of Peru then criticizes the Arbitral Tribunal for failing to apply the

canons of interpretation of Article 32 of the VCLT by ignoring the supplementary

evidence that contradicted the Tribunal’s broad reading of Article 8(3).”° Even if the

arbitration clause were ambiguous, the Republic of Peru continues, the Tribunal’s
Reply, para. 36.

Memorial, paras. 108-113; Reply, paras. 42-43; Reisman Opinion, para. 51 (Exh. RA-001).

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 153.

Reply, paras. 20, 22-23.
Memorial, para. 164, Reply, paras. 45-46.

 

 

32

analysis of the supplementary means of interpretation of Article 32 of the VCLT
should have lead it to conclude that the Contracting Parties to the Peru-China BIT

intended to limit jurisdiction solely to disputes about the amount of compensation.”!

89. Article 32 of the VCLT on the “Supplementary Means of Interpretation” provides

that:

“Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation,
including the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances
of its conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the
application of article 31, or to determine the meaning when the
interpretation according to article 31: (a) leaves the meaning
ambiguous or obscure; or (b) leads to a result which is manifestly
absurd or unreasonable.”

90. In the Republic of Peru’s view, the Arbitral Tribunal more precisely noted but

91.

discarded identical accounts of the Contracting Parties’ intentions from the Chinese
and Peruvian negotiators of the Peru-China BIT, which clearly indicate the
Contracting Parties’ intent to limit investor-state jurisdiction to the amount of
compensation for expropriation.’? The Republic of Peru principally refers to the
testimony of Mr. Fan, the Chinese negotiator of the Peru-China BIT, who declared

before the Arbitral Tribunal:

“‘T remember that we gave [to the Peruvian negotiators] a clear
and_ straightforward example, which we used in a number of
negotiations: ‘you can submit a dispute to arbitration without our
consent in the event that our courts decide that there has been an
expropriation of your investment and that you are owed $ 6 but you
think that the debt is $ 10’. This example reflects the outer limit of
the consent of the Republic of China regarding international
arbitration.’”™

The Applicant adds that Ms. Vega, a chief negotiator of the BIT for Peru, stated that
“negotiations essentially began and ended on the basis of the wording used in the

Chinese proposal,”’> which she quoted in response to a proposal by Peru that the

Memorial, para. 88.

VCLT, Art. 32 (Exh. RA-LA-088). See also, Reisman Opinion, paras. 26-33 (Exh. RA-001).
Memorial, paras. 125-128, 163; Reply, paras. 47-51, 59, 60.

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 167 (quoting Mr. Fan’s Statement, para. 28).
Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 168.

33

 

choice of the competent court or arbitration by an investor would be irrevocable. The

Chinese response to this proposal was:

“Honestly, though China is a signatory to the ICSID Convention,
the reality is that at this moment it is not able to agree to submit all
disputes between a foreign investor and the Chinese Government in
accordance with its laws and we believe that you can understand our
position.” 7°

92. The Republic of Peru contends that, in the following passage of the Decision on
Jurisdiction and Competence, the Arbitral Tribunal dismissed the evidence as “not

conclusive” without further explanations:””

“Although this exchange shows that China was not willing to accept
the proposal of Peru on ICSID arbitration on all matters that might
have arisen between a foreign investor and the Government of China
(and clearly the position of China was in this sense more restrictive
than that of Peru), this is not conclusive evidence of the scope of
paragraph three of Article 8 of the BIT. In particular, it does not
establish clearly if China’s consent was limited to disputes about the
amount of compensation for expropriation or if according to the final
wording of the BIT it would include disputes involving other topics
as well under Article 4 of the BIT.”

93. According to Rule 34 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, an arbitral tribunal is the judge
of the admissibility of the evidence adduced and of its probative value. It may also
be deduced from Rule 36 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules (under which an arbitral
tribunal is empowered to admit evidence given by a witness or expert in a written
declaration) that an arbitral tribunal is also the proper judge to evaluate evidence
given in the form of a witness or expert declaration. As the Duke v. Peru Committee
remarked, it would not be proper for an ad hoc committee to re-evaluate such
evidence,” a conclusion also buttressed by the decisions of the Committees in Rumeli

v. Kazakhstan® and CDC v. Seychelles.*' The task of this ad hoc Committee is to

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 170.
Memorial, para. 140, Reply, paras. 61-65.
Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 171.
Duke v. Peru, para. 214 (Exh. CA-LA-2.4).
Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri v. Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/16, Decision on Annulment (25 March 2010) [hereinafter Rumeli v. Kazakhstan], para. 96 (Exh.
CA-LA-2.17).
CDC v. Seychelles, paras. 46 and 77 (Exh. CA-LA-2.2).

34

94.

95.

96.

  

determine whether there was any manifest excess of powers when the Arbitral
Tribunal assessed the evidence presented to it. In the view of the Committee the

answer is clearly no.

The Republic of Peru claims that the Arbitral Tribunal misunderstood the significance
of China’s notification to ICSID when it joined the Convention in 1993, which was

cited at paragraph 163 of the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence:

“Pursuant to Article 25 (4) of the Convention, the Chinese
Government would only consider to submit itself to the jurisdiction
of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
with respect to disputes arising in relation to the compensation that
results from expropriation and nationalization.’ ”**

Instead, the Republic of Peru argues, the Arbitral Tribunal ignored this evidence by

holding that:

“it would be questionable to interpret the consent of the Parties to
the BIT in Article 8, based on a notification that deals with a
completely different Treaty such as the ICSID Convention, and
which does not even condition the consent of China in the
Convention.”

The Republic of Peru refutes this interpretation of the Arbitral Tribunal. ** It argues,
inter alia, that the ICSID Convention cannot be dismissed as an entirely different
treaty as it was referenced in the Peru-China BIT, which was the treaty under which

the Tribunal was sitting.

The Republic of Peru finally contends that the weight of case law favors its position,
relying on the decisions in Rosinvest Co. v. The Russian Federation, Berschader v.
The Russian Federation, and Austrian Airlines v. Slovak Republic, in which,
according to the Applicant, arbitral tribunals have concluded that arbitration clauses
restricted to disputes concerning the amount of compensation for an expropriation

should be interpreted exactly as they are written.** The Republic of Peru adds that the

 

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 163 (quoting Professor Chen’s Opinion).

iction and Competence, para. 165.
. 129-137, Reply, paras. 52-59.

Memorial, paras. 143-152, Reply, paras. 67-74.

35

97.

98.

Arbitral Tribunal distorted the jurisprudence it cited to support its decision.*° It
contends that the Arbitral Tribunal relied on inapt sources which it misrepresented,
such as the decisions in Saipem S.p.A v. Bangladesh, Telenor Mobile Communications
A.S. v. Hungary, Franz Sedelmayer v. The Russian Federation, where an objection to
jurisdiction based on the language limiting dispute settlement to compensation for
expropriation similar to Article 8(3) was never examined. Furthermore, the Applicant
contends that, the reasoning in the English Judgment Czech Republic v. European
Media Ventures about the arbitration clause in the Belgium/Luxembourg-
Czechoslovakia BIT which, unlike that of the Arbitral Tribunal, emphasized the
importance of the preparatory work and did not ignore the results of its analysis under

Article 32 of the VCLT, favors its case and not that of Mr. Tza Yap Shum.’”

The Arbitral Tribunal concluded that a narrow reading of the Peru-China BIT was not

justified by the awards in Berschader** or RosInvest® and found more persuasive the

separate opinion in Berschader.”°

The Committee is of the opinion that the Arbitral Tribunal committed no manifest
excess of powers in its interpretation of Article 8 and in finding that the word
“involving” is ambiguous.°! On their face, the words of the first sentence of Article
8(3) of the Peru-China BIT which read “/i]f a dispute involving the amount of

compensation for expropriation cannot be settled within six months after resort to

Memorial, paras. 143, 153-159.

Id. See also, Reply, paras. 75-81; Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 107:9-110:5.

Vladimir Berschader and Moise Berschader v. Russian Federation, SCC Case No. 080/2004, Award (21
April 2006), para. 153 (Exh. RA-LA-090) (“[...] It is only a dispute which arises regarding the amount or
mode of ion to be paid sub: to an act of expropriation already having been established,
either by acknowledgment of the responsible Contracting Party or by a court or arbitral tribunal, which may
be subject to arbitration under the Treaty.”)
RosInvestCo UK Ltd. v. The Russian Federation, SCC Case No. V079/2005, Award on Jurisdiction (October
2007), para. 110 (Exh. RA-LA-076) (“[...] Though no documents from the negotiations of the BIT have been
produced, the Parties including the Claimant agree that the rather complicated wording in Article 8
presented a compromise between the UK's intention to have a wide arbitration clause and the Soviet
intention to have a limited one. If that is so, it is hard to arrive at an interpretation all the same that the
clause is so wide as to include all aspects of an expropriation.”)

Vladimir Berschader and Moise Berschader v. Russian Federation, SCC Case No. 080/2004, Separate
Opinion (7 April 2006), fn. 4 (Exh. RA-LA-090) (“As demonstrated by the fact that neither party led any
evidence concerning the negotiation and ratification of the Treaty (such as travaux préparatoires or
contemporaneous legislative or executive statements), the first and best evidence of discerning what the
Treaty drafters meant is to [be] found in the terms of the Treaty”); Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence,
paras. 173-186.

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 145 (“Apparently, said wording sought to create certain
limitations. However, the precise scope of these limitations constitutes a central issue that must be
determined.”)

 

 

36

99.

100.

101.

negotiations [...]” do not include the question of the legality of expropriation, but
equally do not refer to disputes exclusively limited to the amount of compensation.
Out of context, the meaning of the phrase is not textually obvious. The Arbitral
Tribunal interpreted the expression “dispute involving the amount of compensation for

expropriation” in the overall context of Article 8.°7

The Arbitral Tribunal went through an interpretative process mandated by the VCLT.
It looked at the ordinary meaning of the word “involving”, considered the context of
Article 8(3) and then looked at subsidiary sources.” It is not for the Committee to
replace the Arbitral Tribunal’s judgment by its own. A body that had appellate
jurisdiction might well find fault as a matter of law with some aspects of the Arbitral
Tribunal’s application of the VCLT, but an ad hoc committee does not have such
powers. The Republic of Peru’s request for annulment on the basis of manifest excess

of powers is accordingly dismissed.

b. Article 52(1)(E): Failure to State Reasons

The Republic of Peru criticizes the Arbitral Tribunal for failing to state reasons in the
analysis of Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT, which led to the conclusion that this
provision should receive a broad interpretation.** The Republic of Peru essentially
challenges the incompatibility between the Arbitral Tribunal’s analysis of Article 8(3)
and the ordinary meaning of this same provision as well as of the other terms of the
BIT. In its challenge under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention, the Applicant
essentially reiterates the grievances against the reasoning of the Arbitral Tribunal
which it already made in the context of Article 52(1)(b). As already stated, the
Committee reserves for discussion under Article 52(1)(d) the arguments of the
Republic of Peru concerning the Arbitral Tribunal’s sua sponte approach to the
interpretation of the term “involving” in Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT and of the

“fork-in-the-road” provision of the same treaty.°°

The Committee in Kléckner I recognized that:

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, paras. 146-161.
Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, paras. 146-172.
Memorial, paras. 165-170.
Memorial, paras. 166-167.

37

“Interpretation of the concept of ‘failure to state reasons’ is therefore
decisive. It is especially delicate because of the absence of any
previous inter] ions of the Washi Ce ion and the lack
of sufficiently clear or consistent indications from prior international
practice. [...] The text of [Article 52(1)(e)] requires a statement of
reasons on which the award is based. This does not mean just any
reasons, purely formal or apparent, but rather reasons having some
substance, allowing the reader to follow the arbitral tribunal’s
reasoning, on facts and on law.”°°

 

This Committee notes that the reasons of the Arbitral Tribunal for its construction of
Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT can be read in paragraphs 143 to 188 of the
Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence. The Republic of Peru objects to the quality
of the reasoning rather than a quantitative absence of reasons. Indeed, control over a
tribunal’s reasons would be pointless if it did not involve a minimum of control over
the relevance of the reasons of the decision or award. As remarked by the CDC v.
Seychelles Committee, Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention requires that the

reasons of the Arbitral Tribunal not be frivolous.°”

102. Contradiction in the reasoning was approached by the Kléckner I Committee in a

96

manner which has been accepted by subsequent ad hoc committees:**

“[a]s for ‘contradictory reasons,’ it is in principle appropriate to
bring this notion under the category of ‘failure to state reasons’ for
the very simple reasons that two genuinely contradictory reasons
cancel each other out. Hence the failure to state reasons. The
arbitrator’s obligation to state reasons which are not contradictory
must therefore be accepted.”°°

The Committee in Vivendi v. Argentina cautioned, however, that:

“[iJt is frequently said that contradictory reasons cancel each other
out, and indeed, if reasons are genuinely contradictory so they
might. However, tribunals must often struggle to balance conflicting
considerations, and an ad hoc committee should be careful not to
discern contradiction when what is actually expressed in a tribunal’s
reasons could more truly be said to be but a reflection of such

Kléckner v. Cameroon I, paras.118-119 (Exh. RA-LA-055).

CDC v. Seychelles, para. 70 (Exh, CA-LA-2.2).

Reisman Opinion, paras. 67, 71-74 (Exh. RA-001).

Klockner v. Cameroon I, para. 116 (Exh, RA-LA-055).
38

conflicting considerations.” '°°

103. In the present matter, the Arbitral Tribunal concluded its analysis of Article 8 of the

Peru-China BIT with the following words:

“in order to give meaning to all elements of the Article, the words
‘involving the amount of compensation for expropriation’ must be
interpreted to include not only the mere determination of the amount
but also other issues that are normally inherent in an expropriation,
including whether the property was actually expropriated in
accordance with the standards and requirements of the BIT, and the
determination of the amount of compensation due, if applicable. In
the opinion of the Tribunal, a contrary conclusion would undermine
the provision for arbitration before ICSID since according to the
final sentence of Article 8(3), to submit the investment dispute to the
courts of the host State would definitely preclude the possibility of
access to arbitration under the ICSID Convention. Therefore, since
Claimant has filed a prima facie claim for expropriation, the
Tribunal, in accordance with Articles 25 and 41 of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 41 of the Rules of Arbitration, believes it has
jurisdiction to hear, on the merits, the claim filed by Claimant.” '!

104. The Committee finds that this is a reasoned conclusion within the meaning of Article

100

52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention. The Arbitral Tribunal reached its conclusion after
having noted at paragraph 150 of the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence that
the phrase “‘‘involving the amount of compensation for expropriation’ is susceptible to
a variety of possible meanings.” The Arbitral Tribunal interpreted this first sentence
of Article 8(3), which “presents the central problem of interpretation,” with the

grammatical inference to be given to the word “involving”. It held:

“The BIT uses the word ‘involucra’, which according to the
definition given by the Dictionary of the Real Academia Espafola,
means ‘abarcar, incluir, comprender.’ A good faith interpretation of
this term indicates that the only requirement in the BIT is that the
dispute should ‘include’ the determination of an amount of
compensation and not that the dispute should be restricted to this
element.” 1

Compaiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A & Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.

ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment (3 July 2002) [hereinafter Vivendi v. Argentina], para. 65 (Exh. RA-LA-
024).

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 188.

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 149.

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 151.

39

105.

106.

107.

This reasoning is linked to (i) the Arbitral Tribunal’s analysis of Article 4 of the Peru-
China BIT on expropriation, !* which, in the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, envisions
claims following expropriation on aspects other than the amount of compensation;
and (ii) the Arbitral Tribunal’s analysis of the context of Article 8(3), and in particular
the investment promotion objectives of the Peru-China BIT, according to which the
BIT would not be attractive to foreign investors if claims on expropriation other than

the amount of compensation were excluded from arbitration. !°>

Having thus already closed the door to the Republic of Peru’s narrow interpretation,
the Arbitral Tribunal nonetheless considered further the Republic of Peru’s arguments
in the global context of Article 8 which sets out three stages for dispute resolution.
The Arbitral Tribunal concluded that, if the Republic of Peru’s interpretation were to
be adopted, access to ICSID arbitration for the investor would be altogether denied
because the fork-in-the-road provision in the last sentence of Article 8(3) would rule
out arbitration on the amount of compensation if the investor has submitted the other
issues of the dispute on expropriation to a competent court of the Contracting Party, in

accordance with Article 8(2).!°°

The Republic of Peru says that the Arbitral Tribunal interpreted the term “dispute” so
broadly that the fork-in-the-road provision would have barred even Mr. Tza Yap
Shum’s claims had the Arbitral Tribunal considered the question.!°’ The Republic of
Peru also claims in this regard that the Arbitral Tribunal failed to state reasons for
ignoring the obvious case of expropriation by statutory decree, which would allow the
investor to submit a dispute on the amount of compensation to international
arbitration.'°° Since the Republic of Peru challenges the validity of the Decision on
Jurisdiction and Competence under Article 52(1)(d) for deciding sua sponte to focus
on the fork-in-the-road provision, the Committee considers that this grievance is
subsumed in the denial of the right to be heard, which is to be dealt with at section c)

below.

104 Peru-China BIT, Art. 4 (Exh. RA-004) (“/. Neither Contracting Party shall expropriate, nationalize or take
similar measures (hereinafter referred to as ‘expropriation’) against investments or investors of the other
Contracting Party in its territory, unless the following conditions are met: (a) for the public interest, (b)
under domestic legal (c) without dis ion, (d) against c ion.”)

105

106 Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, par

 

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, paras. 152-153.

- 154-161.

  

07 Reply, para. 96.
108 Memorial, paras. 110-113; Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 50: 18-22.

40

108.

109.

110.

The Arbitral Tribunal next turned to the supplementary means of interpretation
envisaged by Article 32 of the VCLT. More specifically, it considered (i) the
circumstances of the conclusion of the Peru-China BIT, namely, China’s notification
under Article 25(4) of the ICSID Convention, and (ii) the preparatory work of the
Peru-China BIT, namely, the testimonies of the Chinese and Peruvian negotiators of
the Treaty, which it found not conclusive of the Contracting Parties’ intention to
restrict their consent to arbitration to disputes about the amount of compensation
only.'” It also reviewed the BITs signed by China before the Peru-China BIT,
without finding compelling evidence on the meaning of the words “involving the

amount of compensation for expropriation.” '!°

It finally discussed investment
arbitration cases (Saipem, Telenor Mobile, Sedelmayer, Berschader and RosInvest) as
well as an English judgment (European Media Ventures) to buttress its finding of a

broad interpretation of Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT.!!!

The Republic of Peru argues that the negotiating history of the Peru-China BIT
contradicted the Arbitral Tribunal’s broad interpretation of Article 8(3), and that
unrebutted evidence of both China’s and Peru’s negotiators of the Peru-China BIT as

well as China’s notification to ICSID were discarded by the Arbitral Tribunal.!!*

Although the Republic of Peru says that it is not necessary for the Committee to
weigh the evidence on the record, the Committee finds that this is precisely what the
Applicant is seeking. The Arbitral Tribunal did not reach its decision without
considering the evidence submitted by the Republic of Peru, it simply was not
convinced by the evidence put forward by the Republic of Peru. The relevance and
weight of evidence before the Arbitral Tribunal cannot be reevaluated by the
Committee which is not an appellate body. The Republic of Peru, therefore, cannot
criticize the Arbitral Tribunal for (i) considering that the letter from Mr. Fan, which
showed that China was not willing to accept Peru’s proposal of ICSID arbitration on
all matters, was not conclusive evidence of the scope of Article 8(3) of the Peru-China

BIT, or (ii) for failing to make that determination with respect to all other pieces of

09 Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, paras. 162-171.

410 Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 172.

‘41 Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, paras. 173-186.

42 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1 35:16-19, 38:11-39:2, 43:3-5.

41

111.

112.

evidence it had before it.''? Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention does not
require that an arbitral tribunal explains itself in respect of each piece of evidence
adduced by either party which is not outcome determinative or to give reasons for
preferring some evidence over other evidence. Rather, the award has to enable the

reader to see the reasons upon which the award itself is based.!!4

The Republic of Peru finally contends that the Arbitral Tribunal only asserted
jurisdiction over expropriation-related claims and declined jurisdiction over other
claims without giving any explanation for why those other claims were not covered
by the wording “disputes involving, but not limited to, the amount of compensation for
expropriation.” ''> However, in the context of its demonstration that Article 3 of the
Peru-China BIT could not be interpreted so as to extend the jurisdiction of the Centre,

the Arbitral Tribunal stated its view that:

“[...] the literal wording of Article 8 reflects that the Contracting
Parties reached an agreement on two fundamental issues. First, as
indicated above, they agreed to submit expropriation disputes to
ICSID arbitration. Secondly, they specifically considered the
possibility of submitting other types of disputes to ICSID arbitration
and specifically reserved the right to do it only ‘if the parties to the
dispute so agree.’ [...] As a result, the Tribunal hereby determines
that the specific wording of Article 8(3) should prevail over the
general wording of the MFN clause in Article 3 and Claimant’s
arguments on the contrary must be dismissed.” |!

The reasoning of the Arbitral Tribunal meets, in the Committee’s opinion, the
requirement of Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention which, as explained in the
MINE Decision:

“is satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow how the
tribunal proceeded from Point A to Point B and eventually to its
conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of law.”!"7

It is generally understood that one of the major purposes for giving reasons in a

43 Hearing on Annulment, 22 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 2, 398:1-399:14.
“4 Rumeli v, Kazakhstan, para. 104 (Exh. CA-LA-2.17).
45 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 25: 13-19.

116
17

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para.216.
Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v. Government of Guinea, 1CSID Case No.

ARB/84/4, Decision on Annulment (14 December 1989) [hereinafter MINE v. Guinea], para. 5.09 (Exh. CA-
LA-2.12).

42

113.

114.

decision, apart from assuring the parties that the issues before the tribunal were
considered and understood, is to serve as a basis for review of the decision. In the
context of the ICSID Convention, the purpose of the review is, however, constrained
by Article 52(1)(e) which only provides for a limited scope of review, as is confirmed
by a line of decisions of ad hoc committees. For example, in CDC v. Seychelles, the

Committee held that:

“[...] Article 52(1)(e) [...] does not provide us with the opportunity
to opine on whether the Tribunal’s analysis was correct or its
reasoning persuasive.” !!8

The same conclusion was reached by the Committee in Wena v. Egypt:

“[...] Article 52(1(e) does not allow any review of the challenged
Award which would lead the ad hoc Committee to reconsider
whether the reasons underlying the Tribunal’s decision were
appropriate or not, convincing or not.” |?

The Republic of Peru submits sixteen propositions to establish that the Arbitral
Tribunal failed to state reasons or why it failed to address a series of questions in
relation to the meaning or context of Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT or the object
and purpose of the BIT, the circumstances of the BIT’s negotiations and the choice of
jurisprudence in support of its interpretation of Article 8(3).'2° It invites the
Committee to review the reasons of the Arbitral Tribunal. However, the Committee
considers the Arbitral Tribunal’s reasoning to be neither frivolous nor insufficient.
The Committee considers that the Arbitral Tribunal did, in light of the evidence
adduced by the Parties, explain why it reached its decision. This Committee would
move beyond its powers under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention if it were to follow

the Republic of Peru’s propositions. They are consequently rejected.

c Article 52(1)(D): Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of
Procedure

Under this head of Article 52, the Republic of Peru first criticizes the Arbitral Tribunal

48 CDC v, Seychelles, para. 70 (Exh. CA-LA-2.2).
419 Wena v. Egypt, para. 79 (Exh, RA-LA-096).
120 Memorial, paras. 165-170; Reply, paras. 94-99.

43

115.

116.

117.

(i) for assuming jurisdiction where jurisdiction was lacking and (ii) for deciding

contrary to unrebutted extensive evidence without appropriate explanation. '?!

The Committee cannot share the view that, by assuming jurisdiction where it had
none, an arbitral tribunal would seriously breach a fundamental rule of procedure.
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention lays down the conditions for accessing the
jurisdiction of the Centre. Article 41 of the ICSID Convention provides that the
Tribunal shall be the judge of its own competence. In ruling on the interpretation of
Article 8 of the Peru-China BIT, the Arbitral Tribunal acted in conformity with the
ICSID Convention and with the mission entrusted upon it by the Parties. None of
these provisions purport to achieve or protect due process before the arbitral tribunal.
They aim at maximizing the effectiveness of the arbitration process by avoiding
dilatory tactics which would otherwise occur if competence were an interlocutory

question to be determined by another decision maker than the arbitral tribunal.

In the Committee’s view, examination by the arbitral tribunal of the evidence adduced
by the parties is one of the fundamental rules of procedure protected by Article
52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention to achieve a fair trial. The Decision of the ad hoc

Committee in Wena v. Egypt notes that Article 52(1)(d):

“refers to a set of minimal standards of procedure to be respected as
a matter of international law. It is fundamental, as a matter of
procedure, that each party is given the right to be heard before an
independent and impartial tribunal. This includes the right to state
its claim or its defense and to produce all arguments and evidence in
support of it. This fundamental right has to be ensured at an equal
level, in a way that allows each party to respond adequately to the
arguments and evidence presented by the other.” '??

This is without prejudice to an arbitral tribunal’s assessment of whether such evidence

is relevant to its decision.

It is undisputed that all the evidence put forward by the Parties was discussed before
the Arbitral Tribunal. China’s notification under Article 25(4) of the ICSID

Convention, the expert witness’s testimony of Professor Chen, as well as the witness

"21 Memorial, paras. 171-173.
12 Wena v. Egypt, para. 57 (Exh, RA-LA-096).

44

118.

1

23

25

testimony of the negotiators of the BIT, Mr. Fan and Ms. Vega, were discussed and
considered by the Arbitral Tribunal.!??_ The Republic of Peru contends that the
Arbitral Tribunal decided to ignore this evidence without explaining why.'4 But the
Republic of Peru does not identify with regard to the unrebutted evidence it claims to
have placed before the Arbitral Tribunal any grievance that could be a serious breach
of the fairness of the arbitral proceedings, other than its dissatisfaction with the
Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence. The Applicant’s argument, which turns
solely on the evaluation made by the arbitrators of such evidence, fails again in the
context of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. Failing to assess evidence in the
way that the Republic of Peru sets out in its submission does not constitute a serious

departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

The Republic of Peru next contends that the Arbitral Tribunal’s failure to provide
reasons for its Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence is also a serious breach of a
fundamental rule of procedure.'2> The ground of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention must be distinguished from other grievances concerning jurisdiction of
the arbitral tribunal and from the relevance of the legal foundation of the decision.
Professor Reisman, the expert witness for the Applicant, reminds us in his Opinion of
27 June 2012 on “Annulment on the Grounds of Excés de Pouvoir and Failure to State
Reasons of the Decision on Jurisdiction” that the presence of reasons was important
for the drafters of the Washington Convention, which they identified as an
independent requirement for the validity of awards under Article 52 of the

Convention:

“[t]he preliminary draft of Article 52(1) (Document 24) simply
reproduced Professor Scelle’s formula, which, it will be recalled, did
not make express the need for reasons but, as Scelle’s commentary
makes clear, included the requirement among minimal procedural
standards. The first ICSID Convention draft (Document 43)
dis 1 the mini procedure requii by turning a
‘failure to state reasons for the award, unless the parties have agreed
that reasons need not be stated’ into an express ground of annulment.
In other words, at that stage, the drafters were sufficiently concerned
about the need for reasoned awards to require them explicitly but
they treated that requirement as dispositive: reasons were required

 

 

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, paras. 160-172.
Memorial, para.173; Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 39: 8-10.
Memorial, para. 174.

45

119.

unless the parties decided to dispense with them. But the Revised
Draft (Document 123), which became Article 52(1) of the
Convention, suppressed the dispositive option and transformed the
need for reasons into an explicit requirement that the parties could
not opt out of, even by private agreement. Hence, whatever general
international law may be on the matter, the ICSID Convention seems
to make the requirement of a reasoned judgment a lex specialis.” '”6

Professor Reisman underlines that:

“Scelle understood ‘a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure’ implicitly to cover a tribunal's failure to state reasons,
whereas the ICSID Convention makes that requirement express and
installs it in a separate section, Article 52(1)(e).”'?7

The Committee is of the opinion that the right to a reasoned and final determination of
the dispute by an arbitral tribunal is one of the aspects of the right of access to an
arbitral forum. As such, it is also a fundamental rule of procedure protected by Article
52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. The existence of reasons ensures that there has
been a minimum respect of the fundamental exigencies of justice by the tribunal,
which would not square with an arbitrary decision, and is consonant with Article 52 of
the ICSID Convention which serves as a safety valve against aberrant awards.'?°
Assuredly, the obligation to provide reasons does not require that a detailed answer be
given to each of the parties’ arguments. This has been expressed in numerous
decisions of ad hoc committees. As the ad hoc Committee in Kléckner I explained,
an arbitral tribunal is under no obligation to answer every argument of the parties

when they are of no relevance to the outcome of the case:

“These reasons must therefore be able to serve as a basis of the
decision of the Tribunal and be ‘sufficient’ in this sense. The test of
sufficiency must obviously be evaluated with especial care lest the
request for annulment under Article 52 serve as a disguised
appeal.” !?°

The Vivendi v. Argentina Committee clarified, in a holding which has since been

26 Reisman Opinion, para. 63 (Exh. RA-001).

27 Reisman Opinion, para. 22 (Exh. RA-001).

28 See MCI y. Ecuador, para. 49 (Exh. CA-LA-2.14).

129 Klockner v, Cameroon I, para. 118 (Exh. RA-LA-055) as cited in Reisman Opinion, para. 69 (Exh. RA-001).

46

130

confirmed by a line of other ad hoc Committee decisions,'*” that an arbitral tribunal

only has to address the parties’ arguments which:

“are themselves capable of leading to the conclusion reached by the
tribunal and that all questions submitted to a tribunal are expressly
or implicitly dealt with.” '>!

120. However, the Republic of Peru cannot simply assume that one count of annulment is
met by establishing that another has been met, as it does with its allegation that the
failure by the Arbitral Tribunal to state reasons for its Decision on Jurisdiction and
Competence constitutes a breach of a fundamental rule of procedure that the Tribunal
must address the material questions posed by the Parties, in violation of Article
52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention.'*?. There has to be a proper demonstration of the
violation of each ground listed in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention.'** Such
demonstration is absent here. Further, the Republic of Peru did not establish a failure
to state reasons and in consequence it cannot succeed in its related argument that such
alleged failure also amounts to a serious departure from a fundamental rule of

procedure. The Applicant’s grievance complaint is unfounded.

121. The Republic of Peru finally argues that the Arbitral Tribunal committed a serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure by denying the Republic of Peru the
opportunity to express its views on (i) the Tribunal’s broad interpretation of the term
“involving” in the first sentence of Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT and (ii) the

interpretation of the fork-in-the-road provision in the last sentence of Article 8(3),

which were the dispositive issues of the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence. '**

The Applicant alleges that this is a serious violation of the adversarial nature of the

procedure because the Arbitral Tribunal decided these matters “sua sponte”.!?°

130 Wena v. Egypt, para. 101 (Exh, RA-LA-096); CDC v. Seychelles, para. 71 (Exh. CA-LA-2.2); Lucchetti v.
Peru, para. 128 (Exh. RA-LA-045); Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/05/19,
Decision on Annulment (14 June 2010), para. 36 (Exh. CA-LA-2.9); Rumeli v. Kazakhstan, paras. 81, 84
(Exh. CA-LA-2.17).

31 Vivendi v, Argentina, para. 87 (Exh. RA-LA-024).

2 Memorial, para. 174.

83 See also Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 285:4-286:21; 22 March 2014, Vol.

2, 363:8-364:19.

Memorial, para. 175, Reply, para. 104.

'85 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 46:1-8, 116:15-117:16; 22 March 2014, Vol. 2,
321:17-322:10.

47

122.

123.

The Republic of Peru contends that it was common ground between the Parties that
the literal interpretation of the text of Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT!*° was
narrow. The Applicant further argues that Mr. Tza Yap Shum, as Claimant in the
arbitration proceedings, only argued about a broader interpretation of Article 8(3)
based on policy grounds, not on a theory of textual interpretation such as that adopted

by the Arbitral Tribunal.!7

The Committee identifies the following passages with respect to the interpretation of
Article 8 in the record before the Arbitral Tribunal which are of relevance here. In his
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction of the Centre, Competence of the Tribunal and
Admissibility of the Claim of 25 July 2008, Mr. Tza Yap Shum, after explaining that
Article 8 of the BIT not only covers the situation of direct expropriation but also that
of indirect expropriation,'** remarked that should access to ICISID arbitration be

barred:

“it would force a foreign investor affected by ’de facto’ expropriation
to turn to Peruvian Courts of Justice, since indirect expropriation is
not addressed by Peruvian material and procedural law, thus
impairing his right to defence, and the guarantee for his rights and
interests.”'°

Mr. Tza Yap Shum alleged the following:

“A literal and formalistic approach of the Peru-China BIT may lead
to a number of conclusions that divert from the spirit of this
instrument, which is to be applied with an integral and systematic
interpretation of the will of the Contracting States, in the context of a
global system of foreign investments, to address, protect and
guarantee a number of investors’ rights in the host State. [...]

In addition, applying Article 31 of the Vienna Convention to the

136 Peru-China BIT, Art. 8(3) (Exh. RA-004) (“If a dispute involving the amount of compensation for
expropriation cannot be settled within six months after resort to negotiations as specified in Paragraph 1 of
this Article, it may be submitted at the request of either party to the international arbitration of the
International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), established by the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States, signed at Washington D.C.
on March 18, 1965.”)

137 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 27: 4-8, 29: 12-15; 22 March 2014, Vol. 2, 330: 2-10.

138 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction of the Centre, Competence of the Tribunal and Admissibility of the Claim
(25 July 2008) [hereinafter Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction], paras 125-140.

139 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 151.

48

declaration of the Contracting Parties of the Peru-China BIT, the
interpretation must be based on ’good faith, attributing to the terms
of the Treaty their regular meaning in context, and taking into
account their objective and purpose’, and therefore the Claimant
concludes that the determination of the legality of an action of
indirect, de facto expropriation may not be left to the decision of a
Court of Justice of the host State, but submitted to the competence of
international Arbitral Tribunals, as they constitute the international
guarantee in favour of investors, which both Contracting Parties of
the BIT explicitly recognise in its preamble.” '*°

124. At the Hearing on Annulment, counsel for Mr. Tza Yap Shum pointed to the
references made in oral pleadings before the Arbitral Tribunal regarding the scope of
Article 8 of the Peru-China BIT. The passages of the transcripts of the hearing on

jurisdiction before the Arbitral Tribunal read in pertinent part:

“So, we have analyzed whether a controversy involves the amount
of expropriation or whether the legality of the expropriation act is
also something that needs to be dealt with here. We were able to

verify that Respondent reads the BIT in a literal manner [...]”;\"!

“So, the legality of the acts of expropriation is something that needs

to be interpreted in a comprehensive manner” ;'?

“The conclusions here, we analyzed the offer made by the State,
which is comprehensive compensation and legality of the
expropriaton act.”

125. The Committee notes that Mr. Tza Yap Shum argued in his written and oral
submissions before the Arbitral Tribunal that only a broad reading of Article 8(3) was

consistent with the promotion and protection of investments which:

“[...] will be conductive to stimulating investments, on the basis of
equality and mutual benefits, as recognised in the preamble of the
BIT in question.” #

“So, if I invite foreign investors to come to my country, well, we have
to have mechanisms that would perhaps help us solve problems

Id., paras. 152, 165 (emphasis in original).
141 Hearing on Jurisdiction, 15 October 2008, Tr. Vol. 1, 56:18 — 57:1.
142 Hearing on Jurisdiction, 15 October 2008, Tr. Vol. 1. 62:11-12.
143 Hearing on Jurisdiction, 15 October 2008, Tr. Vol. 1, 63:21— 64:1.
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 164.

49

because of differences that may arise amongst the parties. And, of
course, if that doesn't happen, there is a vacuum that goes against
the rights of the investor.”

“T cannot go to the market and attract foreign investors and say,
look, you know, you cannot access arbitration. You have to go the
courts, the local courts of the judiciary of my country. This is a
policy [which] is contradictory to the statement that was made, and
it is also contradictory to most of ICSID arbitrations that have to do
with indirect expropriation.” '*°

126. In its Post-Hearing Submission on Objections to Jurisdiction of 18 November 2008,

the Republic of Peru, as Respondent in the arbitration proceedings, argued for a

narrow interpretation of Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT:

“There is no ‘dispute involving the amount of compensation for
expropriation’ between the parties. Since there has been no finding
of wrongful expropriation on the part of Peru, there cannot be a
dispute concerning the ‘amount of compensation for expropriation’
in this proceeding.

The dispute that Claimant wants to submit to arbitration does not
fall within the scope of Peru’s offer to arbitrate in the Peru-China
BIT, and thus no agreement to arbitrate was perfected. Claimant's
purported acceptance of Peru’s offer to arbitrate is a nullity and
cannot serve as a basis for exercising jurisdiction.” |

127. It is undisputed that, in accordance with Article 41 of the ICSID Convention and Rule

Al of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Arbitral Tribunal had to rule on its jurisdiction
over the claim for illegality of an alleged indirect expropriation as a result of
SUNAT’s actions, pursuant to the objections raised by the Republic of Peru.'#8 In
particular, the Republic of Peru challenged the Arbitral Tribunal’s competence on the
ground that the claim on the illegality of the expropriation was not within the scope of
its offer to arbitrate in accordance with Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT.'4?

According to the Republic of Peru’s allegations in the above cited Post-Hearing

Hearing on Jurisdiction, 15 October 2008, Tr. Vol. 1, 63:15-20.

Hearing on Jurisdiction, 16 October 2008, Tr. Vol. 2, 71:5-13.

Republic of Peru’s Post-Hearing Submission on Objections to Jurisdiction (18 November 2008), paras. 98-
99.

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 40.

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 129.

50

128.

129.

150

Submission, it was only after a finding of expropriation that any dispute “concerning
the amount of compensation for expropriation” could be submitted to ICSID

arbitration.!°°

The Committee recognizes that interpretation must start from the ordinary meaning of
a word, part of a phrase, a sentence or a paragraph. An interpretation of Article 8(3)
of the Peru-China BIT could not come as a surprise for the Republic of Peru.
According to Article 31(1) of the VCLT, which was discussed in the arbitration
proceeding, interpretation involves text, context and object and purpose. When the
authentic text exists in several languages, such as here (the Peru-China BIT was
signed in Chinese, Spanish and English, English being the controlling language in
case of divergence of interpretation),!>! the ordinary meaning of the word or phrase
may indeed be determined with a linguistic exegesis in order to dispel the ambiguity
which may arise from only one linguistic version of the text of the treaty. A
dictionary is a useful tool for the interpreter, but the Applicant chose not to provide
one to the Arbitral Tribunal and cannot blame the Arbitral Tribunal for its linguistic
analysis in interpreting the word “involving” at paragraph 151 of its Decision on

Jurisdiction and Competence: !>?

“The BIT uses the word ‘involucra’ which according to the definition
given by the Dictionary of the Real Academia Espanola, means
‘abarcar, incluir, comprender’. A good faith interpretation of this
term indicates that the only requirement in the BIT is that the dispute
should ‘include’ the determination of an amount of compensation
and not that the dispute should be restricted to this element [...].”

The Committee is of the view that in interpreting the word “involving” in the first
sentence of Article 8(3), the Arbitral Tribunal did not rely on anything which neither
of the Parties had argued nor on what they could not have reasonably expected, even
if the reasons put forward by the Arbitral Tribunal might not have been anticipated.
The Committee is not convinced that the interpretation of the word “involving” in the
phrase “involving the amount of compensation” had not been at issue in the

arbitration, and it is of the view that the Republic of Peru could have reasonably

See Republic of Peru’s Post-Hearing Submission on Objections to Jurisdiction (18 November 2008), paras.

98-99.
15! Peru-China BIT (Ex. RA-004). See also, Hearing on Annulment, 22 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 2, 313:9-14.

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 151.

51

130.

131.

anticipated that interpretation of the phrase “involving the amount of compensation”

would be the key issue for any decision on the scope of Article 8(3).

The task of the Arbitral Tribunal was to decide on its own competence, and it could
only do so in construing the terms of the arbitration clause of the BIT. The Parties’
submissions in the arbitration procedure were centered on this issue. If the
Committee were to follow the Republic of Peru in its criticisms, it would create an
obligation for arbitrators to submit the legal reasoning for discussion of the parties,
with the consequence that no award could ever be adopted before the parties had the
opportunity to argue about the relevance of the Tribunal’s legal reasoning. As

remarked by the Kléckner v. Cameroon I Committee:

“As for the Tribunal itself, when in the course of its deliberations it
reached the provisional conclusion that the true legal basis for its
decision could well be different from either of the parties’ respective
arguments, it was not, subject to what will be said below, in principle
prohibited from choosing its own argument. Whether to reopen the
proceeding before reaching a decision and allow the parties to put
forward their views on the arbitrators’ ‘new’ thesis is rather a
question of expedience. The real question is whether, by formulating
its own theory and argument, the Tribunal goes beyond the ‘legal
framework’ established by the Claimant and the Respondent [...]
Within the dispute’s ‘legal framework,’ arbitrators must be free to
rely on arguments which strike them as the best ones, even if those
arguments were not developed by the parties (although they could
have been). Even if it is generally desirable for arbitrators to avoid
basing their decision on an argument that has not been discussed by
the parties, it obviously does not follow that they therefore commit a
‘serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure’. Any other
solution would expose the arbitrators to having to do the work of the
parties’ counsel for them and would risk slowing down or even
paralysing the arbitral solutions to disputes.” >

The Republic of Peru’s argument provides us with an example of the reduction ad
infinitum which is illustrated by Zeno’s paradox of motion: assuming that time is
composed of a series of moments, the arrow which travels no distance during that
moment, is not moving and will never reach the target. In similar fashion, an
arbitrator will never be able to make an award because of the obligation to

continuously submit the reasons for the award to the parties for their observations.

'83 Klockner v, Cameroon I, para. 91 (Exh. RA-LA-055).

52

132.

133.

134.

The Committee considers that the Parties had a full opportunity to make their

arguments on the interpretation of “involving” before the Arbitral Tribunal.

The Republic of Peru finally contends that it never had the opportunity to reply to the
Arbitral Tribunal’s flawed analysis according to which “the fork in the road provision
implied a necessarily broad arbitration provision.” + According to the Republic of
Peru, the Tribunal “essentially” concluded that “if disputes [under Article 8(3)] are
limited to the amount of compensation, the fork-in-the-road provision will not allow
any disputes to be submitted to arbitration; but if disputes include the legality of the
expropriation then the fork-in-the-road provision will allow their submission to
arbitration.” > The Republic of Peru argues that the Claimant would not have made
the argument that the Arbitral Tribunal made because it would have meant that Mr.
Tza Yap Shum’s own claims would have been barred by the fork-in-the road

6

provision.!°° The Republic of Peru also argues that the Tribunal’s analysis was

flawed because for the fork-in-the-road provision to operate, the dispute and the

parties must be identical.!°’

The Committee acknowledges that the Parties had a full opportunity to argue about
the meaning of the whole of Article 8, so the question is did the Arbitral Tribunal have
an obligation to go back to the Parties to ask about the last sentence of Article 8(3) on
which the Parties had not focused? Given the importance of the analysis to the
Arbitral Tribunal’s overall reasoning, one may be inclined to say that it should have.
It is however possible to take the view that it did not have such an obligation,

although the matter could have been handled better by the Arbitral Tribunal.

The Committee notes that the Republic of Peru argued before the Arbitral Tribunal

8 which is

that Article 8 of the Peru-China BIT establishes a three-step process, !*
summarized at paragraph 158 of the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence. First,

a cooling off period of six months in Article 8(1) which stipulates that:

“[a]ny dispute between an investor of one Contracting Party and the

'S4 Memorial, para. 175.

'55 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 47: 13-19.

'86 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 80: 1-5.

'S7 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 80: 10-21.

'58 Hearing on Jurisdiction, 15 October 2008, Tr. Vol. 1, 30:17 — 32:4.

53

135.

136.

other Contracting Party in connection with an investment in the
territory of the other Contracting Party shall, as far as possible, be
settled amicably through negotiations between the parties to the
dispute”.
Second, in the event the dispute is not settled accordingly, Article 8(2) opens an

option to the investor to submit the dispute to the courts of the host State:

“[ilf the dispute cannot be settled through negotiations within six
months, either party to the dispute shall be entitled to submit the
dispute to the competent court of the Contracting Party accepting
the investment.”

Third, according to the Republic of Peru, once the state court has found a wrongful
expropriation, if the “dispute involving the amount of compensation for
expropriation” still cannot be settled, the investor may then access international

arbitration in accordance with Article 8(3).

The whole discussion of the Arbitral Tribunal in paragraphs 154-161 of the Decision
on Jurisdiction and Competence hinges on the three step approach proposed by the

Republic of Peru. The Arbitral Tribunal referred to this analysis when it stated:

“However, beyond the possible effects of such a provision, the
Tribunal considers that if it were to accept Respondent’s
interpretation of Article 8(3), a contextual interpretation of the BIT
would lead to an incoherent conclusion — namely that the investor, in
fact, could never have access to arbitration.” 159

In the course of its discussion of the interaction among the three sentences of Article
8(3), the Arbitral Tribunal also refers to Prof. Chen’s Opinion distinguishing two
stages in a dispute over expropriation, existence of the expropriation first, and amount

of compensation, next. The Arbitral Tribunal reasoned:

“The Tribunal recognizes that Prof. Chen’s Opinion argues and
attempts to address the problem presented in the final sentence of
Article 8(3). Prof. Chen states the following:

‘If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, either the investor or the

'59 Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 154.

54

host State can submit to a competent court in the State hosting the
investment. If, after such court finds that the investment has been
expropriated, a dispute arises between the investor and the State
with respect to the amount of compensation owed to the investor for
the value of the expropriated investment, either party may submit
such dispute to ICSID arbitration. The treaty notes, however, that
resort to international arbitration shall not be available to either
party if they previously submitted the dispute involving the amount of
compensation for expropriation to the local courts.” ©

137. For the Committee, the arguments about the last sentence of Article 8(3) of the Peru-
China BIT were central to the Arbitral Tribunal’s reasoning. As already discussed, the
Arbitral Tribunal was doing what the VCLT requires, i.e., it considered the meaning
of the word “involving” in the context of Article 8(3) as a whole. If the VCLT is
properly applied, an interpreter, who has to consider the ordinary meaning in context,
cannot reach a conclusion about the meaning and then see if it is supported by the
context or the object or purpose. It is part of a single operation. In that sense, the
arguments about the last sentence of Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT were central
because referring to context should not be supplementary. However, for the reasons
that follow, the Committee is not convinced that the Tribunal departed from a
fundamental rule of procedure in connection with its analysis of the last sentence of

Article 8(3).

138. The above mentioned analysis of the Republic of Peru and Opinion of Prof. Chen are
descriptive of the mechanism of Article 8 and 8(3). True, the expression “fork-in-the-
road” appears only in the Arbitral Tribunal’s words at paragraph 159 of the Decision
on Jurisdiction and Competence and not in the Parties’ submissions. However, the
Committee remarks that Prof. Chen’s Opinion, when stating “that resort to
international arbitration shall not be available to either party if they previously
submitted the dispute involving the amount of compensation for expropriation to the
local courts”, describes a fork-in-the-road provision which is generally understood as
the foreclosure of any possibility of electing another available route for dispute
resolution once the choice of a particular dispute resolution procedure has been

161

made. When it used the expression “fork-in-the-road”’, the Arbitral Tribunal was

describing the dispute resolution mechanism established under Article 8 of the Peru-
160 Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 160 (emphasis in original).

161 See C. McLachlan, L. Shore, M. Weiniger, INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT ARBITRATION (2010), § 3.30.
55

139.

140.

China BIT without interpreting the language of the BIT. Description is not
interpretation. The fork-in-the-road provision qualifies the nature of the dispute
settlement clause. It changes nothing that the expression was not mentioned as such

by the Parties.

Article 8 of the Peru-China BIT, which was discussed by the Parties, was also the
Treaty provision whose meaning had to be determined by the Arbitral Tribunal. At
paragraph 159 of the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, the Arbitral Tribunal

found that the three step approach suggested by the Republic of Peru was:

“directly contrary to the last sentence of Article 8(3). In fact, the
last sentence leaves no doubt that an investor (of any Contracting
Party), when trying to choose a course of action to settle a dispute in
accordance with Article 8, finds himself with an irrevocable forum
selection clause, also known by the phrase ‘fork-in-the-road’. An
investor ‘shall be entitled to submit the dispute to the competent
court of the Contracting Party’ [...] in accordance with Paragraph
8(2), but if the investor does so, in accordance with Paragraph 8(3),
such investor could not under any circumstances resort to ICSID
arbitration to settle a dispute ‘involving the amount of compensation
for expropriation’. Therefore, in accordance with the interpretation
stated by Respondent, in the event that one Party requests to submit
the dispute to ICSID arbitration for the purposes of dispute
resolution ‘involving the amount of compensation for expropriation’,
it would be informed that the parties have not consented to submit
themselves to such arbitration since the investor has been requested
to first settle the dispute before the courts of the corresponding
Contracting Party”.

The interrelation of the three paragraphs of Article 8 and of the three sentences of
Article 8(3) was discussed by the Parties and more particularly by the Republic of
Peru which put forward one interpretation of these provisions. The terms of Article
8(3) contain a fork-in-the-road provision from which the Arbitral Tribunal drew the

following conclusion, opposite to that advocated by Prof. Chen:

“[t]he Tribunal unfortunately does not consider that the wording
used in the final sentence of Article 8(3) of the BIT justifies
differentiating between claims ‘involving the amount of
compensation for expropriation’ and other claims. The sentence is
categorical. It refers to any claim subject to ‘the competent court of
the other Contracting Party’. Therefore, this argument does not

56

141.

142.

A.

143.

144.

162

persuade the Tribunal.”'?

The Committee finds that the interpretation of Article 8(3) of the Peru-China BIT was
at all times within the debate between the Parties. An interpreter is not limited by the
arguments made by the parties when its interpretation, unlikely to be surprising to
either party, is drawn from the terms of the provision which have been discussed by
the parties and rests on a description of the mechanism of the arbitration provision.
Therefore, the Committee concludes that, while the Republic of Peru has
demonstrated that the legal argument on the fork-in-the-road provision in Article 8(3)
relied upon by the Arbitral Tribunal was not explicitly articulated in the arbitration, it
has not demonstrated that it could not have reasonably anticipated that such argument

would be taken into consideration by the arbitrators.

The Committee finds that there is no serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure. The Republic of Peru’s request for annulment on this ground is

accordingly dismissed.

IV. THE AWARD OF 7 JULY 2011

THE PARTIES' SUBMISSIONS

a. The Applicant’s Submissions

In the alternative, the Republic of Peru seeks annulment of the Award in its entirety,'®
based on the finding that the preliminary precautionary measures imposed by SUNAT
and upheld by the tax court constituted an indirect expropriation of Mr. Tza Yap

Shum’s investment for which Peru must be held liable.

i. Manifest Excess of Powers

The Republic of Peru first alleges that the Arbitral Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention) by deciding different claims than
the claim of expropriation, when it had ruled in its Decision on Jurisdiction and

Competence that the claim for expropriation was the only claim the Arbitral Tribunal

Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, para. 161.

‘6 Memorial, para. 260; Reply, para. 181.

s7

145.

was entitled to entertain. According to the Applicant, notwithstanding that decision,
the Arbitral Tribunal adjudicated the reasonableness and propriety of the Peruvian tax
authorities’ actions beyond their allegedly expropriatory nature, thereby deciding the
claims of Mr. Tza Yap Shum on fair and equitable treatment, arbitrary and
discriminatory measures, and denial of justice that it had agreed were outside its
jurisdiction. For the Republic of Peru, the Arbitral Tribunal also exceeded its powers
by ignoring general principles of law requiring that the damage for which a State is

held liable must be caused by the conduct of that State.

ii. Failure to State Reasons

The Republic of Peru next contends that the Arbitral Tribunal failed to state reasons

(Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention) for:

. “ignoring Peru’s arguments regarding Claimant’s [Mr. Tza Yap Shum’s] failure
to prove that the precautionary measures, rather than Claimant’s [Mr. Tza Yap
Shum’s] own business and legal choices, caused the alleged harm to his

investment;

. failing to recognize that TSG chose preventive bankruptcy, even though the
Tribunal conceded that the full amount of SUNAT’s tax resolutions was more
than matched by the GST refunds that SUNAT paid to TSG and that, rather
than use the refunds to pay its taxes or to provide collateral in order to lift the
precautionary measures, TSG found it [at paragraph 249 of the Award] ‘more
beneficial from a financial standpoint to repay short term, high interest

creditors’;

. why it was appropriate for an expropriation analysis to decide, in effect,
whether Claimant [Mr. Tza Yap Shum] had been granted fair and equitable
treatment, had been subject to arbitrary and discriminatory measures, or had

been denied justice; and

. relatedly, how it could rely on legal sources with respect to its ‘arbitrary’ and

denial of justice standards that had nothing to do with expropriation

‘64 Memorial, paras. 250-252; Reply, paras. 169-171.

58

claims.” 1°

146. The Republic of Peru also argues that the Arbitral Tribunal engaged in contradictory

reasoning amounting to a failure to state reasons by:

. “finding that TSG was somehow [financially] devastated when the
precautionary measures froze the sum of US$ 172 for less than six months,
even while finding that TSG made almost no use of the banking system, and
that it may not have been mandatory to use the banking system in Peru;”!®

. “purporting to apply [at paragraph 160 of the Award] the rule from LG&E that
‘where the investment continues to operate, even its profits are diminished’
then an expropriation has not occurred, then acknowledging [at paragraphs
165 and 166 of the Award] TSG ’s retention of control over its operations
albeit with diminished profits, and yet concluding that the precautionary

measures were expropriatory;”!©7

. “citing ADM and Tate & Lyle [at paragraph 162 of the Award], where the
tribunal had concluded that there was no expropriation because the investment
continued to operate, conceding that SUNAT’s precautionary measures did not
cause Claimant [Mr. Tza Yap Shum] to lose its capacity to operate, but
concluding that the precautionary measures were nevertheless
expropriatory;” !*

. “citing S.D. Myers [at paragraph 163 of the Award] ‘in which the closing of the
Canadian border to exports of hazardous waste for 18 months was not
considered to be an expropriatory measure,’ yet concluding that SUNAT’s
precautionary measures — which were in effect for less than six months — were
expropriatory;”!©

. “reasoning [at paragraph 173 of the Award] that, ‘under international law, a

State is not liable for the loss of value of property or for other economic

S Memorial, para. 254. See also, Reply, para. 173.
Reply, para. 174. See also, Memorial, para. 255.
Memorial, para. 255. See also, Reply, para. 174.
Memorial, para. 255.

Memorial, para. 255; Reply, para. 174.
59

147.

148.

149.

disadvantages that result from good faith imposition of general taxes ... or
other conduct commonly accepted as part of the police powers of the state,’
but then holding that a state is liable for alleged economic disadvantages
resulting from taxation — so long as its internal decision-making can be

described as ‘arbitrary’ or the Tribunal purports to find a denial of justice;”!”°

. “stating [at paragraph 95 of the Award] that ‘the exercise of administrative and
regulatory powers of a State carries with it a presumption of legitimacy,’
which is ‘especially true where the State is acting in pursuit of an important
public interest,’ but applying no such presumption in favor of Peru’s legitimate

exercise of its taxation powers.”!7!

iii. | Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

The Republic of Peru finally argues that the Arbitral Tribunal seriously breached a
fundamental rule of procedure (Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention) by
exercising jurisdiction beyond the scope of the Parties’ consent to arbitration and by

failing in multiple respects to state reasons for its Award.!7”

b. The Respondent’s Submissions

Mr. Tza Yap Shum replies that the Arbitral Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its
powers. He argues that the Arbitral Tribunal used several sources for the concept of
arbitrariness, which is a general concept that is not exclusively restricted to the fair
and equitable treatment standard. He contends that the Arbitral Tribunal did not
import the arbitrariness standard to interpret the term “expropriation” in Article 4 of
the Peru-China BIT, nor did it import the denial of justice standard in the
expropriation claim.'7? In his view, the Award has therefore settled only an

expropriation dispute. !”*

Mr. Tza Yap Shum also contends that the Arbitral Tribunal stated the reasons on

179 Memorial, para. 255; Reply, para. 174.

im
Im

Memorial, para. 255.
Memorial, par:

257-258; Reply, paras. 175-177.

 

"3 Counter-Memorial, paras. 107, 109-115; Rejoinder, paras. 119-134.
"74 Counter-Memorial, para. 151.

60

150.

151.

"75 Counter- Memorial, para:
© Counter-Memorial, paras.

1

which it based its Award. He argues that the Arbitral Tribunal’s analysis was based on
contrasting the effects doctrine with the legitimate exercise by the Republic of Peru of
the police powers on tax matters. For the regulatory powers of the State resulting in
an act of expropriation to be considered a legitimate act, it is necessary to assess the
State’s behavior against criteria such as non-arbitrariness, non-discrimination,
reasonability, protection of the public interest, good faith and due process, among
others. Mr. Tza Yap Shum argues that the causal relationship between SUNAT’s
measures and the substantial deprivation of the investment in TSG has been proved
and remarks that the Arbitral Tribunal considered the State’s argument about the value
of the investment before the imposition of tax liens and relied on the damages expert

report produced by the Republic of Peru.!7>

Mr. Tza Yap Shum further contends that (i) there is no contradiction in deciding an
expropriation claim by analyzing the legitimacy requirements of a regulatory act; (ii)
there is no contradiction between the effects of SUNAT’s measures and the reasoning
of the Arbitral Tribunal relating to the use of the banking system by TSG; (iii) there is
no contradiction in the application as reference of the LG&E Award on substantial
interference; (iv) there is no contradiction in the reference to the ADM and Tate &
Lyle Award on the operational capacity of TSG; and (v) there is no contradiction in the
reference to the S.D. Myers Award on the temporary impact of SUNAT’s measures on
the investment. Mr. Tza Yap Shum also contends that the application of the good faith

standard is not contradictory. !7°

Mr. Tza Yap Shum finally argues that the Arbitral Tribunal did not seriously depart
from any fundamental rule of procedure. For Mr. Tza Yap Shum, the Tribunal settled
the disputed issue of expropriation based on an analysis of the effects doctrine and
once it was convinced that an expropriatory measure had occurred, it contrasted such
measure against the Republic of Peru’s police powers on tax matters. Therefore, Mr.
Tza Yup argues, the Tribunal did not import criteria pertaining to fair and equitable

treatment, arbitrary and discriminatory measures, and claims on denial of justice.!””

100-103, 117-118, 147; Rejoinder, paras. 98-104.
119-135; Rejoinder, paras. 105-118.

 

   

"7 Counter-Memorial, para. 137; Rejoinder, paras. 143-144.

61

152.

153.

B. THE COMMITTEE'S ANALYSIS

a. Article 52(1)(B): Manifest Excess of Powers

The Arbitral Tribunal found that the precautionary measures resulted in an indirect
expropriation of Mr. Tza Yap Shum’s investment in breach of Article 4 of the Peru-
China BIT, for which he was not compensated. !7° Examining whether the Republic of
Peru could nevertheless be exempt from liability based on public interest in the

exercise of its taxation power, the Arbitral Tribunal recognized that:

“under international law, a State is not liable for the loss of value of
property or for other economic disadvantages that result from the
good faith imposition of general taxes, regulations, or other conduct
commonly accepted as part of the police powers of the state. The
creation, administration, and collection of taxes form part of the
taxation power of the states.”'”

Having underlined earlier that States are not exempt from responsibility and from the
obligation to pay compensation if their actions are arbitrary or discriminatory,'*° the
Arbitral Tribunal ended the discussion with a declaration that arbitral awards
involving allegations of indirect expropriation resulting from the actions of tax

authorities:

“reveal a substantial consensus that the imposition of taxation
measures or their enforcement may be expropriatory if they are
confiscatory, arbitrary, abusive, or discriminatory.” '*!

This gives rise to the criticism of the Republic of Peru, which discerns a manifest
excess of powers arguing that the Arbitral Tribunal used the word “arbitrary” to
import the fair and equitable treatment standard into the expropriation analysis.
According to the Republic of Peru, this is evidenced by the Arbitral Tribunal’s
reliance on non-expropriation sources (Amto v. Ukraine, S.D. Myers v. Canada, EDF
v. Romania, Lauder v. Czech Republic and the ICJ Judgment in ELS/).'*? The

Applicant’s criticism extends to the Arbitral Tribunal’s analysis of the availability of

"8 Award, para. 170.
"79 Award, para. 173.
'80 Award, para. 148.
'8! Award, para. 181.
'8 Memorial, para. 224-225; Reply, paras. 149-155.

62

an adequate legal remedy and due process in the course of its examination of
SUNAT’s conduct,'§? from which the Arbitral Tribunal concluded that TSG had a
formal rather than a substantive access to a legal remedy.'*4 The Arbitral Tribunal,
the Republic of Peru alleges, imported the inapplicable denial of justice standard into
Mr. Tza Yap Shum’s expropriation claim, when such standard would have been
appropriate only if the Tribunal’s jurisdiction extended to the Claimant’s fair and

equitable treatment claims.!*°

However, the Applicant notes, the Arbitral Tribunal
had already concluded in the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence that it did not

have jurisdiction over Mr. Tza Yap Shum’s fair and equitable claims. !*°

154. According to the Republic of Peru, in importing the arbitrary and discriminatory

measures and fair and equitable treatment standards into the expropriation analysis to
condemn SUNAT’s actions as arbitrary, the Arbitral Tribunal violated its own
Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence.'®’ For the Applicant, the Arbitral Tribunal
extended its jurisdiction to cover Article 3(1) of the Peru-China BIT on fair and
equitable treatment!** by relying on non-expropriation jurisprudence in order to find
its “arbitrariness” standard and then hold Peru liable for expropriation.'®? The
Arbitral Tribunal also erred, further submits the Republic of Peru, in applying a rule
of law not found in the Peru-China BIT. The Applicant notes that the Peru-China
BIT does not have a prohibition against arbitrary measures and argues that the Arbitral
Tribunal would have had no jurisdiction over a claim based on such standard even if

the Peru-China BIT prohibited such arbitrary measures. !°°

155. The Committee notes that the Arbitral Tribunal discussed at length the notion of

189
190

8 Award, pa

223-240.

Award, para. 238.

Memorial, paras. 245-248; Reply, paras. 164-167.

Memorial, para. 248. In the Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, the Arbitral Tribunal found that
Article 3(1) of the Peru-China BIT, which according to the Tribunal “establishes the principle that investors
of the Contracting Parties shall be granted fair and equitable treatment under the most favored nation
clause (“MFN”) contained in Article 3(2)” could not be interpreted to extend the jurisdiction of ICSID to
fair and equitable treatment and protection claims, or to provide the basis for an independent source for the
competence of the Tribunal. Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence, paras. 189, 220.

Memorial, paras. 224, 230.

Peru-China BIT, Art. 3 (Exh. RA-004) (“J. Investments and activities associated with investments of
investors of either Contracting Party shall be accorded fair and equitable treatment and shall enjoy
protection in the territory of the other Contracting Party. 2. The treatment and protection referred to in
Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be less favorable than that accorded to investments and activities
associated with such investments of investors of a third State.
Memorial, para. 225.

Memorial, para. 222.

 

 

 

63

156.

157.

158.

“arbitrariness”, which it considered as a fundamental concept recognized across legal

191

systems. The Arbitral Tribunal explained and said that arbitrariness is a relevant

concept, based on its review of relevant jurisprudence:

“[h]aving studied numerous arbitral awards involving allegations
of indirect expropriation resulting from the actions of tax authorities,
the Tribunal recognizes that most have been rejected. These awards
however also reveal a substantial consensus that the imposition of
taxation measures or their enforcement may be expropriatory if they
are confiscatory, arbitrary, abusive, or discriminatory.” '°?
The Republic of Peru attacks the reasoning of the Arbitral Tribunal and _ its
interpretation of the jurisprudence and legal authorities in support of the finding that
SUNAT?’s measures did not result from the legitimate regulatory activity of the State,
but were the result of arbitrary conduct and were therefore expropriatory. However,
conduct relevant to the question of indirect expropriation could also be relevant to the
question of fair and equitable treatment. Further, arbitrariness is one of the questions
relevant to both fair and equitable treatment and indirect expropriation claims. It is no
surprise then that the Arbitral Tribunal might refer in the present context to concepts
that are relevant to both indirect expropriation and fair and equitable treatment. Thus,
the Applicant’s criticism becomes a matter of interpretation relevant to the merits.
For example, the Republic of Peru alleges that the tribunal in EDF v. Romania applied
a good faith standard that contradicted the analysis of the Arbitral Tribunal.'> While
the Republic of Peru may disagree, it is for the Arbitral Tribunal to interpret the law.

The Committee reiterates that its role is not to act as a court of appeal.

The Committee also finds that the Republic of Peru draws unwarranted conclusions
from one footnote when it argues that “the Tribunal apparently seized on the EnCana
tribunal's dicta regarding a tax that is ‘arbitrary in its incidence’ as the sole source of

international law supporting its invasive standard of review.” !°*

The Republic of Peru further contends that “in applying the ‘arbitrary’ standard that

'91 Award, paras. 186-195.

192
193
194

Award, para. 181.
Memorial, para. 221.
Memorial, para. 213. See also, id. para. 211-212 (referring to Award, para. 181, fn. 151 citing EnCana v.

Republic of Ecuador, Award (3 February 2006), para. 177 (“Only if a tax law is extraordinary, punitive in
amount or arbitrary in its incidence, would issues of indirect expropriation be raised.”)).

64

159.

160.

it had imported from the fair and equitable treatment and arbitrary and
discriminatory measures jurisprudence, the Tribunal imposed its own view of how
SUNAT should have conducted its own internal workings.” '®> It goes on to argue that
“(1) SUNAT plainly had discretion to implement the precautionary measures under
the Peruvian Tax Code, yet (2) the Tribunal went beyond Peruvian law to judge
SUNAT by its internal guidelines and preliminary drafts of internal memoranda.” !°°
The Arbitral Tribunal decided that SUNAT’s behavior in imposing the preliminary
precautionary measures provided by Section 56 of the Peruvian Tax Code was
arbitrary, particularly with regard to the failure to observe internal procedures.'*” The
Arbitral Tribunal also took account of the Republic of Peru’s contentions that SUNAT
had discretion under Section 56 of the Peruvian Tax Code to implement the
preliminary precautionary measures where such measures were indispensable based
on the taxpayer’s conduct or when reasons existed to suspect that the collection
process could become unsuccessful.!°* What the Republic of Peru is requesting is a
retrial of issues already dealt with by the Arbitral Tribunal, but Article 52 of the

ICSID Convention does not allow for such a retrial by the Committee.

The Arbitral Tribunal stressed “that it does not sit nor seek to sit as a supranational
court of appeals to add a further level of scrutiny over SUNAT’s actions [...].”'°? The
Republic of Peru nevertheless challenges the Arbitral Tribunal for its “probing
inquiry” of SUNAT’s internal procedures,” a criticism which the Committee takes
note of but can take no action on in light of Article 53 of the ICSID Convention.

Article 53 lays down the principle that an award shall not be subject to any appeal.

The same is true for the Republic of Peru’s continuing dissatisfaction with the Arbitral
Tribunal’s reasoning on the availability for the investor of an adequate legal remedy
and due process. The key question for the Arbitral Tribunal was whether these

remedies were adequate and effective.”°! The conclusion of the Arbitral Tribunal that

Memorial, para. 231.
Memorial, para. 231. See also, Memorial, paras. 232-244.
Award, para. 218.

198 Award, paras 196-205.
99 Award, para. 184.

200

Memorial, para. 214.

201 Award, para. 183.

65

161.

162.

202 cannot be

TSG did not have a reasonable opportunity to claim its legitimate rights
overturned by the Committee in view of its limited powers under Article 52 of the

ICSID Convention.

All in all, the Committee cannot subscribe to the Applicant’s theory according to
which, under the guise of an expropriation analysis the Arbitral Tribunal actually
decided a fair and equitable treatment and/or an arbitrary and discriminatory measures
claim by ruling that SUNAT acted arbitrarily.2°? The criticisms of the Republic of
Peru bear on the reasons of the Award and are no basis for intervention by the
Committee. The Applicant’s objections based on the interpretation of the Peru-China
BIT, the meaning of the Peruvian Tax Code and the actions of the Tax Court as
assessed in the Award would require the Committee to re-decide the merits. Thus, the
Committee cannot conclude that the Arbitral Tribunal made an award going beyond

its authority.

The Republic of Peru finally argues that the Arbitral Tribunal exceeded its powers by

ignoring “general principles of law”?

identified in the Articles on Responsibility of
States for Internationally Wrongful Acts (the ILC Articles). In particular, the
Applicant refers to Article 31 of the ILC Articles, requiring that the damage for which
a State is held liable must be caused by the conduct of that State. The Republic of
Peru asserts that, although the harm to TSG was caused by the investor’s choice not to
lift the preliminary precautionary measures instead of deciding to initiate preventive
bankruptcy, the Arbitral Tribunal held the host State liable.?°° The Committee notes
that in the usual practice of ad hoc committees, failure to apply the applicable law has
been considered as a manifest excess of power.?°° However, a violation of Article
52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention requires an egregious misinterpretation or
misapplication of the applicable law.?°? A mere error of law does not equal to an
excess of powers, let alone a manifest excess of powers. The Committee finds that
the Republic of Peru does not identify such a violation of Article 52(1)(b). Its

objection relates more to a claim that the Tribunal failed to explain its reasoning or

202 Award, para. 240.
23 Reply, paras. 158-163.
24 Memorial, para. 252.

205

Memorial, para. 252; Reply, para. 171.

206 Kléckner v. Cameroon I, para. 59 (Exh. RA-LA-055); MINE v. Guinea, para. 5.03 (Exh. CA-LA-2.12).
207 Soufraki v. UAE, para. 86 (Exh, RA-LA-041).

66

163.

164.

165.

that there was a contradiction in the reasoning, which will now be examined.

b. Article 52(1)( E): Failure to State Reasons

The Republic of Peru essentially concentrates its attack on the section of the Award
(paragraphs 152-170) corresponding to the Arbitral Tribunal’s analysis of whether the
preliminary precautionary measures imposed by SUNAT resulted in an expropriation
of Mr. Tza Yap Shum’s investment. The Republic of Peru (i) emphasizes that the
Arbitral Tribunal contradicted itself by changing the legal standard to prove
expropriation; (ii) claims that the Arbitral Tribunal did not analyze the actual facts,
but hypothetical facts to which it applied its contradictory legal standard; and (iii)
asserts that the Tribunal did not provide reasons for importing the arbitrariness

standard into what was allegedly an expropriation analysis.?!°

i. Change of the Legal Standard for Expropriation

In support of its first argument, the Republic of Peru claims that each source of law
mentioned by the Arbitral Tribunal manifestly contradicts the conclusion that

SUNAT’s precautionary measures were expropriatory.”!!

For the Applicant, instead
of the substantial deprivation standard, the Arbitral Tribunal applied a de minimis
standard, in which any change to the level or the nature of the investment operations

will constitute an expropriation.?!?

The Republic of Peru further contends that, although conceding that no legal
impediment existed during the bankruptcy proceeding to preclude TSG, which
retained control of its operations, from carrying out its activities, the Arbitral Tribunal
noted that TSG did not regain its original operating capacity before June 2006 when
the bankruptcy proceeding concluded.*!* The Republic of Peru adds that, as a result of

214

its alteration of the substantial deprivation standard as set out in LG&E Energy~'* and

208 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 55: 5-9.
2” Memorial, para. 206; Reply, paras. 125-138; Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 55: 5-14, 57:

5-16.

20 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 73: 17-20.
2! Memorial, paras. 187-190, 194-195, 204-206; Reply, paras. 109-110.

213,

212 Reply, paras. 116-119.

213 Memorial, para. 190.
214 LG&E Energy Corp. et. al. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability (3
October 2006), para, 200 (Exh. RA-LA-057) (“Thus, the effect of the Argentine State’s actions has not been

67

S.D.Myers,”!> the Arbitral Tribunal contradicted itself by relying on the 18-month
standard set out in S.D. Myers and finding that SUNAT’s precautionary measures
were expropriatory, when their actual duration of less than six months was in fact too

temporary. 216

166. More particularly, the Republic of Peru characterizes as an “annullable error” the
application by the Arbitral Tribunal of contradictory standards concerning substantial
deprivation and permanence for the finding of an expropriation at paragraph 168 of

the Award.”!” This paragraph reads:

“[t]he Tribunal has studied the Respondent's arguments to effect that
TSG might have operated without making use of its bank accounts,
or that TSG’s decision to seek protection through a reorganization
proceeding resulted from financial difficulties which had nothing to
do with the actions of SUNAT; and also that Claimant has failed to
demonstrate that the impact of the measures was more than
temporary. Additionally, during the bankruptcy proceeding, the
company appears to have received a dramatically decreased amount
of income (apparently from prior sales) and still somehow managed
to repay some of its debts. By themselves, these events do not show
that the company continued to exist and to operate as it had prior to

the measures.”

167. As the Republic of Peru correctly reminds the Committee,”'® contradictory reasons
constitute one of the aspects of the absence of reasons according to the consistent
practice of ad hoc committees which has already been referred to.7!? It has already
been mentioned that the K/éckner v. Cameroon I Committee identified an obligation

on the part of the arbitrator to set forth reasons which are not contradictory.”

 

permanent on the value of the Claimants’ shares’, and Claimants’ investment has not ceased to exist. Without
a permanent, severe deprivation of LG&E’s rights with regard to its investment, or almost complete
deprivation of the value of LG&E’s investment, the Tribunal concludes that these circumstances do not
constitute expropriation.” )

215 §.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Partial Award (13 November 2000), paras. 283-284
(Exh. RA-LA-078) (“An expropriation usually amounts to a lasting removal of the ability of an owner to
make use of its economic rights although it may be that, in some contexts and circumstances, it would be

ippropriate to view a dep as ing to an expropriation, even if it were partial and temporary. In
this case, the closure of the border was temporary. SDMI's venture into the Canadian market was postponed
for approximately eighteen months [...] but it does not support the proposition on the facts of this case that
the measure should be characterized as an expropriation [...].”)

216 Memorial, para. 204, Reply, paras. 121- 124.

217 Memorial, para. 195.

218 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 57: 9-12.

219 Supra, para. 102.

220 Klockner v. Cameroon I, para. 116 (Exh. RA-LA-055).

68

 

168.

169.

170.

However, the ground for annulment of Article 52(1)(e) is limited to discordance in the

reasons which a reading of the award should make apparent.

But rather than focusing on a contradiction in the reasons, the Republic of Peru’s
argument is more concerned with an application of the law that is different from its
own interpretation. Reopening the discussion of the L&G E Energy and S.D. Myers
awards as interpreted by the Arbitral Tribunal in the context of a challenge under
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention would serve no purpose other than
transforming the annulment review into an appeal. The Arbitral Tribunal simply drew
from the analysis of the above cited cases the following conclusion, which is not the

one the Republic of Peru wished to have been drawn:

“[iJn contrast to the cases cited, SUNAT’s actions not only reduced
the company’s rate of return, but instead also eliminated or
substantially frustrated the operational capacity of the business.”??'

The Republic of Peru contends that, although many tribunals insist that the measure
must cause a total deprivation of the investor’s rights in order to be actionable, the
Arbitral Tribunal stated in conclusory fashion that it had “examined the parties’
arguments and sources of law that emphasize that the effects of the measures on the
investment must be of a severe nature” with virtually no discussion of those sources of

2
law.???

The Republic of Peru criticizes the Arbitral Tribunal for failing to state
reasons for why it chose to abandon the high expropriation threshold reiterated in the
decisions which the Republic of Peru relied upon in the arbitration proceedings
(Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, Pope & Talbot v. Canada, CMS
Gas v. Argentine Republic, Telenor v. Republic of Hungary, Toto Costruzioni Generali
S.p.A. v. Republic of Lebanon, Enron Corporation v. Argentine Republic, Tokios
Tokelés v. Ukraine) but which were not mentioned in the Tribunal’s Award even in a
footnote. It further notes that there is no mention of the Feldman award’s conclusions
that tax measures are not expropriatory even if their effects make it impractical for

certain business activities to continue.”

It is sufficient to say that the Award makes clear that the jurisprudence in support of

221 Award, para. 162.

222

Memorial, para. 187.

3 Memorial, paras. 193, 224.

69

the Republic of Peru’s position that no indirect expropriation occurred through

SUNAT’s precautionary measures?**

Tribunal held:

was examined by the Arbitral Tribunal. The

“[i]n our analysis of the character of SUNAT’s measures, we have
examined the parties’ arguments and sources of law that emphasize
that the effects of the measures on the investment must be of a severe
nature.

For example, it has been drawn to our attention that the tribunal in
LG&E Energy Corp. et al. v. Argentine Republic indicated that
‘[i]nterference with the investment’s ability to carry on its business is
not satisfied where the investment continues to operate, even if
profits are diminished’. In this case as in other awards in which no
expropriation was found to have occurred, the investment in question
maintained some level of operational viability though with its
profitability comparatively lower.

According to TSG’s financial statements, however, this was not the
case with the investment in the instant case. Even with the
protection of the bankruptcy proceeding that the company itself
initiated, net sales of the company dropped from an average of
approximately S/.80 million before the measures in 2003-2004, to
approximately S/.3.4 million in 2005-2006. ”??>

171. The Applicant is simply inviting the Committee to discuss the correctness of the

findings of the Arbitral Tribunal.

172. The Republic of Peru also criticizes the Arbitral Tribunal for dismissing in one
sentence the ADM and Tate & Lyle award which had held that there was no
expropriation because the investment continued to operate.7”° However, the Republic
of Peru fails to explain how footnote 124 of paragraph 162 of the Award, which reads
“[u]nlike the investment in the case of Archer Daniels Midland the measures in

question affected the only business activity of TSG”, would constitute insufficient

224 Counter-Memorial of Defense (12 April 2010), paras. 217-236.

25 Award, paras. 159-161.

26 Archer Daniels Midland Co. and Tate & Lyle Ingredients Americas, Inc. v. United Mexican States, 1CSID
Case No. ARB(AF)/04/5, Award (21 November 2007) (Ex. RA-LA-05), para. 246 (“An alternative criterion
regarding intensity is whether the host State measure affects most of the investment’s economic value or
renders useless the most economically optimal use of it [...] Using the abovementioned test, the tax was not
sufficiently restrictive to support a conclusion that the Tax had effects similar to an outright expropriation’);
Memorial, para. 192.

70

justification in itself for the solution reached by the Arbitral Tribunal regarding the
indirect expropriation of the investment. The Committee recalls that the Vivendi v.

Argentina ad hoc Committee has already pointed out that:

“[a] greater source of concern is perhaps the ground of ‘failure to
state reasons’, which is not qualified by any such phrase as
‘manifestly’ or ‘serious’. However, it is well accepted both in the
cases and the literature that Article 52(1)(e) concerns a failure to
state any reasons with respect to all or part of an award, not the
failure to state correct or convincing reasons. It bears reiterating
that an ad hoc committee is not a court of appeal. Provided that the
reasons given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues
that were before the tribunal, their correctness is beside the point in
terms of Article 52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons may be stated
succinctly or at length, and different legal traditions differ in their
modes of expressing reasons. Tribunals must be allowed a degree of
discretion as to the way in which they express their reasoning.

In the Committee's view, annulment under Article 52(1)(e) should
only occur in a clear case. This entails two conditions: first, the
failure to state reasons must leave the decision on a particular point
essentially lacking in any expressed rationale; and second, that point
must itself be necessary to the tribunal’s decision [...].”?>"

The Committee also takes the view that contradiction in the reasoning arises under
Article 52(1)(e) when the conflicting reasons are substantial. Further, the requirement
to state reasons (which purpose is to enable the parties, and more particularly the
losing party, to understand the decision) applies only to reasons which constitute the
basis for the conclusions of the Arbitral Tribunal. Peru’s challenge to the Arbitral
Tribunal’s treatment of the ADM and Tate & Lyle award is unsupportable under either

of these standards.

ii. Reliance on Hypothetical Facts

173. In support of its second argument that the Arbitral Tribunal’s expropriation analysis
was based on hypothetical facts and not on the actual facts on the record,””* the
Republic of Peru remarks that the Arbitral Tribunal based its decision on a
hypothetical period of three years for the precautionary measures, when they were

21 Vivendi v. Argentina, paras. 64-65 (Exh. RA-LA-024) (emphasis in original).

28 Hearing on Annulment, 22 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 2, 353:5-9.
71

174.

175.

176.

actually lifted after six months.”? The Republic of Peru also argues that the Arbitral
Tribunal removed the causation requirement between SUNAT’s precautionary
measures, which were in effect for only six months (between 28 January and 11 July

2005) and froze only US$ 172, and the alleged substantial deprivation of TSG.”

According to the Republic of Peru, the Arbitral Tribunal acknowledged that the
preliminary measures imposed in January 2005 were lifted after six months, but held
that they would have frustrated the operations of TSG and resulted in an indirect
expropriation on the basis of the hypothetical of how long the freeze would have

lasted had Claimant not had it lifted.?*!

For the Applicant, the Arbitral Tribunal also
ignored entirely the Republic of Peru’s invocation of the ICJ Judgment in ELS/’s

discussion of causation, and instead relied on the dissenting opinion in that case.

The other “annullable error’, identified by the Republic of Peru in paragraph 168 of
the Award, relates to the alleged failure by the Arbitral Tribunal to consider arguments
regarding Mr. Tza Yap Shum’s failure to prove that the precautionary measures caused
harm to his investment. Instead of addressing this question, the Republic of Peru
claims, the Arbitral Tribunal offered no clue as to what the “general principles” on the
issue of causation to which it referred might be, and did not apply them to determine
whether the measures caused the alleged harm to Mr. Tza Yap Shum.”*? The passage

in the Award, which is more particularly criticized, reads as follows:

“[t]he Peru-China BIT, unlike other foreign investments treaties or
agreements, does not include a provision expressly requiring proof of
the causal connection between a certain measure and the resulting
damage. International tribunals have generally addressed the issue
based on general principles of international law, which, in this case
are the ones applicable under Article 42 of the ICISD
Convention. ”?*4

It can be remarked that, at footnote 134 of paragraph 167 of the Award, the Arbitral

Tribunal referred to examples of awards and legal literature in relation to the “general

° See Memorial, para. 205; Award, paras. 164, 169.

230 Reply, paras. 111-115.

231 Hearing on Annulment, 22 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 2, 351:11 — 353:9.
232 Memorial, para. 198.

233 Memorial, paras. 196-197.

24 Award, para. 167.

72

principles of international law” which responds to the point raised by the Applicant.
The gist of the criticism here is really that the Arbitral Tribunal drew the wrong

conclusion.

177. The Republic of Peru argues that the Arbitral Tribunal failed to explain at paragraph

168 of the Award, in a sentence which reads “[b]y themselves, these events do not
show that the company continued to exist and to operate as it had prior to the
measures”, why it considered that the precautionary measures caused the alleged
substantial deprivation. It further contends that the Arbitral Tribunal reversed the
burden of proof in rejecting Peru’s causation arguments, as it was for Mr. Tza Yap
Shum, and not for the Republic of Peru, to show that the measures caused the alleged

substantial deprivation.?*°

178. The Committee observes that the legal rules concerning the burden of proof are set

out at paragraphs 71-73 and 151 of the Award.?*° Allegations pertaining to the
violation of said rules cannot give rise to annulment by this Committee under Article
52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention, which deals only with the existence of reasons and

not with the correctness of the application of the law.

179. Furthermore, the declarations of the Arbitral Tribunal in paragraph 168 of the Award,

235
236

which refute the arguments of the Republic of Peru, must be read in conjunction with
the reasoning in the section of the Award on the expropriatory effects of the
preliminary precautionary measures and in light of footnote 139 of the Award at the

end of the last sentence of paragraph 168.7°7 In the opinion of the Committee, the

Reply, paras. 114-115.

Award, para. 72 (“Accordingly, Claimant must principally show that there has been expropriatory conduct of
its investment in breach of the Treaty. Respondent, in turn, is charged with demonstrating whether, as it has
alleged, the conduct in question is permitted under the Treaty or international law”), Award, para. 151 (“The
Claimant, of course, has the burden of proving [a] claim [of expropriation]. Even while the Claimant may
have suffered an economic injury as a result of Respondent's actions, the injury must be sufficiently severe so
as to constitute expropriation under international law. If he does not demonstrate such a_ taking,
appropriation, or the destruction of value of his property (‘taking’), the Claimant's case must fail. Even if he
proves an impact sufficient to constitute expropriation, the Tribunal must determine whether the Respondent
is exempt of international responsibility given the important public interest involved in the exercise of
taxation authority by States. In order to do this, the Tribunal must evaluate whether the actions taken were
discriminatory or arbitrary.)

Award, para. 168, fn. 139 (clarifying that TSG managed to pay its debts although it had received a
dramatically decreased amount of income apparently from prior sales that “/iJn effect, it was not shown that
these sales were the result of the procurement of new inventories. According to the explanation from
Claimant, these corresponded to sales of existing inventory and the payment interest from advances to
providers.”)

    

73

180.

181.

factual elements on which an arbitral tribunal relies in a chain of causality to reach its
conclusion are not subject to review by an ad hoc committee because of its limited
remit under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention. This would otherwise

transform the annulment procedure into an appeal.

In support of its allegations that SUNAT’s measures did not harm TSG, the Republic
of Peru asserts an absence of reasons in the Award for failing to recognize that TSG
chose preventive bankruptcy on 11 March 2005, even though it could have paid its tax
liabilities or pledged the tax refunds as a guarantee which would have allowed it to lift
the precautionary measures. The Republic of Peru argues that the Arbitral Tribunal
never considered that the choices of the investor caused the alleged damages to
TSG.*8 The Republic of Peru explained during the Hearing on Annulment that the
tax debt was reduced to 3 million soles and that SUNAT reimbursed TSG for an
amount of almost 33 million soles, so that TSG had the money to pay its tax debt, but
chose instead to pay short term creditors because it was more beneficial to do so
financially.?*°

Contrary to the Applicant’s allegations, the Committee finds that the Arbitral Tribunal
did provide reasons. The Award notes that the Republic of Peru presented evidence
that TSG would have had the legal alternative of offering cash and other collateral in
the full amount of the tax debt to have the precautionary measures lifted and to
resume use of the Peruvian banking system.7*° The Arbitral Tribunal evaluated the

argument of the Republic of Peru in the following way:

“[a]dditionally, during the hearing it was suggested that the investor
showed bad faith after the measures were imposed by SUNAT.
Specifically, the Respondent questioned the decision to use the funds
generated by TSG’s tax rebates to repay third party creditors rather
than to make payment of the tax claims of the SUNAT. It is not
surprising that the investor might opt for this course of action in
order to mitigate the damages caused to his investment. In effect,
because of the way that the investment was financially structured, it
was more beneficial from a financial standpoint to repay short term,
high interest creditors. The other alternative (to use the rebates to
pay off or guarantee its tax debt) would have required him, probably,

238 Memorial, paras, 202-203.
2° Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol 1, 61:16 — 63:11.
240 Award, para. 155.

74

182.

183.

procedure and carried out some minor activities.

to offer these funds as a guarantee to SUNAT for an indeterminate
time. [...]*!

The Award clarifies that TSG made use of the Peruvian banking system, not as a
source of capital, but rather to receive operating capital, to process letters of credit
issued by foreign purchasers and to transfer the repayment of its loans and interest.
The Arbitral Tribunal held that the declaration of preventive bankruptcy proceedings
in March 200577 was the right initiative in response to the precautionary measures
imposed by SUNAT in January 2005, to regain access to the banking system and to

operate as an automatic lift of the preliminary measures:

“[e]ven though the request [...] served to have the freezing of bank
accounts and third parties’ withholding lifted in the short term in
June 2005, the bankruptcy proceeding did not conclude until June
2006. It was not until the bankruptcy proceedings concluded in June
2006, at the behest of the company itself, that it regained its original
operating capacity.

It is true, as the Respondent notes, that during the proceeding no
legal impediment existed that precluded TSG from carrying on its
business activity. The voluntary reorganization proceeding did not
deprive the shareholders of control; although the business was
subject to reorganization, it retained control of its operations. As an
effect of the declaration of reorganization, the Bankruptcy Law
requires the lifting of all preliminary precautionary measures so that
SUNAT was forced to lift its measures, which occurred on July 1,
2005. The Tribunal, however, is convinced that the request for
reorganization was the only effective remedy available to the
Claimant to achieve, within a reasonable time period, the lifting of
the preliminary precautionary measures that were stifling its ability
to develop its business activity. As a result, the Tribunal finds that
TSG’s decision to seek bankruptcy protection was reasonable and
appropriate under the circumstances.”**+

The Arbitral Tribunal noted that TSG continued to function during the bankruptcy

extraordinary protection from the bankruptcy proceeding [...] the company would

241 Award, para. 249.
22 Award, para. 153.

3 Award, para. 110.

24 “Award, paras. 165-166.

75

It determined that “without this

simply have been unable to continue operating.”** The Arbitral Tribunal indicated
that even with the protection of the bankruptcy proceedings the net sales of the
company dropped from S/80 million in 2003-2004, before the preliminary
precautionary measures were put in place on 28 January 2005, to approximately S/ 3,4

million in 2005-2006.74°

184. The Republic of Peru criticizes the Arbitral Tribunal for failing to respond to its
explanation of Peruvian law regarding acceptable means of payment under a contract,
which it presented to support its argument that the precautionary measures did not
prevent TSG from carrying out transactions with the fishing industry. The Republic
of Peru says that, instead, the Arbitral Tribunal gave an incomprehensible answer at

footnote 115 of paragraph 156 of the Award.”4” The footnote at issue reads:

“[t]he Respondent, based on the report and testimony of its tax law
expert, José Galvez, suggests that TSG could have resorted to cash
transactions such as account deposits with no need to use its bank
accounts [...] This alternative would not have served SUNAT’s
interest in this instance nor was it viable. To the contrary,
channelling [sic] TSG’s financial operations through its bank
accounts is far from incidental, and it allowed it to comply with the
Peruvian ‘bankerization’ rules, to facilitate its operation of the
business and even SUNAT ’’ audit operations.”

185. The Committee notes that footnote 115 refers to the following passage of paragraph

156, according to which SUNAT:

“[...] should have understood that the bank withholding measure
would be a fatal blow on TSG’s ability to operate, choking off its
normal sources of working capital and precluding it from resort to
the banking system for processing of its letters of credit and
repayment of its debts.”

186. The Committee concludes that the declarations of the Arbitral Tribunal should be

considered in light of earlier declarations in the Award in which the Arbitral Tribunal

explained:

25 Award, para. 157.
246 “Award, para. 161.
247 Memorial, paras. 200-201.
76

“[i]n carrying out its operations, TSG made use of the Peruvian
banking system. In so doing, TSG complied with the norms of
‘bankerization’ (‘Bancarizacion’ [i.e., a policy in favor of using the
formal banking system]). While the use of the banking system may
not have been mandatory, the ‘bankerization’ of TSG’s operations
allowed it to irrefutably certify expenses, costs or credits in order to
deduct them on its tax statements.”>*

187. The Republic of Peru argues that the Arbitral Tribunal contradicted itself in finding
that TSG was financially devastated by the freeze of US$ 172 as a result of the
precautionary measures which were in force for less than six months, while finding
that TSG made use of the banking system and that it may not have been mandatory to

use the banking system in Peru.”? The Tribunal held that:

“[t]he freeze in the form of bank withholdings was an utter failure.
As a result of it, a total of approximately US $172 was collected
compared to a tax debt of approximately US $ 4 million. In similar
form, the withholding measure to third parties did not result in any
collections whatsoever.”?°°

188. The Committee notes that the Arbitral Tribunal acknowledged in the Award that TSG,
which principally had a financial role, used the Peruvian banking system to carry out

its operations:

“[...] TSG'’s principal role [...] was a financial one. Despite having
a modest capital, TSG had access to short-term international
financing, principally from business associates, friends and relatives
of the investor. During the 2002-2004 period, these funds amounted
to approximately US $ 59 million. In a period when liquidity was
scarce and business loans from Peruvian financial institutions were
difficult to obtain, TSG used these funds not only to purchase raw
fish and fish flour, but also to provide advances to fishing companies
for fuel or equipment and to processing companies for refurbishing
equipment and facilities. These advances were generally repaid, with
interest, by deducting the payments due from the amounts payable by
TSG to the fishing or processing companies.

In carrying out its operations, TSG made use of the Peruvian

28 Award, para. 101.
»” Reply, para. 174.
280 Award, para. 220.
77

banking system. [...]”?>!

189. | The Arbitral Tribunal further stated in relation to the efficacy of SUNAT’s measures:

“[a]s indicated previously, the measures, in contrast, did have an
impact on the operational capacity of the business. During the
period immediately after their imposition (2005-2006), a business
whose previous revenues had reached S/ 90 million, reported
average income of barely S/ 766,941 per year and essentially
disappeared from the tax rolls.

As indicated previously, it is true that TSG later continued operating
in Peru. However, this was the product of a preventive bankruptcy
proceeding initiated by the company itself, that culminated in late
2006 and because of it, TSG was able to restructure its finances,
access the banking system, and operate free of precautionary
measures affecting its assets. Specifically, it initiated the proceeding
to recover the operating conditions that it had lost for a considerable
period of time as a result of SUNAT’s actions. It would thus be
illogical to allow SUNAT to benefit from these efforts of the taxpayer,
in order to justify or minimize the impact of its own conduct.”

190. It is worth recalling an often cited passage of the decision of the ad hoc Committee in

MINE v. Guinea which clarifies with respect to the reasoning of an award that:

“[...] the requirement that an award has to be motivated implies that
it must enable the reader to follow the reasoning of the Tribunal on
points of fact and law. It implies that, and only that. The adequacy of
the reasoning is not an appropriate standard of review under
paragraph (1)(e), because it almost inevitably draws an ad hoc
Committee into an examination of the substance of the tribunal’s
decision, in disregard of the exclusion of the remedy of appeal by
Article 53 of the Convention. A Committee might be tempted to
annul an award because that examination disclosed a manifestly
incorrect application of the law, which, however is not a ground for
annulment.

In the Committee's view, the requirement to state reasons is satisfied
as long as the award enables one to follow how the tribunal
proceeded from Point A to Point B and eventually to its conclusion,
even if it made an error of fact or of law. This minimum requirement
is in particular not satisfied by either contradictory or frivolous

251 Award, paras. 100-101.
282 Award, paras. 221-222.
78

191.

192.

193.

99253
reasons.”

The Committee finds that the Arbitral Tribunal’s above cited reasons enable the
Parties and any reader of the Award, including Treasury Officials or Parliament,” to
follow that TSG, which used the banking system for its financing of the fishing
industry in Peru to export to China, decided to file bankruptcy proceedings in March
2005 in order to lift SUNAT’s precautionary measures. Such measures did not only
freeze the current account with US$172, but more seriously affected the checking
accounts and the suppliers whose payments to TSG were withheld. The lift of the
precautionary measures (that had been suspended with the bankruptcy proceedings)
ended when the bankruptcy proceedings ended in June 2006. From there on, TSG
regained its original operating capacity. However, as the Award makes clear at
paragraph 164, SUNAT’s measures imposed on January 2005, which were to be
effective for a one-year period until January 2006, were renewed twice for a one-year
period, from January 2006 to January 2007, and from there to January 2008.75 Asa
direct consequence of SUNAT’s measures, TSG went outside the market as it had lost
the contracts with its suppliers in the fishing industry: “a business whose previous
revenues had reached S/.90 million, reported average income of barely S/. 766,941

per year and essentially disappeared from the tax rolls.”?°6

The Committee finds that it is therefore possible to follow from point A to point B and
all the way to the conclusion of the Arbitral Tribunal that Mr. Tza Yap Shum was
deprived of his investment in TSG. The Arbitral Tribunal did not jump over necessary

reasons. This Committee, it bears recalling again, is not an appeal body.

In light of the preceding, the Committee does not consider it necessary to enter into a
discussion regarding the Republic of Peru’s allegations that the Arbitral Tribunal
failed to state reasons in its Award in accordance with Article 52(1)(e) in finding an
expropriation despite its own finding that Mr. Tza Yap Shum could continue operating

257

in Peru but simply chose to leave the market~’ only because TSG failed to generate

283 MINE v. Guinea, paras. 5.08-5.09 (Exh. CA-LA-2.12).
284 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 218:18 — 219:8.
285 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 293:7-21; 22 March 2014, Vol. 2, 446:5 — 448:18.
286 Award, para. 221.
27 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 63:12 — 64:10, 68:9-19; Memorial, para. 191.
79

194.

195.

profits even before the precautionary measures were implemented.”** The Applicant’s
submission that the Arbitral Tribunal’s attempt to find an expropriation based on
purely hypothetical facts constitutes a manifest excess of powers?” is also rejected.
The Arbitral Tribunal provided ample reasons and did not manifestly exceed its

powers.

iii. Importing the Arbitrariness Standard into the Expropriation
Analysis

The Republic of Peru finally asserts that the Arbitral Tribunal failed to state reasons
for importing the arbitrariness standard into what was allegedly an expropriation
analysis. The Republic of Peru contends that the Tribunal purported to apply the good
faith standard, which is the correct standard to determine whether a state’s core police

powers are exempt from liability for expropriation, but contradicted itself by applying

a stricter arbitrariness standard.?°°

The Republic of Peru argues that the Arbitral Tribunal had recognized the existence of

a presumption of legitimacy in the exercise by the State of its regulatory powers.”°!

The Tribunal held that:

“[a]s argued by the Respondent, the exercise of administrative and
regulatory powers of a State carries with it a presumption of
legitimacy. This is especially true where the State is acting in pursuit
of an important public interest like the protection of public policy,
health or public morality (known as the ‘police powers’ of the State).
In this sense, the taking or seizure of property for failure to pay taxes
is recognized as a legitimate tool of tax administration, provided,
however, that such actions are carried out pursuant to reasonable
legal procedures and where such actions are not confiscatory,
abusive or discriminatory.”?°

However, the Republic of Peru complains, the Tribunal applied no such presumption

in favor of Peru’s legitimate exercise of its taxation powers.”° Such a basic principle,

288 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 66:14 — 67:2.
2° Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 64:10-12.
2 Memorial, paras. 226-228; Reply, paras. 156-157; Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 73:17-

20.

261 Memorial, para. 229.

262

263

Award, para. 95.
Memorial, para. 229.

80

196.

197.

198.

199.

the Republic of Peru argues, “cannot hinge on trivia such as the formatting of drafts
of SUNAT’s internal reports or whether SUNAT personnel followed every step of

nonbinding departmental guidelines.”?™

The Committee notes that the Award states in this regard:

“[e]ven though the Tribunal recognizes that the regulatory authority
of the State deserves deferential treatment, it is essential to do so
without losing sight of the reasons why such deference is
accorded.”

The Arbitral Tribunal concluded from the examination of SUNAT’s conduct that:

“[...] even recognizing the importance of the functions that SUNAT
exercises in tax administration and collection, SUNAT’s behaviour in
imposing the preliminary precautionary measures on TSG
particularly the failure to observe its own procedures, must be
considered arbitrary.”

The Republic of Peru discusses the probative weight of the evidence put forward
before the Arbitral Tribunal regarding the conduct of the State of Peru. However, the
relevance of the evidence produced by the Parties is a matter of assessment for the
arbitral tribunal in the exercise of its discretion. At bottom, the position of the
Republic of Peru is that there are no reasons because the Arbitral Tribunal did not

agree with the Republic of Peru’s arguments.

The Committee finds that Peru’s challenge based on the Arbitral Tribunal’s failure to
state reasons is in effect a legal and evidentiary appeal which is impermissible under

Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention and is accordingly dismissed.

c Article 52(1)(D): Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of
Procedure
The Republic of Peru contends that the same arguments supporting its challenge to
the Award for manifest excess of powers under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID

Convention also support a challenge for serious departure from a fundamental rule of

264 Reply, para. 163.
265 Award, para. 180.
266 “Award, para. 218.

81

200.

201.

202.

203.

204.

267
268

procedure under Article 52(1)(d).7°7 The Applicant argues that the Tribunal in fact
adjudicated claims for fair and equitable treatment, arbitrary and discriminatory
measures and denial of justice, which were beyond its jurisdiction, thereby breaching

a fundamental rule of procedure.°*

For the Applicant manifestly exceeding the parties’ consent is a serious departure

from a rule of a fundamental rule of procedure.”

The Applicant’s arguments have already been rebutted under Article 52(1)(b).

270 the

Essentially for the same reasons set out in the previous section of this decision,
Committee denies the Applicant’s challenge for serious breach of a fundamental rule
of procedure. There must be a proper demonstration of the violation of each ground

listed in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention, which is lacking here.?7!

The Republic of Peru also contends that the Arbitral Tribunal’s ignoring of Peru’s
evidence of the real causes behind TSG’s poor financial performance amounts to a
serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.?’> The Committee
acknowledges that the right to be heard is one of the fundamental rules of procedure
protected by Article 52(1)(d), but such right places no obligation on an arbitral
tribunal to address each and every argument raised by the parties. Cast in other terms,
an arbitral tribunal is under the obligation to decide in light of all the evidence
adduced by the parties, but it has no obligation to explain itself on each and every

piece of evidence.

The Republic of Peru more generally complains about the Award as being the result of
a substantially flawed process.””> This is an assumption that the grounds of Article 52

are cumulative.

Finally, the Republic of Peru also argues, generally, that the same arguments giving
rise to its challenge to the Award for failure to state reasons under Article 52(1)(e) also

support a challenge to the Award for serious departure from a fundamental rule of

Memorial, para. 257; Reply, para. 176.
Id.

2 Hearing on Annulment, 22 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 2, 375:16-376:14.
2 Supra, paras. 152-161.

21. Supra, para. 120.

22 Hearing on Annulment, 21 March 2014, Tr. Vol. 1, 66:7-13.

23 Reply, para. 175.

82

205.

206.

207.

procedure under Article 52(1)(d).?”*

The Committee recognizes that the same defects in an award may fall under several
grounds of Article 52. However, this does not relieve an applicant of the obligation to
demonstrate that it has a valid complaint under each separate ground. It is necessary
to distinguish between the different grounds. Here, the grounds of annulment of
Article 52(1)(b) and (e) are simply subsumed by the Republic of Peru in the ground of
Article 52(1)(d). Its challenge is therefore denied.

Vv. COSTS

The Republic of Peru asks the Committee to find that Mr. Tza Yap Shum must bear all
costs and fees, including attorney fees associated with this annulment proceeding,””>
as well as the costs of the application regarding the termination of the stay of
enforcement until the end of the annulment proceedings.?”° Mr. Tza Yap Shum
requests, in turn, that the Committee order the Republic of Peru to bear all costs and
fees it is causing to the investor, not only in connection with the request for annulment
but also in connection with the Jurisdiction and Merits stages, including attorneys’
fees, counsel expenses, and other compensation the Committee may deem
appropriate.?””

The Committee notes that both the Parties and the Committee were well served by the
high professionalism of the Secretariat which always acted in a tactful and efficient
manner. The dismissal of the Application for Annulment of the Republic of Peru
would not justify, in the Committee’s view, deciding that the unsuccessful Applicant
should carry the burden of the whole costs of the annulment proceeding. The
Republic of Peru did raise serious questions for annulment. There was an important
question of at what point the application of the VCLT rules is so misguided that there
is a manifest excess of powers. The Committee also regrets that Mr. Tza Yap Shum
only informed at the outset of the First Session of his decision to drop the application
for termination of the Stay of Enforcement. Such application was a strong reason for

holding an in person meeting in Washington, D.C. with all costs associated with such

24 Memorial, para. 258; Reply, para. 177.
25 Memorial, para. 260.

26 First Session Tr., 29:9-11, 32:2-5.

27” Counter-Memorial, para. 153.

83

meeting. Those costs were advanced by the Republic of Peru in accordance with

Article 14(3)(e) of the ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations.

208. On the basis of Articles 52(4) and 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, the Committee
which has discretion to determine how and by whom the cost of the proceedings will
be borne, finds that simply allocating all of the costs to the Republic of Peru would
not give recognition to the above circumstances. In view of the preceding, the
Committee decides that the Republic of Peru should bear 80% and that Mr. Tza Yap
Shum should bear 20% of the full costs and expenses in connection with the

annulment proceeding.?”°

209. With regard to Party costs, namely, cost for legal representation and expenses, the
Committee would like to acknowledge the great assistance it received from counsel
who presented their case with efficacy and civility. In accordance with the invitation
of the Committee, the Parties submitted their statements of costs on 9 January 2015,
with a correction received from the Republic of Peru on 14 January 2015. In exercise
of its discretion under the ICSID Convention in connection with Party costs, the
Committee decides that each Party should bear its own cost for legal representation

and expenses for the fair and proper presentation of their positions.

VI. DECISION

210. For the reasons given above, the ad hoc Committee decides that:

. The Republic of Peru’s Application for Annulment is dismissed in its entirety;

. The Republic of Peru shall bear 80% of all the costs of the proceedings
incurred in connection with the Annulment proceeding and Mr. Tza Yap Shum

20% of the said costs;

. Each Party shall bear its own Party costs incurred in connection with the

Annulment proceeding;

. Pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule

54(3), the stay of enforcement of the Award is terminated.

28 The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed Financial Statement of the case account as
soon as all invoices are received and the account is final.

84

a)

 

Judge Dominique Hascher

President of the ad hoc Committee

Date: FEB 02 2015

Professor Donald M. McRae

 

Professor Kaj Hobér

Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee

Date: JAN 15 2015 Dates JAN 96 2015

