INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT
DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the annulment proceeding between
SGS SOCIETE GENERALE DE SURVEILLANCE S.A.
AND

THE REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/29

 

DECISION ON PARAGUAY’S REQUEST FOR THE
CONTINUED STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

 

Members of the Committee
Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno B., President
Mr. Eduardo Zuleta J., Member of the Committee

Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, Member of the Committee

Secretary of the Committee

Ms. Mercedes Cordido- Freytes de Kurowski

Date: March 22, 2013

Il.

VI.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Glossary.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

 

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS CONCERNING THE STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE
AWARD

 

A. Paraguay’s Position

 

B. SGS’s Position

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS CONCERNING THE PROSPECTIVE REQUIREMENT
THAT A BOND BE POSTED FOR THE CONTINUED STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF
THE AWARD

 

A. Paraguay’s Position

 

B. SGS’s Position
RECENT FACTS

 

ANALYSIS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE............0++
A. Annulment Regime Under ICSID
B. The Circumstances of the Present Case .....

DECISION

 

 

 

GLOSSARY

Award: Award rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal on February 10, 2012.

BIT: Agreement between the Republic of Paraguay and the Swiss Confederation on the

Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, entered into on January 31, 1992 and

in force and effect since September 28, 1992.

ICSID Arbitration Rules: Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings.

ICSID or Centre: International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes.

ICSID Convention: Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States

and Nationals of Other States.

ICSID Financial Regulations: ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations.

SGS: SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A.

IL

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On February 10, 2012, the Tribunal in the original arbitration proceeding presided by
Dr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov (Bulgarian), appointed by the Chairman of the
Administrative Council of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes, and also comprising Mr. Donald Francis Donovan (U.S.A.), appointed by
SGS, and Dr. Pablo Garcia Mexia (Spanish), appointed by the Republic of Paraguay,
rendered an Award partially upholding SGS’s claims and awarding it
US$39,025,950.86, plus simple interest as compensation. The Tribunal concluded
that Paraguay had breached its obligation, under Article 11 of the 1992 Agreement on
the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between Switzerland and
Paraguay, to guarantee the observance of the commitments it had entered into with

respect to SGS’s investment.

The Tribunal also found that it did not need to resolve SGS’s claims that
(i) Paraguay’s failure to fulfill its alleged extra-contractual promises of payment
constituted an additional breach of Article 11 of the BIT; and that (ii) Paraguay had
breached Articles 4(1) and 4(2) of the BIT, by taking undue and discriminatory
measures and by denying fair and equitable treatment. According to the Tribunal,
such claims ultimately derived from the same set of facts and contractual
commitments that gave rise to the Tribunal’s conclusion that Respondent had
breached Article 11 of the BIT, and because in any event a further finding in favor of

SGS would not affect the quantum of damages.

On June 7, 2012, ICSID received from the Republic of Paraguay an application for

annulment and a request for stay of the enforcement of the Award.

On June 8, 2012, pursuant to Rule 50(2) (a) and (b) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application and notified the Parties of

the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule

54(2).

By letter of June 25, 2012, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2), SGS
requested that the Committee rule, within 30 days of the date of its constitution, on
whether the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award should be continued. SGS
expressed its opposition to a continued stay of enforcement and requested that
Paraguay be ordered to post a bond in the event that the Committee should decide to

continue such stay.

On July 27, 2012, the Secretary-General, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule
6(1), notified the Parties that the three members of the ad hoc Committee had
accepted their appointments and that the Committee was therefore deemed to have
been constituted on that date. The ad hoc Committee was composed of Mr. Rodrigo
Oreamuno, a national of Costa Rica, President of the Committee; Dr. Eduardo Zuleta,
a national of Colombia; and Mr. Salim Moollan, a national of Mauritius and France.
Ms. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski, ICSID Legal Counsel, was designated

to serve as Secretary of the Committee.

On July 30, 2012, pursuant to Regulation 14(3) (e) of the ICSID Administrative and
Financial Regulations, the Centre requested that the Republic of Paraguay make a
first advance payment of US$200,000 (two hundred thousand United States dollars)
within thirty (30) days to cover the initial costs of the annulment proceedings,

including the First Session of the Committee.

By letter of August 8, 2012, the Committee invited the Parties to file written
observations on the request for continued stay of enforcement prior to the First
Session. The Republic of Paraguay was invited to file its observations by August 14,

2012 and SGS by August 20, 2012.

On the same date and pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2), the Committee
extended the provisional stay of the enforcement of Award until it had heard the

Parties and reached a final determination on the continuation of the stay.

On August 14, 2012, the Committee confirmed that, as agreed by the Parties, the First
Session would be held on August 31, 2012, at the seat of the Centre in Washington,
DC.

As scheduled, on August 14, 2012, the Republic of Paraguay filed its “Observations
in Support of its Request for a Continued Stay of the Award”.

On August 20, 2012, the Republic of Paraguay informed that it would not be able to
make the requested advance payment in time for the First Session, acknowledging
that in such circumstances it might no longer be possible to hold the First Session on
August 31, 2012. As a result, the Republic of Paraguay waived the requirement of
ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1) that the Committee hold its First Session within 60 days

after its constitution.

As scheduled, on August 20, 2012, SGS filed its response to the Observations by the
Republic of Paraguay in Support of its Request for a Continued Stay of the Award.

On August 21, 2012, the Committee informed the Parties that in view of Paraguay’s
message of August 20, 2012, the First Session was canceled. SGS was invited to
agree to the Committee holding the First Session after the 60-day period prescribed in
ICSID Arbitration Rules 13(1) and 53.

On August 21, 2012, SGS gave its consent to the Committee holding its First Session
after the 60-day period prescribed in the ICSID Arbitration Rules. SGS also
requested that, if payment had not been received by August 26, 2012, the Committee

confirm in writing that the provisional stay of the Award should be lifted.

20.

21.

22.

On August 23, 2012, the Committee, referring to the Parties’ recent submissions on
the stay of enforcement, indicated that it would like to hear the Parties’ oral

presentations on this matter before reaching a decision.

By letters of August 23 and 24, 2012, the Parties expressed their positions on whether

or not the stay of enforcement should expire on August 26, 2012.

On August 24, 2012, the Committee informed the Parties about its decision to
continue the stay of enforcement until September 17, 2012, when it would

automatically be terminated should the Centre not have received Paraguay’s payment.

On August 30, 2012, the Committee confirmed that, as agreed by the Parties, the First
Session would be held on October 29, 2012, provided that Paraguay pay the first
advance by September 17, 2012.

On September 14, 2012, the Centre acknowledged receipt of Paraguay’s payment and
the Committee confirmed that the First Session and hearing on the stay of
enforcement would be held on October 29, 2012, at the seat of the Centre in

Washington, D.C.

On October 27, 2012, the Committee informed the Parties that in view of the fact that
a hurricane was expected to affect the Washington D.C. area and cause major
disruptions in the East Coast of the United States, the First Session would be held on
October 29, 2012 by telephone conference and not in person. The hearing about the
stay of enforcement was therefore canceled and the Parties were directed to make

their presentations in writing by November 2, 2012.

The Committee held its First Session with the Parties on October 29, 2012 by
telephone conference. The Parties confirmed that the Members of the Committee had
been validly appointed. It was agreed inter alia that the applicable Arbitration Rules

would be those in effect from April 10, 2006, that the procedural languages would be

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

English and Spanish and that the place of the proceeding would be Washington D.C.
In the absence of an agreement between the Parties, the Committee fixed a schedule
for the submissions of pleadings on the application for annulment. The agreements of
the Parties and the schedule for the submissions were embodied in Procedural Order

No. 1, dated November 13, 2012, signed by the President and circulated to the Parties.

On November 7, 2012, each Party filed further presentations about SGS’s request to
terminate the stay of enforcement of the Award. The original deadline had to be
postponed, as agreed by the Parties, because of the serious disruptions that hurricane
Sandy caused in New York, which affected the ability of Paraguay’s counsel to

respond.

On November 14, 2012, following the resignation of the ad hoc Committee member
Salim Moollan, the Secretary-General notified the Parties of the vacancy on the ad
hoc Committee and the proceeding was suspended pursuant to ICSID Arbitration

Rules 53 and 10(2).

On November 26, 2012, after consulting with the Parties, the Chairman of the ICSID
Administrative Council appointed Judge Abdulqawi A. Yusuf, a national of Somalia,
to the ad hoc Committee to fill the vacancy caused by Mr. Salim Moollan’s

resignation.

On November 29, 2012, following Judge Yusuf’s acceptance of his appointment, the
ad hoc Committee was reconstituted and the proceeding was resumed pursuant to

ICSID Arbitration Rules 53 and 12.

The Members of the Committee have deliberated by various means of communication

and have taken into consideration the Parties’ entire submissions on the matter.

Il. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS CONCERNING THE STAY OF
ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

A. PARAGUAY’S POSITION

28. By means of a written submission filed on June 7, 2012, pursuant to Article 52(5) of
the ICSID Convention and Rule 54 of ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Republic of
Paraguay requested that the enforcement of the Award issued on February 10, 2012
be stayed until the Committee renders a decision on the application for annulment

thereof.

29. Paraguay stated that strong grounds for the annulment of the Award existed and that it
did not request such annulment and the stay of enforcement of the award simply to

delay payment.!

30. In support of its request for a continued stay of enforcement of the Award, Paraguay
stated that:
(a) Its application for annulment of the award is substantial.
(b) It is nota dilatory tactic.
(c) The continued stay of enforcement of the award does not prejudice SGS.

(d) No bond or guarantee is necessary as mounting interest on the award and
Paraguay’s obligations under the ICSID Convention suffice to protect

SGS’s right to payment if the annulment were denied.”

' Paraguay’s Application for Annulment, June 7, 2012, 4 70.
? Paraguay's Written Submission of August 14, 2012, 4 3.

31.

32.

33.

34.

Furthermore, Paraguay maintained that annulment committees have routinely and
consistently stayed awards pending a decision on annulment, provided that they are
satisfied that the annulment petition is not merely dilatory. Quoting Azurix v.
Argentina, Paraguay highlighted that a stay should be granted absent exceptional

circumstances.

According to Paraguay, “[a] stay pending a decision on annulment makes eminent
practical sense: if the stay is lifted, Paraguay will face the prospect of having to pay
the Award before a decision on annulment is rendered, and then seek to recover the
money if the Award is annulled. It is far more efficient to await a final determination
of the Parties’ obligations”.*

In addition, Paraguay pointed out that the delay that SGS may encounter in recovering
on the Award “... is incidental to the Convention system of annulment, which permits
stays of enforcement pending annulment proceedings”.> It went on to cite Enron v.

Argentina as follows: “... the postponement of the right to payment of the award
caused by a stay cannot, by definition, per se constitute prejudice”®. It added that
SGS is not a struggling enterprise that needs to recover on the Award as soon as
possible but a multinational company with more than 70,000 employees that recorded

US$4.93 billion in revenue for 2011.

In its written submission of November 7, 2012, Paraguay requested once again that
the stay of enforcement of the Award be continued, without conditions.® It
highlighted that, according to the “Background Paper on Annulment for the

Administrative Council of ICSID” of August 2012, ad hoc committees have never

31d..99.

*Td..4 10.

SId., 99 14 and 15.
°Id.

"Id.

§ Paraguay's Written Submission of November 7, 2012, § 2.

declined to continue the stay of enforcement of an award and that there is no reason

for this case to be the first exception.”

35. Paraguay insisted that there are several reasons why the Committee should continue
the stay of enforcement of the Award:

(a) SGS will be sufficiently compensated for any delay in the enforcement of
the Award by the continued accrual of interest. In Paraguay's opinion,
even if it were not to prevail, SGS would be in the same economic position
as it is in now.

(b) Paraguay has no history of non-compliance with international awards and
has paid the amount determined by the Tribunal in the only award issued
against it.

(c) No exceptional circumstances exist that would require Paraguay to provide
security in order to continue the stay of enforcement of the award.

(d) Paraguay’ application for annulment is not dilatory.'°

36. Paraguay cited MTD v. Chile, Vivendi v. Argentina and Libananco v. Turkey in
support of its position whereby SGS may not use this annulment proceeding to
improve the interest awarded thereto. It reiterated that the simple interest awarded is
sufficient to compensate SGS for the delay in the event that Paraguay’s application
for annulment of the Award was denied."!

37. Paraguay denied having a history of non-compliance with international obligations
and non-payment of awards. It explained that it had recently been involved in two
international arbitrations and that in the proceeding instituted by Grupanor Cercampo

ld. 94.

1d 45.

"1d. 497-10.

S.A. Paraguay paid the award, whereas in the BIVAC case, the Tribunal concluded

that Paraguay had not breached the relevant treaty.’

38. Paraguay claimed that:

“{tJhere is no indication, past or present, that Paraguay will
not enforce the Award should its annulment request fail.
Paraguay is in full compliance with Article 69 of the ICSID
Convention. It has passed Law No. 944/1982, which
incorporated the ICSID Convention into Paraguayan law.
Moreover, Article 536 of the Paraguayan Code of Civil
Procedure establishes that international arbitral awards shall
have full force and effect in accordance with the terms of the

treaties under which they are rendered”. 8

39. Paraguay insisted that its application for annulment is not dilatory. It also pointed out
that in SGS v. Philippines and SGS v. Pakistan, both based on the umbrella clause, the
Tribunal declared that it lacked jurisdiction (SGS v. Pakistan) or that the claim was
inadmissible (SGS v. Philippines). According to Paraguay the Award represents a

grave abuse of power and an intrusion in the realm of negotiated contracts."
40. Paraguay summarized its viewpoint in the following manner:

“As the ad hoc committee in Mitchell v. Congo explained, ‘in

a different field but with the same ‘raison d’étre’, stay of

21d. 99 11 and 12.
Sid.q 14.
1d. 4g] 15-19.

Al.

42.

43.

enforcement pending an appeal from a judicial decision is,

according to several national laws, almost automatic’”.'°

B. SGS’s PosITION

SGS disagrees with Paraguay as far as the continued stay of enforcement of the award
is concerned. It contests Paraguay’s suggestions that “... a stay of enforcement is
almost automatic and should be granted absent ‘very exceptional circumstances’” and
that, in the present case, there are “no exceptional circumstances [that] warrant
denying a stay”. According to SGS, Paraguay misstates the applicable standard.
Under the plain language of the ICSID Convention, awards are immediately binding

and a stay of enforcement is the exception”. '°

By citing, Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v.
Argentina, and Kardassopoulos and Fuchs v. Georgia, among others, SGS argued
that “[cJonsistent with the plain meaning of the ICSID Convention, ad hoc
committees have recognized that there is no automatic right to a stay and that a stay is

a remedy of an ‘exceptional nature’”.'”

SGS also contested Paraguay’s allegation that the stay of enforcement of the Award

would not prejudice SGS, and asserted that:

“[s]imple interest at LIBOR + 1% (as was awarded by the
Tribunal) does not constitute adequate compensation for the
time value of money. The unchallenged evidence, at the
hearing below, by SGS’s Vice President, Finance and

Administration (Governments and Institutions Services

'S Paraguay’s Written Submission of August 14, 2012, 410.
'6 SGS's Written Submission of August 20, 2012, f] 11 and 12.
0

Id., 14.

44.

4S.

46.

Division), Michael Lironi, was that interest even at LIBOR +
2% was below SGS’s ‘actual cost of borrowing’. SGS would
suffer a further prejudice if Paraguay — as it has done with
respect to the 2005 judgment of the Swiss Federal Tribunal —
were to reorganize or conceal its foreign assets so as to make

itself judgment proof”.'*

In response to Paraguay’s second argument that its application is not dilatory SGS
contended that “[e]ven if one accepts that Paraguay is exercising in good faith its right
to seek annulment, that cannot justify a stay of enforcement... An applicant cannot
be entitled to receive the benefit of a stay of enforcement merely because it acted as it

was expected to”.

SGS stated that it had doubts as to Paraguay’s intent to comply with the Award and

whether or not the application for annulment is a dilatory tactic.”

SGS cited Professor Schreuer, asserting that “[a]nnulment is only concerned with the
legitimacy of the process of decision [in the arbitration]: it is not concerned with its
substantive correctness”, and that the application for annulment should allege
“... defects that go far beyond ‘mere errors of fact or law’ and, if proved, would
indeed justify annulment”.! SGS added that “... Paraguay alleges no procedural vice
or impropriety. Instead, the essence of Paraguay’s Annulment Application is a
disagreement with the Tribunal’s interpretation of the umbrella clause of the BIT and
its application of the dispute resolution provision of the BIT”.”? SGS concluded that:
“Paraguay’s Annulment Application therefore facially has no basis under the ICSID

Convention”.”>

S1d.4 18.
id. 421.
1d. 22.
114.427.
21d. 4 28.
3 1d.,430.

Il.

47.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

24 Da

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS CONCERNING THE PROSPECTIVE
REQUIREMENT THAT A BOND BE POSTED FOR THE CONTINUED
STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

A. PARAGUAY’S POSITION

According to Paraguay, the stay of enforcement of the Award should be continued
without the requirement of a bond. There is no requirement in the ICSID Convention
or the Arbitration Rules whereby a party must provide security in order to continue a

stay.7*

Paraguay pointed out that many committees have held that no bond should be
required unless there is evidence that the State would not comply with its obligations

if annulment were to be denied.”*

Paraguay highlighted that SGS has been unable to establish circumstances creating
doubt that Paraguay would comply with the Award should the annulment application
be denied. It also insisted that Paraguay has no history of non-payment under the

ICSID Convention.”

Furthermore, Paraguay asserted that requiring security would put SGS in a better
position, would penalize Paraguay for exercising its rights under the ICSID
Convention, and would create a disincentive for developing countries to submit

applications for annulment.?”
By citing CMS v. Argentina, Paraguay concluded that several ad hoc committees have

adopted the interpretation that a bank guarantee represents a windfall for the

respondent in an annulment proceeding.”*

raguay’s Written Submission of August 14, 2012, 4] 16.

3 1d.,417.
6 1d. 19.

7 Pa

raguay's Written Submission of November 7, 2012, 4 5.

81d. 22.

52.

53.

54.

55.

B. SGS’s PosITION

SGS stated that if the Committee were to accept Paraguay’s request for a continued
stay of enforcement of the Award, it should require that Paraguay post security for the

full amount of the Award, plus interest.

SGS pointed out that Paraguay owes over US$39 million that it promised to pay on
several occasions but failed to do so.” Moreover, it stated that “Paraguay repeatedly
failed to pay its share of the advances on costs requested by ICSID, with the result
that SGS was forced to bear the entire costs of the arbitration proceedings”.*” SGS
asserted that, in addition to the amount owed to SGS, Paraguay also owes BIVAC,
(SGS’s competitor), approximately US$36.1 million.*! SGS added that there is
another case against Paraguay before the Swiss Federal Tribunal and that Paraguay

has openly declared that it will not honor such debt.”

After citing the Libananco and Kardassopoulos cases, SGS asserted that “... many
committees have ordered the provision of security as the necessary and natural quid
pro quo for a continuation of a stay of enforcement and have not required any further
showing of special circumstances. Even if this Committee were minded to require a
positive showing by SGS (which it does not need to) ... there are circumstances that

justify the provision of security in the present case”.

SGS pointed out that Paraguay “... nowhere suggests that it is unable to pay the
Award in full immediately or would suffer economic hardship if required to do so.
Paraguay merely contends that it would be ‘far more efficient’ for it to pay the Award

only after the Committee renders its decision ...”**

2° SGS's Written Submission of August 20, 2012, 4 5.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

SGS stated that, in ICSID cases, the parties have the joint obligation to make an
advance payment to cover the costs of the proceedings. It also added that “Paraguay
violated that obligation, in a sustained fashion over the three years that the case below
was pending, until Paraguay cynically paid its share of the costs on the day it filed
this annulment proceeding”.*°

Moreover, SGS asserted that “Paraguay has not designated any court or other
authority, in accordance with Article 54(2), for the recognition and enforcement of
ICSID arbitral awards. Nor has Paraguay identified to ICSID any legislative or other
measures taken, pursuant to Article 69 of the Convention, to make the Convention

effective in its territory”.*°

Based on Repsol and the statements made by Professor Schreuer, SGS asserted that
“{t]he requirement of security serves as an important deterrent against ‘automatic’

annulment applications”.*”

After pointing out that it had been trying to cause Paraguay to pay the amounts owed
thereto for over 15 years, SGS stated that such sole reason would suffice for the
Committee to order Paraguay to post a bond or other security as a condition precedent

to continuing the stay of enforcement of the Award.**

SGS requested that the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award be lifted, and, in
the alternative, that is to say, in the event that the Committee decided to continue such
stay, the Committee order that, within the term of thirty days as from the date of
issuance of the decision, Paraguay “... post security in the form of an unconditional

and irrevocable bank guarantee or standby letter of credit with a reputable

51d. 438.
61d. 439.
57 1d. 4] 42 and 43.
81d. 945.

61.

international bank headquartered in Western Europe or North America for the full
amount of the Award (including interest to the date of the Committee’s order, plus 30
days) or in such other form and amount as may be determined by the Committee”. In
addition, it requested that the Committee order “... that the security so provided be
collectible by SGS in full and on first demand if Paraguay’s Annulment Application
is rejected, or in the event of partial annulment, partially collectible by SGS in the
remaining amount of the Award rendered in its favor”.*’ Lastly, it concluded that
“.. if Paraguay fails to provide the security so ordered within 30 days or defaults in
paying any other amount required by ICSID to be paid in the course of Paraguay’s
Annulment Application (including the costs of ICSID and/or the costs of the
Committee), the stay of enforcement of the Award shall be terminated ...”.*°

In its written submission of November 7, 2012, SGS stated that there are three
circumstances that warrant the prospective requirement to provide security in the case

at issue here:

(a) Posting a bond would not prejudice Paraguay. In such regard, it asserted
that “Paraguay does not and cannot say that it would suffer economic
hardship if required to post a bond. Nor would Paraguay suffer any harm
if the Award were annulled. In such circumstance, the bond would simply
be rescinded, thereby fully addressing Paraguay’s stated concern about

efficiency”."!

(b) The Committee would safeguard the integrity of the ICSID system and
ensure that Paraguay honor its obligations under the ICSID Convention.
In connection therewith, SGS stated that “[t]he Committee will have noted
that Paraguay nowhere undertakes to comply with the Award should the

Committee reject its application for annulment. (In any event, assurances

9 1d.,]49.
“ld.

4! $GS's Written Submission of November 7, 2012, page 3.

(c)

62. SGS added

would have little value given the history of broken promises by Paraguay
to pay SGS.) Paraguay’s failure even to undertake to comply with the
Award comes on top of a record of defiance by Paraguay of its ICSID
obligations — Paraguay paid its share of the arbitration costs below only
after it decided to commence these annulment proceedings — and evidence
of attempts by Paraguay to make itself judgment-proof and frustrate
enforcement of a Swiss court judgment rendered in favor of European
banks. By ordering a bond, this Committee would prevent this case from
becoming another black mark for the ICSID system of a dishonored

award” 2?

The nature of the application for annulment submitted by Paraguay
warrants a bond or other security. SGS asserts that the Committee should
determine whether or not the application for annulment is dilatory. In the
words of SGS, “...Paraguay’s application is a disagreement about treaty
interpretation. Paraguay does not allege procedural vice, due process
violation or unfairness. The core issue raised by Paraguay is a
disagreement with the Tribunal about the proper interpretation of the
dispute resolution clause of the BIT in light of the forum selection clause

in the underlying contract”.

that in Kardassopoulos v. Georgia the Committee ordered Georgia to post

a bond in circumstances similar to these. According to SGS “... in that case the key

consideration was Georgia’s protracted history of broken promises to compensate the

investor. That history (12 years) was shorter than ours (15 years)". SGS also cited

Lemire v. Ukraine where the Committee ordered Ukraine to post security on the basis

of Ukraine

“Td. pages 3 and 4.
5Id., pages 3 and 4.

‘s poor record of non-compliance with its international obligations.*> In

contrast, SGS referred to the fact that, in two cases against Chile (Pey Casado and
MTD), the Committees did not order the posting of a bond. This fact “... could point
to a spotless record of compliance with its international payment obligations”.“° SGS
also stated: that the Committee in Pey Casado considered “... that Chile’s
‘faithfulness and utmost seriousness’ in complying with its international
commitments and duties ‘should itself constitute a sufficient assurance’ of future

compliance”.”” In MTD the Tribunal pointed out that Chile ‘has always

complied with its International payment obligations and with all judgments or awards

of international courts and tribunals””.**

63. The Committee will now proceed to analyze the Parties’ written submissions and to
adopt a decision on the request submitted by Paraguay. Before doing so, it will,
however, examine recent facts that have been brought to its attention in connection
with the request for continued stay of enforcement of the Award.

46 1d., page 4.

“7 1d., page 4.

8 Id., page 5.

_

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

Vv.

RECENT FACTS

On January 15, 2013, SGS sent a letter to the Committee stating that Paraguay had
issued a “preliminary offering circular” (the “Offering”) for a bond issuance that it

would circulate through investment bankers and international law firms.

The Committee examined the Offering carefully and was able to verify that, as SGS
stated, Paraguay had actually made reference to the Award holding it liable to pay
SGS approximately US$39 million, plus interest thereon.

In its letter of January 15, 2013, SGS added that, on account of the stay of
enforcement of the Award, it was disabled from attaching, even provisionally, the
monies that would flow through the New York banking system in connection with the

bond issuance.
Moreover, SGS pointed out that, on page 10 of the Offering, Paraguay had made

reference to the possibility of SGS, or any other creditor mentioned in the Offering,

attaching part of the proceeds of the bond placement.

On page 10 of the Offering, Paraguay listed the following outstanding credits:

 

 

 

 

 

Creditor Approx. Amount Arbitral Tribunal or Court

Nine Banks US$85,000,000 plus interest Swiss Federal Tribunal

SGS US$39,000,000 plus interest ICSID Arbitral Tribunal

BIVAC US$36,000,000 ICSID Arbitral Tribunal and
Paraguayan Courts.

 

 

 

 

69.

70.

71.

72.

On pages 9 and 10 of its Offering, Paraguay included the two following paragraphs:

“Part of the offering proceeds could be attached by creditors
to satisfy outstanding and pending judgments and awards
against Paraguay.

Creditors holding outstanding court judgments or arbitral
awards present a risk of disruption to the offering. The risk
with respect to the offering is that the initial purchasers in the
offering could be said to have an obligation to pay money to
Paraguay and Paraguay’s judgment creditors may attempt to
restrain Paraguay’s interest in any such obligation. Further,

Paraguay’s creditors could attempt to attach the proceeds of
39 49

the offering”.
In its letter of January 15 referred to supra, SGS requested that this “...Committee lift
with immediate effect the provisional stay of enforcement” of the Award. SGS
concluded its letter stating that “[t]his may be the last opportunity that SGS will have
to force Paraguay to respect its ICSID obligations by attaching monies due to SGS
under the ICSID Award”.”

On the same day, the Committee invited the Republic of Paraguay to address SGS’s

request on or prior to January 18, 2013.

Before receiving Paraguay’s response, the Committee received another
communication from SGS dated January 17, whereby it stated that, “as a matter of
urgency”, it addressed it directly to the Committee. In this second letter, SGS

requested the following provisional measures:

“.. aS a matter of urgency and in accordance with its powers
under Article 39(1) of the Rules, the Committee order that
Paraguay direct its agents — including Citigroup and its
affiliates (as Global Coordinator, Joint Book-Runner,

® Preliminary Offering Circular, Republic of Paraguay, evidence submitted by SGS on January 15, 2013,
pages 9 and 10.

k

°° SGS’s Letter of January 15, 2013, pages | and 2.

Trustee, Principal Paying Agent, Transfer Agent and
Registrar of the Offering), Bank of America Merrill Lynch
(as Joint Book-Runner of the Offering) and any other
financial institutions involved in the Offering — to place the
proceeds of the Offering (up to the amount of the ICSID
Award plus interest) in an interest-bearing trust account with
Citigroup in New York pending the Committee’s decision on
the Parties’ respective requests regarding the stay of

enforcement”.*!

73. On January 18, 2013, the Committee received Paraguay’s answer to SGS’ letter. In

this reply, Paraguay:

(a)

(b)

(c)

Stated that, “... although it is true that Paraguay is raising funds on the
international debt markets... this fact does nothing to change the debate
over continuation of the stay of enforcement of the Award ...”.°?

Stated once again that since no ad hoc committee has declined to continue
the stay enforcement of an award, such stay should be continued pending
the Committee’s final decision in the context of this annulment

proceeding.**

Submitted a copy of the special power granted by the President of the
Republic of Paraguay to the Attorney General “... to provide a sworn
commitment before the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID), in the name and in representation of the Paraguayan
State, [in] the litigation Societe Generale de Surveillance S.A. (S.G.S.)
against the Republic of Paraguay, No. ARB/07/29 ...”.*

74. By means of a further communication dated January 24, 2013, Paraguay strongly

opposed the provisional measure requested by SGS and referred to in paragraph 72

5! §GS's Letter of January 17, 2013, pages | and 2.
* Paraguay’s Letter of January 18, 2013, page 1.

3 Id., page 1.

* Decree No. 9949 of October 24, 2012, submitted by Paraguay on January 18, 2013.

20

supra, arguing that such measure would negatively affect the actions it is undertaking

in order to raise funds in international capital markets.

75. On January 25, 2013, SGS sent a letter to the Committee in which it withdrew the

request for provisional relief that it had made in its January 17 letter. It stated that:

(a)

(b)

(c)

@

(e)

“For the avoidance of doubt, such withdrawal does not entail acceptance
by SGS of the arguments raised in Paraguay’s letter of 24 January
2013 ...".°°

“*.. Paraguay had hitherto offered no assurances that it intended to comply

with the Award should this Committee reject its annulment application”.*°

“The decree that authorizes Paraguay to offer assurances was issued on 24
October 2012 ...” but Paraguay preferred to keep it in reserve and it was
not until it “... was faced with the prospect of seeing the proceeds of its
first sovereign bond offering seized that Paraguay undertook to represent

to this Committee that it intended to comply with the Award”.*”

“\.. Paraguay anticipated future enforcement actions and specified that
“any action taken to enforce ... the SGS Award” would not be regarded as

an event of default under the bonds”.**

“SGS maintains its request that the Committee not extend the provisional
stay of enforcement or, alternatively, order Paraguay to provide financial

security for the full amount of the Award with interest”.©?

*5 SGS’s Letter of January 25, 2013, page 1.

“6 1d., page 2.
57 1d., page 2.
*Id., page 2.
*Id., page 3.

21

76. On January 30, Paraguay sent its reply to SGS’s January 25th letter. With respect to

Decree 9949, it stated:

77. In that response Paraguay stated that the Offering “...does not purport to state a
government policy that an enforcement action will be required to enforce the

Award”.°' It also reiterated its request that the stay of the Award be extended.

“SGS’s unfounded speculation about the timing of the letter
cannot detract from the fact that Paraguay has conveyed its
assurances that it will pay the Award if it is not annulled. As
Paraguay has already pointed out, annulment committees
routinely accept such assurances to support extending
provisional stays”.°°

© Paraguay’s Letter of January 30, 2013, page 2.

“'Id., page 2.

22

Vv. ANALYSIS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

A. ANNULMENT REGIME UNDER ICSID

78. Before analyzing the arguments of the Parties, the Committee considers it important

to refer to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention which reads as follows:

“The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances
so require, stay enforcement of the award pending its
decision. If the applicant requests a stay of enforcement of
the award in his application, enforcement shall be stayed
provisionally until the Committee rules on such request”.

79. Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides the following:

“Stay of Enforcement of the Award

(1) The party applying for the interpretation, revision or
annulment of an award may in its application, and either
party may at any time before the final disposition of the
application, request a stay in the enforcement of part or all of
the award to which the application relates. The Tribunal or
Committee shall give priority to the consideration of such a
request.

(2) If an application for the revision or annulment of an
award contains a request for a stay of its enforcement, the
Secretary-General shall, together with the notice of
registration, inform both parties of the provisional stay of the
award. As soon as the Tribunal or Committee is constituted
it shall, if either party requests, rule within 30 days on
whether such stay should be continued; unless it decides to
continue the stay, it shall automatically be terminated.

(3) If a stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to
paragraph (1) or continued pursuant to paragraph (2), the
Tribunal or Committee may at any time modify or terminate
the stay at the request of either party. All stays shall
automatically terminate on the date on which a final decision
is rendered on the application, except that a Committee

23

80.

granting the partial annulment of an award may order the
temporary stay of enforcement of the unannulled portion in
order to give either party an opportunity to request any new
Tribunal constituted pursuant to Article 52(6) of the
Convention to grant a stay pursuant to Rule 55(3).

(4) A request pursuant to paragraph (1), (2) (second sentence)
or (3) shall specify the circumstances that require the stay or
its modification or termination. A request shall only be
granted after the Tribunal or Committee has given each party
an opportunity of presenting its observations.

(5) The Secretary-General shall promptly notify both parties
of the stay of enforcement of any award and of the
modification or termination of such a stay, which shall
become effective on the date on which he dispatches such
notification”.

The Parties hold different views with regard to the interpretation of the annulment
regime under ICSID. Moreover, Paraguay affirmed that it has always complied with
its international obligations, especially those arising from ICSID arbitrations.
added that annulment committees have routinely and consistently stayed awards
pending a decision on annulment, provided that they are satisfied that the annulment
petition is not merely dilatory. Quoting Azurix v. Argentina, Paraguay highlighted
that a stay should be granted absent exceptional circumstances.” In contrast, SGS
alleged that Paraguay has repeatedly failed to comply with its international
obligations; there is no automatic right to a stay of enforcement of an award and that a

stay is a remedy of an exceptional nature.”

© Paraguay’s Written Submission of August 14, 2012, 4 9.
© SGS’s Written Submission of August 20, 2012, §§] 7, 8, 9, 11 and 12.

24

81.

82.

83.

Article 52 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules 52 to 54 lay down the

fundamental rules on annulment of awards. The relevant mechanism deriving from

the conjunction of such rules is the following:

(a)

(b)

(c)

@

(e)

Upon registration of an application for the annulment of an award, ICSID

authorities appoint an ad hoc Committee to decide on such application.

If the application for annulment contains a request for stay of enforcement
of the award, the Secretary-General of ICSID shall order the provisional

stay thereof.

In the event that the Committee considers “that the circumstances so
require”, it may order that the stay be continued pending its decision on

the application for annulment.

Unless the Committee decides to continue the stay, it shall automatically

be terminated.

If the Committee grants a stay of enforcement, it may at any time modify

or terminate the stay at the request of either party.

Based on the plain language of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules on

annulment, it is clear to the Committee that a continued stay of enforcement of the

award is not, in any event, automatic. Pursuant to article 52(5) of the ICSID

Convention, a continued stay is dependent on the specific circumstances of the case.

Indeed, to order the continuation of the provisional stay, the Committee must be

convinced that within the context of the case at hand such continuation is required.

The above conclusion is further reinforced by Article 53 of the Convention, pursuant

to which the binding nature of the award is the rule and its annulment the exception:

“The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be
subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except those
provided for in this Convention. Each party shall abide by
and comply with the terms of the award except to the extent

25

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

that enforcement shall have been stayed pursuant to the
relevant provisions of this Convention”.

The actions taken by the “Contracting Parties”, who created the ICSID system must
lead us to the conclusion that the binding nature of the award is the rule, whereas its
annulment is the exception. The ICSID system is built on the premise that the awards
rendered by ICSID tribunals settle in a definite manner the issues submitted to their
consideration, and that only under exceptional and highly limited circumstances may

their annulment be declared.

The inevitable consequence of the foregoing reasoning is that, despite an application
for annulment, awards must be enforced and only in very specific cases where the
circumstances so require, may enforcement be stayed by the corresponding

committee.

Based on the plain language of Rule 54(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, it is also
clear to the Committee that the party interested in the continued stay bears the burden
of proof to demonstrate the existence of circumstances that warrant said continuation.
Indeed, Rule 54(4) provides that “[a] request [for a stay of enforcement] ... shall
specify the circumstances that require the stay ...”. In the present case, the burden of

establishing circumstances justifying a continued stay clearly falls on Paraguay.

The Committee also notes that Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention provides that
the stay shall only be continued if the Committee considers that “the circumstances so
require”. The Convention does not use other less categorical verbs, such as

“recommend”, “deserve”, “justify” or similar words, but resorts to the imperative verb

“require”.

In sum, to order a continued stay of enforcement of the award, the Committee must be
certain that the circumstances of the particular case so require. It is for the interested
party to show that such circumstances exist, and thus, the stay of enforcement of the

award should be continued.

26

89. The reasoning set forth above is in conformity with decisions of previous ad hoc

committees,e. g., the Committee in Sempra v. Argentina held that:

“Against that background, the view of the present Committee
as to the prerequisites for granting a stay can be summarized
as follows. An ICSID award is immediately payable by the
award debtor, irrespective of whether annulment is sought or
not. A stay of enforcement should not in any event be
automatic, and there should not even be a presumption in
favour of granting a stay of enforcement. This follows, in the
Committee’s opinion, from the ordinary meaning to be given
to the terms of Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention, which
authorizes the Committee to stay enforcement of the award
pending its decision ‘if it considers that the circumstances so
require’. Although the ICSID Convention does not give any
indication as to what circumstances would warrant a stay, it is
nonetheless clear from this language that there must be some
circumstances present that speak in favour of granting a stay.
As a consequence, it cannot be assumed that there should be
a presumption in favour of a stay or that the primary burden
is placed on the award creditor to show that continuation of
the stay should not be granted”.

90. As was highlighted by Paraguay, some ad hoc committees have considered that,

absent unusual circumstances, the granting of a stay of enforcement pending the

outcome of the annulment proceeding has now become almost automatic.

B. THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE PRESENT CASE

91. The Committee gave careful consideration to the rules set forth in the ICSID
Convention and Rules of Arbitration with regard to the stay of enforcement of awards
and to the Parties’ submissions. As a result, the Committee concluded that Paraguay

has failed to discharge its burden of proof. Indeed, Paraguay has not demonstrated

“* Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16). Decision on the
Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award (Rule 54 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules) of March 5, 2009, | 27.

27

92.

93.

94.

95.

that there are specific circumstances in the present case that require the stay to be

continued.

Paraguay has limited its arguments to an attempt to prove that SGS would not be
prejudiced by a continued stay and that it would be “far more efficient” to await a
final determination of the Parties’ obligations. The Committee agrees with SGS in
that Paraguay has “reversed the prejudice issue”. As stated above, under the ICSID
Convention, awards are immediately binding and SGS is entitled to the amounts that
were awarded by the Tribunal. It was Paraguay’s burden to show that it would be
prejudiced if enforcement were allowed and that such prejudice warranted a
continued stay of enforcement. However, Paraguay did not even argue that it is
unable to immediately pay the Award or that it would suffer economic hardship if

required to do so.

The Committee must also reject Paraguay’s argument that it would be far more
efficient for it to pay only after the Committee denies its annulment request. That
Paraguay may have to pay now only to be reimbursed later — if the Award were
annulled — is the natural consequence of the enforcement regime created by the
ICSID Convention, where a stay is the exception and not the rule. Furthermore,
Paraguay has not claimed that it would be unable to recoup any payments made to
SGS; it has, on the contrary, acknowledged that SGS is a large and solvent

multinational company.

Paraguay repeatedly manifested that its annulment application was not presented with
a dilatory purpose. In the Committee’s view, the mere fact that the application is not
dilatory does not justify a stay of enforcement of the Award. The Committee
considers that SGS is correct in stating that Paraguay cannot be entitled to receive the

benefit of a stay of enforcement merely because it acted as it was expected to.

In addition to the strict legal reasoning and to the analysis of the specific

circumstances of the case that may warrant a stay, this Committee must assess, in

28

order to make a determination on such a delicate matter, the recent history of

Paraguay’s compliance with its ICSID- related payment obligations.

96. In paragraph 187 of the Decision on Jurisdiction, issued on February 12, 2010 in the
arbitration proceeding giving rise to this annulment proceeding, the Tribunal stated

that:

“The Tribunal takes note that Respondent has not complied
with ICSID’s 27 April 2009 and 24 August 2009 requests for
payment of each Party’s share of the advance on costs.
Instead, Claimant has paid the entirety of the requested

advance on costs (including Respondent’s share)”.°°

97. In paragraph 192 of the Award issued on February 10, 2012, in that same arbitration,

the Tribunal pointed out that:

“The Tribunal believes that both sides have presented their
positions ably and in good faith, and neither has caused
undue delay or expense in the proceeding. However,
Respondent has not paid its portion of the costs associated
with this proceeding, and has forced Claimant to bear the
entire cost itself. The Tribunal finds that Respondent should
pay its share, and, therefore, awards to Claimant half of the
costs of the arbitration, i.e., the amount of the ICSID costs
and fees that Respondent should have advanced. The
Tribunal does not believe it is appropriate to make any other
award with respect to costs and fees”.

98. In furtherance of the obligation imposed by Rule 13 of the Arbitration Rules, soon
after it had been constituted, on July 30, 2012, this Committee requested that
Paraguay make an advance payment of US$200,000 not later than August 29, 2012,
so that the Committee would have the necessary funds to cover the expenses of the

first session. On August 14, 2012, the Committee decided that the first session was to

% S$GS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of Paraguay, (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/29),
Decision on Jurisdiction of February 12, 2010), | 187.

% SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of Paraguay, Award of February 10, 2012 (ICSID
Case No. ARB/07/29), § 192.

29

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

be held on August 31, 2012, provided that Paraguay made the relevant deposit in a
timely fashion. In spite of other actions undertaken by the Committee and by its

Secretary, payment was not received in time and the first session had to be cancelled.

In view of the foregoing, the Committee agreed to continue the stay of enforcement of
the award until September 17, 2012 and warned Paraguay that if on such date ICSID
had not received US$200,000 deposit it would terminate the stay of enforcement of

the Award. Finally, on September 13, 2012 Paraguay made the deposit.

Moreover, in the Offering the Republic of Paraguay itself acknowledged the existence
of three outstanding obligations, two of them related to ICSID, to pay very
considerable amounts, respectively, to nine banks, SGS and BIVAC. It also referred
in the Offering to “other creditors of Paraguay” and to the possibility of any of those
creditors (the three it identified as well as the others that it mentioned but failed to

identify) attaching part of the proceeds of the Offering.

The purpose of the special power that the President of the Republic of Paraguay
granted to the Attorney General, to which reference is made in paragraph 73 above,
was to provide a “sworn commitment”. In this Committee’s opinion, such a
commitment is neither provided for under the Rules of ICSID nor does it amount to
the posting of security. Besides, it is not categorical enough to evidence Paraguay’s
firm undertaking to pay the amounts owed to SGS, in the event that the annulment of

the Award were denied.

SGS strongly opposed Paraguay's request for the continued stay of enforcement of
the Award. It argued that, in any case, such stay could only be continued if Paraguay
were ordered to post a bond or security. By virtue of the determination to be made

infra, an analysis of the bond issue becomes unnecessary.

Likewise, in view of the fact that in its letter dated January 25, 2013 SGS withdrew its

request for provisional measures, the Committee will not refer to it.

30

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

The Parties based the arguments advanced in their written submissions on many
decisions issued by other courts and arbitral tribunals. Therefore, the Committee

deems it necessary to make some general comments in this regard.

The Committee considers that the decisions adopted by other arbitral tribunals or ad
hoc committees are not decisive for the purpose of the settlement of this dispute and
are clearly not binding upon this Committee. However, this has not prevented the
Committee from taking into consideration the content of the decisions issued by other
arbitral tribunals and ad hoc committees as well as the arguments raised by the Parties
based on such decisions, insofar as they shed light on the matter to be settled in this

stage of the proceeding.

The Committee deems it necessary to establish that its duty at this stage of the

proceeding is solely to decide on the continued stay of enforcement of the Award.

The Committee declares that nothing contained herein may or shall be interpreted as a
preview of the criteria that will be used in the decision to be issued at the end of this

proceeding.

The Committee gave careful consideration to the content of the arguments advanced
by the Parties in their written submissions, with regard to factual and legal matters, as
well as to the documents contributed by them to the file. All these documents have
been of utmost importance to the Committee. In this decision, the Committee refers to
the arguments raised by the Parties that it deemed most relevant. Even where it fails
to make express reference to all the arguments advanced by the Parties, the reasoning

of the Committee considered most of them.

Based on the conclusions reached in the foregoing paragraphs, the Committee finds
that Paraguay’s request for a continued stay of enforcement of the Award must be

rejected.

31

VI. DECISION
110. The Ad hoc Committee hereby:
(a) Rejects Paraguay’s request for the continued stay of the enforcement of the

Award rendered on February 10, 2012 whose annulment was requested by

Paraguay;

(b) Declares that the provisional stay granted by the Secretary-General is

terminated as of the date hereof;

(c) Decides that it will rule on the allocation of costs and expenses in its

decision on the annulment of the Award.

   

Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno B.
President of the ad hoc Committee

For the ad hoc Committee

32

