INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
Washington D.C.

Case N° ARB/02/6

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A.
(Claimant)

versus

Republic of the Philippines
(Respondent)

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Dr. Ahmed S. El-Kosheri, President
Professor James Crawford, Arbitrator

Professor Antonio Crivellaro, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Martina Polasek

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent
Messrs. Jean-Pierre Méan and Ms. Judith Gill and

Andrea Rusca, SGS Société Générale Mr. Matthew Gearing

de Surveillance S.A. Allen & Overy

Messrs. Emmanuel Gaillard and Professor Christopher Greenwood, QC

John Savage, Shearman & Sterling
Undersecretary Mr. Manuel A. J. Teehankee
Department of Justice, Philippines

Assistant Secretary Mr. Emmanuel P. Bonoan
Department of Finance, Philippines

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines

Contents

Procedural Background
Factual Introduction

The Relevant Contractual Provisions

The Relevant Treaty Provisions
The Evolution of the Dispute

The Arguments of the Parties concerning Jurisdiction
The Issues for the Tribunal

Was there an investment in the territory of the Philippines?
Jurisdiction under the “Umbrella Clause”: Article X(2)
Jurisdiction over contractual claims: Article VIII(2)

The exclusive choice of forum clause

(i) Is the exclusive jurisdiction clause overridden
by the BIT or the ICSID Convention?
(ii) Effect given to exclusive jurisdiction clauses

in arbitral practice
(iii) Distinction between jurisdiction and admissibility
(iv) Conclusion on Article 12 of the CISS Agreement

Is there a BIT claim independent of the CISS Agreement?

(i) The general principle
(ii) The BIT claims presented by SGS

The retrospectivity issue

The Tribunal’s Conclusions and the Implications for Further
Proceedings concerning the Present Dispute

I

Il.

Il.

IV.

Vv.

VI.

VIL.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(6)

VII.

Decision

Declaration by Professor Crivellaro

ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

paragraphs
1-11
12-18
19-25
26-34
35-43
44-91
92-168
99-112
113-129
130-135
136-155

139-148

149-153
154
155

156-164

157-159
160-164

165-168

169-176
177

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

IL PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1. On 26 April 2002, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)
received from SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. (SGS) a request for arbitration dated 24
April 2002 against the Republic of the Philippines (hereafter the Philippines or the Respondent, as
the context requires). SGS is a large Swiss corporation providing verification, testing, monitoring
and certification services in respect of various products, to the private sector as well as to
governments and international institutions. On 23 August 1991, SGS concluded an agreement
with the Philippines regarding the provision of comprehensive import supervision services (the
CISS Agreement), under which SGS would provide specialized services to assist in improving the
customs clearance and control processes of the Philippines. A dispute having arisen between the
parties concerning alleged breaches of the CISS Agreement, SGS invoked in the request for
arbitration the provisions of a bilateral Agreement of 1997 between the Swiss Confederation and
the Republic of the Philippines on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments (the

BIT).'

2. The request for arbitration was registered on 6 June 2002 by the Secretary-General of
ICSID, in accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention. On the same date, the
Secretary-General notified the parties of the registration and invited them to proceed to constitute

an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible.

3. On 24 June 2002, the parties agreed that the Tribunal should consist of three arbitrators,
one appointed by the Claimant and the second appointed by the Respondent within 30 days
thereafter. They further agreed that the third arbitrator, the President of the Tribunal, be appointed
by agreement between the parties, or in the absence of such an agreement within 30 days of the

appointment of the second arbitrator, by the Secretary-General of ICSID.

4, On the same date, 24 June 2002, the Claimant appointed Professor Antonio Crivellaro, a

national of Italy, as arbitrator. Professor Crivellaro accepted his appointment on 27 June 2002. On

! Swiss Confederation-Republic of the Philippines, Agreement on the Promotion and Reciprocal

Protection of Investments, 31 March 1997 (in force, 23 April 1999).

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

18 July 2002, the Respondent appointed Professor James Crawford, a national of Australia, as

arbitrator. Professor Crawford accepted his appointment on 23 July 2002.

5. On 5 September 2002, the parties informed the Centre that they were unable to reach an
agreement on the appointment of the President of the Tribunal. It therefore fell to the Secretary-
General of ICSID to proceed with the appointment of the President. Having consulted with the
parties regarding the appointment, on 16 September 2002 the Secretary-General appointed Dr.
Ahmed S. El-Kosheri, a national of Egypt, as President of the Tribunal. On 18 September 2002,
the Acting Secretary-General informed the parties that Dr. El-Kosheri had accepted his
appointment and that, as a result, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the Arbitration Rules of the
Centre, the Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted and the proceedings to have begun on
that day. The parties were further informed that Ms. Martina Polasek, counsel, would serve as

Secretary of the Tribunal.

6. On 5 November 2002, the Respondent filed an Initial Submission on Jurisdiction, raising

objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

7. The first session of the Tribunal with the parties was held on 13 November 2002 at the
World Bank offices in Paris. At the session the parties expressed their agreement that the Tribunal
had been properly constituted in accordance with the relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention
and the Arbitration Rules. The parties also agreed on a number of procedural matters reflected in

written minutes signed by the President and Secretary of the Tribunal.

8. The Respondent confirmed at the first session that it objected to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal and that it regarded its initial submission of 5 November 2002 as the Respondent’s
Memorial on Jurisdiction. Considering the Respondent’s objections, the President announced the
Tribunal’s decision to suspend the proceeding on the merits pursuant to Rule 41(3) of the
Arbitration Rules and to deal with the objections as preliminary questions. In this regard, the
parties agreed on the following procedural calendar for the written phase of the proceedings on
jurisdiction: the Claimant would file a Counter-Memorial by 31 January 2003; the Respondent
would file a Reply by 14 March 2003 and the Claimant would file a Rejoinder by 25 April 2003.

It was also agreed that an oral hearing on jurisdiction would be held in Paris on 26-27 May 2003.

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

9. The Counter-Memorial and Reply having been filed within the agreed time limits, the
Claimant, upon request granted by the Tribunal, filed its Rejoinder on 6 May 2003. The hearing
was held as scheduled on 26-27 May 2003, during which Messrs Gaillard and Savage addressed
the Tribunal on behalf of the Claimant and Ms. Judith Gill, Mr. Mathew Gearing and Professor
Christopher Greenwood QC addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Respondent. A sound
recording and a verbatim transcript were made of the hearing and deposited in the archives of the

Centre.

10. By letter of 8 August 2003, SGS’s Counsel forwarded to the Tribunal a copy of the
Decision rendered by another ICSID Tribunal in the sister case between SGS and Pakistan. That
decision has since been published? Taking into account suggestions made by counsel for both
parties in correspondence exchanged on 11-12 August 2003, the Tribunal allowed the parties
simultaneously to file their comments on SGS v. Pakistan by 8 September 2003. Both parties duly
did so.

ll. The Tribunal did not consider it necessary to hold a further oral hearing on the question of
the implications for the present case of the decision of the Tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan. It has
carefully considered the parties’ written and oral submissions, as well as their post-hearing

comments. It reaches the following decision on the question of its jurisdiction.
Il. FACTUAL INTRODUCTION

12. SGS is part of a large group providing, inter alia, certification services based on pre-
shipment inspections carried out on behalf of the governmental authorities of the importing
country in the country of export. Pre-shipment inspection not only covers quality, quantity and
export market price, but also seeks to verify compliance with import regulations, the declared
value of goods and their classification for customs purposes. In addition SGS provides assistance

in the modernization of customs and tax infrastructures in the country of import.

13. In the 1980s, the Philippines decided to appoint an inspector in its countries of supply to

provide a comprehensive import supervision service (CISS), including verification of the quality,

2 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ARB 01/13), decision
of 6 August 2003, (2003) 18 ICSID Review-FILJ 307 (hereafter SGS v. Pakistan).

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

quantity and price of imported goods prior to shipment to the Philippines. The Philippines entered
into two successive CISS contracts with SGS in 1986 before putting the subsequent contract out to
tender. A number of companies were short-listed in a bidding process conducted on 6 November
1990, which led to a new agreement entered into with SGS on 23 August 1991 (the CISS
Agreement) for an initial period of three years. Conclusion of the CISS Agreement was approved

by the President of the Philippines.

14. Before the end of the three year period, the parties agreed on the extension of the CISS
Agreement, with certain modifications, for a further three year term (the First Addendum).
Subsequently, they agreed to introduce further amendments and to extend the duration of the CISS
Agreement from 15 March 1998 to 31 December 1999 (the Second Addendum). By a document
dated 22 December 1999, the Philippines asked SGS and the latter agreed to extend the provision
of services under the CISS Agreement as amended. This further extension lasted from 31
December 1999 to 31 March 2000, at which point SGS’s services under the CISS Agreement were
discontinued. In the early years there was some opposition to the CISS system, but this seems to
have dissipated by the time of the First and Second Addendums. In any event the Tribunal has no
evidence that the discontinuance in 2000 was due to any overall dissatisfaction on the part of the
Philippines Bureau of Customs (BOC) with the service provided by SGS. It seems that it was
primarily motivated by changes to customs arrangements associated with the implementation of
the GATT-WTO Valuation System, in accordance with which customs duty would be chargeable
on transaction values rather than assessed values, reducing the need for physical inspection of

imports.>

15. SGS submitted to the Philippines certain monetary claims which were subject to various
attempts for amicable settlement. In substance its claim was for monies unpaid under the amended
CISS Agreement, amounting to CHF202,413,047.36 (approximately US$140m), in addition to

which SGS sought interest on the amount unpaid.

16. In commencing the present proceedings SGS alleged that, in refusing to pay the amount
claimed (most of which was conceded by the BOC to be payable), the Philippines is in breach of
Articles [V(1), I1V(2), VI(1) and X(2) of the BIT. SGS bases its Request for Arbitration on Article

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

25(1) of the ICSID Convention, considering that (a) there is a dispute of legal nature; (b) arising
directly out of an Investment; (c) between a contracting State and a National of another

Contracting State; and (d) the parties have consented in writing to ICSID Arbitration.

17. The Philippines objected to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal pursuant to Rule 41(2) of the
ICSID Rules on the basis that it had not consented to submit the dispute to ICSID arbitration as
required by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. In particular it argues that there was no
investment in the Philippines as required by the BIT, that the dispute is purely contractual in
character, and that the issues in dispute are governed by a subsisting dispute resolution provision in
the CISS Agreement requiring submission of all contractual disputes to the courts of the

Philippines.

18. Before dealing with these and related issues, it is necessary to set out relevant provisions

of the CISS Agreement and the BIT, and to say something more about the evolution of the dispute.

Ill. ©THE RELEVANT CONTRACTUAL PROVISIONS

19. According to Article 1 of the CISS Agreement of 23 August 1991, SGS accepted to carry
out, on an exclusive basis, pre-shipment inspection in any country of export to the Philippines.
Inspections would cover quality, quantity and price comparisons. Article 5 required SGS to
maintain a liaison office in the Philippines. Under Article 16, SGS also agreed to provide the
Philippines with the assistance set out in Schedule II. This assistance was to be provided free of
cost; on the other hand it was stated to be a “special condition” which “shall govern the other
services to be conducted by SGS”. The assistance to be provided included:
- training courses to be conducted by SGS for various Philippines agencies, in particular
the BOC;
- the provision to the BOC of customs equipment and the maintenance of that
equipment;
- the provision of customs consultants to carry out feasibility studies and evaluation of

the BOC’s computerisation needs;

 

3 See the letter of the Secretary, Department of Finance, 22 December 1999, signed by the CEO of

SGS in the Philippines, agreeing to a 3 month extension of service “in a manner that will maximize
assistance to the Bureau of Customs in implementing the GATT-WTO Valuation System”.

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

- the provision of a customs specialist to investigate the practicability of an “open”
bonded warehouse system for the BOC;

- the provision of a customs intelligence/investigative consultant for a stipulated period
to conduct an in-depth review of the coordination between various Philippines
intelligence units, the provision of computer hardware and software to support the
coordination process, and thereafter to provide technical support; and

- setting up a BOC library, stocked with the most comprehensive trade publications
from the twenty leading exporting countries to the Philippines, as well as other price

data and basic customs texts on administration and procedure.

20. In exchange for the performance of SGS’s obligations, according to Article 6 and Schedule
I the Philippines agreed to pay SGS, in Swiss francs, a fee amounting to 0.6% of the FOB value
declared on the exporter’s final settlement invoice covering each shipment inspected. A minimum
of USD225 (convertible into Swiss francs at the prevailing exchange rate) per shipment or part
shipment would be applicable where the rate of 0.6% would produce a smaller amount. For

inspections of shipments invoiced at less than USD2,500 the minimum fee was USD150.

21. Under Articles 7 and 10.1.4, the Philippines had to maintain a letter of credit in the amount
of CHF 7,500,000 against which SGS could present for payment invoices for fees due under the
CISS Agreement.

22. Article 12 of the CISS Agreement provided that:

“The provisions of this Agreement shall be governed in all respects by and construed
in accordance with the laws of the Philippines. All actions concerning disputes in
connection with the obligations of either party to this Agreement shall be filed at the
Regional Trial Courts of Makati or Manila.”

Thus contractual disputes were required to be submitted to specified courts in the Philippines to be

decided in accordance with Philippines law.

23. Under the terms of the First Addendum, executed on 14 December 1994, in consideration
of the extension of the CISS Agreement for a period of three years from 15 March 1995, SGS
agreed to carry out the “Exit Program” as set out in Schedule A of the Addendum. The Exit
Program consisted of a number of “projects” to be undertaken jointly by the BOC and SGS in

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

addition to the regular pre-shipment inspection programme. The objectives of these projects were
stated to be:
(i) to set in place on or before 16 March 1998 or at the end of the CISS Agreement
between the Philippines and SGS the various systems that would enable the
Philippines to value imported goods, identify high risk shipments that would be
subjected to careful verification, conduct examinations on such shipments
following the same procedure and level of scrutiny as SGS, and maintain a data
bank of various files/control tables needed for the proper determination of dutiable
values;
(ii) to identify leakages in customs revenue generation and set in place systems to plug
such leaks, manage and monitor their occurrence; and
(iii) to extend to BOC information on the latest available hardware, systems and
technology utilised by other customs and port administrations in facilitating trade

and preventing smuggling and other frauds on customs.

24. The Second Addendum to the CISS Agreement, executed on 29 January 1998, extended
the duration of the CISS Agreement to the end of 1999; it also made certain changes to the terms
of the CISS Agreement intended to enhance the efficiency of pre-shipment inspection operations

and to provide relevant electronic infrastructure.

25. The provisions of Article 12 of the CISS Agreement concerning governing law and the
settlement of disputes continued to apply to the Agreement as amended by the First and Second

Addenda, as well as to the further extension of the Agreement to 31 March 2000.

Iv. THE RELEVANT TREATY PROVISIONS

26. The Tribunal’s jurisdiction, if it exists, must arise by virtue of the ICSID Convention
associated with the BIT. It was not disputed by the parties that at the jurisdictional stage the
Tribunal may deal with all issues of law that are necessary in order to determine its jurisdiction. It
is not enough that the Claimant raises an issue under one or more provisions of the BIT which the
Respondent disputes. To adapt the words of the International Court in the Oil Platforms case, the

Tribunal “must ascertain whether the violations of the [BIT] pleaded by [SGS] do or do not fall

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

within the provisions of the Treaty and whether, as a consequence, the dispute is one which the

[Tribunal] has jurisdiction ratione materiae to entertain” pursuant to Article VIII(2) of the BIT!
27. With regard to the ICSID Convention, the relevant provisions are Article 25(1) and 26.

28. Article 25(1) sets out the criteria to be met in order for ICSID to have jurisdiction over a

dispute. It provides that:

“The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of
an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency
of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.”

This has to be read in conjunction with Article 42(1) of the Convention, which provides that:

“The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as may be
agreed by the parties. In the absence of such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the
law of the Contracting State party to the dispute (including its rules on the conflict of
laws) and such rules of international law as may be applicable.”

29. It is clear from the general language of Article 25(1) that ICSID jurisdiction may extend to
disputes which are purely contractual in character.’ For example a dispute arising out of an
investment contract between a State or constituent subdivision or agency could be covered,° and
this could be the case even though the dispute exclusively concerns issues arising under the proper
law of the contract. There is no distinction drawn in Article 25, or in Article 42(1), between purely

contractual and other disputes (e.g. claims for breach of treaty).

‘ Case concerning Oil Platforms, Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America, IC) Reports

1996 p. 803 at 810 (para. 16). In that case the Court denied jurisdiction under two articles of the Treaty of
Amity and upheld it under another article. See also Case concerning Legality of Use of Force (Yugoslavia v.
Belgium), ICI Reports 1999 p. 124 at 137 (para. 38).

This is accepted as axiomatic in the literature. See, e.g., C Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A
Commentary (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2001) 127-34.

In the case of a contractual dispute between an investor and a constituent subdivision or agency of a
contracting State, there are two further conditions for jurisdiction: first, the constituent subdivision or agency
must have been designated to the Centre by the State (Article 25(1)); secondly, the approval of that State
must have been given or waived (Article 25(3)). By contrast, where a claim is made against a Contracting
State for breach of a treaty, normal international law principles of attribution apply and the provisions of
Article 25(1) concerning designation of constituent subdivisions or agencies are irrelevant: see Compaiiia de
Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic (ARB/97/3), (2002) 6 ICSID Reports
340, 360 (para. 75), agreeing in this respect with the conclusions of the Tribunal in that case: (2000) 5 ISCID
Reports 296, 313-15 (paras. 49-52).

-10-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

30. In accordance with Article 25, ICSID jurisdiction is based on the written consent of the
parties to the dispute. This raises the question of the relation between consent given for the
purposes of the ICSID Convention and any dispute resolution provisions specifically included in
investment contracts. In this regard, Article 26 of the ICSID Convention provides that:

“Consent of the Parties to arbitration under this Convention shall, unless otherwise
stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to the exclusion of any other remedy”.

31. In the present case, the Claimant relies upon the consent to ICSID arbitration given by the
Philippines in the BIT, combined with its own written consent contained in the Request for
Arbitration. It is well established that the combination of these forms of consent can constitute
“consent in writing” within the meaning of Article 25(1), provided that the dispute falls within the

scope of the BIT.

32. Article II of the BIT provides that:

“The present Agreement shall apply to investments in the territory of one Contracting
Party made in accordance with its laws and regulations by investors of the other
Contracting Party, whether prior to or after the entry into force of the Agreement.

33. It is not disputed that SGS is potentially an investor of the other Contracting Party under
the BIT: no issue of SGS’s nationality or effective control is raised. Furthermore it is not denied
by the Respondent that the services provided by SGS, itself or through its wholly-owned Swiss
affiliates, and the resulting rights to payment are capable of constituting an investment. Under
Article [(2) of the BIT, the term “investments” is defined to include “every kind of asset”
including “(c) claims to money or to any performance having an economic value”. But the
Respondent denies that SGS made any investment in the territory of the Philippines, on the basis
that all or substantially all the services for which SGS now claims payment were performed

abroad, and were indeed stipulated to have been so performed in the CISS Agreement.

34. As to the basis of claim and Respondent’s consent to jurisdiction, SGS relies on the

following provisions of the BIT:

“ARTICLE IV

PROTECTION, TREATMENT

-ll-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

1. Investments and returns of investors of each Contracting Party shall at all
times be accorded fair and equitable treatment and shall enjoy full protection and
security in the territory of the other Contracting Party. Neither Contracting Party shall
in any way impair by unreasonable or discriminatory measures the management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment, extension or disposal of such investments.

2. Each Contracting Party shall in its territory accord investments or returns of
investors of the other Contracting Party treatment not less favourable than that which
it accords to investments or returns of its own investors or to investments or returns of
investors of any third State, whichever is more favourable to the investor concerned.

ARTICLE VI

DISPOSSESSION, COMPENSATION

1. Neither of the Contracting Parties shall take, either directly or indirectly,
measures of expropriation, nationalization, or any other measures having the same
nature or the same effect against investments of investors of the other Contracting
Party, unless the measures are taken in the public interest, on a non—discriminatory
basis, and under due process of law, and provided that provisions be made for
effective and adequate compensation. Such compensation shall amount to the market
value of the investment expropriated immediately before the expropriatory action was
taken or became public knowledge, whichever is earlier. The amount of
compensation, shall include interest, from the date of dispossession until payment,
shall be settled in a freely convertible currency and paid without delay to the person
entitled thereto without regard to its residence or domicile.

ARTICLE VII

SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES BETWEEN A CONTRACTING PARTY AND AN
INVESTOR OF THE OTHER CONTRACTING PARTY

1. For the purpose of solving disputes with respect to investments between a
Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party and without prejudice
to Article IX of this Agreement (Disputes between Contracting Parties), consultations
will take place between the parties concerned.

2. Tf these consultations do not result in a solution within six months from the
date of request for consultations, the investor may submit the dispute either to the
national jurisdiction of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment has
been made or to international arbitration. In the latter event the investor has the choice

between
(a) the International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(I.C.S.L.D.) instituted by the Convention on the settlement of investment
disputes between states and nationals of other States, opened for signature at
Washington, on 18 March 1965;
(b) an ad hoe arbitral tribunal which unless otherwise agreed upon by the

parties to the dispute shall be established under the arbitration rules of the

-12-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

United Nations Commission on _ International Trade Law
(U.N.C.LT.R.A.L.).

ARTICLE X

OTHER COMMITMENTS

1. If the provisions in the legislation of either Contracting Party or rules of
international law entitle investments by investors of the other Contracting Party to
treatment more favourable than is provided for by this Agreement, such provisions
shall to the extent that they are more favourable prevail over this Agreement.

2. Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it has assumed with
regard to specific investments in its territory by investors of the other Contracting
Party.”

Vv. THE EVOLUTION OF THE DISPUTE

35. During the period of performance of the CISS Agreement, from 16 March 1992 to 30
March 2000, SGS invoiced BOC approximately US$680m for inspections performed in a large
number of countries. During this period huge numbers of inspections were performed—for
example more than 350,000 inspections in Japan. Of the amount invoiced for these inspections,
some US$540m was actually paid, leaving the amount unpaid which is the subject of the present

claim.

36. In the period from March 1992 to March 1998, payment to SGS for inspections was made
regularly pursuant to the revolving letter of credit arrangements set out in the CISS Agreement.
Problems arose in 1998 with the change of administration in the Philippines. In the period
September 1998 to March 2000, SGS claims to have provided services invoiced at
CHF206,150,238.14 which remained unpaid. The Philippines initially disputed that claim. In
March 2001, the Secretary of Finance of the Philippines directed the BOC to establish a joint
review team with SGS to determine the total amount due. The BOC-SGS Review Team reported
on 25 October 2001. Its Report was forwarded to the Secretary of Finance on 29 October 2001
under cover of a letter of the Commissioner, Bureau of Customs, stating that “This Office concurs
with its findings and recommendations” (Exhibit S6, attached to the Request for Arbitration). The
enclosed Report concluded that of the amount claimed by SGS, CHF192,420,782.26 was payable;
CHF3,737,190.78 should be withheld in favour of the Philippines, and the balance of

-13-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines

ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

CHF9,992,265.10 was unresolved. The Report expressed these findings as recommendations for

the “consideration and/or approval” of the Secretary of Finance. Subsequently SGS indicated, on a

without prejudice basis, that it was prepared to forgo payment of the unresolved balance of

CHF9,992,265.10 if agreement could be reached on financing the amount which the Review Team

had accepted as payable (Exhibit $7).

correspondence about arrears of interest.

37.

Nothing was said in the Report or subsequent

By letter of 10 December 2001 (Exhibit S8) written to Centennial Group Holdings, a

financial adviser of SGS, the Secretary of Finance said:

SGS

“We have no reason to reject the findings of the said report and, accordingly, efforts
may now be directed to finding ways and means to settle the amount unanimously
determined to be payable to SGS, subject to applicable laws and regulations.

We understand that SGS proposes to also deduct from its billings CHF9,992,265.10
under certain conditions. If acceptable, the amount to be deducted from the SGS
billings total CHF13,729.455.88.

We earlier informed you that we initially recommended to the Department of Budget
and Management (DBM) CHF104,095,461.19 last August 9, 2001 for inclusion in the
2002 Budget as part of the unprogrammed funds. We understand that the allocation
for the unprogrammed funds in the 2002 Budget may cover a significant portion of
our obligation to you provided the Government would be able to raise revenues in the
equivalent amount.

Considering the continuing tight budgetary situation faced by the Philippine
Government, we trust that you will understand and accept that the payment of these
obligations recommended to be payable to SGS may have to be spread out over a
certain period of time. We hope to discuss with you as soon as possible an acceptable
payment schedule.

We are also exerting our best efforts for DBM to release a token good faith payment
before the year ends.

We again reiterate our commitment to honor validly contracted obligations of the
Republic of the Philippines.

Thank you for your kind understanding of our fiscal situation.”

argues that this letter amounts to an acknowledgement of indebtedness

of

CHF192,420,782.26. It notes that SGS recorded such a recognition in its reply of 19 December
2001 to the Secretary of Finance (Exhibit $9).

38.

On 14 December 2001 the Department of Finance issued a Press Statement, reciting the

process leading to the establishment of the BOC-SGS Review Team and its recommendations.

The Press Statement concluded as follows:

-14-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

“To stress the N[ational] G[overnment]’s intention to settle its contractual obligations,
the Department of Finance has accepted the Final Report and is now directing efforts
to find ways and means to settle the liability, subject to applicable laws and
regulations including the annual appropriations process in Congress. The DOF
[Department of Finance] is negotiating with SGS to spread out the payments over a
certain period of time considering the tight budgetary situation of the N[ational]
G[overnment].”

39. In January 2002, the Philippines made “a token good faith payment” of PHP 1,000,000
(slightly less than US$20,000) to SGS, as envisaged in the Secretary’s letter of 10 December 2001.
No further payment having been made or agreement reached, the present proceedings were filed

on 26 April 2002.

40. At the time of the jurisdictional hearing, the Respondent submitted that (unlike the position
in the Fedax case’) there had never been an acknowledgement of indebtedness by the Philippines,
and that there were serious issues of fraud and overcharging to be resolved. The fraud allegations
were said to relate to SGS inspection operations in China. SGS denied these allegations, but
appeared to accept that they could be considered, if necessary as a counterclaim, if the Respondent

so wished.*

Al. For reasons that will appear, it is neither necessary nor appropriate for this Tribunal to go
into the allegations now made by the Philippines by way of defence. What is relevant, however, is
that the present claim is not brought for the amount of CHF192,420,782.26 arguably
acknowledged to be due in December 2001 (less the PHP1,000,000 actually paid). It is brought
for the outstanding principal amount of CHF202,413.047.36 plus interest calculated in accordance
with the CISS Agreement, Article 7.52 §GS’s claim thus includes the unreconciled amount of
CHF9,992,265.10, as to which there is no evidence at all of an acknowledgement of indebtedness
by the Philippines. Moreover the calculation of interest payable under Article 7.5 of the CISS
Agreement is not a straightforward matter of arithmetic, but will involve inquiry into relevant due
dates and possibly other matters. On any view, a court or tribunal having jurisdiction to determine

obligations under the CISS Agreement will have a substantial task to perform.

Fedax NV v, Republic of Venezuela, Award of 9 March 1998, 5 ICSID Reports 183.
8 Transcript, 27 May 2003, pp. 100-102.
See Request for Arbitration, paras. 34, 47.

-15-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

42. In these circumstances the Tribunal does not need to decide whether there was a legally
binding acknowledgement of indebtedness by the Secretary of Finance vis-a-vis its creditor, SGS,
as to the amount of CHF192,420,782.26, in December 2001 or subsequently. Even if there was
such an acknowledgement, it would not avoid the need for inquiry by a tribunal with jurisdiction

over the CISS Agreement into the total amount payable, including interest.

43. The Tribunal approaches the question of its jurisdiction on the footing that in the Request
for Arbitration, SGS made credible allegations of non-payment of very large sums due under the
CISS Agreement and claimed that the Philippines’ failure to pay these was a breach of the BIT, but
that the exact amount payable has neither been definitively agreed between the parties nor

determined by a competent court or tribunal.

VI. THE ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES CONCERNING JURISDICTION

44. For SGS, the Philippines’ failure to make the payments claimed under the CISS
Agreement, a large portion of which SGS claims has been acknowledged as payable to SGS

constitutes:

(a) failure to protect SGS’s investment by subjecting it to unreasonable measures in
violation of Article IV(1) of the BIT. In particular, by failing to make the
payments due to SGS, the Philippines has deprived SGS of the returns on its
investments;

(b) failure to ensure fair and equitable treatment of SGS’s investment, in violation of
Article IV(2) of the BIT;

(c) violation of Article X(2) of the BIT, which requires the Philippines to observe the
payment obligations under the CISS Agreement with regard to investments by
SGS; and

(d) an isolated measure taken against SGS alone, which can be assimilated to an
expropriation or a measure having the same nature or the same effect, taken by the

Philippines against SGS’s investments in violation of Article VI(1) of the BIT.

45. In its Request for Arbitration, SGS indicated that the four jurisdictional requirements set

forth in Article 25(1) of ICSID Convention are satisfied, for the following reasons:

-16-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

(a) The dispute is a legal dispute as it concerns the failure by the Philippines to
perform their obligations to SGS under the BIT and the CISS Agreement. It also
concerns the relief to be granted to SGS as a result of those violations.

(b) The dispute arises directly out of an investment. SGS’s activities under the CISS
Agreement clearly satisfied the investment requirements identified in ICSID case
law with regard to duration, regularity of profit and return and the substantial
commitment of human and financial resources in setting up the pre-shipment
inspection system and assisting with the modernisation of the Philippines’ customs
infrastructure, thus making a significant contribution to the development of the
Philippines.

(c) There is no doubt that the dispute is between a Contracting State and a national of
another Contracting State, since SGS is a Swiss company, duly incorporated in
Switzerland under Swiss law.

(d) The parties have consented in writing to ICSID arbitration. It is generally accepted
that consent to ICSID jurisdiction may be given in any one of the following ways:
. by a direct agreement between the host State and the investor;

. by a provision in the host State’s investment legislation which is accepted
by the investor; or

. by an offer made by the State in a treaty which is thereafter accepted by an
investor of the other contracting State.

According to SGS, in the present case the Parties’ consent to refer the dispute to
ICSID arbitration was given pursuant to the third method. It arises out of two
separate instruments: the BIT between Switzerland and the Philippines, and SGS’s

letter of 22 April 2002, received by the Philippines on 24 April 2002.

46. According to SGS, the date of the Philippines’ written and binding consent to ICSID
jurisdiction over the present disputes is, for the purposes of ICSID Institution Rule 2(1)(c), 23
April 1999, the date on which the BIT entered into force.

47. SGS considers it has validly consented to ICSID arbitration over this dispute, by fulfilling

the conditions of Article VIII of the BIT, it has accepted the Philippines’ offer to submit disputes

to ICSID arbitration and thereby perfected the Parties’ arbitration agreement.

-17-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

48. With regard to the definition of “investment” under Article I(2) of the BIT, particularly
sub-paras. (c), (d) and (e), SGS emphasizes the following: (a) the CISS Agreement clearly gives
SGS “claims to money or to performance having an economic value”, in that it gives SGS claims
against the Philippines for unpaid fees; (b) the dispute concerns “rights given by contract”, in that
it concerns SGS’s right to demand that the Philippines perform their obligations under the CISS
Agreement by making timely payment of fees due; and (c) pursuant to the requirements of the

CISS Agreement, SGS has invested substantial resources, including money and know-how.

49. In addition, SGS indicates that it had assets in the Philippines that fall within the non-
exhaustive definition of investments under Article (2) of the BIT. For instance, SGS claims to
have acquired, and imported into the Philippines, movable assets to set up its liaison office
including computer hardware and software and office furniture valued in excess of USD3 million.
The running costs of the Manila Liaison Office, including rental and salaries is claimed having
amounted to USD10 million annually. Furthermore, pursuant to the terms of the CISS Agreement
and its addenda, SGS invested a substantial amount of time, human and data resources, expertise,
information, equipment, software and money in assisting the Philippines to modernise its customs

infrastructure. The value of these investments totals over USD 14 million.

50. Three additional arguments were raised by SGS in its Request for Arbitration which are

worth noting:

First, the Parties unsuccessfully consulted for over two years with a view to resolving this dispute
amicably. This included the establishment of the joint BOC-SGS Review Team, in March 2001,
which reported its findings in November 2001. The requirement for over six months of party

consultations, contained in Article VIII (2) of the BIT, was therefore satisfied.

Second, the BIT does not contain any statement indicating that the parties’ consent to ICSID
jurisdiction is non-exclusive or subject to prior dispute resolution agreements. Article VIII(2) of
the BIT clearly gives SGS, as foreign investor, the option of choosing whether to pursue remedies
in the local courts or to submit the dispute to international arbitration. The Philippines have
consented to ICSID arbitration as one of the available means of dispute resolution and the final
decision as to whether prior provisions for the settlement of disputes contained in Article 12 of the
CISS Agreement have precedence, or whether ICSID arbitration supersedes Article 12, rests solely

in the hands of the investor.

-18-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

Third, the CISS Agreement was entered in 1991, approximately eight years prior to the entry into
force of the BIT. This fact plus the option granted by Article VIII of the BIT, which puts the
choice of seeking relief before either national courts or international arbitration in the hands of the
investor alone, is said to confirm SGS’s entitlement to accept the Philippines’ unilateral offer to
arbitrate the present investment dispute before an ICSID arbitral tribunal. A contrary
interpretation would, in SGS’s opinion, strip the BIT of its purpose, which is to promote foreign
investment by, inter alia, granting foreign investors the protection of having investment disputes

arising from unlawful acts or omissions of host States decided by an international tribunal.

51. On 5 November 2002, the Philippines filed its objections to jurisdiction. The Philippines
stressed that both parties’ consent is the cornerstone of ICSID jurisdiction and that such consent
was not given by the Philippines, on the following grounds:

(a) The dispute between the parties is purely a contractual dispute, SGS’s claim being
for non-payment under a contract. The dispute is governed by a previous and
subsisting dispute resolution agreement included in the CISS Agreement,
according to which “all disputes” have to be submitted to the Regional Trial
Courts of Makati or Manila.

(b) The Swiss-Philippines BIT established certain duties of an international law
nature, and the dispute resolution procedures (including ICSID) provided therein
apply only to international law claims and have no application to purely
contractual disputes.

(c) Nothing in the BIT indicates an intention to override the provisions of the
contract, which provided for the election of a particular dispute resolution by
domestic courts.

(d) The dispute does not relate to “investments in the territory of one Contracting
Party” as required by the BIT. The contract and certain rulings issued by
Philippines authorities confirm that the services were performed outside the
Philippines.

(e) The BIT was not intended to override previous obligations with respect to
“specific investments”.

(f) The subject matter of the dispute is a cross-border service contract which is not an
“investment” for the purposes of the ICSID Convention.

(g) If the Tribunal, contrary to the submissions of the Philippines, were to find that

jurisdiction pursuant to Article 25 of the Convention does exist, such jurisdiction

-19-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

only extends to alleged breaches occurring after the date on which the BIT came

into force, i.e. after 23 April 1999.

52. The Philippines emphasized the implications of inserting Article 12 of the CISS as a
comprehensive choice of forum clause. This was in the original CISS Agreement concluded in
1991, and remained unchanged in the subsequent First and Second Addenda. For the Philippines,
“it is revealing that the parties made no attempt to amend the dispute resolution provisions of the
CISS Agreement, either before or after the BIT had been signed or had come into force”.
According to the Philippines, “Article 12 represents a real and genuine agreement, being the
product of an arms-length bargain of the parties which... resulted from a competitive tender and

bidding process”.

53. The Philippines added that “SGS has not begun to demonstrate that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction because it has not [referred] and cannot refer to any genuine breaches of the BIT. As
noted, its claim is one of alleged non-payment under a contract and should therefore be submitted

to the RTC of Makati or Manila in accordance with the clear contractual provisions”.

54. With regard to the alleged breach of Articles IV(1) and (2) of the BIT, the Philippines
maintain that
“in accordance with the principles of treaty interpretation set out in Article 31(1)
of the Vienna Convention, the text of this article should be given its ordinary
meaning in light of the object and purpose of the parties in concluding the BIT.
Whether a purported measure is discriminatory or unreasonable has to be judged
by reference to the [Philippines’] actions taken with regard to other alleged
investors. The [Philippines’] actions in this context must mean its administrative
actions taken as the governmental authority: SGS has not pointed to any
unreasonable or discriminatory action of the [Philippines]”.

55. Turning to the alleged breach of Article VI of the BIT, the Philippines relies on various
authorities to demonstrate that there has been no taking of rights that could be attributable to the
Philippines. According to the Philippines, the alleged failure to observe payment obligations under
the CISS Agreement does not automatically constitute a violation of the BIT, since the claims are
entirely for alleged non-payment under the CISS Agreement and do not transcend the terms of the

contract.

-20-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

56. Furthermore, the Philippines objects to the assertion that the mere existence of a BIT
would automatically elevate all ordinary contractual disputes into potential international law
disputes. For the Philippines “the BIT sets an independent standard and alleged breaches of its

obligations cannot be aligned with alleged breaches of a private contract”.

57. An additional, important, ground upon which the Philippines bases its objection to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is linked to the territorial limitation in Article II of the BIT, which requires
the “investments” to be in the “territory of one Contracting Party”, thus excluding the services
performed by SGS under the CISS Agreement, which the Agreement expressly states as being
carried on “outside the territory of the Republic of the Philippines”. The Respondent emphasizes
that “the connection between ‘investments’ and ‘territory’ is reinforced by the repeated and
specific linking of the two concepts in respect of obligations appearing in the BIT” (Articles I(4)
and IV). In response to SGS’s reference to services undertaken within the territory of the
Philippines, the Respondent objects that all other services referred to in the Request for
Arbitration, such as training courses, modernisation and computerisation of BOC facilities and
maintaining a liaison office in Manila, were peripheral or negligible in comparison to the main

obligation, which consisted in pre-shipment inspections made outside the Philippines.

58. After reviewing in detail each of the said additional services, the Respondent reaches the

following conclusion:

“In considering whether the requirement of “investments in the territory” under
the BIT is satisfied, the Tribunal should have regard to the place of substantial
performance of the overall obligation. Even though this point arises under the BIT,
previous decisions of ICSID tribunals on investments may nonetheless be of some
assistance. They endorse the approach of considering not the effect of one
individual activity but the overall nature of the obligation.”

The Respondent further argues that:
“[T]he Tribunal should not be distracted by incidental and minor activities, such
as training courses or donation of a certain item of equipment, but instead should
have regard to the ‘integral part of the overall operation’. In this case, the delivery

of the PSI service, being clearly the ‘overall operation’ of this contract, took place
entirely outside the Philippines.”

59. The Philippines makes three further points which should be noted:

-21-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

First, the BIT does not override previous obligations. Article X(2) intends that the parties respect
the terms of existing agreements by requiring each Contracting Party observe “any obligation its
has assumed with regard to specific investments”. Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention,
requiring a good faith interpretation of this provision, and one consistent with the “object and
purpose” of the BIT, suggests that Article X(2) shows an intention to respect “specific
obligations”. Hence, SGS “may not seek to enforce the ‘specific’ payment obligations of the CISS
Agreement whilst at the same time disregarding the agreement to resolve theses payment (and all

other contractual) obligations in the RTC of Makati or Manila.”

Second, in order to establish ICSID jurisdiction, SGS must establish the existence of an
“investment” under both the BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. Under the ICSID
Convention, technical assistance or consultancy contracts, suppliers’ credits and peripheral training
programmes cannot be relied on by SGS as satisfying the “investment” requirement. According to
the Philippines, “even on application of the ‘typical’ characteristics relied on by SGS, the relevant
activities of SGS do not fall within the term “investment.” This assertion is supported by the
following considerations:

(a) “The Payment of a commission fee to SGS ... does not amount to a ‘profit’ or
return which commentators ... have accepted are a necessary part of an
‘investment’. The payment is more properly characterised as remunerative in
nature as opposed to revenue or profit”;

(b) SGS did not assume any risk as a result of the CISS Agreement. In the absence of
evidence of the intention of the drafters of the ICSID Convention as to what “risk”
is entailed in the context of an investment, it is necessary to ascertain the “ordinary
meaning” attached to the phrase. The term “risk”, which is identified as a “typical”
characteristic, in the context of an investment entails the chance that the
contribution of the party will drop in value and/or there will be negative/varying
returns. SGS would always receive a fee dependant on the relevant invoice value
or by virtue of the minimum fee provisions, even on shipments of no value.
Accordingly, there is no “risk” to SGS in the “ordinary meaning” of the word;

(c) The term “investment” should be given its ordinary meaning in light of its object
and purpose. The “ordinary meaning” of the term “investment” excludes the
delivery of an offshore service in exchange for a fee, especially where there is

virtually no capital expenditure or assumption of risk”.

-22-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

Third, with regard to the non-retrospective effect of breaches, the Philippines argues that

jurisdiction can only extend to alleged breaches committed after the BIT came into force, i.e. after

23 April 1999.

Although recognizing that the BIT applies to investments made “whether prior to or after entry

into force of the Agreement”, the Philippines contends that this provision does not apply to

breaches and causes of action which occurred before the BIT came into force. In support of this

position, the Philippines states that:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

“[I]f the BIT had intended to apply to breaches or causes of action which occurred
before the BIT came into force, this would have to be apparent from the face of the
treaty or otherwise. However, it is not apparent; the BIT is not expressed as
applying to breaches or causes of action which occurred before it came into force.
The absence of any express language is indicative of the parties’ intention that the
BIT apply only to disputes/causes of action which arose after its entry into force”;
“That the BIT only contemplates future breaches is also emphasized by the
wording of its obligations. The BIT seeks to regulate only future behaviour by
repeated reference to what the Contracting Party ‘shall’ do or refrain from doing.
The BIT provides, for example, that investments ‘shall’ be accorded fair and
equitable treatment and that investment ‘shall’ not be expropriated or
nationalised”;

In reliance on a previous ICSID case the Philippines indicates that “the Tribunal
emphasized the importance of looking at the dispute resolution provisions of the
BIT within the context of the entire treaty. The Tribunal found support for its
conclusion on the ambit of the dispute resolution provisions in the text of the BIT,
which said that investments ‘shall’ not be expropriated”; and

“SGS cannot claim that consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre has been validly
and irrevocably given by the ROP in this case in respect of breaches occurring on
or before 23 April, 1999 (when the BIT came into force). Jurisdiction cannot at
the very least, extend to the monthly invoices which SGS claims are unpaid from
September 1998 to 23" April, 1999 because these alleged breaches arose before
the BIT came into force. Such analysis also highlights the fact that SGS’s claim is
based on non-payment under a contract and not on treaty violations. Not only has
SGS failed to point to any additional administrative action by the ROP which
gives rise to a breach under the BIT, it has not given details of the timing of such

action”.

-23-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

60. On 31 January 2003, SGS submitted its response. Its central argument was that the present
Tribunal...
“has exclusive jurisdiction over all the claims now brought before it by SGS, as a
result of Article 26 of the ICSID Convention, which deems the parties consent to
ICSID arbitration — perfected on April 22, 2002 — to be exclusive of any other
remedy. But even if, as SGS denies, there is any overlap between the arbitration

agreement contained in the BIT and that found in the CISS Agreement, the former
would simply supersede the latter.”

61. SGS emphasized that:

“throughout the nine year duration of the CISS Agreement SGS invested
enormously in the Philippines. These investments ranged from the establishment
of its Liaison Office in Manila — approved by no less than the Philippine Board of
Investments... — to the annual average employment of 242 staff in the Philippines.
It included pumping average annual sums of US$8 million into Manila from
Geneva for the CISS programme, as well as massive technology transfer and
frequent donations to the ROP. In addition, SGS made possible increased customs
revenues flowing directly to the ROP of over US$2.5 billion, in the period
between 1992 and 2000.”

62. Furthermore, SGS emphasizes that it “made substantial investments in the Territory of the

Philippines” through various channels:

First, considering that “claims to money or to any performance having an economic value” fall
within the meaning of investments in Article I(2) of the BIT, intangible investments such as
“claims to money’ and ‘rights under contract’ are necessarily difficult to physically locate. In this
instance, to the extent that these intangible investments can be situated anywhere... they were
located in the Philippines — the centre of gravity and the primary beneficiary of the CISS

Agreement”;

Second, SGS invested by undertaking “tangible investments in the Philippines in relation with the
CISS programme”, particularly in the form of “the setting up a Liaison Office in Manila, through
its wholly owned subsidiary SGS Far East, and its injection of substantial funds for the operation

of the office”; and

Third, SGS invested in the form of “transfer of know-how” in connection with the CISS
programme”, by carrying out a number of activities that included:
. conducting “training courses and seminars for the purpose of transferring customs related

knowledge to BOC and other ROP agencies”;

-24-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

. playing “a key role in the computerisation of the BOC’s functions, and development of IT
systems such as the Data Warehousing technology”;
. setting “up the VCL which contained a database of CRF data, price information and a

repository of other customs-related information”;

. contributing to the “setting up of an appeals system which relies in part on the price database
provided by SGS”; and
. undertaking a “variety of consultancy projects, for the purpose of transferring customs-

related knowledge to BOC”.
The said activities are considered by SGS as “an investment within the definitions of Article
1(2)(d) of the BIT: “copyrights, industrial property rights, know-how and goodwill”, as well as

within the BIT’s general catch-all definition of investments as “every kind of asset”.

63. A substantial portion of SGS’s response to the Philippines’ objections focuses on
establishing that “the Tribunal has jurisdiction over all SGS’s claims, whether alleging treaty or
contractual violations”. The first pillar of SGS’s case is that “the Tribunal must consider the claims

as formulated by the claimant”, and not as “the ROP seeks to re-qualify them”.

64. The second argument invoked by SGS, is that “the Tribunal may consider contractual
issues in determining claims based on a BIT” despite the fact that contract claims and treaty claims
have different legal bases. In this respect, SGS maintains that:

“[I]t is perfectly proper, and often necessary for a tribunal to interpret a contract

and consider issues of contractual performance in order to determine whether
there has been a violation of international law.”

65. SGS’s third argument is that:
“The effect of an ‘umbrella clause’ such as article X(2) is to elevate a breach of

contract claim to a treaty claim under international law.”

66. The fourth assertion invoked by SGS is that “the Tribunal’s jurisdiction extends beyond
BIT claims to contract claims, due to the reference in Article VIII of the BIT to ‘disputes with
respect to investments”. SGS expresses the result of its analysis of this Article in the following

proposition:

-25-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

“Given the broad ambit of Article VIII of the BIT, it is evident that this Tribunal
has jurisdiction over all the claims raised by SGS, including allegations of breach
of contract by the ROP, as distinct from allegation of violation of the BIT.”

67. SGS denies that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is “extinguished or diminished by the Forum

selection clause in the CISS Agreement”. After an analysis of the rulings given in previous ICSID

cases, SGS arrives at the conclusion that:

“In accordance with the text of the ICSID precedents, this Tribunal must hold that
the forum selection clause in the CISS Agreement does not and cannot exclude the
jurisdiction of this Tribunal with respect to claims presented by SGS in this
proceeding.”

68. The sixth and last point emphasized by SGS is that “the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
extends to ‘retrospective breaches’, in the sense that jurisdiction in the present case extends
to all the claims raised by SGS regardless of the fact that the events giving rise to the claims
of violations of the BIT may have occurred before the entry into force of the BIT because

Article VIII, which is the key provision conferring jurisdiction on the Tribunal, contains no

temporal limitations.”

69.

On 14 March 2003 the Philippines submitted its response to the arguments raised by SGS

in the Counter-Memorial. As a preliminary remark, the Philippines noted that the implication of

SGS’s submissions:

70.

“is that almost any contractual dispute between a State and a foreign party can be
referred to ICSID provided that there is a BIT in force between that State and the
State of the nationality of the foreign party. Jurisdiction provisions in such
contracts, even when providing for exclusive jurisdiction in national courts, will
always be capable of being by-passed and ICSID tribunals will be left to decide all
the relevant contractual issues by reference to whichever national law constitutes
the proper law of the contract in question.”

After undertaking the analysis of certain previous ICSID decisions within the context of

the BIT’s application restricted to “investments in the territory”, the Philippines emphasized the

following:

“To say, as SGS does, that ‘territory’ means only that a benefit needs to be shown
in the territory does violence to the ordinary meaning of the words used, and is
thus contrary to Art. 31(1) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.

-26-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

71.

Such a construction also deprives ‘territory’ as used in the BIT of any meaning...
[I]ts ‘purpose’, a valid consideration under Art. 31(1), was not to extend treaty
obligations beyond the physical definition of territory contained in the
Constitution. For theses reasons, the BIT should not be applied to a service
contract, the key element of which was indisputably delivered offshore.”

The Respondent goes on to affirm that SGS did “nothing to dispel the very clear

impression left by the Request that the SGS claim is purely and simply a claim for non-payment

under a commercial contract, the CISS Agreement. Although SGS refers to a number of provisions

of the BIT, it makes no attempt to develop a claim for anything other than a breach of contract.

Indeed, SGS itself acknowledges that ‘the CISS agreement underlies the claims presently before

the Tribunal’.”

72.

“Nor does [SGS] make any attempt to refute the argument [of the Philippines] that
Article 12 of the CISS Agreement was intended to be an exclusive jurisdiction
clause. Indeed, SGS had itself described the clause in those terms in proceedings
before the Supreme Court of the Philippines.”

The Philippines questioned SGS’s assertion that “the Tribunal cannot go behind the claim

formulated”: in its view...

73.

“[T]he Tribunal can and should determine whether they are indeed satisfied that
the claims (as characterised) are prima facie within the jurisdictional mandate of
ICSID arbitration and have not been mischaracterized. If there is a clear
mischaracterization of claims apparent from the claim documents, then the
Tribunal should enquire further. If the claims are not sufficiently made out, the
Tribunal should decline jurisdiction.”

Concerning the “application of the contractual disputes clause to contractual claims”, the

Philippines maintained that:

“SGS’s claims are purely contractual in nature and arise solely on the basis of
allegations of non-payment under a commercial contract. In deciding whether it
has jurisdiction, the Tribunal needs to determine the ‘fiindamental’ or ‘essential’
basis of the claims. It should give effect to the contractual jurisdiction clause if the
essential basis is a contractual one.”

The Philippines added:

“In the present case, the presence of an exclusive jurisdiction clause in the CISS
Agreement is relevant in several different ways. First, it is an essential part of the

-27-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

background which must be taken into account in construing the scope of the offer
to accept ICSID arbitration which the BIT represents... [A]n ICSID clause in a
bilateral investments treaty constitutes an offer which has to be accepted by the
individual investor. It is inherently unlikely that a State intended to make an offer
of ICSID arbitration to a contractor in respect of simple contractual disputes
arising under a contract governed by its national law when that contract was
subject to an express and exclusive choice of forum. That is particularly so when
the right of recourse to ICSID would be entirely at the discretion of the contactor.
Moreover, in the present case, the subsequent reaffirmation of the disputes clause
in Article 12 of the CISS Agreement after the conclusion, and again after the entry
into force of the BIT, reinforces that conclusion.”

74. Secondly:

“SGS, having undertaken to submit all disputes to the RTC, lacks the power to
seize an ICSID tribunal in order to enforce provisions of the CISS Agreement
when its very act of doing so is itself a violation of its own obligations under that
Agreement. The CMJ argues that Article 12 of the CISS Agreement cannot
override the terms of the BIT but it must be recalled that SGS is not a party to the
BIT, which so far as it is concerned, is res inter alios acta. By contrast, the CISS
Agreement binds both the ROP and SGS. In assessing the effect, as between those
two parties, of the BIT it is impossible to ignore the clear language of the
agreement which binds them both.”

75. Third:

“[I]t is necessary to consider the practical implications of allowing SGS to
disregard the jurisdictional clause to which it freely subscribed when it became
party to the CISS Agreement. Most States conclude large numbers of contracts
with foreign companies each year. In many cases these are expressly and
voluntarily subjected to jurisdiction of the courts of the contracting State and are
governed by the law of that State. It is axiomatic that the courts of that State are
best placed to interpret and apply the law of that State. Moreover, common sense
dictates that an international tribunal which is less well placed to determine
questions of national law should be slow to displace the jurisdiction of courts
expressly selected by the parties to the agreement in question.”

76. With regard to SGS’s assertion that “Article X(2) of the BIT is an ‘umbrella clause’ which
elevates all breaches of contract into breaches of the BIT”, the Philippines denies that it has the
effect of adding another substantive provision to the BIT:
“SGS’s interpretation of Article X(2) effectively emasculates the substantive
protection contained in Arts. II-VI. What SGS is effectively saying is that this

substantial body of international law practice is now to be rendered effectively
otiose because the Claimant need no longer prove the additional element, it need

-28-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

only argue that a breach of a private, commercial contract has been violated by a
State and yet still be able to pursue its grievances in an international forum.”

77. The Philippines invoked the drafting history of the BIT as well as the texts of the draft
exchanged on various earlier occasions which are said to clearly show that the Parties’ intention
was to emphasize their commitment to comply with the substantive treatment obligations assumed
under BIT. According to the Philippines “[i]t is clear that they did not intend to include within the
protection of the BIT and international law, protections from breach of contract. No such
interpretation, as advocated by SGS, can therefore be applied to this BIT”. The Philippines
concluded its argument in this respect by stating that: “Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention,
which requires that treaties shall be interpreted in good faith and in the light of their object and
purpose, suggests that SGS’s contention cannot be upheld, unless there is clear evidence of the

contracting Parties’ intention to produce such an unequal bargain, which has not been shown.”

7B. In response to SGS’s argument that “Article VIII(1) is in broad terms and allows SGS to
refer all its claims to ICSID even though they arise under the CISS Agreement and not under the

BIT”, the Philippines analysed the cases relied on by SGS, reaching a different conclusion:

“[A] proper consideration of the cases referred to by SGS shows that they were
determined in the absence of a valid effective contractual disputes clause... In
other words, one has to distinguish between causes of action founded upon
contract and those founded upon the BIT. The Tribunal [in the Vivendi case]
maintained that the former have to be resolved by the parties’ agreed contractual
mechanism, even if the same issues give rise to separate claims under a BIT which
may be referred to ICSID jurisdiction. In other words, there is no suggestion that
ICSID jurisdiction somehow takes priority over or invalidates a contractual
disputes provision in respect of contractual claims. Alternatively, even if (which is
denied) SGS is correct to argue that Art. VIII can be construed as allowing purely
contractual claims to be referred to ICSID, that does not apply where there is a
freely negotiated and valid contractual disputes provision, as closer examination
of the cases relied on by SGS demonstrates.”

 

79. Finally, concerning SGS argument that “the retrospective provisions of the BIT bring
claims arising before the entry into force of the BIT within the ambit of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction”, the Philippines responded by affirming that
“under general principles of international law (embodied in the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties) retrospective effect cannot be presumed in the

absence of clear words. Therefore, if the Contracting Parties had intended that the
BIT extend to breaches occurring before the BIT came into force, then they would

-29-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

have expressly so provided in the articles of the BIT, which they did not. SGS’s
submission that Art. X(2) lacks any temporal restriction ignores both the effect of
Art. II, which clearly sets out the scope of application, and of Art. 28 of the
Vienna Convention.”

According to the Philippines, it “is the ‘act’ or ‘fact’ of breach or the date of accrual of the cause
of action, which in this case occurs on the date on which the obligation to pay was not met, which
is relevant to determining the application of the BIT. It is an established principle of most legal

systems that a breach occurs when it is alleged that payment fell due and was not made.”

80. On 6 May 2003 SGS submitted its Rejoinder. In its view, SGS’s investment in the
Philippines was significant by any standard. But even if SGS made only a small investment in the
country, they were sufficient to qualify for ICSID jurisdiction. According to SGS, the various
investments and activities undertaken cannot be considered “de mininis”, “ancillary” or
“peripheral”. After an enumeration of the facts supporting SGS’s contentions as to what
constituted its substantial economic contributions within the Philippines, SGS concluded its survey

by stating that:

“The weight of the evidence set out in the CMJ and in the preceding sections of
this Rejoinder leaves no doubt that SGS invested substantially in the Philippines
for the purposes of the CISS Programme. In view of this overwhelming evidence,
including the many Ip acknowled by the ROP of the
considerable benefits to the ROP of SGS’s services, it is extremely surprising that
the ROP continues to argue that SGS did not make a qualifying investment in the
Philippines. After all, although the ROP accepts that SGS’ activities under the
programme constitute investments, it fails to identify any country other than the
Philippines where that investment might be located. The whole CISS Programme,
and all the activities performed under it, were investments in the Philippines
within the meaning of the BIT and the ICSID Convention.”

 

81. As to “the jurisdictional requirements of the ICSID Convention” for the purpose of
establishing that “the dispute is ‘with respect to investments’ within the meaning of the BIT”. SGS
based its position on two parallel legal arguments. First, no direct or physical investments are
needed to be located within the territory, since the reference to “investments” in Articles V, VI and

X of the BIT “is not preceded or followed by the phrase ‘in the territory’.” Second, SGS did in

 

any event make substantial investments in the Philippines.

82. The analysis of certain previous ICSID cases led SGS to conclude:

-30-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

- “Whether one looks at the objectives of the BIT, the economic realities of global
investment flows, the definition of ‘investments’ under the BIT, or the principles set
out in precedent ICSID cases, it is clear that the BIT does not cover only
investments physically located within the territory of the host State”;

- “For there to be a qualifying investment it is sufficient that the investor show that
the effect of or the value added by the investments or the investment activities flow
into the territory of the host State”;

- “In the present case, it is clear that while the visual pre-shipment inspections were
performed outside the Philippines, the relevant information derived from those
inspections was delivered in the ROP’s territory”;

- “Further, and more broadly, the economic effect of the information obtained by
SGS through its inspections was felt within the ROP’s territory, and not in any other

country.”

83. Defending its initial proposition that “the Tribunal must consider the claims as formulated
by the claimant”, SGS reviewed previous decisions in order to ascertain that “ICSID case law does

not impose a prima facie test”. But even if it did, SGS would pass it “without difficulty”.

84. With regard to the effect of a valid choice of forum clause on the jurisdiction of an ICSID
tribunal, SGS maintained its previous position according to which “the presence of a contractual
forum selection clause will not affect an international tribunal’s jurisdiction to consider violations
of international law”. According to SGS the case law invoked by the Philippines does not support
the latter’s proposition that “a contractual forum selection clause ousts an international tribunal’s
jurisdiction over claims pleaded on the basis of a breach of contract rather than of a violation of a
treaty”. In SGS’s opinion, the rule is that “a contractual forum selection clause will not affect or
exclude ICSID jurisdiction”. According to SGS: “This is the case when the investor’s claim
alleges violations of a BIT, but it is also the case in the present dispute with respect to SGS’s

claims, raised in the alternative, alleging breaches of contract that are not violations of the BIT.”
85. Subsequently, SGS reiterated its position in the following manner:

- “There is nothing in the language of the CISS Agreement which would exclude

ICSID’s jurisdiction over any of the claims presented in these proceedings”;

31-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

- “The essential basis of each of SGS’s principal claims is an alleged violation by the
ROP of a substantive provision of the BIT. Therefore, should the Tribunal seek to
determine the essence of those claims, that essence is a violation of the BIT and not a
breach of contract”;

- “Further, SGS’s alternative claim, which is based on breach of contract, need not be
referred to the Philippines courts identified in the CISS agreement”;

- “Article VIII (of the BIT) ...allows SGS to submit its alternative breach of contract

claim to ICSID arbitration as that claim is ‘with respect to investments’ .

86. As to Article X(2) of the BIT, SGS reviewed a considerable number of supporting
authorities, concluding that:
“From the forgoing, it [is] abundantly clear that a provision such as Art. X(2) of

the BIT is designed to extent the BIT’s protection to cover breaches of contracts
between the host State and the investor.”

87. It also devoted further elaboration to the assertion that “the Tribunal’s jurisdiction covers
breach of contract claims by virtue of Article VIII of the BIT”, which allows the referral to ICSID
arbitration of “disputes with respect to investments”, and thus grants this Tribunal jurisdiction over
all claims raised by SGS, including its alternative claim alleging breach of contract by the

Philippines, as distinct from allegations of violation of the BIT.

88. On 26 and 27 May 2003 the jurisdictional issues were again debated at a hearing, held in
Paris. During the hearing, each party submitted its own views and arguments, and discussed those
of the other. In general, each party’s position remained as presented in the written submissions,

but additional contributions were given which clarified some essential points.

89. On the Claimant’s side, emphasis was given to the “territoriality” of their investment in the
Philippines. Answering questions raised by the Tribunal, the Claimant explained in detail the
modalities through which services were rendered outside and inside the Philippines. In particular,
the role of the Manila liaison office has become clear, as well as the way SGS reported to the BOC

and received payment of its fees.

90. The Claimant devoted significant time to re-address the interpretation of the so-called

“umbrella clause” (Article X(2) of the BIT). Authorities relied on in support of a broad

-32-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

interpretation of that clause included Prosper Weil,'° Joachim Karl,'' an UNCTAD publication of
1998 on BIT practice,’? Ibrahim Shihata,'> F.A. Mann,'* M. Nash Leich,'* Dolzer & Stevens,'°

Antonio Parra,'” and others, together with a survey of a number of BITs.

OL. On the Respondent’s side, important clarifications were given as to:

e the understanding of certain basic provisions of the CISS Agreement, including the
selection of forum clause;

e the tax treatment reserved to SGS’s investment in the Philippines;

e the mechanics of payment under the contract;

e the Philippines’ understanding of the “umbrella clause” in the light of other comparable
BITs;

e the legal nature of the CISS Agreement (whether a concession of public services or not);

© certain Philippine court proceedings, where the foreign or internal nature of SGS’s
services had been discussed;

¢ whether SGS’s claims were based on alleged violations of the contract or of the BIT;

e whether SGS’s services constituted, in their essence, an investment under the Convention
and the BIT;

e whether, and to what extent, international public law, including treaties on investment,
applies to “private” or “commercial” contracts concluded directly by a State with foreign

companies.

to P Weil, “Problémes relatifs aux contrats passés entre un état et un particulier”, in (1969-III) 128

Receuil des cours 95, 130-3.

u J Karl, “The Promotion and Protection of German Investment Abroad”, (1996) 11 ICSID Rev-FILJ
1,23.
BR UNCTAD, Bilateral Investment Treaties in the mid-1990s (Geneva, 1998) 54-6.

1 Shihata, “Applicable Law in International Arbitration: Specific Aspects in the Case of the
Involvement of State Parties”, in The World Bank in a Changing World (1995) vol. Il, 595, 601.

4 FA Mann, “British Treaties for the Promotion and Protection of Investments” (1981) 52 BYIL 241,

B

245-6.
1s M Nash Leich, “Contemporary Practice of the United States relating to International Bilateral
Investment Treaties” (1990) 84 AJIL 895, 898.

te R Dolzer & M Stevens, Bilateral Investment Treaties (Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1995) 81-2.

-33-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

VII. THE ISSUES FOR THE TRIBUNAL

92. In the Tribunal’s view, the arguments and submissions of the parties recited above raise

five main issues:

(a) whether a contract for the provision of services performed mostly (but not wholly)
outside the territory of the host State may nonetheless constitute an investment in
its territory for the purposes of Article II of the BIT, having regard to the
circumstances of the present case and the provisions of the CISS Agreement;

(b) whether the so-called “umbrella clause” (Article X(2) of the BIT) gives the
Tribunal jurisdiction over essentially contractual claims against the Respondent
State;

(c) alternatively, whether the general description of a “dispute concerning an
investment” (Article VIII(1) of the BIT) encompasses claims of an essentially
contractual character;

(d) whether the Tribunal can or should exercise jurisdiction in the present case,
notwithstanding the exclusive jurisdiction clause, Article 12 of the CISS
Agreement, requiring contractual disputes to be referred to the courts of the
Philippines; and

(e) whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the present claims as claims for breach

of treaty independently of the CISS, under Articles IV and/or VI of the BIT.

93. In addition, the Respondent argues that the BIT did not apply retrospectively to claims
which arose prior to its entry into force on 23 April 1999. This argument cannot be considered
until the Tribunal has identified which claims (if any) are properly before it, and the basis of its

jurisdiction over such claims.

94. The parties disagreed on all five basic issues identified in paragraph 92, treating them all
as questions going to jurisdiction. In the Tribunal’s view there is no doubt that most of these
issues are jurisdictional. The position is, however, less clear as to issue (d), the effect of Article 12

of the CISS Agreement. This may better be regarded as concerned with the admissibility of the

 

A Parra, “Provisions on the Settlement of Investment Disputes in Modern Investment Laws,

Bilateral Treaties and i on ”, (1997) 12 ICSID Rev-FILJ 287.

-34-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

claim than jurisdiction in the strict sense. But there is no doubt that it is preliminary in character

and the parties have treated it as such.

95. Each of these five issues was discussed at some length by the ICSID Tribunal in SGS v.
Pakistan. In that case an Inspection Agreement between SGS and Pakistan, concluded in 1995,
provided for analogous services to those in the present case. Less than two years after the
Agreement entered into force it was purportedly terminated by Pakistan. The dispute between the
parties concerned the validity and legal effect of the termination, as well as the adequacy of
performance on both sides and outstanding financial claims. The Agreement contained an
exclusive jurisdiction clause (Article 11) referring “[a]ny dispute, controversy or claim arising out
of, or relating to” the Agreement to arbitration in Pakistan. In fact three different cases were
brought: first, by SGS in the Swiss courts, then by Pakistan before the local courts to initiate a
domestic arbitration under Article 11, and finally by SGS before ICSID (following the failure of
the Swiss proceedings). SGS argued that the offer of ICSID arbitration in the Swiss-Pakistan BIT
took priority over domestic arbitration under Article 11 of the Inspection Agreement, and that

ICSID jurisdiction included claims both under the contract and under the BIT.

96. So far as the five questions enumerated in paragraph 92 above are concerned, the Tribunal

in SGS v. Pakistan gave the following answers:'*

(a) There was an investment “in the territory of the host State” within the meaning of
the BIT because there had been an “injection of funds into the territory of Pakistan
for the carrying out of SGS’s engagements under the PSI Agreement.”"® It did not
matter that most of SGS’s expenses were incurred outside Pakistan: some
expenditure in Pakistan had been “necessary to enable [SGS] to perform its

2

obligations under the PSI Agreement” and that was sufficient for this purpose. It

was also relevant that, as described by Pakistan in the Swiss proceedings (in which
it successfully claimed sovereign immunity) “the functions delegated to SGS”
were considered as functions jure imperii performed in aid of the collection of tax
revenue by Pakistan.”’

1s A number of other questions were raised before the SGS v. Pakistan Tribunal (e.g. lis alibi

pendens). These are not relevant to the present case.
SGS v. Pakistan, para. 136.

SGS v. Pakistan, para. 137.

SGS v. Pakistan, paras. 138-9.

20
21

-35-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Article 11 of the Swiss-Pakistan BIT, providing that each State Party “shall
constantly guarantee the observance of the commitments it has entered into with
respect to the investments of the investors of the other Contracting Party”, could
not have the far-reaching effect of “automatically ‘elevat[ing]’ to the level of
breaches of international treaty law” breaches of investment contracts entered into
by the State.” Having regard to the distinction in principle between breaches of
contract and breaches of treaty, contractual claims could only be brought under
Article 11 “under exceptional circumstances”.??

The phrase “disputes with respect to investments” in Article 9(1) of the Swiss-
Pakistan BIT does not encompass claims of an essentially contractual character.
In the Tribunal’s view, there was nothing “in Article 9 or in any other provision of
the BIT that can be read as vesting... jurisdiction over claims resting ex hypothesi
exclusively on contract”.*

The Tribunal’s jurisdiction being limited to claims under the BIT, i.e. to claims for
breaches of international obligations, that jurisdiction was not affected by the
exclusive jurisdiction clause in the Inspection Agreement. Since the Tribunal
lacked any purely contractual jurisdiction, there was no need to consider whether
the effect of the BIT was to override exclusive jurisdiction clauses in contracts.
Nor was it necessary to consider the effect of Article 26 of the ICSID
Convention.» However the Tribunal expressed doubts that it could have been
intended by general language in the BIT to “supersede and set at naught all
otherwise valid non-ICSID forum selection clauses in all earlier agreements
between Swiss investors and the Respondent.””°

In principle it was for the Claimant to formulate its claim: “if the facts asserted by
the Claimant are capable of being regarded as alleged breaches of the BIT,
consistently with the practice of ICSID tribunals, the Claimant should be able to

27

have them considered on their merits. That was the case with SGS’s claim

against Pakistan. Accordingly the Tribunal had, and should exercise, jurisdiction

SGS v. Pakistan, para. 166.
SGS v. Pakistan, para. 172.
SGS v. Pakistan, para. 161.
SGS v. Pakistan, para. 174.
SGS v. Pakistan, para. 161.
SGS v. Pakistan, para. 145.

-36-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

over the Claimant’s treaty claims as distinct from its contract claims,

notwithstanding the pending arbitration of the contractual claims in Pakistan.’*

97. This Tribunal will revert to these questions as they arise in the somewhat different legal
and factual context of the present dispute. As will become clear, the present Tribunal does not in
all respects agree with the conclusions reached by the SGS v. Pakistan Tribunal on issues of the
interpretation of arguably similar language in the Swiss-Philippines BIT. This raises a question
whether, nonetheless, the present Tribunal should defer to the answers given by the SGS v.
Pakistan Tribunal. The ICSID Convention provides only that awards rendered under it are
“binding on the parties” (Article 53(1)), a provision which might be regarded as directed to the res
judicata effect of awards rather than their impact as precedents in later cases. In the Tribunal’s
view, although different tribunals constituted under the ICSID system should in general seek to act
consistently with each other, in the end it must be for each tribunal to exercise its competence in
accordance with the applicable law, which will by definition be different for each BIT and each
Respondent State.”? Moreover there is no doctrine of precedent in international law, if by
precedent is meant a rule of the binding effect of a single decision.” There is no hierarchy of
international tribunals, and even if there were, there is no good reason for allowing the first
tribunal in time to resolve issues for all later tribunals. It must be initially for the control
mechanisms provided for under the BIT and the ICSID Convention, and in the longer term for the
development of a common legal opinion or jurisprudence constante, to resolve the difficult legal

questions discussed by the SGS v. Pakistan Tribunal and also in the present decision.

98. The Tribunal accordingly turns to the six questions identified in paragraphs 92 and 93

above.

SGS v. Pakistan, para. 187-9.
See Schreuer, 1082, referring to earlier cases.
Indeed there is no guarantee that ICSID decisions will be published: see ICSID Convention, Art.

-37-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

(a) Was there an investment in the territory of the Philippines?

99. In accordance with Article II, the BIT applies to “investments in the territory of the one
Contracting Party made in accordance with its laws and regulations by investors of the other
Contracting Party, whether prior to or after the entry into force of the Agreement”. The language
is clear in requiring that investments be made “in the territory of” the host State,’! and this
requirement is underlined by other references to the territory of the host State in the BIT (see
Preamble, para. 2, Articles II(1), (2), 'V(1), (2), (3), VIII(2) and X(2)). In accordance with normal
principles of treaty interpretation,” investments made outside the territory of the Respondent State,
however beneficial to it, would not be covered by the BIT. For example the construction of an
embassy in a third State, or the provision of security services to such an embassy, would not
involve investments in the territory of the State whose embassy it was, and would not be protected

by the BIT.

100. As noted above, the Respondent argued that all or substantially all of SGS’s investment
fell into that category. Moreover it stressed that the parties themselves, in the CISS Agreement
and through their conduct, had treated SGS as non-resident in the Philippines and as providing
services abroad and not in the Philippines. Those aspects of SGS’s performance which occurred in
the Philippines (the provision of the various services detailed in paragraphs 19 and 23 above, and
the maintenance of the Manila Liaison Office) were merely incidental or peripheral. Furthermore,
the Respondent argued, the gist of the present case was a claim for money due for services
performed in the country of export, not in the Philippines. No question arose, for example, as to
the unfair treatment or wrongful expropriation of the Manila Liaison Office. The actual dispute

revolved around non-payment for services provided, and necessarily provided, abroad.

101. The Tribunal does not agree that SGS’s services under the CISS Agreement can be
subdivided in this way. Under the CISS Agreement, SGS was to provide services, within and
outside the Philippines, with a view to improving and integrating the import services and
associated customs revenue gathering of the Philippines. The focal point of SGS’s services was
the provision, in the Philippines, of a reliable inspection certificate (termed a Clean Report of

a The term “territory” is defined in Article 1(4) as “the territory of the State concerned as defined by

the respective Constitution and other pertinent law”. This definition was extensively discussed by the
Parties in negotiating the BIT.
» Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 23 May 1969, 1155 UNTS 331, Arts. 31-33.

-38-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

Findings (CRF)) on the basis of which import clearance could be expedited and the appropriate
duty charged. SGS’s inspections abroad were not carried out for their own sake but in order to
enable it to provide, in the Philippines, an inspection certificate on which BOC could rely to enter
goods to the customs territory of the Philippines and to assess and collect the ensuing revenue. It
is true that the certificate was not a legal instrument; it was merely evidence of the nature, value
and classification of a shipment. It was nonetheless valuable evidence and its provision was
central to SGS’s operations. Further, those operations were organized through the Manila Liaison
Office, which under Article 5 of the CISS Agreement SGS was obliged to “continue and
maintain... until the date upon which this Agreement ceases to be effective or its implementation
is interrupted or indefinitely suspended.” This was a substantial office, employing a significant
number of people. Requisitions for inspections were channelled through the Office which
arranged the inspection, received the results, incorporated them in a CRF which it provided both to
the importer and the BOC prior to customs clearance and dealt with any resulting queries. In
addition, direct periodic reports had to be made to the Government,” and from time to time BOC

would make specific requests for reports or other services with respect to specific consignments.

102. The position might have been different if SGS had provided the certificates and issued its
reports abroad, e.g. to a Philippines trade mission in each country of export. But it did not perform
the service in that way, nor did the CISS Agreement envisage that it would do so. A substantial
and non-severable aspect of the overall service was provided in the Philippines, and SGS’s

entitlement to be paid was contingent on that aspect. Article 6.3 of the Agreement provided that...

“SGS shall be entailed to such fees regardless of whether the seller fails to provide the
necessary information for the issuance of a Clean Report and/or does not proceed with
the shipment of goods for any reason... provided, SGS has rendered the required
service and supplies the Government with reasonable information regarding its
inspections and price comparison.”

8 A number of provisions of the CISS Agreement called for reporting to the Government, an act

evidently to be performed in the Philippines: see Articles 2.2.2, 2.2.3, 2.2.4, 2.3, 4.2. Of particular
significance was Art. 4.2:

“Periodical reports shall be issued by SGS to the Government giving details of the volume

of goods inspected; undervaluation detected and consequent increase in revenue payable to

the Government; over-invoicing detected and commissions and similar fees payable to

importers or third parties in the Philippines and other benefits which the Government has

derived from the Comprehensive Import Supervision Service.”
See also the amendment to Art. 6.3 made by the First Addendum, requiring SGS to coordinate with BOC in
verifying the utilization of its certificates: this verification process would naturally take place in the
Philippines.

-39-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

Article 8.1 required SGS “in performing services hereunder [to] exercise reasonable care”. It is
clear that this obligation extended to exercising such care in making the various reports to the

Government required by the Agreement.’

103. These elements taken together are sufficient to qualify the service as one provided in the
Philippines. Since it was a cost to SGS to provide it, this is enough to amount to an investment in

the Philippines within the meaning of the BIT.

104. The Philippines argued that the CISS Agreement was structured in such a way as to
minimize the significance of the Liaison Office, and more generally of the services provided
within the Philippines. The purpose of doing so was to ensure that income payable to SGS for its
services was not taxable in the Philippines. Article 2 of the CISS Agreement provided that
inspection was to be carried out “at all points of supply outside the territory of the Republic of the
Philippines and/or in the ports of shipment and other points of dispatch”. Article 5 provided that
the Liaison Office was established “exclusively for informational, as opposed to income
generating purposes.” Article 6.2 declared that the fees for services under the Agreement have
been fixed taking into consideration Philippine tax laws and rulings to the effect that “income
derived by a foreign company from services performed outside of Philippine territorial jurisdiction

9935

are not subject to any Philippine tax.””” It went on to provide that fees “shall be correspondingly

increased” if this assumption about tax liability should prove to be unfounded.

105. The Liaison Office (which had a number of sub-branches) was funded by subventions
from an SGS affiliate in Geneva which employed the staff. According to evidence presented by
SGS, its monthly payroll in the Philippines ranged between US$100,000 and US$200,000,
amounting to something of the order of a quarter of its total expenses. SGS accepted that this was
a fraction of the cost of conducting the actual inspections abroad. Under Article 7 of the CISS
Agreement, invoices were forwarded to the BOC from Switzerland and were paid by bank transfer

to SGS’s Swiss account.

s Article 8.1 was amended by the First Addendum so as to limit SGS’s liability to certain values. The

duty of care remained. In addition SGS was required to execute a separate undertaking “[t]o ensure
compliance with all its commitments and obligations”: this would clearly have applied to obligations
required to be performed in the Philippines.

s Article 6.2 was amended by the First Addendum so as to incorporate the relevant BIR Rulings into
the Agreement “in accordance with the principle that the provisions of existing laws are read and become
part of contractual stipulations.”

  

-40-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

106. The Tribunal does not consider that these circumstances affect the conclusion that SGS
made an investment in the Philippines. A Swiss company within the SGS Group funded the
Liaison Office as a part of the provision of an overall service—essentially an informational
service—which for the reasons given had its focus in the Philippines. The fact that the bulk of the
cost of providing the service was incurred outside the Philippines is not decisive. Nor is it decisive
that SGS was paid in Switzerland. In any event, the agreed forum for suit if SGS was not paid was

the Regional Trial Court in Manila or Makati.

107. The Respondent argued that SGS’s conduct demonstrated its acceptance that the
investment was made abroad; even that it amounted to an estoppel. The Tribunal does not agree.
The fact that for tax purposes SGS’s services were treated as performed abroad is not decisive.
The tax treatment of investments is a matter for local law with its own regime of rules as to where
income is considered to have been earned, a regime distinct from that of the BIT. SGS pointed out
that it was a matter for the revenue authorities to determine the situation, not for BOC to do so, and
that it had reserved the right to reassess its charges in the event that income under the CISS

Agreement was held to be locally taxable.

108. Similar considerations apply to SGS’s pleas before the local courts that it was not locally
present for the purposes of legal proceedings brought against it. In fact the Tribunal finds it
difficult to understand why the Liaison Office, employing a significant number of people, was not
locally present.*° There was certainly a sufficient presence to establish jurisdiction based on

residence under many legal systems.

109. For similar reasons the Tribunal does not accept that SGS is estopped from arguing that
there was an investment in the Philippines for the purposes of the BIT. Accepting, for the sake of
argument, that the principle of estoppel is relevant for this purpose, the statements made by SGS to

various Philippine government offices’ or before the local courts** were not directed to the issue

36 Apparently the Philippines courts in the two Lorenzo Tan cases gave conflicting decisions on this

point. Transcript, 26 May 2003, p. 39.
a Thus lawyers for an SGS affiliate seeking an amendment of a Certificate of Authority to allow for
the work of the Manila Liaison Office in 1987 stated that the Office would not undertake inspections but
“will merely be a documents centre set up to facilitate the smooth running of the scheme”. This may have
understated the significance the Liaison Office came to have but was not fundamentally incorrect: the CISS.
scheme revolved around the provision of reliable documents. See also the Application to do Business or

-41-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

whether there was an investment in the Philippines for the purposes of the BIT.” Even if they had
been, there is no evidence that the Philippines relied on such statements in order to exclude the
possibility of proceedings under the BIT. If the Philippines had considered the matter, it would no
doubt have relied on Article 12 of the CISS Agreement as determining local contractual
jurisdiction vis-a-vis SGS, not on arguments made by SGS in miscellaneous local proceedings

brought, mostly unsuccessfully, by third persons.

110. Earlier decisions of ICSID Tribunals on the question whether an investment was made “in
the territory” of the host State do not provide much assistance. The question was discussed in the
Gruslin case, but the claim was rejected on another jurisdictional ground.” The Tribunal in the
Fedax case gave a very broad definition of territoriality,*' but the focus of the decision was
whether the endorsee of a promissory note issued with respect to an investment had itself made an
investment, and whether the dispute over non-payment of the note arise “directly” out of an
investment within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. Counsel for the
Respondent declined to argue that Fedax was in this respect wrongly decided,” but at any rate the
circumstances of the Fedax case were very different from the present. This was also true in the
CSOB case, where the emphasis was more on the existence of an investment than its location. But
the Tribunal held that the agreement in that case qualified as an investment under the BIT because

its “the basic and ultimate goal... was to ensure a continuing and expanding activity of CSOB” in

 

Engage in any Economic Activity in the Philippines, made by SGS Far East Ltd. on 31 March 1987,
according to which the Manila Liaison Office would “serve as a documents/communication centre pursuant
to agreement with Phil. Government”

In Macasiano v. Société Générale de Surveillance S.A., SGS responded to a Supreme Court
challenge concerning the constitutionality of the CISS Agreement by asserting that the Agreement was “an
ordinary contract” and did not involve an “invalid delegation of sovereign attributes”: Comment of 1
February 1994. By resolution of 5 April 1995 the case was held moot.

” Other decisions included Bureau Veritas v. Office of the President, (1992) 205 SCR Annotated 705.
Counsel for the Philippines accepted that the various cases were “not on all fours”: Transcript, 26 May 2003,

p. 38.
Ly

4

Gruslin v. Malaysia, Award of 27 November 2000, 5 ICSID Reports 483, 507-8.
Fedax NV v, Republic of Venezuela, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 11 July 1997, 5 ICSID
Reports 183, 198 (para. 41): “The important question is whether the funds made available are utilized by the
beneficiary of the credit, as in the case of the Republic of Venezuela, so as to finance its various
governmental needs.” The territorial requirement in the BIT in that case was, however, less categorical It
referred to “the proteetion in its territory of investments of nationals of the other Contracting Party”:

ton and reciprocal ion of i "Caracas, 22
October 1991, 1788 UNTS 70, Art. 2, and this only in the clause dealing with entry, not in a general clause
defining the scope of the Treaty as a whole.

2 Transcript, 26 May 2003, p. 65; 27 May 2003, pp. 105-7.

 

 

 

 

-42-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

the Slovak Republic. The Tribunal emphasised “the entire process” of economic activity, even

though particular aspects of it were not locally performed.”

111. | The most relevant decision is that in SGS v. Pakistan, where, as noted, the Tribunal held
that equivalent pre-inspection services were provided “in the territory of the host State” because
there had been an “injection of funds into the territory of Pakistan for the carrying out of SGS’s
engagements under the PSI Agreement.”“* The Tribunal agrees with this reasoning. Indeed the
present case seems even stronger, given the scale and duration of SGS’s activity and the

significance of the activities of the Manila Liaison Office.

112. For these reasons the present Tribunal concludes that SGS made an investment “in the
territory of” the Philippines under the CISS Agreement, considered as a whole. Moreover the
present dispute concerns the service so provided and arises directly out of it, within the meaning of
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. There was no distinct or separate investment made
elsewhere than in the territory of the Philippines but a single integrated process of inspection
arranged through the Manila Liaison Office, itself unquestionably an investment “in the territory
of” the Philippines. Thus the present dispute falls within the scope of the BIT in accordance with
Article II.

(b) Jurisdiction under the “Umbrella Clause”: Article X(2)

113. On the footing that it had made an investment in the territory of the Philippines, the
principal jurisdictional submission of SGS is that, having failed to pay for services due under the
CISS Agreement, the Philippines is in breach of Article X(2) of the BIT, and that the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction is attracted by Article VIII(2) in respect of such breaches. The Philippines for its part
denies that Article X(2) has such an effect, relying inter alia on the decision of the SGS v. Pakistan

Tribunal on the equivalent BIT provision in that case.

8 Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, AS v. The Slovak Republic, Decision on Objections to

Jurisdiction, (1999) 5 ICSID Reports 330, 356 (para. 88).
“a SGS y. Pakistan, para. 136.

-43-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

114. One must begin with the actual text of Article X.*° It is headed “Other Commitments”.
Article X(1) is a kind of “without prejudice” clause, providing that legislative provisions or
international law rules more favourable to an investor shall to that extent “prevail over this
Agreement”. It deals with the relation between commitments under the BIT and distinct
commitments under host State law or under other rules of international law. It does not appear to

impose any additional obligation on the host State in the framework of the BIT.*°

115. Article X(2) is different. It reads:

“Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it has assumed with regard to
specific investments in its territory by investors of the other Contracting Party.”

This is not expressed as a without prejudice clause, unlike Article X(1). It uses the mandatory
term “shall”, in the same way as substantive Articles III-VI. The term “any obligation” is capable
of applying to obligations arising under national law, e.g. those arising from a contract; indeed, it
would normally be under its own law that a host State would assume obligations “with regard to
specific investments in its territory by investors of the other Contracting Party”. Interpreting the
actual text of Article X(2), it would appear to say, and to say clearly, that each Contracting Party
shall observe any legal obligation it has assumed, or will in the future assume, with regard to
specific investments covered by the BIT.“” Article X(2) was adopted within the framework of the

BIT, and has to be construed as intended to be effective within that framework.

116. The object and purpose of the BIT supports an effective interpretation of Article X(2).
The BIT is a treaty for the promotion and reciprocal protection of investments. According to the
preamble it is intended “to create and maintain favourable conditions for investments by investors
of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other”. It is legitimate to resolve uncertainties in its

interpretation so as to favour the protection of covered investments.

8 See paragraph 34. The BIT was concluded in English and French, with the English text prevailing

in case of any “divergence of interpretation”. Examination of the French text does not reveal any relevant
divergence.

The phrase “shall prevail over”, used in relation to other commitments, may not have the effect of
incorporating those commitments into a BIT. See Yaung Chi Oo Trading Pte. Ltd. v. Government of the
Union of Myanmar (ASEAN ILD. Case No. ARB 01/1), (2003) 42 ILM 540, 556-7 (paras. 79-82).

It was not suggested by the Respondent that Article X(2) only applies to obligations already
assumed at the time of entry into force of the BIT. Like other provisions of the BIT, Article X is ambulatory
in effect.

-44-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

117. Moreover it will often be the case that a host State assumes obligations with regard to
specific investments at the time of entry, including investments entered into on the basis of
contracts with separate entities. Whether collateral guarantees, warranties or letters of comfort
given by a host State to induce the entry of foreign investments are binding or not, i.e. whether
they constitute genuine obligations or mere advertisements, will be a matter for determination
under the applicable law, normally the law of the host State. But if commitments made by the
State towards specific investments do involve binding obligations or commitments under the
applicable law, it seems entirely consistent with the object and purpose of the BIT to hold that they
are incorporated and brought within the framework of the BIT by Article X(2).

118. The Respondent argued that, if Article X(2) does have substantive effect, it should be
interpreted as being limited to obligations under other international law instruments.** But such a
limitation could readily have been expressed. The argument accepted that Article X(2) may have

operative effect, but read into that provision words of limitation which are simply not there.

119. This provisional conclusion—that Article X(2) means what is says—is however
contradicted by the decision of the Tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan, the only ICSID case which has so
far directly ruled on the question.’® It should be noted that the “umbrella clause” in the Swiss-
Pakistan BIT was formulated in different and rather vaguer terms than Article X(2) of the Swiss-
Philippines BIT. Article 11 of the Swiss-Pakistan BIT provides that:

“Either Contracting Party shall constantly guarantee the observance of the

commitments it has entered into with respect to the investments of the investors of the
other Contracting Party.”

Apart from the phrase “shall constantly guarantee” (what could an inconstant guarantee amount
to?), the phrase “the commitments it has entered into with respect to the investments” is likewise
less clear and categorical than the phrase “any obligation it has assumed with regard to specific

investments in its territory” in Article X(2) of the Swiss-Philippines BIT.

120. Nonetheless it is relevant to consider the reasons given by the Tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan

for giving a highly restrictive interpretation to the “umbrella clause”, in the context of the more

48 Transcript, 26 May 2003, pp. 100-2.

See above, paragraph 96.

-45-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

specific language of Article X(2), the provision the present Tribunal has to apply. Essentially

there were four such reasons.

121. The first reason was textual. As the Tribunal noted, Article 11 could cover a wide range of
commitments including legislative commitments; it went on to say that the interpretation favoured
by SGS was “susceptible of almost indefinite expansion”. It is true that Article X(2) of the
Swiss-Philippines BIT likewise is not limited to contractual obligations. But it is limited to
“obligations... assumed with regard to specific investments”. For Article X(2) to be applicable,
the host State must have assumed a legal obligation, and it must have been assumed vis-a-vis the
specific investment—not as a matter of the application of some legal obligation of a general
character. This is very far from elevating to the international level all “the municipal legislative or

administrative or other unilateral measures of a Contracting Party.”*!

122. Secondly, the Tribunal applied general principles of international law to generate a
presumption against the broad interpretation of Article 11. The principle relied on was that “a
violation of a contract entered into by a State with an investor of another State, is not, by itself, a
violation of international law”.*? This principle is well established. It was affirmed by the ad hoc
Committee in the Vivendi case, cited by the Tribunal.** But the Franco-Argentine BIT considered
in the Vivendi case did not contain any equivalent to Article 11 of the Swiss-Pakistan BIT, and the
ad hoc Committee therefore did not need to consider whether a clause in a treaty requiring a State
to observe specific domestic commitments has effect in international law. Certainly it might do so,
as the International Law Commission observed in its commentary to Article 3 of the ILC Articles
on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts. The question is essentially one of

interpretation, and does not seem to be determined by any presumption.

SGS v. Pakistan, para. 166.
‘ Ibid.

2 SGS y. Pakistan, para. 167.

SGS v. Pakistan, paras. 147-148, citing the Vivendi Annulment decision, (2002) 6 ICSID Reports
340, 365-7 (paras. 95-98, 101).

” Commentary to Article 3, para. (7), referring to the possibility that “the provisions of internal law...
are actually incorporated in some form, conditionally or unconditionally, into that [sc. the international]
standard”. See J Crawford, The International Law Commission’s Articles on State Responsibility.
Introduction, Text and Commentaries (Cambridge, CUP, 2002) 89.

-46-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

123. Thirdly, the Tribunal was concerned that the effect of a broad interpretation would be,
inter alia, to override dispute settlement clauses negotiated in particular contracts. The present
Tribunal agrees with this concern, but—as will be seen—it does not accept that this follows from

the broad interpretation of Article X(2).

124. Fourthly and subsidiarily, the Tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan found support for its conclusion
in the fact that Article 11 is located at the end of the BIT, after the basic jurisdictional clauses,
whereas if it had been intended to impose substantive international obligations it would more
naturally have appeared earlier. This factor is entitled to some weight, and it is the case that
where it appears (as it does in only a minority of BITs) the “umbrella” clause is usually located
earlier in the text.’ But the Tribunal does not regard the location of the provision as decisive,
having regard to the other considerations recited above. In particular, it is difficult to accept that
the same language in other Philippines BITs is legally operative,” but that it is legally inoperative

in the Swiss-Philippines BIT merely because of its location.

125. Not only are the reasons given by the Tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan unconvincing: the
Tribunal failed to give any clear meaning to the “umbrella clause”. It treated Article 11 as

signalling...

“an implied affirmative commitment to enact implementing rules and regulations
necessary or appropriate to give effect to a contractual or statutory undertaking in
favor of investors of another Contracting Party that would otherwise be a dead letter.
Secondly, we do not preclude the possibility that under exceptional circumstances, a
violation of certain provisions of a State contract with an investor of another State
might constitute violation of a treaty provision... enjoining a Contracting Party
constantly to guarantee the observance of contracts with investors of another
Contracting Party.”*

58

SGS v. Pakistan, para. 168.
56 SGS v. Pakistan, paras. 169-70.

a E.g., United States-Poland, Treaty concerning Business and Economic Relations, Washington, 21
March 1990, Art. 2(6), final sentence; United States-Estonia, Treaty for the Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments, 19 April 1994, Art. 2(3)(c).

8 E.g., United Kingdom-Philippines, Agreement for the Promotion and Protection of Investments, 3
December 1980, Art. III(3); Netherlands-Philippines, Agreement for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments, 27 February 1985, Art. III(3).

” SGS y. Pakistan, para. 172 (emphasis added).

-47-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

But Article 11, if it has any effect at all, confers jurisdiction on an international tribunal, and needs
to do so with adequate certainty. Jurisdiction is not conferred by way of “an implied affirmative

commitment” or through the characterisation of circumstances as “exceptional”.

126. Moreover the SGS y. Pakistan Tribunal appears to have thought that the broad
interpretation which it rejected would involve a full-scale internationalisation of domestic
contracts—in effect, that it would convert investment contracts into treaties by way of what the
Tribunal termed “instant transubstantiation”.” But this is not what Article X(2) of the Swiss-
Philippines Treaty says. It does not convert non-binding domestic blandishments into binding
international obligations. It does not convert questions of contract law into questions of treaty law.
In particular it does not change the proper law of the CISS Agreement from the law of the
Philippines to international law. Article X(2) addresses not the scope of the commitments entered
into with regard to specific investments but the performance of these obligations, once they are
ascertained.®' It is a conceivable function of a provision such as Article X(2) of the Swiss-
Philippines BIT to provide assurances to foreign investors with regard to the performance of
obligations assumed by the host State under its own law with regard to specific investments—in
effect, to help secure the rule of law in relation to investment protection. In the Tribunal’s view,

this is the proper interpretation of Article X(2).

127. To summarize, for present purposes Article X(2) includes commitments or obligations
arising under contracts entered into by the host State. The basic obligation on the State in this case
is the obligation to pay what is due under the contract, which is an obligation assumed with regard
to the specific investment (the performance of services under the CISS Agreement). But this
obligation does not mean that the determination of how much money the Philippines is obliged to
pay becomes a treaty matter. The extent of the obligation is still governed by the contract, and it

can only be determined by reference to the terms of the contract.

oo SGS y. Pakistan, para. 172.

“ This is not a novel distinction. It is made for example in the UNCTAD Study, Bilateral Investment
Treaties (Graham & Trotman, NY, 1988) 55-6: “Its effect [sc. of the umbrella clause] is not to transform the
provisions of a State contract into international obligations... However, it makes the respect of such
contracts... an obligation under the treaty” (emphasis in original). The subsequent UNCTAD study,
Bilateral Investment Treaties in the Mid-1990s (NY, 1998) 56, is less precise but likewise concludes that “as
a result of this provision, violations of commitments regarding investment by the host country would be
redressible through the dispute-settlement procedures of a BIT.”

-48-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

128. To summarize the Tribunal’s conclusions on this point, Article X(2) makes it a breach of
the BIT for the host State to fail to observe binding commitments, including contractual
commitments, which it has assumed with regard to specific investments. But it does not convert
the issue of the extent or content of such obligations into an issue of international law. That issue
(in the present case, the issue of how much is payable for services provided under the CISS
Agreement) is still governed by the investment agreement. In the absence of other factors it could
be decided by a tribunal constituted pursuant to Article VIII(2). The proper law of the CISS
Agreement is the law of the Philippines, which in any event this Tribunal is directed to apply by
Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention. On the other hand, if some other court or tribunal has

exclusive jurisdiction over the Agreement, the position may be different.

129. Before turning to that question, however, it is appropriate to ask whether the present
Tribunal could exercise jurisdiction over contractual disputes concerning an investment by virtue
of Article VIII(2) of the BIT, irrespective of any breach of the substantive provisions of the BIT.
This issue was debated before the Tribunal and is potentially relevant, for example, in the context

of the application of the BIT to claims arising before its entry into force.

(c) Jurisdiction over contractual claims: Article VIII(2)

130. Article VIII of the BIT provides for settlement of “disputes with respect to investments
between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party”. Ifa dispute is not
resolved by consultations between the parties pursuant to Article VIII(1), the investor may submit
the dispute “either to the national jurisdiction of the Contracting Party in whose territory the
investment has been made or to international arbitration”, and in the latter case, at the investor’s

option, to ICSID or UNCITRAL arbitration.

131. Prima facie, Article VIII is an entirely general provision, allowing for submission of all

62

investment disputes by the investor against the host State.”” The term “disputes with respect to

investments” (“différents relatifs 4 des investissements” in the French text) is not limited by

reference to the legal classification of the claim that is made. A dispute about an alleged

a

Earlier drafts of what became Article VIII were similarly broad: e.g. Art. 10(1) of an earlier draft
referred to “any dispute that may arise in connection with the investment”.

-49-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

expropriation contrary to Article VI of the BIT would be a “dispute with respect to investments”;

so too would a dispute arising from an investment contract such as the CISS Agreement.

132.

This prima facie conclusion is supported by a number of further considerations, both

within the BIT itself and extrinsic to it:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

6B
64

Each of the forums contemplated by Article VIII(2) (the national courts of the host State,
ICSID panels and ad hoc tribunals established under the UNCITRAL Rules) has the
competence to apply the law of the host State, including its law of contract. Indeed, if the
BIT has not been implemented internally, the national courts may only be competent to
apply their own law.

The general term “disputes with respect to investments” may be contrasted with the more
specific term “[d]isputes... regarding the interpretation or application of the provisions of
this Agreement” in Article IX. If the States Parties to the BIT had wanted to limit
investor-State arbitration to claims concerning breaches of the substantive standards
contained in the BIT, they would have said so expressly, using this or similar language.

As noted already, the purpose of the BIT is to promote and protect foreign investments.
Allowing investors a choice of forum for resolution of investment disputes of whatever
character is consistent with this aim.* By contrast drawing technical distinctions between
causes of action arising under the BIT and those arising under the investment agreement is
capable of giving rise to overlapping proceedings and jurisdictional uncertainty. It may be
necessary to draw such distinctions in some cases, but it should be avoided to the extent
possible, in the interests of the efficient resolution of investment disputes by the single
chosen forum.

By definition, investments are characteristically entered into by means of contracts or
other agreements with the host State and the local investment partner (or if these are
different entities, with both of them). The specific link between investments and contracts
is acknowledged by the line of cases dealing with pre-contractual claims. ICSID tribunals
have been very reluctant to acknowledge that an investment has actually been made until
the contract has been signed or at least approved and acted on. Thus the phrase “disputes

with respect to investments” naturally includes contractual disputes; the same is true of the

See above, paragraph 116.
See, e.g., Mihaly International Corporation v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, Award

of 15 March 2002, 6 ICSID Reports 308, 319-20 (paras. 48, 51) (entry into an investment coextensive with
conclusion of a binding contract).

-50-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

phrase “legal dispute arising directly out of an investment” in Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention.

(e) In other investment protection agreements, when investor-State arbitration is intended to
be limited to claims brought for breach of international standards (as distinct from
contractual or other claims under national law), this is stated expressly. A well-known
example is Chapter 11 of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), under
which investors may only bring claims for breaches of specified provisions of Chapter 11

itself.

133. | However, a different view of the matter was apparently taken by the ICSID Tribunal in
SGS v. Pakistan, and it is necessary to consider the reasons given for their conclusion. The
equivalent provision of the BIT in that case, Article 9, used the phrase “disputes with respect to
investments”: this is the same as Article VIII of the Swiss-Philippines BIT. The relevant passage

of the decision reads as follows:

“161. We recognize that disputes arising from claims grounded on alleged
violation of the BIT, and disputes arising from claims based wholly on supposed
violations of the PSI Agreement, can both be described as ‘disputes with respect to
investments,’ the phrase used in Article 9 of the BIT. That phrase, however, while
descriptive of the factual_subject matter of the disputes, does not relate to the /egal
basis of the claims, or the cause of action asserted in the claims. In other words, from
that description alone, without more, we believe that no implication necessarily arises
that both BIT and purely contract claims are intended to be covered by the
Contracting Parties in Article 9. Neither, accordingly, does an implication arise that
the Article 9 dispute settlement mechanism would supersede and set at naught all
otherwise valid non-ICSID forum selection clauses in all earlier agreements between
Swiss investors and the Respondent. Thus, we do not see anything in Article 9 or in
any other provision of the BIT that can be read as vesting this Tribunal with
jurisdiction over claims resting ex hypothesi exclusively on contract. Both Claimant
and Respondent have already submitted their respective claims sounding solely on the
PSI Agreement to the PSI Agreement arbitrator. We recognize that the Claimant did
so in a qualified manner and questioned the jurisdiction of the PSI Agreement
arbitrator, albeit on grounds which do not appear to relate to the issue we here
address. We believe that Article 11.1 of the PSI Agreement is a valid forum selection
clause so far as concerns the Claimant's contract claims which do not also amount to
BIT claims, and it is a clause that this Tribunal should respect. We are not suggesting
that the parties cannot, by special agreement, lodge in this Tribunal jurisdiction to
pass upon and decide claims sounding solely in the contract. Obviously the parties

 

6s To similar effect see e.g., the Vivendi Annulment decision, (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 340, 356 (para.
55). The issue there was a slightly different one, viz., whether in pursuing ICSID arbitration rather than
local proceedings for breach of contract the investor had taken the “fork in the road” under the BIT. But it
involved the interpretation of similar general language in the BIT.

51-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

can. But we do not believe that they have done so in this case. And should the parties
opt to do that, our jurisdiction over such contract claims will rest on the special
agreement, not on the BIT.

162. We conclude that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction with respect to claims
submitted by SGS and based on alleged breaches of the PSI Agreement which do not
also constitute or amount to breaches of the substantive standards of the BIT.”

134. The present Tribunal agrees with the concern that the general provisions of BITs should
not, unless clearly expressed to do so, override specific and exclusive dispute settlement
arrangements made in the investment contract itself. On the view put forward by SGS it will have
become impossible for investors validly to agree to an exclusive jurisdiction clause in their
contracts; they will always have the hidden capacity to bring contractual claims to BIT arbitration,
even in breach of the contract, and it is hard to believe that this result was contemplated by States
in concluding generic investment protection agreements. But there are two different questions
here: the interpretation of the general phrase “disputes with respect to investments” in BITs, and

the impact on the jurisdiction of BIT tribunals over contract claims (or, more precisely, the

 

admissibility of those claims) when there is an exclusive jurisdiction clause in the contract. It is
not plausible to suggest that general language in BITs dealing with all investment disputes should
be limited because in some investment contracts the parties stipulate exclusively for different
dispute settlement arrangements. As will be seen, it is possible for BIT tribunals to give effect to

the parties’ contracts while respecting the general language of BIT dispute settlement provisions.

135. Interpreting the text of Article VIII in its context and in the light of its object and purpose,
the Tribunal accordingly concludes that in principle (and apart from the exclusive jurisdiction
clause in the CISS Agreement) it was open to SGS to refer the present dispute, as a contractual

dispute, to ICSID arbitration under Article VIII(2) of the BIT.”

66 Emphasis in original.

‘The same conclusion was reached by an ICSID Tribunal in Salini Costruttori SpA v. Kingdom of
Morocco, (2001) 6 ICSID Reports 398, 415 (para. 61).

6

-52-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

(d) The exclusive choice of forum clause

136. The Tribunal turns to the question of the jurisdiction clause mutually agreed in the CISS

Agreement and its impact on the present claim.

137. As noted already, Article 12 of the CISS Agreement provides that:

“All actions concerning disputes in connection with the obligations of either party to
this Agreement shall be filed at the Regional Trial Courts of Makati or Manila.”

Prima facie Article 12 is a binding obligation, incumbent on both parties, to resort exclusively to
one of the named Regional Trial Courts in order to resolve any dispute “in connection with the
obligations of either party to this Agreement”. It is clear that the substance of SGS’s claim, viz., a

claim to payment for services supplied under the Agreement, falls within the scope of Article 12.

138. It has been suggested that in some legal systems, a clause referring to national courts or
tribunals may be legally ineffective to confer or affect that jurisdiction, and should be construed as
a mere acknowledgement of a jurisdiction already existing by virtue of the non-derogable law of
the host State. This was suggested of the law of Argentina in the Lanco case. But the Tribunal
does not interpret Article 12 of the CISS Agreement as a mere acknowledgement which does not
impose a contractual obligation upon SGS as to the use of the Philippines courts to resolve
contractual disputes. SGS did not dispute that under Philippine law (the proper law of the CISS
Agreement), a contractual stipulation to accept the exclusive jurisdiction of the Regional Trial
Courts is effective in law and binding on the parties. In accordance with general principle, courts
or tribunals should respect such a stipulation in proceedings between those parties, unless they are
bound ab exteriore, i.e., by some other law, not to do so. Moreover it should not matter whether
the contractually-agreed forum is a municipal court (as here) or domestic arbitration (as in SGS v.
Pakistan) or some other form of arbitration, e.g. pursuant to the UNCITRAL or ICC Rules. The
basic principle in each case is that a binding exclusive jurisdiction clause in a contract should be

respected, unless overridden by another valid provision.”

Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic, (1998) 5 ICSID Reports 367, 378 (para. 26). The
Tribunal would observe, however, that the mere fact that “administrative jurisdiction cannot be selected by
mutual agreement” does not prevent the investor agreeing by contract not to resort to any other forum.

; For an express provision see Article II(1) of the Claims Settlement Declaration, 19 January 1981,
which expressly overrides exclusive jurisdiction clauses except for those relating to Iranian courts: | Iran-US
CTR9.

 

-53-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

(i) Is_the exclusive jurisdiction clause overridden by the BIT or the ICSID

Convention?

139. Accordingly, faced with an exclusive jurisdiction clause in these terms, the first question
must be whether the BIT or the ICSID Convention purport to confer upon investors the right to

pursue contractual claims under the BIT disregarding the contractually chosen forum.

140. One possibility is that this right is conferred by Article VIII(2) of the BIT itself, which
gives the investor a choice to submit the dispute “either to the national jurisdiction of the
Contracting Party in whose territory the investment has been made or to international arbitration”,
and in the latter case, a further choice between ICSID and UNCITRAL arbitration. The question is
whether Article VIII(2) was intended to override an exclusive jurisdiction clause in an investment

contract, so far as contractual claims are concerned.

141. Two considerations lead the majority of the Tribunal to give a negative answer to this

question.” The first consideration involves the maxim generalia specialibus non derogant.

Article VIII is a general provision, to ii ar whether
“prior to or after the entry into force of the Agreement” (Article II). The BIT itself was not
concluded with any specific investment or contract in view. It is not to be presumed that such a
general provision has the effect of overriding specific provisions of particular contracts, freely
negotiated between the parties. As Schreuer says, “[a] document containing a dispute settlement
clause which is more specific in relation to the parties and to the dispute should be given

””! The second consideration derives

precedence over a document of more general application.
from the character of an investment protection agreement as a framework treaty, intended by the
States Parties to support and supplement, not to override or replace, the actually negotiated

investment arrangements made between the investor and the host State.

142. It is suggested that, while BIT provisions for investor-State arbitration do not override

exclusive jurisdiction clauses in later investment contracts, at least they have that effect for earlier

7 Professor Crivellaro would give an affirmative answer, at least with respect to BITs which post-date
the relevant contract. See his attached Declaration.

Schreuer, 362.

-54-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

” But there is no textual

contracts, by application of the maxim /ex posterior derogat legi priori.
basis in the BIT for drawing such a distinction. The distinction would tend to operate in an
arbitrary way: in the present case, for example, the BIT is renewable after 10 years and thereafter
every five years (Article XI(1)); the CISS itself was renewed on the same terms as to dispute
settlement on several occasions. In such circumstances, which is the prior agreement and which is
the subsequent one? But the decisive point is that the /ex posterior principle only applies as
between instruments of the same legal character. By contrast what we have here is a bilateral
treaty, which provides the public international law framework for investments between the two
States, and a specific contract governed by national law. It must be presumed that whatever effect
the BIT has on contracts it has on a continuing basis, as new contracts are concluded and new
investments admitted. A distinction between earlier and later exclusive jurisdiction clauses in
contracts cannot therefore be accepted—unless expressly provided for, which is not the case with

the BIT which the Tribunal has to interpret.

143. For these reasons, in the Tribunal’s view, the BIT did not purport to override the exclusive
jurisdiction clause in the CISS Agreement, or to give SGS an alternative route for the resolution of

contractual claims which it was bound to submit to the Philippine courts under that Agreement.

144. Alternatively, SGS argues that Article 26 of the ICSID Convention has this effect. Article
26 provides:
“Consent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention shall, unless otherwise
stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to the exclusion of any other remedy. A.

Contracting State may require the exhaustion of local administrative or judicial
remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration under this Convention.”

It may be argued that, when the present proceedings were commenced in 2002, consent was
thereby given by the parties to ICSID jurisdiction “to the exclusion of any other remedy”,

including that provided for in the CISS Agreement.

145. Unlike the argument considered above concerning the legal effect of the BIT, this
argument at least has the merit that it identifies two agreements of the same character between the

same parties, viz., Article 12 of the CISS Agreement and the later agreement to ICSID arbitration

See, e.g., the discussion in Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic, (1998) 5 ICSID Reports

-55-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

constituted by the terms of Article VIII of the BIT in association with the Request for Arbitration.
In principle a later agreement between the same parties could override an earlier one. But SGS’s
argument depends upon a view of the intended meaning and effect of Article 26 which the

Tribunal does not share, for three reasons.

146. First, it is not supported by the travaux préparatoires of Article 26, which make it clear

that Article 26 was intended as a rule of interpretation, not a mandatory rule.”

147. Secondly, it ignores the phrase “unless otherwise stated” in Article 26. The question may
be asked why the exclusive jurisdiction clause in the contract is not a contrary statement for this
purpose. Article 26 is concerned with the consent of the parties to ICSID arbitration (not the
consent of the States Parties to a BIT). In that context the immediately succeeding phrase “unless
otherwise stated” must include a contrary statement or agreement by those parties. This is the
conclusion reached by Schreuer:
“This exclusive remedy rule of Art. 26 is subject to modification by the parties. The
words ‘unless otherwise stated’ in the first sentence give the parties the option to
deviate from it by agreement.”
Moreover he applies this principle not only to other forms of arbitration but also to domestic forum
clauses:

“Explicit reference to domestic courts means that the exclusive remedy rule of Art. 26
does not apply since the parties have stated otherwise.””*

148. Thirdly, the view that Article 26 provides a mandatory override of previously agreed
dispute settlement clauses would mean that in the common case under a BIT (such as the Swiss-
Philippines BIT) where the parties have a choice between ICSID arbitration and UNCITRAL
arbitration in respect of the same dispute, that choice would materially affect their legal rights. A
party to a contract containing an exclusive jurisdiction clause would obtain an override if it opted

for ICSID arbitration (by virtue of Article 26), but not if it opted for UNCITRAL arbitration (since

 

367, 377 (para. 24).
2 See the summary in Schreuer, 388-90.
Schreuer, 347.
Schreuer, 363.

™

15

-56-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

the UNCITRAL Rules contain no equivalent provision). The Tribunal does not believe that this

could have been intended.

(ii) Effect given to exclusive jurisdiction clauses in arbitral practice

149. Accordingly the Tribunal is faced with a valid and applicable exclusive jurisdiction clause,
affecting the substance of SGS’s claim. The question is whether this affects the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction or the admissibility of the claim.

150. The jurisprudence of mixed arbitral tribunals has not been entirely consistent, but the
balance of opinion supports the conclusion that it does. For example, in the Woodruff case the
United States-Venezuela Mixed Commission had jurisdiction over “[a]ll claims owned by citizens
of the United States of America against the Republic of Venezuela”, such claims to be decided
“upon a basis of absolute equity, without regard to objections of a technical nature, or of the
provisions of local legislation”.”° The holders of Venezuelan railway bonds issued in 1859 made
claims but were denied on the ground that by the terms of the bonds all controversies were to be
“decided by the common laws and ordinary tribunals of Venezuela”. The Umpire, Barge, rejected
the argument that the Protocol of 1903 overrode the exclusive claims clause in the contract:

“the judge, having to deal with a claim fundamentally based on a contract, has to

consider the rights and duties arising from that contract, and may not consider a

contract that the parties themselves did not make, and he would be doing so if he gave

a decision in this case and thus absolved from the pledged duty of first recurring for

rights to the Venezuelan courts, thus giving a right, which by this same contract was

renounced, and absolve claimant from a duty that he took upon himself by his own
voluntary action...””"

The Commission decided that “as the claimant by his own voluntary waiver has disabled himself
from invoking the jurisdiction of this Commission, the claim has to be dismissed without prejudice

on its merits, when presented to the proper judges.”

151. The United States-Mexico General Claims Commission took a similar approach in the

North American Dredging Company of Texas case. The Commission said:

76 See the United States-Venezuela Claims Protocol, 17 February 1903: 101 BFSP 646, 2 Malloy
1870.
” (1903) 9 RIAA 213, 222.

-57-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

“each case involving the application of a valid clause partaking of the nature of the
Calvo Clause will be considered and decided on its merits. Where a claim is based on
an alleged violation of any rule or principle of international law, the Commission will
take jurisdiction notwithstanding the existence of such a clause in a contract
subscribed by such claimant. But where a claimant has expressly agreed in writing,
attested by his signature, that in all matters pertaining to the execution, fulfillment,
and interpretation of the contract he will have resort to local tribunals, remedies, and
authorities, and then wilfully ignores them by applying in such matters to his
government, he will be held bound by his contract and the Commission will not take
jurisdiction of such claim.””

152. It is true that there are decisions apparently to the opposite effect, but mostly these depend
on the existence of a provision overriding contractual forum clauses. For example, the Italian-
Venezuelan Protocol of 13 February 1903 contained two salient provisions: in Article I, Venezuela
expressly recognized “in principle the justice of the [Italian] claims”—this amounted in effect to
an acknowledgement of indebtedness. Secondly, the Protocol was concerned with a defined class
of existing claims; after dealing with certain of these specifically, it referred “all the remaining
Italian claims, without exception” to the Mixed Commission.*”. In the Martini case, Arbitrator
Ralston was able to rely on “the plain language of the protocol” in dismissing arguments based on

a local forum clause.*!

153. But it is one thing for a defined class of existing claims to be referred to an international
tribunal “without exception”, and another for a government to agree to the adjudication for the
future of an indefinite range of cases in a number of different forums with different rules. The
Tribunal cannot accept that standard BIT jurisdiction clauses automatically override the binding
selection of a forum by the parties to determine their contractual claims. As the ad hoc Committee

said in the Vivendi case:

 

6 Ibid., 223. An earlier decision to similar effect is Flanagan, Bradley, Clark & Co. v. Venezuela,
under the Convention between the United States and Venezuela of 5 December 1885, in Moore, Digest of
International Arbitrations (1898) vol. IV, 3564, 3665.

(1926) 20 AJIL 800, 808 (para. 23); 3 ILR 292, 293. See also Mexican Union Railway Limited
(Great Britain) v. United Mexican States (1930) 5 RIAA 115, 5 ILR 207; El Oro Mining & Railway Co.
Limited (Great Britain) v. United Mexican States (1931) 5 RIAA 191, 6 ILR 201.
Art. IV. Art. VII dealt with bondholders’ claims. For the text see 10 RIAA 479.
(1903) 10 RIAA 644, 663-4. Decisions of mixed arbitral tribunals under the Treaty of Versailles,
1919, were variable and depended on the interpretation of Article 304(b) of the Treaty, which could be
regarded as overriding exclusive jurisdiction clauses in contracts: see, e.g., Greek Government v. Vulkan
Werke (1925) 3 ILR 402.

al

-58-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

“where the essential basis of a claim brought before an international tribunal is a
breach of contract, the tribunal will give effect to any valid choice of forum clause in
the contract."

(iii) Distinction between jurisdiction and admissibility

154. In the Tribunal’s view, this principle is one concerning the admissibility of the claim, not
jurisdiction in the strict sense. The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is determined by the combination
of the BIT and the ICSID Convention. It is, to say the least, doubtful that a private party can by
contract waive rights or dispense with the performance of obligations imposed on the States parties
to those treaties under international law. Although under modern international law, treaties may
confer rights, substantive and procedural, on individuals,** they will normally do so in order to
achieve some public interest. Thus the question is not whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction: unless
otherwise expressly provided, treaty jurisdiction is not abrogated by contract. The question is
whether a party should be allowed to rely on a contract as the basis of its claim when the contract
itself refers that claim exclusively to another forum. In the Tribunal’s view the answer is that it
should not be allowed to do so, unless there are good reasons, such as force majeure, preventing
the claimant from complying with its contract. This impediment, based as it is on the principle
that a party to a contract cannot claim on that contract without itself complying with it, is more

naturally considered as a matter of admissibility than jurisdiction.

© (2001) 6 ICSID Reports 340, 366 (para. 98).

8 Cf. LaGrand Case (Germany v. United States of America), CJ Reports 2001 p. 466 at 494 (paras.
77-78); ILC Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, annexed to GA Res
56/83, 12 December 2001, Art. 33(2).

“ It may be noted that the analogous rule of exhaustion of local remedies is normally a matter
concerning admissibility rather than jurisdiction in the strict sense: I Brownlie, Principles of Public
International Law (6" edn, Oxford, 2003) 681; CF Amerasinghe, Local Remedies in International Law (2"!
edn, Cambridge, CUP, 2004) 293-4.

-59-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

(iv) Conclusion on Article 12 of the CISS Agreement

155. To summarise, in the Tribunal’s view its jurisdiction is defined by reference to the BIT and
the ICSID Convention. But the Tribunal should not exercise its jurisdiction over a contractual
claim when the parties have already agreed on how such a claim is to be resolved, and have done
so exclusively. SGS should not be able to approbate and reprobate in respect of the same contract:
if it claims under the contract, it should comply with the contract in respect of the very matter
which is the foundation of its claim. The Philippine courts are available to hear SGS’s contract
claim. Until the question of the scope or extent of the Respondent’s obligation to pay is
clarified—whether by agreement between the parties or by proceedings in the Philippine courts as
provided for in Article 12 of the CISS Agreement—a decision by this Tribunal on SGS’s claim to

payment would be premature.

(e) Is there a BIT claim independent of the CISS Agreement?

156. Before considering the implications of these findings for the present proceedings it is
necessary to consider whether SGS has stated a case under the BIT which can be determined
independently from the contractual issues referred to the Philippine courts by Article 12 of the
CISS Agreement, a jurisdictional agreement which, for the reasons given, this Tribunal must

respect.

(i) The general principle

157. In accordance with the basic principle formulated in the Oil Platforms case (above,
paragraph 26), it is not enough for the Claimant to assert the existence of a dispute as to fair
treatment or expropriation. The test for jurisdiction is an objective one and its resolution may
require the definitive interpretation of the treaty provision which is relied on. On the other hand,
as the Tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan stressed," it is for the Claimant to formulate its case. Provided
the facts as alleged by the Claimant and as appearing from the initial pleadings fairly raise
questions of breach of one or more provisions of the BIT, the Tribunal has jurisdiction to

determine the claim. By extension, in international arbitration a Claimant must state its claim in its

8S See above, paragraph 96. See also United Parcel Service of America, Inc. v. Government of

Canada, Decision on Jurisdiction, 22 November 2002, para. 33.

-60-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

initial application, and wholly new claims cannot thereafter be added during the pleadings. On
the other hand, a Claimant is not limited to the facts set out in its Request for Arbitration: it may
assert and prove additional facts, including those occurring at a subsequent time up to the closure

of the proceedings, provided these fall within the scope of its original claim.*’

158. The Tribunal would note that the dispute in SGS v. Pakistan appears to be a more complex
one than the present, and that the SGS v. Pakistan Tribunal held it was not to be characterised as a
merely contractual dispute.“* That was certainly true in the Vivendi case, where the claim
presented by the Claimant went beyond the scope of the concession agreement and involved
allegations which, if proved, were capable of amounting to breaches of Article 3 or possibly
Article 5 of the Franco-Argentine BIT. As the ad hoc Committee held:

“the conduct alleged by Claimants, if established, cou/d have breached the BIT. The

claim was not simply reducible to so many civil or administrative law claims

concerning so many individual acts alleged to violate the Concession Contrac' It

was open to Claimants to claim, and they did claim, that these acts taken together, or
some of them, amounted to a breach of Articles 3 and/or 5 of the BIT.”

 

159. By contrast the present dispute is on its face a dispute about the amount of money owed
under a contract. SGS accepts that the provision of services under the CISS Agreement came to an
end by effluxion of time. No question of a breach of the BIT independent of a breach of contract
claim is raised (as, arguably, in SGS v. Pakistan); there is no allegation of a conspiracy by local
officials to frustrate the investment (as in Vivendi). As presented to the Tribunal by the Claimant,

the unresolved issues between the parties concern the determination of the amount still payable.

(ii) The BIT claims presented by SGS

160. In its Request for Arbitration SGS invoked Articles IV, VI and X(2).” Article X(2)

having already been dealt with, the Tribunal turns to the remaining claims under Articles IV (fair

86 See Case Concerning Certain Phosphate Lands in Nauru (Nauru v. Australia) , 1CJ Reports 1992 p.

240 at 265-70 (paras. 64-70).
"7 See Case Concerning the Land and Maritime Boundary between Cameroon and Nigeria
(Cameroon v. Nigeria), Preliminary Objections, \CJ Reports 1998 p. 275 at 317-19 (paras. 96-101); Request
for Interpretation of the Judgment of 11 June 1998 in the case concerning the Land and Maritime Boundary
between Cameroon and Nigeria (Nigeria v. Cameroon), Preliminary Objections, ICJ Reports 1999 p. 31 at
38 (para. 15).

8s SGS v. Pakistan, paras. 186-8.

(2001) 6 ICSID Reports 340, 370 (para. 112, emphasis in original). See also ibid., para. 114.
Request for Arbitration, paras. 38-41.

89
90

-61-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

and equitable treatment) and VI (expropriation). It is convenient to deal first with the

expropriation claim.

161. In the Tribunal’s view, on the material presented by the Claimant no case of expropriation
has been raised. Whatever debt the Philippines may owe to SGS still exists; whatever right to
interest for late payment SGS had it still has. There has been no law or decree enacted by the
Philippines attempting to expropriate or annul the debt, nor any action tantamount to an
expropriation. The Tribunal is assured that the limitation period for proceedings to recover the
debt before the Philippine courts under Article 12 has not expired.”’ A mere refusal to pay a debt
is not an expropriation of property, at least where remedies exist in respect of such a refusal. A
fortiori a refusal to pay is not an expropriation where there is an unresolved dispute as to the

amount payable.

162. Turning to Article IV (fair and equitable treatment), the position is less clear-cut.
Whatever the scope of the Article IV standard may turn out to be—and that is a matter for the
merits—an unjustified refusal to pay sums admittedly payable under an award or a contract at least
raises arguable issues under Article IV. As noted already (see paragraphs 36-41), the Philippines
did appear to acknowledge that a large proportion of the amount claimed was payable. In the
circumstances the Tribunal reaches the same conclusion on Article IV as it does on Article X(2).
At the level of jurisdiction, a claim has in its view been stated by SGS under both provisions. But,
there being an unresolved dispute as to the amount payable, for the Tribunal to decide on the claim
in isolation from a decision by the chosen forum under the CISS Agreement is inappropriate and

premature.

163. | The Tribunal holds that it has jurisdiction over SGS’s claim under Articles X(2) and IV of
the BIT, but that in respect of both provisions, SGS’s claim is premature and must await the

determination of the amount payable in accordance with the contractually-agreed process.
164. In these circumstances it is not necessary for the Tribunal to consider whether Article 12

of the CISS Agreement is wide enough to encompass a claim under substantive provisions of the

BIT, and what the legal consequences of an affirmative answer would be.

a Transcript, 27 May 2003, pp. 57-8.

-62-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

(f) The retrospectivity issue

165. Finally, as noted above, the Respondent argued that the BIT did not apply retrospectively

to claims which arose prior to its entry into force on 23 April 1999.

166. According to Article II of the BIT, it applies to investments “made whether prior to or
after the entry into force of the Agreement”. Article II does not, however, give the substantive
provisions of the BIT any retrospective effect. The normal principle stated in Article 28 of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties applies: the provisions of the BIT “do not bind a party
in relation to any act or fact which took place or any situation which ceased to exist before the date
of the entry into force of the treaty”. The application of this principle to BIT claims was explored
in some detail by a NAFTA Tribunal in Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America.”
As the Tribunal said (discussing the substantive standards under Chapter 11 of NAFTA): “events
or conduct prior to the entry into force of an obligation for the respondent State may be relevant in
determining whether the State has subsequently committed a breach of the obligation. But it must

still be possible to point to conduct of the State after that date which is itself a breach.””*

167. It may be noted that in international practice a rather different approach is taken to the
application of treaties to procedural or jurisdictional clauses than to substantive obligations. It is
not, however, necessary for the Tribunal to consider whether Article VIII of the BIT applies to
disputes concerning breaches of investment contracts which occurred and were completed before
its entry into force. At least it is clear that it applies to breaches which are continuing at that date,

and the failure to pay sums due under a contract is an example of a continuing breach.

168. In the present case the Tribunal has held that its jurisdiction in the present case depends
primarily on Article X(2) of the BIT, which is a substantive and not merely a procedural provision.
As to Article X(2), it is clear that the failure to observe obligations arising under the CISS
Agreement could not have occurred before the recommendation made by BOC to the Secretary of
Finance in December 2001 as to the total amount payable under the CISS Agreement.” This was

well after the entry into force of the BIT, and there is accordingly no problem of the retrospective

2 (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 192, 208-9 (paras. 68-70).
8 Ibid., 209 (para. 70).
o4

See above, paragraphs 37-41.

-63-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

application of the BIT in the present case. Similar considerations apply to SGS’s case under

Article IV of the BIT.

Ix.

THE TRIBUNAL’S CONCLUSIONS AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS FOR

FURTHER PROCEEDINGS CONCERNING THE PRESENT DISPUTE

169. For the reasons given above, the Tribunal concludes as follows:

()

2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

SGS made an investment in the territory of the Philippines within Article II of the
BIT. The present dispute is one with respect to that investment and arises directly
from it (see above, paragraphs 99-112).

Under Article X(2) of the BIT, the Respondent is required to observe the
obligation to pay sums properly due and owing under the CISS Agreement; but
this obligation is dependent on the amounts owing being definitively
acknowledged or determined in accordance with the CISS Agreement (see above,
paragraphs 113-129).

Under Article VIII(2) of the BIT, the Tribunal has jurisdiction with respect to a
claim arising under the CISS Agreement, even though it may not involve any
breach of the substantive standards of the BIT (see above, paragraphs 130-135).
But such a contractual claim, brought in breach of the exclusive jurisdiction clause
embodied in Article 12 of the CISS Agreement, is inadmissible, since Article 12 is
not waived or over-ridden by Article VIII(2) of the BIT or by Article 26 of the
ICSID Convention (see above, paragraphs 136-155).

No claim for breach of Article VI of the BIT can be sustained on the facts as
presented by the Claimant (see above, paragraphs 156-164).

SGS’s claims under Articles X(2) and IV, in association with Article VIII(2), fall
within the temporal scope of the BIT and are not excluded on grounds of

retrospectivity (see above, paragraphs 165-168).

170. The effect of these findings is that SGS is bound by the terms of the exclusive jurisdiction

clause, Article 12 of the CISS Agreement, in order to establish the quantum or content of the

obligation which, under Article X(2) of the BIT, the Philippines is required to observe. This is a

matter of admissibility rather than jurisdiction, and there is a degree of flexibility in the way it is

-64-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

applied.°> For example, evidently a party could not be required to litigate locally if the local courts

are closed to it due to armed conflict.

171. Normally a claim which is within jurisdiction but inadmissible (e.g., on grounds of failure
to exhaust local remedies) will be dismissed, although this will usually be without prejudice to the
right of the claimant to start new proceedings if the obstacle to admissibility has been removed
(e.g., through exhaustion of local remedies). However, international tribunals have a certain
flexibility in dealing with questions of competing forums. In the MOX Plant case (Ireland v.
United Kingdom) before an Annex VII Tribunal under the Law of the Sea Convention 1982, it
emerged that a circumstance highly relevant to the question of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction was the
impending commencement of proceedings by the European Commission against Ireland in the
European Court of Justice. The European Commission claimed that the matter in dispute fell
exclusively within the jurisdiction of the European Court. Depending on the outcome of those
proceedings, the Annex VII Tribunal might find itself without jurisdiction by virtue of Article 281
of the 1982 Convention. The Tribunal stayed its own proceedings pending determination of the
issue by the European Court, proceedings which it called on the parties to expedite as far as lay

within their power.”

172. More directly in point, perhaps, Pakistan argued that the Tribunal should adopt a similar
procedure in SGS v. Pakistan. The Tribunal declined to do so because it held that there was no
sufficient overlap between the BIT claims before it and the contractual claims before the Pakistan
arbitrator.’ In particular it noted that there was no need for “the factual predicate of a
determination by the PSI Agreement arbitrator that either party breached that Agreement” in order

to enable it to decide the BIT claims.”*

173. Implicit in the discussion in SGS v. Pakistan is the view that an ICSID Tribunal has the
power to stay proceedings pending the determination, by some other competent forum, of an issue

relevant to its own decision. This Tribunal agrees. Article 19 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules

8s An analogy may be drawn with the practice of national courts faced with claims such as lis alibi

pendens and forum non conveniens, which are likewise not jurisdictional. See, e.g., the cases discussed by
TL Stein in “Jurisprudence and Jurists’ Prudence: The Iranian-Forum Clause Decisions of the Iran-U.S.
Claims Tribunal”, (1984) 78 AJIL 1, 20-23.

°6 The MOX Plant Case (Ireland y. United Kingdom), Order No. 3, (2003) 42 ILM 1187, 1199.

or SGS v. Pakistan, paras. 185-89.

“8 Ibid., para. 188.

-65-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/O2/6

gives the Tribunal general power to make orders required for the conduct of the proceeding, and
this general power is confirmed by the second sentence of Article 44 of the Convention, in
accordance with which:

If any question of procedure arises which is not covered by this Section or the

Arbitration Rules or any rules agreed by the parties, the Tribunal shall decide the
question.

174. The Tribunal notes that at the time the present arbitration was commenced, SGS had made
substantial efforts to settle the claim through negotiations. Indeed a recommendation had been
made by BOC to the Secretary of Finance of the Philippines as to the amount payable—a
recommendation which the Secretary of Finance had appeared to accept.” SGS’s Request for
Arbitration clearly pleaded the failure to pay as a breach of the BIT, specifically Article X(2) and
IV. But because of Article 12 of the CISS Agreement, it is for the Philippines courts to determine
how much is payable, unless the parties themselves can reach a definitive agreement on SGS’s
claim. Thus this Tribunal is precisely faced with the situation where the Philippines’ responsibility
under Article X(2) and IV of the BIT—a matter which does fall within its jurisdiction—is subject
to “the factual predicate of a determination” by the Regional Trial Court of the total amount owing

by the Respondent.'”

175. In the circumstances the Tribunal concludes that the circumstance of the fixing of the
amount payable under the CISS Agreement—whether by definitive agreement between the parties
or by proceedings before the courts of the Philippines—should not require the bringing of a new
ICSID claim by SGS, but falls within the framework of SGS’s existing claim in this arbitration.'”'
That being so, justice would be best served if the Tribunal were to stay the present proceedings
pending determination of the amount payable, either by agreement between the parties or by the

Philippine courts in accordance with Article 12 of the CISS Agreement.

176. The stay of proceedings may be lifted for sufficient cause on application by either party.
The Tribunal calls on both parties to expedite proceedings before the Philippine courts and, in

general, to take all necessary measures to ensure a prompt and effective resolution of the dispute.

99
100

See above, paragraphs 37-41.
Other questions could perhaps arise, even if the amount payable were to be determined by the
Regional Trial Court: cf. Russian Indemnity case, (1912) 11 RIAA 431.

tor See above, paragraph 157.

-66-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

The parties are directed to report briefly to the Tribunal, either jointly or separately, at sixth-
monthly intervals commencing | July 2004, on the steps being taken for the resolution of the

present claim.

-67-

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance _v. Republic of the Philippines ICSID Case N° ARB/02/6

DECISION

177. _ For these reasons the Tribunal:

(a)

(b)
(c)

(d)

(e)

holds that it has jurisdiction over the present dispute under Article VIII(2) of the
BIT in combination with Articles X(2) and IV;

dismisses the claim so far as it is based on Article VI of the BIT;

by majority, stays the present arbitration proceedings pending a decision on the
amount due but unpaid under the CISS Agreement, a matter which (if not agreed
by the parties) is to be determined by the agreed contractual forum under Article
12 of the CISS Agreement;

decides that the proceedings will resume on the request of either party as soon as
the condition for admissibility set out above has been satisfied;

reserves all questions concerning the costs and expenses of the Tribunal and the

costs of the parties for subsequent determination.

Professor Crivellaro appends a declaration to the present decision.

 

signed
Dr. Ahmed S. El-Kosheri.
President
signed signed
Professor James R. Crawford Professor Antonio Crivellaro
January 29, 2004

-68-

