INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the annulment proceeding between:

SGS SOCIETE GENERALE DE SURVEILLANCE S.A.

THE REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/29

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Eduardo Zuleta J., Member
Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, Member
Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno B., President

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Mrs. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

May 19, 2014

THE PARTIES’ REPRESENTATIVES

Representing SGS Société Générale de Representing the Republic of Paraguay
Surveillance S.A.

Mr. Olivier Merkt and Dr. Roberto Moreno Rodriguez
Mr. Nicolas Grégoire Procurador General de la Reptiblica
SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A.

Geneva, Switzerland Dr. Hernan Martinez

Abogado del Tesoro Ministerio de Hacienda
Mr. Paul D. Friedland and

Mr. Damien Nyer Mr. Brian C. Dunning, Ms. Irene Ribeiro Gee and
White & Case LLP Mr. David N. Cinotti

New York, N.Y. Venable LLP

United States New York, N.Y.

United States

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PROCEDURAL HISTORY.

 

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

 

A. PARAGUAY’S POSITION

 

B. SGS’ POSITION
ANALYSIS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE .........ccccsccscssesssseeseseeeseeseseeseseesssneseaneneaneneas
COSTS
DECISION

 

 

 

GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS

Agreement or Contract

Application

Arbitration Rules

Award

Background Paper on Annulment

BIT

Counter-Memorial

Decision on Jurisdiction

ICSID Convention

ICSID or the Centre

Memorial

Paraguay

iii

Agreement entered into between the
Government of the Republic of Paraguay and
SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. on
the Rendering of Technical Services for Import
Pre-Shipment Inspection

Annulment Application, dated June 7, 2012.

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

Award rendered on February 10, 2012 in the
arbitration SGS Société Générale de
Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of Paraguay,
ICSID Case No. ARB/07/29

Background Paper on Annulment for the
Administrative Council of ICSID, August 10,
2012.

Agreement on the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments between Switzerland
and Paraguay. Signed on January 31, 1992, and
entered into force on September 28, 1992.

SGS’s Counter-Memorial on Paraguay’s
Article 52 Application for Annulment, dated
March 8, 2013.

Decision on Jurisdiction, dated February 12,
2010.

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States

International Centre for Settlement of

Investment Disputes

Memorial in Support of the Republic of
Paraguay’s Application for Annulment, dated
January 4, 2013.

The Republic of Paraguay or the Respondent

Parties

SGS

Tr

Tribunal

The Republic of Paraguay and SGS Société
Générale de Surveillance S.A.

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. or
the Claimant

English transcript of the Hearing on
Annulment held on November 1, 2013.
References to the transcript are made in the
following manner: “page number: line
number”.

The Arbitral Tribunal that rendered the Award.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On June 7, 2012, ICSID received from Paraguay an Application for annulment of the
Award rendered in ICSID Case No. ARB/07/29, SGS Société Générale de Surveillance
S.A. v. Republic of Paraguay. The Application also contained a request for the stay of
enforcement of the Award, in accordance with Rule 54(1) of the Arbitration Rules. The
Application for Annulment was submitted within the time period provided for by Article

52(2) of the ICSID Convention.

The Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application for Annulment on June 8,
2012, in accordance with Rule 50(2) (a) and (b) of the Arbitration Rules, and at the same
time notified the Parties of the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award, in accordance

with Rule 54(2) of the Arbitration Rules.

By letter of June 25, 2012, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2), SGS
requested that the Committee rule, within 30 days of the date of its constitution, on whether
the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award should be continued. SGS expressed its
opposition to a continued stay of enforcement and requested that Paraguay be ordered to

post a bond in the event that the Committee should decide to continue such stay.

On July 27, 2012, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Article 52(2) of the
Arbitration Rules, informed the Parties that the ad hoc Committee (the “Committee”’) had
been constituted. It was composed of Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno, a national of Costa Rica,
President, Mr. Eduardo Zuleta, a national of Colombia, and Mr. Salim Moollan, a national
of Mauritius and France. The Parties were also informed that Mrs. Mercedes Cordido-

Freytes de Kurowski, ICSID Legal Counsel, would be the Secretary of the Committee.

By letter of August 8, 2012, the Committee invited the Parties to file written observations
on the request for continued stay of enforcement prior to the First Session. Paraguay was
invited to file its observations by August 14, 2012 and SGS by August 20, 2012. Both

Parties presented their submissions in a timely manner.

The first session was held on October 29, 2012 by telephone conference. During the First

Session the Parties confirmed that the Committee had been properly constituted, in

1

accordance with the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules, and that they had no
objections to the appointment of any member of the Committee. It was agreed that the
proceeding would be conducted in accordance with the ICSID Arbitration Rules in effect
from April 10, 2006. The Parties agreed on several other procedural matters, inter alia, that
the procedural languages would be English and Spanish, and that the place of the
proceeding would be the seat of the Centre in Washington D.C. The Parties’ joint
agreement and the procedural calendar were incorporated in Procedural Order No. 1 dated

November 13, 2012, signed by the President and circulated to the Parties.

On November 7, 2012, each party filed further observations with regard to SGS’ request to

terminate the stay of enforcement of the Award.

On November 14, 2012, following the resignation of the ad hoc Committee member Mr.
Salim Moollan, the Secretary-General notified the Parties of the vacancy, and the

proceeding was suspended pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rules 53 and 10(2).

On November 26, 2012, after consulting with the Parties, the Chairman of the ICSID
Administrative Council appointed Judge Abdulqawi A. Yusuf, a Somali, Djiboutian and
Canadian national, to the ad hoc Committee to fill the vacancy caused by Mr. Salim

Moollan’s resignation.

Following the appointment of Judge Abdulqawi A. Yusuf, the ad hoc Committee was
reconstituted and the proceeding was resumed on November 29, 2012, pursuant to ICSID

Arbitration Rules 53 and 12.

In accordance with the procedural calendar set forth in Procedural Order No. 1, the
Republic of Paraguay filed its Memorial on Annulment on January 4, 2013, and SGS filed
its Counter-Memorial on March 8, 2013. On March 22, 2013, the Tribunal decided that a

second round of pleadings was not needed.

On January 17, 2013, SGS filed a request for provisional measures. By a communication
dated January 24, 2013, Paraguay strongly opposed the provisional measures requested by
SGS and on January 25, 2013, SGS sent a letter to the Committee in which it withdrew its

request for provisional relief.

On March 22, 2013, the ad hoc Committee issued its Decision on Paraguay’s Request for
the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award and SGS’ request to terminate it. In it,
the Committee decided to reject Paraguay’s request, declared that the provisional stay
granted by the Secretary-General was terminated as of that date, and that it would rule on

the allocation of costs and expenses in its decision on the annulment of the Award.

The Hearing on Annulment was scheduled to take place on June 13, 2013. However, it was
cancelled because Paraguay failed to pay in time the corresponding fees. It was

subsequently rescheduled for November 1, 2013.

On August 6, 2013, Counsel for SGS, with the assent of Counsel to Paraguay, informed the
Tribunal that the Parties had successfully concluded settlement negotiations and executed a
Settlement Agreement dated July 20, 2013. This Agreement required specific actions to be
taken by the Parties by December 15, 2013. The Parties agreed that, pending such actions,
the annulment proceeding should continue as scheduled and requested the Tribunal to

maintain the scheduled date for the Hearing on Annulment.

On September 20, 2013, the Tribunal requested the Parties to inform whether the Hearing
on Annulment that had been scheduled for November 1, 2013 would go forward. Counsel
for Paraguay replied on September 24, 2013, indicating that the specified actions required
by the Settlement Agreement had not been undertaken and that it was unlikely that they
would before November 1, 2013. The Parties therefore agreed that the Hearing on

Annulment should go forward on November 1, 2013, as scheduled.

On November 1, 2013, the Hearing on Annulment was held at the seat of the Centre in
Washington, D.C. The three members of the ad hoc Committee and the Secretary were

present during the hearing.

During the hearing, SGS was represented by Messrs. Olivier Merkt and Nicolas Grégoire
from the Legal Department of SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A., and by Messrs.
Paul Friedland, Damien Nyer and Daniel Aun from White & Case LLP.

The Republic of Paraguay was represented by Dr. Roberto Moreno Rodriguez, Procurador

General de la Repiiblica; Dr. Giuseppe Fossati, Legal Counsel from the Procuraduria

3

20.

21.

a

22.

23.

24.

General de la Reptiblica,; Dr. Benigno Lépez, and by Mr. Brian C. Dunning, Mr. David
Cinotti and Ms. Irene Ribeiro Gee from Venable LLP.

On March 26, 2014, the proceeding was declared closed in accordance with Rules 53 and

38(1) of the Arbitration Rules.

The ad hoc Committee conducted its deliberations by various modes of communication
among its members and in issuing this Decision has taken into account all written

submissions and oral arguments of the Parties.

. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

PARAGUAY’S POSITION

In its Application, Paraguay requested the ad hoc Committee to annul the Award in its
entirety on the basis of two grounds contained in Article 52 of the ICSID Convention: (i)
that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention); and (ii) that the award failed to state the reasons on which it is based (Article

52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention).

Paraguay argued these two grounds for annulment in its Memorial. However, at the
hearing, Paraguay said that the main question that it would address was whether or not the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers'. Paraguay would therefore not refer to the parts
of its brief related to sovereign acts and the failure to state reasons, but it would rest on its

Memorials about these two matters.’
Manifest Excess of Powers

According to Paraguay the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in two ways. First, the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in deciding the merits of a dispute over which it
lacked jurisdiction, because of an exclusive forum selection clause in the contract in favour

of the exclusive jurisdiction of Paraguayan courts. Second, the Tribunal also manifestly

'Tr., 8:18-20
° Tr. 9:4-9

25.

26.

27.

28.

exceeded its powers by deciding SGS’s claims on the merits, because a pure breach of

contract by a State without the exercise of sovereign powers cannot violate the BITS
In its Memorial on Annulment Paraguay stated:

“The Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by refusing to give effect to this forum-
selection clause and instead deciding that Paraguay violated the BIT because it breached
the payment obligations in the Contract.’*

Paraguay added:

“The Tribunal also manifestly exceeded its jurisdiction in deciding the merits of SGS’s
claims because a failure to pay under a contract, without any use or abuse of sovereign
authority, cannot amount to a treaty breach, as many ICSID tribunals have held. Because
the alleged breach of contract could not violate the BIT, the claim was manifestly outside
the Tribunal’ s jurisdiction.”>

Paraguay divided its argument on manifest excess of power in two parts:

“First, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers when it considered and decided SGS’s
claim that Paraguay breached the Contract by failing to pay SGS’s invoices. This contract
claim was within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Paraguayan courts pursuant to the clear
and unambiguous terms of the parties’ Contract. No other ICSID tribunal has held that an
Umbrella Clause in a BIT renders within its jurisdiction and admissible a breach of
contract, without more, that is undisputedly subject to an exclusive contractual forum-
selection clause.”°

“The Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in this case by deciding a claim that was
outside its jurisdiction under the BIT and that was inadmissible because it was within the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Paraguayan courts. Because the Tribunal lacked authority to
decide the merits of the case, it manifestly exceeded its powers.”

“Second, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by deciding SGS’s claim on the
merits because a pure breach of contract, without any sovereign act, cannot violate the
Umbrella Clause in the BIT. SGS’s claim based solely on failure to pay under the Contract
was manifestly outside the Tribunal’s power to decide.”*

Paraguay also affirmed:

> Memorial on Annulment, {| 36-37

“Id
Id
“id
"Id
“Id

+ 12
13
6 136
138
137

29.

30.

31.

32.

“Although the ad hoc Committee is not a court of appeal, the Tribunal’s decision to
consider SGS’s claim on the merits goes far beyond mere error of law or treaty
misinterpretation” “*...the Award should be annulled because the Tribunal had no authority
to consider the merits of SGS’s claims in the first place. Indeed, in rejecting BIVAC’s
claims, the BIVAC tribunal held that “[fJor this Tribunal to exercise jurisdiction in relation
to a pure contractual dispute, in the circumstances of this case, would plainly amount to an
excess of jurisdiction.””

With respect to the forum-selection clause, Paraguay asserted:

“Tt was a manifest excess of powers to refuse to enforce the forum-selection clause and
instead decide the merits of SGS’s contract claim pursuant to the Umbrella Clause in the
BIT. This excess of power is ‘obvious from a simple reading of the reasons of the
Tribunal’. The Tribunal’s exercise of jurisdiction violated fundamental principles of party
autonomy or pacta sunt servanda, and is inconsistent with the rule that specific agreements
control over general agreements on the same issue.”!°

Paraguay concluded its argumentation about the forum-selection clause stating:

“For these reasons, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by refusing to abide by the
clear language in the Contract and instead deciding the merits of SGS’s Umbrella Clause
claim, a claim fundamentally based on a contract rather than any independent treaty
standard.”"!

Paraguay argued that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in a second way, by

deciding the merits of a contractual dispute, outside the scope of the Umbrella Clause”.

In Paraguay’s view, a breach of contract by a State, without the exercise of sovereign
powers, cannot violate the Umbrella Clause in the BIT’. Paraguay referred to the
decisions in Pan American Energy LLC v Argentine Republic, Impregilo S.p.A v Islamic
Republic of Pakistan and Joy Mining Machinery Ltd v. Arab Republic of Egypt, to state
that Umbrella Clauses and BIT standards are not breached by a commercial conduct like
the failure to pay under a contract. On the contrary, “only governmental or sovereign

conduct can breach a BIT standard”.

° Id., 1.44 (footnote omitted)

Iq
"4g
2X1

., | 47 (footnote omitted)
.. 1 93

.. 1 94

.. (1 35-37

.. 1 94

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

Moreover, the Umbrella Clause in the BIT does not transform a mere contract breach into a
treaty breach and is not sufficiently specific to override this rule'’. Further, the Umbrella
clause is not a substantive standard of protection'® and does not automatically convert
contract claims into treaty claims. Paraguay cites, the decisions in Bayandir v. Pakistan
and Impregilo v. Pakistan which confirm the basic principle that a State does not violate

international law by simply breaching a contract!’,
With respect to the umbrella clause, Paraguay concluded:

“Accordingly, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by exercising jurisdiction over
a pure breach of contract on the theory that the Umbrella Clause elevates a breach of
contract to a breach of treaty. Paraguay’s alleged failure to pay invoice, the sole basis of
the Award here, involves no sovereign act or abuse of sovereign authority, and therefore
cannot amount to breach of the BIT.”"®

According to Paraguay:

“\.. if the commitments protected by the Umbrella Clause included contractual
commitments, the Tribunal was required to examine the Contract as a whole, not merely
parts of it... The Tribunal’s basis for rejecting this argument is far from clear and was
based on reasoning that contradicted its explanation for exercising jurisdiction over SGS’s
Umbrella Clause claim.”!

Paraguay asserted that:
“In its Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal repeatedly relied on a distinction between
treaty and contract claims ... the Tribunal performed no separate treaty analysis or different

inquiry; instead, the tribunal entirely focused on whether Paraguay breached the Contract,
not whether it breached an independent treaty standar« 70

At the hearing on annulment held in Washington D.C. on November 1, 2013, Paraguay

summarized the arguments on which it based its request for the annulment of the Award.

S1d,q97

1d. ¢ 98

"Td, ql 102-104.

81d, q 105

'° Td. ¢ 108 (internal quotation and footnote omitted)

20 Td., {4 109 and 110 (internal quotations and footnotes omitted)

7

38. Paraguay stated: “‘...the main question to be addressed today is whether or not the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers.””!

39. Paraguay added that it would point out “...the standard under which this Committee should
review our challenges to the award”, and said that its argument about the standard for the
review rests on three main propositions.

40. According to Paraguay, those three propositions are the following:

a) “...a tribunal exceeds its powers when it decides an issue that the parties committed to
the exclusive jurisdiction of a different tribunal or forum.”

b) “...that power, not jurisdiction or admissibility, is the key issue under Article 52(1)b.”

c) “...whether the term "manifest" requires obvious excess, series (sic) excess, or simply
an excess of jurisdiction...”

41. When explaining its first proposition, Paraguay stated:

“This application is not about perceived errors on the merits of a Tribunal's Award, but the
illegitimacy of the Tribunal's rendering an award on the merits at all.”4

42. Paraguay also argued as follows: “ ... what could go more to the heart of the legitimacy of
the decision-making process than an argument that the Tribunal lacked any power to render
a decision at all on the merits. A tribunal's power is necessarily tied to the consent of the
parties.”?°

43. In its PowerPoint presentation Paraguay cited the Decision on Annulment issued in CDC
Group PLC v. Republic of the Seychelles, in which it was affirmed that a “Tribunal’s
legitimate exercise of power is tied to the consent of the parties, and so it exceeds its
powers where it acts in contravention of that consent. . 776

*' Tr. 8:18-20

* Tr. 9:16-18

° Tr., 9:21-22 to 10:1-7

“Tr. 10:15-18

Tr, 11:4-8

°° Paraguay’s Presentation, November 1, 2013, p. 4

44.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

It also referred to Helnan v. Egypt (Decision on Annulment), saying that “[t]he concept of

the powers of a tribunal goes further than its jurisdiction...”””

Paraguay then explained its second proposition, saying that:

“The second proposition is that the issue before this committee is whether the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers. The committee need not decide whether the challenges
here pertain to jurisdiction or admissibility.”

“Article 52(1)b speaks of exceeding powers, not jurisdiction.”?*

Paraguay also quoted Professor Vaughan Lowe saying that “the tribunal of general
jurisdiction must decline to accept the case, because the parties are legally bound to refer

the case to another tribunal.””°

With respect to the standard of the term “manifest”, Paraguay referred to the ICSID
Background Paper on Annulment saying that “ad hoc committees have interpreted
‘manifest’ to mean ‘obvious, clear or self-evident, and which is discernible without the
need for an elaborate analysis of the award’.”*°

According to Paraguay, in this case, “[t]he Tribunal’s excess of power was obvious, clear,

self-evident, and requires no elaborate analysis to understand.”*!

Paraguay also stated that “...a tribunal that exceeds the boundaries of the parties' consent

to arbitrate has necessarily committed a manifest excess of power. 2

Paraguay then affirmed that “...the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers when it

decided SGS's umbrella clause claim.”

During the hearing, Paraguay referred expressly to the forum-selection clause of the

agreement:

"Id.

° Tr., 12:6-10 to 12-13

» Paraguay’s Presentation, November 1, 2013, p. 5
Td., p.7

Tr, 16:11-14

Tr, 16:19-21

Sr, 17:7-9

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

“Any conflict, controversy or claim deriving from or in connection with the Contract, its
breach, termination or invalidity shall be submitted to the Courts of the City of
Asuncién.”**

Paraguay added that “[t]he Tribunal should, therefore, have acknowledged and enforced

the forum-selection clause in the contract and declined to hear SGS's claim for

nonpayment.”*»

Paraguay further explained that “...at least the following aspects of the Tribunal's decision

are evidence of manifest excess of the Tribunal's powers”:

a) “...the Tribunal ignored party autonomy by refusing to enforce the forum-selection
clause”;

b) “The Tribunal's disregard of the forum-selection clause is completely inconsistent...
with the internationally-accepted legal doctrine of pacta sunt servanda...”;

c) “...the Tribunal also disregarded the universally-accepted rules of legal interpretation,
generalia specialibus non derogant and lex specialis generalibus derogant”;

d) “...other ICSID Tribunals have dismissed umbrella clause claims based on breach of
contract when contract disputes are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of another
formula.”*°

During the hearing, Paraguay referred specifically to the decision on annulment issued in

the Vivendi I case and quoted the following from that decision:

“Whether there has been a breach of the BIT and whether there has been a breach of
contract are different questions. Each of these claims will be determined by reference to its
own proper or applicable law.”*”

Paraguay also quoted paragraph 98 of the Vivendi I decision on annulment:

“In a case where the essential basis of a claim brought before an international tribunal is a

breach of contract, the tribunal will give effect to any valid choice of forum clause in the
9938
contract.

Paraguay argued that: “...the umbrella clause and the commitments here do not arise from

an independent treaty standard. The basis of the claim is the breach of a contractual

or, 17:14-17
8 Tr., 17:20-22
* Tr., 18:6-7, 19:18-21, 21:6-9 and 22:3-6
Tr, 23:13-17

*§ Paraguay’s Presentation, November 1, 2013, p. 16

commitment; a contract that contained the provision that expressly withdrew consent to

. wo a3
arbitrate contractual claims.”*”

57. Paraguay concluded that:

“The Tribunal's failure to give effect to the parties’ bargain in the form of a forum-selection
clause constituted a manifest excess of power.“

58. In its rebuttal in the Hearing Paraguay stated:

“...Paraguay is not asking this Committee to substitute its judgment for that of the Tribunal,
or to decide the merits of the case de novo.”*! It is asking the Committee “...to recognize
that the Tribunal never had the power to hear this claim in the first place.”

59. It added that:

“.,.Paraguay believes that the basic principle in issue in this case is consent of the parties”;
and argued that: “... Paraguay never consented to arbitrate these contract claims before an
arbitration Tribunal of any kind.”

60. Paraguay also affirmed that on the question of specific versus general, “SGS has turned the
concept on its head a bit in arguing that the treaty is the specific and the forum-selection
clause is the general and would argue that the treaty is clearly the more general as it
mentions no specific party except for Paraguay, no specific contract or specific aspect of
the contract.”4
“The Tribunal simply repeatedly talked about what it took to breach the contract rather
than what it took to breach the commitment clause in the treaty. That is, it engaged in no
separate treaty inquiry.”

61. Paraguay further argued that:

“... the Tribunal refused to deal with the central issue as to what constituted the separate
legal inquiry, the separate legal inquiry that the Vivendi annulment committee set forth as

Tr. 26:5-10

Tr, 27: 2-4

“tr 47: 12-14

? Tr, 47: 17-19

Tr. 48: 3-7

“Tr. 48: 16-22

Tr, SU:11-15

the distinction between treaty and contract that the Tribunal said in its decision of
jurisdiction applied.”*°

62. Paraguay summarized its position as follows:

“...what we are asking is that the committee put everything in context and try to reconcile
this big tension between international law and domestic law...”

“\.. and in that context of the mandate of the BIT, ... try to make sense of all this,
respecting the principle that the parties made an agreement to dispute contractual claims
somewhere else.”

63. Finally, Paraguay stated the following:

“... the other point ... is about what SGS coined as non-textual limitations of the umbrella

clause, like we’re trying to create textual limitations to the meaning of the umbrella
9949

clause.

Failure to State Reasons

64. In its Memorial, Paraguay stated that the Award should be annulled on the additional

ground that it failed to state reasons”.

65. Paraguay argued that the failure to state reasons not only exists when the Tribunal gives no
reasons at all but also “... applies when the tribunal’s reasons ‘are so inadequate that the

coherence of the reasoning is seriously affected’ or when the reasons are not ‘adequate and

sufficient reasonably to bring about the result reached by the Tribunal’ a

66. Paraguay contended that the Tribunal did not conduct independent treaty analysis on the
contract commitment to provide access to local courts as encompassed by the Umbrella

Clause; and instead, it merely acted as a commercial tribunal deciding a contract case”.

“6 Tr., 52:10-15

“Tr. 53:18-21

Sr. 54:1-5

Tr, 54:7-11

*° Memorial on Annulment, { 106
5! Id., | 106 (footnotes omitted)
1d, q 119

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

According to Paraguay the Tribunal’s analysis did not respond to the arguments on
independent treaty analysis, which required the Tribunal to examine contractual
commitments as a whole and whether or not Paraguay could have violated the contract
without blocking access to domestic courts®*. In this connection, Paraguay referred to the
decisions in BIVAC v. Paraguay and SGS v. Philippines, where the Tribunals considered
that the treaty standard had to incorporate the whole Contract and not ignore the forum-
selection clause™. Despite the incorporation of the BIT into the contract, the Tribunal’s

analysis does not explain why it considered one commitment and not the other®®.
Referring to the Tribunal’s alleged failure to state reasons, Paraguay argued that:

“ ... if the umbrella clause elevated the contract to a commitment protected by the treaty ...
then the treaty inquiry ... required the Tribunal to consider the entire contract.”

For the reasons stated in its Memorial and at the hearing, Paraguay asked the Committee to

“... annul the Award in its entirety.”*”

SGS’ POSITION

SGS affirms that Paraguay’s Annulment Application rests on a disagreement about the
Tribunal’s interpretation of the BIT and that it raises before the Committee the same

arguments that it presented before to the Tribunal®*.

On its March, 8 2013 Counter-Memorial SGS referred to Paraguay’s claims about the

forum-selection clause stating:

“The Tribunal here found that the contractual forum selection clause did not deprive the
investor of its right under the BIT to seek international arbitration to resolve its treaty
claim. To find otherwise would depart from the plain and ordinary meaning of the BIT,
which makes a contractual breach a treaty breach and which provides for international

Sid, qil4

“1d, Qs

S1d., GY 116-118

© Tr., 50: 17-22

*7 Memorial on Annulment, { 121

*$ Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{] 1-2

72.

723.

74.

75.

arbitration for any treaty claim. Even if, contrary to fact, the Tribunal’s reasoning had been
inconsistent with the language of the BIT, that would not matter for the purposes of Article
52. It does not matter under Article 52 whether the Tribunal was right or wrong in its
interpretation of the Treaty. It does not matter under Article 52 whether other ICSID
tribunals have taken a different view, or the same view, of the issue presented. And it does
not matter under Article 52 whether some or all of the members of this Committee, had
they been asked to decide the merits of the dispute, might have come to a different or the
same conclusion as to how to harmonize the tension between the provisions of the BIT and
the contractual forum selection clause.”

SGS added:

“Paraguay likewise argues that, on both jurisdictional and admissibility grounds, the
Tribunal should have disregarded the clear and explicit dispute resolution provisions of the
BIT in favour of the forum selection clause of the Contract because of the maxims of pacta
sunt servanda and lex specialis generalibus derogat. Whatever their merits (and this
Committee need not endorse or reject them), Paraguay’s arguments fall far short of
establishing that the Tribunal’s conclusions had no basis in the BIT and were, therefore,
untenable and constituting a manifest excess of powers.”

SGS also affirmed the following:

“Commentators have similarly rejected Paraguay’s interpretation of the ICSID Convention
as requiring a different standard for jurisdictional determinations. The main drafter of the
ICSID Convention, Aron Broches, explained:

‘Art. 41 of the Convention declares that the Tribunal is the judge of its
competence. An ad hoc Committee constituted to rule on a request for annulment
may not substitute its view for that of the Tribunal as if it were an appellate and

hierarchically superior body, which it is not. It may annul the award only if the
Tribunal’s decision on competence was manifestly wrong’.”°!

With respect to Paraguay’s assertion that the Tribunal did not reason the Award properly,
SGS affirmed that the Tribunal expressed its reasons amply in paragraphs 101 to 109 of the

Award and in paragraphs 173-185 of the Decision on Jurisdiction™.

SGS also affirmed:

1d. 43

I
© Td., | 48 (footnote omitted)
I

©! Id., 1 43 (footnote omitted)
© Td., 70 and {75

76.

77.

78.

79.

“Paraguay is wrong. The Tribunal, while observing that Paraguay’s argument ‘taken on its
face, lack[ed] logical coherence’ because it could not be correct that ‘Paraguay had the
option of either paying its invoices or submitting the dispute to the local courts’,
nonetheless offered a detailed rebuttal of the argument and conducted an analysis under the
BIT.”

“The Tribunal’s premise was its earlier conclusion in the Decision on Jurisdiction and the
Award that an umbrella clause elevates contractual commitments into treaty obligations”.
“Paraguay appears to fault the Tribunal for not having articulated further why, if the effect
of Article 11 of the BIT was to elevate Paraguay’s contractual obligation to pay its invoices
into a treaty obligation, the parties’ obligation under the Contract to litigate their disputes
in the Paraguayan courts was not likewise elevated.”

Manifest Excess of Powers

At the hearing, SGS referred to the Article 52 standard and to the CDC case, which in its
view is about legitimacy of the process. It stated that “Article 52 was included in the
Convention primarily to assure the legitimacy of the process, not to assure a correct

result...”

For SGS, “Legitimacy ha[d] two notions. One concerns jurisdiction, and the other concerns

the process.”

SGS quoted from the Decision of the AES v. Hungary Committee the following:

“Ad hoc committees must avoid ‘an approach which would result in the qualification of a
tribunal’s reasoning as deficient, superficial, sub-standard, wrong, bad or otherwise faulty,
in other words, a re-assessment of the merits which is typical for an appeal.”°”

SGS then referred to the functions of annulment committees stating:
“Where there’s disagreement among ICSID Tribunals about an issue of treaty

interpretation, it’s not the task of an ad hoc committee to pick one side or the other or to try
to harmonize ICSID jurisprudence.”®*

 Td., Wf 70-71 (footnotes omitted)
 Id., 173 (footnote omitted)
Tr., 28:14-16
°° Tr., 28: 20-21
°7 SGS° Presentation, November 1, 2013, page 4
Tr, 30:6-10

80.

81.

82.

83.

With respect to the forum-selection clause, SGS also stated that it was not asking the

Committee: “
“\.. to characterize Paraguay’s arguments about the forum-selection clause debate as
admissibility rather than jurisdiction.”

“You can characterize them as both ways, ... and we will respond to both. And we will
treat them independently, addressing... the jurisdictional aspect of the forum-selection
clause argument first.””°

With respect to what it called Paraguay’s jurisdictional argument, SGS cited paragraphs
141-142 of the Decision on Jurisdiction, that quoted Vivendi I v. Argentina and read as

follows:

“Where ‘the fundamental basis of the claim’ is a treaty laying down an independent
standard by which the conduct of the parties is to be judged, the existence of an exclusive
jurisdiction clause in a contract between the claimant and the respondent state or one of its
subdivisions cannot operate as a bar to the application of the treaty standard. We note that
in our view, this rule applies with equal force in the context of an umbrella clause.”7!

Commenting on ICSID’s jurisprudence about the jurisdictional matter, SGS affirmed:

“\..the tribunal’s jurisdictional ruling relied on the plain language of the BIT which
provides for ICSID arbitration under all treaty claims. . ve

“... ICSID jurisprudence is so well-established on this jurisdictional point that Dolzer and
Schreuer call it a consistent practice, that the treaty-based jurisdiction of international
arbitral Tribunals to decide on violations of these treaties is not affected by domestic
forum-selection clauses in contracts.””*

SGS further argued that:

“.,.Paraguay just asks to take a different view than the overwhelming weight of ICSID
authority and commentary. Well, even if you had a different view, it’s not a basis for an
Article 52 claim. In fact, it wouldn’t be a basis for an Article 52 claim even if the

Tr, 31: 9-11

Tr, 31:13-17

™ Tr., 32: 3-11, quoting from Decision on Jurisdiction, {141-142
? Tr., 33: 4-6

3
r Tt.

Tr., 33: 11-16

84.

85.

86.

87.

overwhelming weight of jurisdiction and commentary were contrary to fact on Paraguay’s
«qa 074
side.

“The Tribunal here based its jurisdictional ruling on the plain language of the BIT; and it
can’t be and wasn’t an excess of power, let alone a manifest excess of power.””°

SGS then referred to the forum-selection clause, which, in its view, is about:

“... the issue of how to resolve the tension when a BIT provides for ICSID arbitration over
all claims arising under the treaty, including an umbrella clause. And then an umbrella
clause claim is based on a contract that contains a local court submission. This is a much-
debated, very interesting issue in international investment law. And it’s an interesting and
much-debated issue because there’s no easy answer.””°

SGS further stated “One or the other has to take primacy, either the ICSID consent in the

BIT that is perfected when the investor files its claims for ICSID arbitration or the local

court submission in the contract.”””

SGS quoted paragraph 171 of the Decision on Jurisdiction, which reads as follows:

“Thus the Tribunal finds that it has jurisdiction over Claimant’s claims under Article 11
that Paraguay failed to observe commitments it allegedly made to SGS, both under the
Contract and under its alleged subsequent oral and written promises to make good on the
claimed debt to SGS. And having found jurisdiction, we are of course mindful of the
Vivendi I ‘annulment committee’s admonition that a ‘[t]ribunal, faced with such a claim

and having validly held that it had jurisdiction, [is] obliged to consider and to decide iv”

According to SGS, this meant that:

“... the Tribunal recognized that the two instruments in question, the BIT and the contract,
gave the investor a choice. And by ruling this way it’s our submission (sic) the Tribunal
resolved the tension as best as the tension can be resolved. But it doesn’t matter whether
we’re wrong. And it doesn’t matter whether you disagree with the way the Tribunal
resolved this tension. This is indisputably a subject matter about which reasonable minds
can differ.”

™ Tr., 33: 21-22 and 34:1-6

5
r Tt.

Tr., 34:7-10
7 Tr., 35:15-22
" Tr., 36:2-7
78 Decision on Jurisdiction, {{ 171 and SGS’ Presentation, November 1, 2013, page 12
” Tr., 36:19-22 and 37:1-6

17

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

SGS then quoted the decision rendered in the Azurix Corp. v. Argentina Annulment

Proceeding (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, {| 68), that concluded:

“Tf (...) reasonable minds might differ as to whether or not the Tribunal has jurisdiction,
that issue falls to be resolved definitively by the Tribunal.”*°

SGS further stated:

.. another way to characterize this interesting tension in international investment law is
that its resolution is debatable. And as you see on page 14 (of SGS’s presentation), where
the matter is debatable, Article 52 does not apply.”*!

“As the CDC committee said, any excess apparent in a Tribunal’s conduct if susceptible of
argument one way or the other is not manifest.”*?

SGS then quoted the Duke Energy International Peru Investments No.1 Limited v. Peru,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/28, Decision of the ad hoc Committee (March 1, 2011), at {| 99
that stated:

““A debatable solution is not amenable to annulment [under Article 52], since the excess of

powers would not then be ‘manifest’.”*°

SGS further stated that:

“Paraguay has argued that the ‘where reasonable minds differ’ standard doesn’t apply to
jurisdiction or admissibility issues; but that reads manifest out of Article 52. And ad hoc
committees have rejected just that argument.”**

With respect to this issue, which was referred specifically in the Soufraki and Lucchetti
cases, SGS affirmed that they basically agree in that “the requirement that an excess of

power must be ‘manifest’ applies equally if the question is one of jurisdiction.”*°

“The Committee [Lucchetti v Peru Committee] considers that the word ‘manifest’ should
be given considerable weight also when matters of jurisdiction are concerned.”

8° SGS" Presentation, November 1, 2013, page 13
8! Tr., 37:19-22 and 38:1
© Tr, 38:2-4

3
Str,

 

9-12

“Tr, 38:13-17
85 SGS" Presentation, November 1, 2013, page 15

* Td.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

SGS further contended that:

“The extreme complexity of the jurisdictional requirements under the convention makes it
necessary to limit the permissible reassessment of the Tribunal’s competence by an ad hoc
committee.”*”

Quoting from the M.C.I Power Decision, SGS argued that:

“...As the M.C.I. Power v. Ecuador Committee said ‘the annulment mechanism is not
designed to bring about consistency in the interpretation and application of international
investment law.”**

SGS then referred to another argument raised by Paraguay:

“Paraguay’s contention ..., not raised this morning but raised in its brief, is that the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its power by allowing the umbrella clause claim to proceed,
absent evidence of sovereign action.”

SGS expressed the view that:
“... the key point here is that nothing in the text of the BIT’s umbrella clause says or
suggests that sovereign action is required. And given that our Tribunal applied and
followed the plain text of the BIT, I don’t see how it could have been a manifest excess of
power.”

SGS then quoted paragraph 168 of the Decision on Jurisdiction which reads as follows:

“Given the unqualified text of Article 11 of the Treaty, and its ordinary meaning, we see no
basis to import into Article 11 the non-textual limitations that Respondent proposed in its
Reply. Article 11 does not exclude commercial contracts of the State from its scope.
Likewise, Article 11 does not state that its constant guarantee of observance of such
commitments may be breached only through actions that a commercial counterparty cannot
take, through abuses of state power, or through exertions of undue government
influence.””!

Failure to State Reasons

*'Tr., 39:6-9

88 SGS" Presentation, November 1, 2013, page 17 (footnote omitted)
© Tr, 40:13-17

Tr, 41:10-15

°! SGS" Presentation, November 1, 2013, page 19 (footnote omitted)

19

98.

99.

100.

101.

SGS then referred to Paraguay’s contention that the Tribunal failed to state the reasons on
which it based the Award. SGS summarized Paraguay’s position about this issue asserting
that the “...Tribunal stated that contract claims are distinct from treaty claims but then

treated the treaty claim as indistinguishable from the contract claim. And that’s a failure to

state reasons.”°>

SGS answered Paraguay’s assertion arguing that “...the point that our Tribunal was

making was that the BIT and contract provide independent bases for a claim. Our Tribunal

also held that the same act can breach both the treaty and the contract and that the umbrella

Hn’

clause equated a breach of contract with the treaty breac’ and quoted the last sentence

of paragraph 105 of the Award where it is stated that:

“The two obligations are discrete, separate commitments as between the parties, assuming
the contrary would, in effect, imply that one can only breach a contract when it breaches,
not one, but more than one of its clauses.”°*

SGS concluded this part of its presentation by stating that:

“ [A]s the Vivendi I committee stated on the Article 52 standard with respect to reasons, it
is well accepted, both in the cases and the literature, that Article 52(1)(e) concerns a failure
to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an award, not the failure to state correct or
convincing reasons.”

“Tt bears reiterating that an ad hoc Committee is not a court of appeal. Provided that the
reasons given by a Tribunal can be followed and relate to issues that were before the

Tribunal, their correctness is beside the point in terms of Article 52(1)(e).”°°

SGS requested the Committee to:

© Tr, 43:3-6

8 Tr, 43:7-12
Tr, 43: 18-22
Tr. 44: 4-9
°° Tr., 44:10-15

20

a. Reject Paraguay’s Annulment Application in its entirety;
b. Order Paraguay immediately to comply with the Award; and

c. Order Paraguay to bear all costs incurred by SGS in connection with this

annulment proceeding, including its legal fees and expenses, as well as the fees
and expenses of ICSID’s Secretariat and the members of the Committee”.

Ill. ANALYSIS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

102. In order to arrive to the conclusions contained in this Decision the Committee reviewed
and considered all the arguments of the Parties and the documents submitted by them in
this proceeding. The fact that the Committee does not specifically mention a given
argument or reasoning does not mean that it has not considered it. In their submissions the
Parties produced and cited numerous awards and decisions dealing with matters that they
consider relevant to this Decision on Annulment. The Committee has also considered these
documents carefully and may have taken into account the reasoning and findings of the
Committees referred to during the proceeding as well as other committees on annulment.
However, in coming to a decision on the matter of annulment raised by Paraguay, the
Committee must perform, and in fact has performed, an independent analysis of the ICSID

Convention, the Arbitration Rules, and the particular facts of this case.

103. The mission of ad hoc Annulment Committees has been defined clearly by many jurists
that have dealt with this matter, by ICSID’s jurisprudence and by ICSID itself, in the

Background Paper on Annulment.

104. In the said Background Paper on Annulment, the ICSID Secretariat concluded that the
drafting history of the Convention demonstrated that annulment of ICSID awards was

designed as a limited remedy to safeguard against procedural errors in the decisional

°? Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {81

21

process”* and that it did not “(...) provide a mechanism to appeal alleged misapplication of

the law or mistakes in fact”.

105. In essence, there is a unanimous agreement that annulment is distinct from appeal '°, The

ad hoc committees are not courts of appeal and their task is not to harmonize ICSID’s

1

jurisprudence, ° or as the M.C.I. Power v. Ecuador annulment committee stated: “[t]he

annulment mechanism is not designed to bring about consistency in the interpretation and

application of international investment law”?

106. For these reasons, the Committee will not elaborate further on these matters, and will
directly address the questions submitted to it, pursuant to Article 52 of the ICISD
Convention, i.e.: (i) whether the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and (ii) if the

Award failed to state the reasons on which it is based.
Manifest Excess of Powers

107. According to Paraguay’s submissions, the first manner in which the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers consisted in deciding the merits of a dispute over which it lacked
jurisdiction, in light of the existence of an exclusive forum selection clause in the contract

that favours the exclusive jurisdiction of Paraguayan courts.

°8 Background Paper on Annulment, p.29, {72

°° Background Paper on Annulment, p.29, 73

' Schreuer, Christoph, et al, The ICSID Convention, A Commentary, Second Edition, Cambridge, 2011, pg. 901,
8-11; ICSID Background Paper on Annulment, pgs. 33-37; Schreuer, Christoph, “From ICSID Annulment to
Appeal Half Way Down the Slippery Slope”, The Law and Practice of International Courts and Tribunals, vol. 10,
2011, pgs. 211-215, pg. 212; Broches, Aron, “Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States
and Nationals of Other States of 1965: Explanatory Notes and Survey of its Application”; Van den Berg, Albert Jan,
Yearbook of Commercial Arbitration, vol. XVII, 1993, 626-716,pg. 687, 1170; See for example, the decisions of
the following Committees: Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. The Republic of Guinea, (ICSID Case
No. ARB/84/4), Decision on Annulment, January 6, 1988, 4.04; Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt,
(ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision (Annulment Proceeding), February 5, 2002, {18 (“Wena”)

11 Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, (ICSID Case ARB/02/7), Decision of the ad hoc Committee
on the Application for Annulment of Mr. Soufraki, June 5, 2007, 20 (“Soufraki”); CDC Group ple v Republic of
Seychelles, (ICSID Case ARB/02/14), Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment of the
Republic of Seychelles, June 29, 2005, 934 (“CDC”); Schreuer, Christoph, et al, The ICSID Convention, A
Commentary, Second Edition, Cambridge, 2011, pg. 902, 113; Van Houte, Hans, “Article 52 of the Washington
Convention- A Brief Introduction”, in Gaillard, Emmanuel, Banifatemi, Yas, (eds), Annulment of ICSID Awards,
IAI Series in International Arbitration No. 1, Huntington, New York, 2004, 11-16, pg. 12

1 V.C. Power Group, L.C. and New Turbine Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/6), Decision
on Annulment, October 19, 2009, {| 24

22

108. Paraguay contended that under Article 52(1)(b) a Tribunal exceeds its power when it
decides a dispute that the Parties have submitted to the jurisdiction of a different court or

Tribunal!°?, Power is the question under Article 52(1)(b),!%

and the Tribunal lacks power
to reach a decision on a matter that was reserved to a different court'”’. This excess of

power by the Tribunal was obvious and clear, and requires no further analysis'°°,

109. Furthermore, Paraguay expressed the view that, unlike a decision on the merits of a claim,
a decision by a Tribunal to exercise jurisdiction that it lacks must be subject to annulment,

even if the tribunal indicated an arguable basis to reach the merits”

. Paraguay invoked
support for the application of this standard on the Vivendi I Decision on Annulment and on
Philippe Pinsolle’s paper “Manifest Excess of Powers and Jurisdictional Review of ICSID

Awards”!*,

110. For SGS, on the other hand, the Tribunal’s decision was based on the plain language of the
BIT and cannot be considered a manifest excess of powers'”, Annulment is only available
in exceptional and highly limited circumstances and it is not the task of an ad hoc
Committee to decide an issue on which there is disagreement between ICSID Tribunals or

to harmonize ICSID jurisprudence”,

Based on analysis by Commentators and on
decisions of prior ad hoc Committees, SGS rejected Paraguay’s argument that a different
standard for manifest excess of powers applies to a Tribunal’s decision on jurisdiction,
because it does away with the kompetenz-kompetenz power of the Tribunal and deletes the

qualifier “manifest” from Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention!!'.

111. Pursuant to Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention, an award can be annulled whenever

the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers. Other Committees have understood

Tr, 9: 20- 10:2

Tr, 15:16
STp, 12:7-11
Tr, 16:10-14

107 Memorial on Annulment, J 43

"8 Id., 1.43, footnote 36

Tr, 34:7-10

"OTr., 30:6-10 and 30:21-31:1

"! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 40-44

23

annulment as limited in scope!!?, The excess of powers must be manifest, and thus must be

easily perceived, self-evident and not result from extensive interpretation'"’,

112. Moreover, prior Committees have agreed that a tenable standard of review shall be
followed; that is, in the face of different opinions on the questions submitted to a Tribunal,
an Annulment Committee must evaluate whether the answers given by the Tribunal seem

tenable and are not arbitrary'*. In other words, an Annulment Committee will not assess

the correctness of the Tribunal’s decision, even if it considers that it is incorrect!'>.

113. The limited scope of Article 52(1)(b) was emphasized in the following passage from the

annulment committee’s decision in CDC v Seychelles''*:

“As interpreted by various ad hoc Committees, the term ‘manifest’ means clear or
“self-evident”. Thus, even if a Tribunal exceeds its powers, the excess must be plain
on its face for annulment to be an available remedy. Any excess apparent in a
Tribunal’s conduct, if susceptible of argument ‘one way or the other’, is not manifest.
As one commentator has put it, ‘If the issue is debatable or requires examination of
the materials on which the tribunal’s decision is based, the tribunal’s determination is
conclusive’.

 

114. This Annulment Committee considers that there is no difference in the standard of review
applicable to a claim of manifest excess of powers on the basis of jurisdiction or on the
merits. Under Article 41 of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal shall be the judge of its
own competence, and thus its decision on the scope of its jurisdiction cannot be reviewed

de novo by an Annulment Committee!'’, This Committee agrees with others that have

' Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine
Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3), Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic, July
30, 2010, 237; Wena, {18

"3 Soufraki, | 39; AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erémii KFT v. Hungary, (ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/22), Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, June 29, 2012, 431

"4 Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2),
Decision on Annulment, December 18, 2012, 70 (Quoting the decision of the Annulment Committee in Kléckner
ID

"5 HeInan International Hotel A/S v. Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/0S/19), Decision of the ad hoc
Committee, June 14 2010, {55 (“Helnan”)

"6 CDC, referring to Wena, { 25, and M.B. Feldman, The Annulment Proceedings and the Finality of ICSID
Arbitration Awards, 2 ICSID Rev. 85 (1987), p. 101

"7 Broches, Aron, “Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States of 1965: Explanatory Notes and Survey of its Application”; Van den Berg, Albert Jan, Yearbook of
Commercial Arbitration, vol. XVIII, 1993, 626-716, pg.689, {180

24

115.

116.

117.

stated that nothing in the ICSID Convention indicates that a different standard shall be

applied to issues of jurisdiction, and therefore an award can only be annulled if the lack or

excess of jurisdiction was manifest!'*,

This position was recognized by ICSID in the Background Paper on Annulment:

“At the same time, ad hoc Committees have acknowledged the principle
specifically provided by the Convention that the Tribunal is the judge of its
own competence. This means that the Tribunal has the power to decide
whether it has jurisdiction to hear the parties’ dispute based on the parties’
arbitration agreement and the jurisdictional requirements in the ICSID
Convention. In light of this principle, the drafting history suggests —-and most
ad hoc Committees have reasoned —that in order to annul an award based on a
Tribunal’s determination of the scope of its own jurisdiction, the excess of
powers must be ‘manifest’. However, one ad hoc Committee found that an
excess of jurisdiction or failure to exercise jurisdiction is a manifest excess of
powers when it is capable of affecting the outcome of the case.”!!°

The Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction portrays the different positions that have been
advanced on these issues by various tribunals. For example, it quotes the decisions of SGS
v. Pakistan, SGS v. Philippines and BIVAC v. Paraguay, on the different approaches to the

issue of the umbrella clause '”°.

In this case, the Tribunal was faced with the difficult decision concerning the distinction
between treaty claims and contract claims, in order to determine if the existence of a forum

I Tt decided that the claims

selection clause in a Contract precluded its jurisdiction
advanced by SGS corresponded to treaty claims and therefore a contractual forum selection
clause did not divest the Tribunal of its jurisdiction to hear claims for breach of treaty”,

Based on this finding, the Tribunal assessed the scope of the BIT’s Umbrella Clause and

"8 Azurix Corp. v The Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Decision on the Application for
Annulment of the Argentine Republic, September 1, 2009, 66; Soufraki, 118-119; Broches, Aron, “Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States of 1965: Explanatory Notes
and Survey of its Application”; Van den Berg, Albert Jan, Yearbook of Commercial Arbitration, vol. XVIII, 1993,
626-716, pg.689, 180; Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Pert, S.A. (formerly Empresas Lucchetti,
S.A. and Lucchetti Pert, S.A.), v. The Republic of Peru, (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4), Decision on Annulment,
September 5, 2007, {101

"9 Background Paper on Annulment, { 89

"°° Decision on Jurisdiction, {{f 169-171

Taq 125

1d. 138

25

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

concluded that this clause established an international obligation for the parties to the BIT
to observe contractual obligations with respect to investors'?* and that, in consequence, it

had jurisdiction over SGS’s claims under Article 11 of the Bir’,

The Tribunal could have decided that, according to the Agreement, it did not have
jurisdiction and that the dispute should be resolved by the Asuncién Courts; or it could
have ruled that pursuant to the BIT, it had jurisdiction and, therefore, should decide the

dispute submitted to its consideration. The Tribunal chose the second option.

The Members of this Committee may agree or disagree with the choice made by the
Tribunal. However, for the purposes of this proceeding that agreement or disagreement
does not have much relevance unless it can be shown that the Tribunal has manifestly

exceeded its powers.

According to Article 41 (1) of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal had to define if it had or
did not have jurisdiction. In doing so, it assessed the different submissions by the Parties
and the possible positions it could take. Nothing in the Tribunal’s analysis demonstrates

that it manifestly exceeded its powers.

This Committee’s responsibility is not to rule about the correctness of the Award. Its
mission is simply to decide if any of the situations described in Article 52 of the ICSID

Convention existed in this case.

According to SGS the Tribunal’s Decision was correct. In Paraguay’s opinion, it was not.
Regardless of what the correct answer is, it is obvious that by deciding in the manner that it
did, the Tribunal did not incur in a “manifest excess of powers”. It simply chose one of the
alternatives that it had. In this connection, the Committee insists that for an excess of

power to be “manifest” it has to be textually obvious and substantively serious.

At the hearing Paraguay stated that it would concentrate on the issue of whether the

Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

"3 Decision on Jurisdiction, | 170
4 Idem, {171

26

124. Paraguay’s basic argument in this matter was that the tribunal’s powers originate

exclusively from the consent of the parties. Based on the decision rendered in Helnan v.
Egypt, it affirmed that “[t]he concept of the powers of a tribunal goes further than its
jurisdiction and refers to the scope of the task which the parties have charged the tribunal
to perform in discharge of its mandate, and the manner in which the parties have agreed

that task is to be performed.”!?°

125. The Tribunal had to decide if it had jurisdiction or not. As explained in paragraphs 117 and

118 above, the Tribunal ruled that it did have jurisdiction, pursuant to the BIT. Therefore,
in this Committee’s judgment, Paraguay’s position alleging that the Tribunal manifestly

exceeded its powers as described above is incorrect.

126. Paraguay insisted repeatedly on its argument that the Tribunal violated the forum-selection

clause of the Contract and thus incurred in a manifest excess of its powers.

127. Paraguay broke down its forum-selection clause argument into the following parts

(paragraph 53 above):

a) “...the Tribunal ignored party autonomy by refusing to enforce the forum-selection
clause”;

b) “The Tribunal's disregard of the forum-selection clause is completely inconsistent...
with the internationally-accepted legal doctrine of pacta sunt servanda...”;

c) “...the Tribunal also disregarded the universally-accepted rules of legal interpretation,
generalia specialibus non derogant and lex specialis generalibus derogat’. 126

128. Concerning the forum selection clause, the Tribunal followed the reasoning of the Vivendi

125

126

127

I Tribunal and Committee and concluded that the forum selection clause did not constitute
a waiver to the investor’s rights under the treaty and therefore could not prevent the
investor from presenting claims under the BIT’, The Tribunal added that: “[e]ven if the
alleged breach of the treaty obligation depends upon a showing that a contract or other

qualifying commitment has been breached, the source of the obligation cited by the

Helnan, {41
Tr., 18:6-7, 19:18-21, 21:6-9 and 22:3-6

Decision on Jurisdiction, {| 140

27

claimant, and hence the source of the claim, remains the treaty itself”!?®. This conclusion

was premised on the existence of treaty claims that SGS could assert under the Bit’,

129. According to Paraguay, the Tribunal disregarded the principles of “generalia specialibus
non derogant” and “lex specialis generalibus derogate”. The Tribunal was faced with the
decision of determining which set of rules (the BIT or the Agreement) was particular to the
situation submitted to it and, therefore, applicable. It decided for the BIT. That decision
may be considered to be correct or incorrect, but it certainly does not constitute a valid

basis to annul the Award.

130. This Committee cannot act as an appeals tribunal and review whether the interpretation of
the umbrella clause and the forum-selection clause by the Tribunal were correct. The
Committee could only annul the award upon verification of the existence of a manifest
excess of powers on the part of the Tribunal, which can be easily perceived and does not
require extensive interpretation of the Award to be perceived. This is not the case in the

Tribunal’s Award.

131. Paraguay asserted that the Tribunal also manifestly exceeded its powers by deciding SGS’s
claims on the merits, because a pure breach of contract by a State does not suffice to
breach Umbrella Clauses and other BIT standards. According to Paraguay, only sovereign
conduct can breach a BIT standard",

132. SGS contended that the BIT’s Umbrella Clause does not require the exercise of sovereign
action and that neither the Tribunal, nor the Committee can read non-textual limitations

+ 3
into the clause"!

133. The Tribunal addressed this issue in the Decision on Jurisdiction and in the Award. It

acknowledged that some arbitral tribunals had deemed an abuse of sovereign powers

necessary to breach an umbrella clause’, but decided to follow the reasoning of other

8 1d. q 142

2974, 142

130 Memorial on Annulment, { 94
8! tp. 41:10-17 and 42:4-8

For example, Siemens v. Argentina and SGS v. Pakistan

28

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

tribunals, such as Burlington Resources v. Ecuador and Duke Energy v. Ecuador, and
concluded that the Umbrella Clause could apply whether or not the exercise of sovereign

. 3
powers was involved 13.

In the Committee’s view, Paraguay’s submission seeks that this Committee conduct a new
analysis on the application of the Umbrella Clause. The scope of the Umbrella Clause is an
issue over which there is much debate in international investment law, and the Tribunal
decided to opt for one of the possible avenues of interpretation. Again, the Committee is
not charged with analysing the correctness of the Tribunal’s reasoning, but instead it must

evaluate if the position held by the Tribunal exceeded the scope of its adjudicative power.

The Committee considers that the Tribunal’s interpretation of the Umbrella Clause was
exercised within the bounds of its power to determine its jurisdiction and thus did not

involve a manifest excess of power.

For these reasons, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its

powers and therefore the Award cannot be annulled on this ground.
Failure to State Reasons

Paraguay argued that the Award provides inadequate reasons that seriously affect its
coherence, insofar as it did not conduct an independent treaty analysis of the contract as a
whole. Its reasoning also contradicts the distinction between treaty and contract claims

contained in the Decision on Jurisdiction’.

SGS submitted that the Tribunal asserted that the BIT and the Contract provided different

basis for a claim. According to SGS, all of Paraguay’s arguments were addressed by the

3
136

Tribunal in a manner that satisfies the standard under Article 52(1)(e), which concerns

'3 Award, { 93; Decision on Jurisdiction, {{f 168-169
4 Tp, 50:17- 51:3

135

Memorial on Annulment, {114

86Tr., 43:13-17

29

139.

oO

140.

141.

142.

143.

failure to state reasons with respect to the Award and not failure to state correct or

convincing reasons BT.

Article 52(1)(e) enables a Committee to annul an award on the basis that it has failed to
state the reasons on which it is based. ICSID’s Background Paper on Annulment referred
to decisions taken by other ad hoc Committees that “... explained that this requirement is
intended to ensure that parties can understand the reasoning of the Tribunal, meaning the
reader can understand the facts and law applied by the Tribunal in coming to its

. - : aes a 99138
conclusion. The correctness of the reasoning or whether it is convincing is not relevant.

In addition, prior Annulment Committees have recalled that the standard under Article
52(1)(e) is a minimum standard that allows a reasonable reader to understand the award!”
As stated by the MTD v. Chile Annulment Committee: “In the end the question is whether
an informed reader of the Award would understand the reasons given by the Tribunal and
would discern no material contradiction in them”'° This ground for annulment only

concerns the absence of reasons and not their quality or correctness 4",

Furthermore, it is not necessary to state reasons for assertions that are in themselves

2
reasons",

This is the standard of review that this Committee considers applicable. Moreover, in view
of the settled doctrine on this issue, the Committee emphasizes that it will not enter into an

assessment of the merits of the dispute, either directly or indirectly.

In paragraphs 167 to 170 of the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal explained clearly its
interpretation of the Umbrella Clause contained in Article 11 of the BIT with respect to

obligations originated in the Agreement and reached the conclusion that it had jurisdiction.

87 Tp, 44:4-9

18 Background Paper on Annulment, p.29, {106

9 Wena, {79

0 MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. v Republic of Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7), Decision on Annulment, March 21,
2007, | 92

5! Compaitia Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, {ff 64-65; CDC, {{{ 70 and 75

1 soufraki, J 131

30

This conclusion was confirmed in paragraphs 72 to 74 of the Award. In paragraphs 173 to
184 of the Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal explained its interpretation of the forum
selection clause in the Agreement in relation with the BIT and reached the same conclusion
with respect to its jurisdiction; paragraph 75 of the Award confirmed that conclusion.
Whether Paraguay or this Committee agrees with the Tribunal's reasoning is irrelevant for
the purposes of this proceeding and clearly does not constitute valid grounds for the

annulment of the Award.
144. In the Award, the Tribunal stated:

“The Tribunal does not accept Respondent’s argument. The law applicable to
Claimant’s claim is the BIT, including Article 11 of the BIT and the investor-state
dispute settlement provisions in Article 9 of the BIT. Article 11 requires Respondent
to observe its commitments with respect to Swiss investors. The “commitment” at
issue in this dispute is the Contract. There is no dispute that the Contract requires
payment in accordance with the invoicing procedures set forth therein and that
Respondent has not paid the vast majority of the invoices SGS issued. In these
circumstances, the Tribunal has no difficulty concluding that Respondent did not
fulfill its contractual commitments.” !

“Respondent argues that it cannot be found to have failed to observe its contractual

commitments unless Claimant proves that Respondent has failed to meet its payment

obligations under the Contract and frustrated the operation of the forum selection
v9 144

clause.

145. The Tribunal stated that Paraguay has not cited any legal authority to support this
position’, It considered that, contrary to Respondent’s arguments, the obligations in the
Contract on payment and to provide access to local courts are not “alternative options but
two discrete obligations.” “° The Tribunal concluded that “[t]his cannot be correct. It
cannot be that Paraguay had the option of either paying its invoices or submitting the

dispute to local courts.” 147

3 Award, J 101
4 1qq 102
5 1q,q 104
46 1d. 105
714,106

31

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.

“Id,
1d,
id,

Finally, the Tribunal characterized this argument as an attempt of the Respondent to
discuss again arguments on jurisdiction, namely the absence of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
on the basis of the existence of a forum selection clause in the Contract'“*. The Tribunal

rejected this argument!*?,

The abovementioned sections of the Award show that the Tribunal provided reasons for its

conclusions '*°.

Such reasons can be followed by the reader from the starting point to its
conclusion. The Tribunal’s analysis departs from a characterization of the type of claim
advanced by SGS and concludes that (i) the two obligations under the Contract are discrete
and (ii) the insertion of a forum selection clause in the Contract could not negate

Respondent’s responsibility under the BIT.

Consequently, in the Committee’s opinion the Award did not fail to express the reasons on

which it is based.

For the above reasons the Committee will dismiss completely Paraguay’s application for

the annulment of the Award.

COSTS

Pursuant to Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention, Chapter VI of said Convention
(Articles 59 through 61) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the proceedings before this

Committee.
Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention states:

“In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the parties otherwise
agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings, and
shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of
the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such
decision shall form part of the award. ”

The Parties did not agree on a method for apportionment of costs different from that

envisaged in Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention.

4109
4109
4M 101-109

32

153. Although the Application of the Republic of Paraguay is being rejected in its entirety, the
Committee does not consider the Application frivolous. Accordingly, exercising its
discretion under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, the Committee shall decide the

following:

(a) Paraguay shall bear the costs of the proceeding, comprising the fees and expenses of the

Committee Members, and the costs of using the ICSID facilities; and

(b) Each party shall bear its own legal costs and expenses incurred with respect to this

annulment proceeding.

33

V. DECISION

154. For the reasons set forth above, the Committee unanimously decides:

. To dismiss in its entirety the Application for Annulment of the Award submitted by the

Republic of Paraguay.

. Each party shall bear its own legal costs and expenses incurred with respect to this

annulment proceeding.

iii.

The Republic of Paraguay shall bear the costs of the proceeding, comprising the fees and

expenses of the Committee Members, and the costs of using the ICSID facilities.

34

Alii ed

 

Judge Abdulgawi Almed Yusuf Mr. Eduardo Zuleta
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee
date: 6-5. 2014 date: 8-s-zoiy4

Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno
President of the ad hoc Committee
date: Moy 12,2014

35

