INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

SGS SOCIETE GENERALE DE SURVEILLANCE S.A.

(Claimant)
and

THE REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY
(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/29

 

Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Members of the Tribunal:
Dr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov, President
Mr. Donald Francis Donovan
Dr. Pablo Garcia Mexia

Secretary of the Tribunal: Dr. Sergio Puig de la Parra

Representing Claimant: Representing Respondent:

Mr. Olivier Merkt & Mr. Nicolas Grégoire Dr. José Entique Garcia Avalos

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A., Geneva, Procurador General de la Repiiblica del Paraguay,
Switzerland Asuncién, Paraguay

and and

Mr. Paul Friedland & Mr. Damien Nyer Mr. Brian C. Dunning & Ms. Irene R. Dubowy
White & Case LLP, New York Thompson & Knight LLP, New York

Date: February 12, 2010

Table of Contents

 

 

 

 

 

I. Procedural Bach d 1
A. Request for Arbitration 1
B. Notice of Registration 1
C. Appointment of Arbitrators 1
D. Objections of Respondent to Jurisdiction 2
E. First Session 2

 

F. Hearing on Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction

 

G. Further Submissions

 

 

 

 

 

 

IL. Factual Backgr. d 6
A. The Contract 6
B. Relevant Contractual Provisions 7

III. Preliminary Considerations 8
A. Relevant Texts 9
B. Standards at the Jurisdictional Stage 10

 

 

IV. Jurisdictional Limits of the BIT and the ICSID Convention

 

A. Was There a Valid Expression of Consent?..

 

 

 

 

B. Is There a Covered Investment? 20
1. Nature of the Investment 21

a. The Switzerland-Paraguay BIT 21

b. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention 26

2. In the Territory 33

 

3. Made in Accordance with Law 36

 

V. Jurisdiction over Claimant’s Claims as Stated.

 

A. Contract Claims and the Impact of the Contract’s Forum Selection Clause...

 

B. Has Claimant Stated Claims over Which the Tribunal Has Jurisdiction?

1. Fair and Equitable Treatment 45

 

2. Undue and Discriminatory Measures...

3. Observance of Commitment: 50,
VI. Costs. 60

VII. Decisi 61

 

wo

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
A. Request for Arbitration

On 19 October 2007, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID”) received a request for arbitration dated 16 October 2007 (the “Request”) from
SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. (“SGS” or “Claimant”) against the Republic of

Paraguay (“Paraguay” or “Respondent” (collectively, the “Parties”’).

The Request was made under the Agreement on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection
of Investments between Switzerland and Paraguay signed 31 January 1992 and entered into
force 28 September 1992 (the “BIT” or the “Treaty”), and the Convention on the Settlement
of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (“ICSID Convention”

or “Convention”’).
B. Notice of Registration

On 19 November 2007, the Deputy Secretary-General of ICSID sent Claimant and
Respondent a Notice of Registration in accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID

Convention.

In issuing the Notice, the Deputy Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to
constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Rule 7(d) of the

Centre’s Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings.
Cc. Appointment of Arbitrators

On 30 January 2008, Claimant requested, in accordance with Rule 2(3) of the Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”), that the Arbitral Tribunal be
constituted in accordance with the provisions of Article 37(2)(b) of the Convention. This
letter was acknowledged by a letter from ICSID to the Parties of the same date. It was
accordingly confirmed that: (1) the Tribunal would consist of three arbitrators; (2) one
arbitrator would be appointed by each Party and the third, the president of the Tribunal,
would be appointed by agreement of the Parties; and (3) the appointments would follow the

ptocedures set out in Rule 3 of the Arbitration Rules.

6.

10.

By letter of 31 January 2008, Claimant appointed Mr. Donald Francis Donovan, Esq., a
national of the United States of America, as a member of the Tribunal. On 31 March 2008,
Respondent appointed Dr. Pablo Garcia Mexia, a national of Spain. No objections were

raised to either appointment.

On 20 February 2008, the Parties having failed to reach agreement on the appointment of
the President of the Tribunal, Claimant requested the appointment of the third, presiding
arbitrator by the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council as provided for in Article

38 of the Convention and Rule 4(1) of the Arbitration Rules.

By letter of 20 May 2008, the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council appointed Dr.
Stanimir A. Alexandrov, a national of Bulgaria, as the third arbitrator and president of the

Tribunal. No objections were raised to this appointment.

The Tribunal was officially constituted on 27 May 2008, in accordance with the Convention
and ICSID Arbitration Rules. Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Senior Counsel, ICSID, was initially
designated to serve as the Secretary of the Tribunal. On 16 April 2009, the Acting Secretary
General informed the Tribunal that due to the redistribution of the Centre’s workload, Dr.

Sergio Puig de la Parra, ICSID, would serve as the new Secretary of the Tribunal.
D. Objections of Respondent to Jurisdiction

On 8 April 2008, Respondent delivered its Memorial with Objections to Jurisdiction to the

Centre, an electronic copy of which was transmitted to Claimant on 10 April 2008.

Respondent filed a further document on the question of jurisdiction dated 26 June 2008

during the first session of the Tribunal on 30 June 2008 (discussed below).

The submissions of 8 April 2008 and 26 June 2008 were confirmed by Respondent to

together constitute Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction.
E. First Session

The first session of the Tribunal was held on 30 June 2008 at the seat of the Centre in

Washington, D.C. At the session the Parties expressed their agreement that the Tribunal

16.

17.

had been properly constituted in accordance with the relevant provisions of the ICSID
Convention and the Arbitration Rules. The Parties also agreed upon a number of
procedural matters reflected in written minutes signed by the President and the Secretary of

the Tribunal

At the first session, the Tribunal heard the Parties’ proposals for handling the objections to
jurisdiction raised in Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction. It was agreed that the
ptoceedings on the merits would be suspended as envisaged in Article 41(2) of the ICSID

Convention and Arbitration Rule 41(3).
The following procedural calendar was agreed for the preliminary phase of the proceedings:

- Claimant would submit its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction by Monday,
22 September 2008; Respondent would submit its Reply on Jurisdiction by Monday,
15 December 2008; and Claimant would submit its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction by

Monday, 23 February 2009;
- a pre-hearing conference would be held on 9 March 2009;

- a hearing on jurisdiction would then be held at the seat of the Centre in

Washington, D.C., from 6 April 2009 through 8 April 2009.

By letter of 11 December 2008 Respondent subsequently requested an extension of time to
respond to Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction. Claimant consented to this
extension of time by a letter dated 15 December 2008. The revised schedule was agreed as

follows:

- Respondent would submit its Reply on Jurisdiction by Monday, 29 December 2008,

and Claimant would submit its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction by Monday, 9 March 2009;

- the hearing on jurisdiction would be held as originally scheduled, from 6 April 2009

through 8 April 2009.

By letter of 20 March 2009 Respondent requested the adjournment of the hearing on
jurisdiction until May, due to the hearing date’s proximity to Holy Week observances.

Claimant objected to such a delay by letter of the same date. By letter of 24 March 2009 the

20.

Tribunal advised the Parties that the hearing would take place on the originally scheduled
date (6 April), noting that that date had been set with the consent of the Parties at the 30
June 2008 first session and had been re-confirmed by both Parties in their letters of 11 and

15 December 2008.

As the Parties had agreed on procedures to be followed for the hearing on jurisdiction in

their letters of 20 March 2009, no pre-hearing conference was necessary.
F. Hearing on Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction

The hearing on Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction was held in Washington, D.C., on
6 April 2009, the Parties having agreed that the additional reserved dates (7 and 8 April) were

not needed.
The Parties were represented as follows:
Claimant

Mr. Paul Friedland, Mr. Mark Luz, Mr. Rafael E. Llano Oddone & Mr. Damien
Nyer, White & Case LLP

Mr. Nicolas Grégoire, SGS
Respondent
Dr. José Entique Garcia Avalos, Attorney General of the Republic of Paraguay
Mr. Raul Sapena, Counsel to the Treasury of the Republic of Paraguay
Mr. Jorge Brizuela, Embassy of the Republic of Paraguay in Washington, D.C.

Mr. Pedro Espinola Vargas Pefia, Advisor to the Executive Director, the World
Bank

Mr. Agustin Saguier Abente, Saguier Abente Law Firm

Mr. Brian C. Dunning & Ms. Irene R. Dubowy, Thompson & Knight LLP

21. Messrs. Garcia and Dunning and Ms. Dubowy addressed the Tribunal on behalf of
Respondent. Mr. Friedland addressed the Tribunal on behalf of Claimant. The jurisdictional
hearing was audio recorded and a verbatim transcript in English and Spanish was prepared

and delivered to the Parties.
G. Further Submissions

22. On 9 June 2009, Respondent wrote to draw the Tribunal’s attention to the decision on
jurisdiction rendered on 29 May 2009 in the case of Bureau Veritas, Inspection, Valuation,
Assessment and Control, BIVAC B.V. v. Republic of Paraguay, CSID Case No. ARB/07/9.' The
Tribunal granted both Parties leave to file brief post-hearing submissions limited to the
relevance of the BIVVAC decision to arguments already put forward by the Parties in the
ptesent case. Respondent made its filing by letter dated 3 July 2009, with Claimant following

suit by letter dated 23 July 2009.

23. The Tribunal has deliberated and considered carefully all of the Parties’ written submissions
on jurisdiction as well as the oral arguments that were delivered in the course of the
jurisdictional hearing. In the following sections, the Tribunal will briefly summarize the
factual background, so far as it is necessary to rule on Respondent’s preliminary objections
(Section II), and address some preliminary considerations relevant to jurisdiction
(Section IIT). It will then turn first to Respondent’s objections based on_ specific
jurisdictional limitations of the BIT and the ICSID Convention (Section IV), and next to
Respondent’s objections that Claimant has not stated proper claims under the Treaty over
which we could exercise jurisdiction (Section V). Finally, the Tribunal will address the issue

of costs (Section VI) and set forth its decision on jurisdiction (Section VII).

© Burean Veritas, Inspection, Valuation, Assessment and Control, BIVAC B.V. 0. Republic of Paraguay, \CSID Case No.
ARB/07/9, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 29 May 2009 (“BIVAC ». Paraguay, Decision on
Jurisdiction”).

IL.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

6

FACTUAL BACKGROUND
A. The Contract

Based on the submissions of the Parties, the Tribunal understands the events surrounding
the dispute to be as follows. Except where characterized as the allegation of one Party or

the other, the following facts are understood to be undisputed.

Claimant is a Swiss company providing, inter alia, certification services based on pre-
shipment inspections of goods. The inspections are typically carried out in the country of
export, resulting in certifications that are used by governmental authorities of an importing

country, ¢.g, in collecting import duties and taxes.

This dispute concerns a contract entered into between SGS and the Ministry of Finance of
Paraguay. Under the contract, SGS was to perform pre-shipment inspection and

certification services for cargoes destined for Paraguay.

The Ministry of Finance of Paraguay was authorized by Presidential Decree No. 12311 of
31 January 1996 (Ex. C-6) to enter into contracts with two companies, SGS and Bureau
Veritas International (“BIVAC”), for pre-inspection services. On 6 May 1996, SGS and
Paraguay’s Ministry of Finance signed the Contract for Technical Services Involving Pre-
Shipment Inspection of Imports (“the Contract”) (Ex. C-4). Services under the Contract
were to begin on 15 July 1996, and the Contract had an initial duration of three years.”
According to the Contract, the purpose of the Contract was the optimization of tax
collection volume and the improvement of the mechanisms for controlling compliance with

the tax obligations relating to import transactions.’

SGS established a liaison office in Asuncion, as well as two smaller offices in Ciudad del Este

and Encarnacién, Paraguay, and carried out inspections of goods in the ports of origin.

2 Arts, 8.1.1 & 8.2, Contract (Ex. C-4).

3B] Ministerio, con el objeto de optimizar el volumen de las recaudaciones impositivas y mejorar los mecanismos para

el control del cumplimiento de las obligaciones tributarias referidas a las operaciones de importacién, ha decidido
establecer un Programa de Inspeccién de Pre-Embarque...Para la ejecucién del Programa de Servicios Técnicos de

Inspeccidn a ser prestados en el exterior, se ha decidido contratar a dos empresas especializadas, por su experiencia,
idoneidad y alta calificacién en la prestacién de este tipo de Servicios Técnicos con Gobiernos de otros paises, que

garanticen el cumplimiento de presente Programa.” Preamble, Contract (Ex. C-4) (emphasis omitted).

29.

30.

31.

According to Claimant, Paraguay’s Ministry of Finance paid SGS’s invoices for the period
between July 1996 and February 1997, but no payment was made for the March 1997
invoice or the invoices that followed thereafter (with the exception of one payment). SGS
continued to conduct pre-inspection services, however. Respondent does not dispute that
payment was not made on some number of SGS’s invoices, although it contests whether all

amounts were owed and raises questions as to whether nonpayment was justified or excused.

On 24 February 1999, the Ministry of Finance informed SGS of its intent to terminate the
Contract pursuant to Article 8.2, which allows either party to choose not to renew the
Contract with four months’ notice prior to the expiration of the Contract’s original term (or
any renewal term). Subsequently, on 1 June 1999, representatives of the Ministry of Finance
and SGS met. According to SGS, which points to correspondence following the meeting,

the Ministry of Finance and SGS mutually agreed to terminate the Contract by 7 June 1999.

SGS made repeated requests for payment on the outstanding invoices, which remain unpaid
to date. SGS contends that at different points in time, various Paraguayan officials
acknowledged Paraguay’s obligation to make payment to SGS. Paraguay and its agencies
initiated a number of investigations into the validity of the Contract and the services

performed under it.

B. Relevant Contractual Provisions

According to Article 2.1 of the Contract, SGS was to carry out the physical inspection of
goods prior to shipment in their country of origin, and determine whether the goods
submitted to inspection corresponded to the importer’s declaration. Article 2.2 required
SGS to verify the price invoiced by the seller and establish whether it fell within reasonable
limits. SGS was then to provide its opinion on the customs value of the imported goods,
under Article 2.3. Under Article 2.4, SGS was also to provide a recommendation for the
tariff classification of the goods, and under Article 2.6, SGS was to establish the country of
origin of the goods. Upon completion of the verification process, based on its findings, SGS
was to issue an Inspection Certificate or Discrepancy Report to the General Customs
Department of Paraguay under Article 2.8. Under Articles 2.9 and 2.10, SGS agreed to

ptovide Paraguay with training programs for General Customs Department officials, to

32.

33.

34.

35.

Il.

36.

ptovide technical assistance and advice, and to contribute to the implementation of a Data

Bank based upon the information contained in the Inspection Certificates.

The Contract also provided, under Article 3.4, that SGS would receive at its liaison office in
Paraguay, for each commercial transaction, an Inspection Request from the importer and

accompanying documentation.

In exchange for the performance of SGS’s obligations, according to Article 4, Paraguay
agreed to pay SGS, in United States Dollars, a fee amounting to 1.3% of the FOB value of
the goods shown in the Inspection Certificate or in the Discrepancy Report. A minimum
US$ 280 fee would be applicable where the rate of 1.3% would produce a smaller fee

amount.

Article 9, concerning dispute resolution (so/ucién de conflictos), provided that “[a]ny conflict,
controversy or claim deriving from or arising in connection with this Agreement, breach,
termination or invalidity, shall be submitted to the Courts of the City of Asuncién under the
Law of Paraguay.”*

Finally, with regard to termination, Article 7.1 provided that either party could terminate the
Contract by reason of non-compliance. Article 7.2 allowed the Ministry of Finance to
unilaterally terminate the Contract on grounds of opportunity, merit or convenience, caused
by or related to the public interest, with 120 days’ notice. Article 8.2 provided that the
Contract’s original three-year term could be renewed unless either party notified the other in
writing of its intention not to extend the Contract beyond the originally agreed upon or

renewal term, and did so at least four months before the expiration of that term.
PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS

Before proceeding to consider Respondent’s various objections to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction

to hear Claimant’s claims, it will be helpful to address certain general considerations that

  

guide the Tribunal’s analy

+ “Cualquier conflicto, controversia o reclamo que se derive o se produzca en relacién al presente Contrato,
incumplimiento, resolucién o invalidez, deberi ser sometido a los ‘Tribunales de la Ciudad de Asuncién segiin la Ley
Paraguaya.” Art. 9.1, Contract (Ex. C-4).

37.

38.

39.

40.

A. Relevant Texts

Claimant’s case is premised on alleged acts and omissions by Respondent that, according to
Claimant, violate Respondent’s obligations under the BIT. Necessarily, therefore, the
Tribunal will look first to the text of the BIT itself. Jurisdiction under the BIT is founded on
Article 9, which provides, “for purposes of solving disputes with respect to investments
between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party,” that
“fijf...consultations do not result in a solution within six months from the date of request
for settlement, the investor may submit the dispute either to the national jurisdiction of the
Contracting Party in whose territory the investment has been made or to international
arbitration. In the latter event, the investor has the choice between” ICSID and ad hoc

arbitration under the UNCITRAL rules.

Here, Claimant having elected ICSID arbitration under BIT Article 9(2)(a), Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention is also applicable to the Tribunal’s jurisdictional inquiry. Article 25

provides, in pertinent part:

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting
State...and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties
to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre...

Article 9(6) of the BIT specifies that:

[t}he arbitral tribunal shall decide on the basis of the present
Agreement [/¢., the BIT] and other relevant agreements between the
Contracting Parties; of the terms of any particular agreement that
may have been concluded with respect to the investment; of the law
of the Contracting State party to the dispute, including its rules on
the conflict of laws; of such principles and rules of international law
as may be applicable.

Among the applicable principles and rules of international law will be the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties (both Switzerland and Paraguay having ratified the
Convention), and in particular the principles of treaty interpretation set forth in Articles 31-

33 thereof.

41.

42.

43.

10

Both Parties have also drawn the Tribunal’s attention to the decisions of other investment
treaty tribunals, where helpful to their arguments, to contend that this Tribunal should or
should not come to similar conclusions on similar questions. It is of course clear that there
is no rule of stare decisis in investment treaty arbitration, that each Tribunal has its own
mandate and competence, and that the decisions of prior tribunals in other cases are not
binding on us in any respect. However, we find it appropriate to consider the reasoning of
and conclusions reached by such tribunals, and to assess their persuasive force in the

particular circumstances presented in this case before us.

For the sake of the coherent and reasoned development of investment law, it is likewise
appropriate in many cases to articulate where and why we do or do not follow the
apptoaches of other tribunals, particularly on issues where prior tribunals’ approaches have
diverged. Such discussions are all the more likely in this case, where the Parties have made

heavy reference to two prior investment treaty cases involving SGS contracts for pre-

 

». Pakistan’ and St

 

shipment inspection services—. v. Philippines’—and where there has
now emerged a decision on jurisdiction in another investment treaty case—BIVAC ».
Paraguay—involving Paraguay’s contract for such services on terms claimed to be
“substantially similar, if not identical” to the Contract between SGS and Paraguay in this

case.

B. Standards at the Jurisdictional Stage

At this stage of the proceedings, the Tribunal has before it only the Parties’ arguments on
jurisdiction and a limited evidentiary record, reflecting the extent to which the Parties have
seen fit to address factual matters at this time. Accordingly, lacking a full presentation of the
Parties’ claims, defenses, and evidence at this preliminary, jurisdictional stage, the Tribunal
must take care to give the proper treatment to the Parties’ factual allegations and legal

arguments.

5 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, YCSID Case No. ARB/01/13, Decision of the
Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 6 August 2003 (“SGS n, Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction”).

6 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision of the Tribunal
on Objections to Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004 (“SGS ». Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction”).

7 Respondent’s Letter to the Tribunal, 9 June 2009 (regarding BIVAC r. Paraguay Decision on Jurisdiction).

11

44, The Parties both invoked the now-familiar notion that, for purposes of determining whether
Claimant has stated a BIT claim over which the Tribunal has jurisdiction, the Tribunal
should consider whether the facts alleged by Claimant, if proven, could give rise to a
violation of the Treaty. For example, referring to certain claims of SGS, Respondent argued
in its Reply that this Tribunal “need not take this claim at face value. Rather, it should
consider if the facts asserted by SGS are capable of being regarded as breach of the B.LT.”*
Respondent contended that Claimant has failed to allege facts that would amount to a
breach of the BIT, as required to pass jurisdictional muster on such a prima facie standard. In

turn, Claimant, quoting the opinion of its legal expert, argued that:

[a]t the jurisdictional threshold, the [C]laimant need only establish
that, assuming the truth of the facts alleged, those facts cow/d violate the
provisions of the treaty at issue. Conversely, the Claimant need sof,
for jurisdictional purposes, prove the fact[s] alleged. Nor need the
[Claimant establish that were it ultimately to prove those facts, they
necessarily »ow/d violate the relevant treaty. It suffices for jurisdiction
if the facts, the truth of which must be presupposed, cow/d violate the
treaty.”

45. At the hearing on jurisdiction, Claimant confirmed its position that the Tribunal should take
as true a// facts asserted by Claimant: not only those facts that go to the sufficiency of the
claims as stated, but also those facts that may be necessary for the determination of the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction under the BIT and the ICSID Convention.”

The

 

46. In the Tribunal’s view, however, it is necessary to distinguish the two inquiries.
question of what standard the Tribunal should apply at the jurisdictional stage in addressing
facts relevant to whether a claimant has adequately stated its claims and can proceed to the
merits is different from the question of the standard for findings of fact necessary to

establish jurisdiction.

8 Respondent's Reply to Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 29 December 2008 (“Respondent’s Reply”), at
para. 105.

° Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, 9 March 2009 (“Claimant’s Rejoinder”), at para. 87 (quoting Reisman Opinion at
para. 7) (emphasis in original).

Transcript, Heating on Jurisdiction, 6 April 2009 at 65:10 to 67:9; see also Reisman Opinion at para. 34.

12

47. It is well accepted that, at the jurisdictional stage, Claimant need not prove the facts that it
alleges in order to state a claim over which this Tribunal has jurisdiction. All Claimant needs
to do is to allege facts that, if proven at the merits stage, could constitute a violation of

‘ the Tribunal will evaluate

Treaty protections. That is, absent exceptional circumstances,’
whether the acts and omissions of Respondent, taken as they are alleged by Claimant, are
capable of making out a Treaty violation—leaving it to the merits stage for Claimant to

ptove those allegations.

48. This is the oft-quoted approach of Judge Higgins’ separate opinion in the ICJ’s Oi/ Platforms
case: a tribunal should “accept pro ‘em the facts as alleged by [the claimant] to be true and in
that light to interpret [the treaty] for jurisdictional purposes — that is to say, to see if on the

basis of [the claimant’s] claims of fact there could occur a violation of one or more of [the

veld

treaty provisions].

49. Many investment treaty tribunals have echoed this approach.’ As the tribunal observed in
SGS v. Pakistan, “we consider that if the facts asserted by Claimant are capable of being
regarded as alleged breaches of the BIT, consistently with the practice of ICSID tribunals,
the Claimant should be able to have them considered on their merits.”"* This approach was
succinctly expressed by the tribunals in Impregilo v. Pakistan, which considered “whether the
facts as alleged by Claimant in this case, if established, are capable of coming within those
provisions of the BIT which have been invoked,”'* and Baymdir v. Pakistan, which asked

whether the facts alleged “fall within those provisions [invoked] or are capable, if proved, of

2916

constituting breaches of the obligations they refer to.

" For example, the tribunal in Amo left room to depart from this approach in the event of “manifest or obvious
misdescription or error in the characterization of the dispute by the Claimants.” Amsco Asia Corp. v. Republic of Indonesia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Jurisdiction, 25 September 1983, at para. 38.

2 Case Concerning Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), 1996 1.C,J. 803 (“Oil Platforms”), Separate
Opinion of Judge Rosalyn Higgins at para. 32.

5 See, eg, Methanex v. United States, UNCITRAL (NAFTA), Partial Award, 7 August 2002, at para. 112; Plama Consortium
Ltd. v, Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 February 2005, at para. 132.

4 SGS v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 145 (citation omitted).

‘5 Impregilo S,p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, CSID Case No. ARB/03/03, Decision on Jurisdiction, 22 April 2005, at
para, 254 (“Inpregilo v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction”) (emphasis in original).

© Bayindrr Insaat Turiz Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, CSID Case No. ARB/03/29, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005, at para. 197 (“Baymndir v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction”).

13

We note that this standard is different from a “prima facie” standard—a term that is
frequently invoked, but that has the potential needlessly to confuse the issue. A prima facie
standard would apply at the merits stage to the evidence that is put forward by a claimant (or
by a respondent, in the case, for example, of an affirmative defense). Black’s Law Dictionary
explains that prima facie evidence is, inter alia, “[t}hat quantum of evidence that suffices for
ptoof of a particular fact until the fact is contradicted by other evidence” and that a prima
facie case is one, inter alia, in which “not only...plaintifPs evidence would reasonably allow
[the] conclusion plaintiff seeks, but also that plaintiff's evidence compels such a conclusion if

v7

the defendant produces no evidence to rebut it.”"” Once a claimant has offered evidence
that makes a prima facie showing, respondent must then produce evidence to rebut the
claimant’s factual assertions. But this is a matter for the merits phase, during which the
tribunal weighs the sufficiency of the Parties’ evidence. At the jurisdictional phase, the
claimant is not asked to make a prima facie showing of its case on the metits; it is not required
to produce evidence to support its allegations about the respondent’s purported default. As
discussed above, all a claimant needs to do is show that the facts that it has alleged (though

not yet proven) could violate the treaty in question."*

It is equally well accepted that, for jurisdictional purposes, it is sufficient that the facts as
asserted by Claimant, if proven, cou/d (not would) violate the provisions of the BIT. In other
words, at the jurisdictional stage, the Tribunal need not decide whether, assuming the factual
allegations were proven, the claim would prevail as a matter of law. Judge Higgins drew this

distinction, too, in her separate opinion:

It is interesting to note that in the Mavrommatis case the Permanent
Court said it was necessary, to establish its jurisdiction, to see if the
Greek claims “would” involve a breach of the provisions of the
article. This would seem to go too far. Only at the merits, after
deployment of evidence, and possible defences, may “could” be
converted to “would”. The Court should thus see if, on the facts as
alleged by Iran, the United States actions complained of might violate
the Treaty articles.”

" BLACK’s LAW DICTIONARY (6' ed. 1990) at 1189-90.

'S One might say that a claimant must allege a prima facie case at the jurisdictional stage, but it need not make that case
until the merits stage.

 

°° Oil Platforms, Separate Opinion of Judge Rosalyn Higgins at para. 33.

14

If the rule were otherwise, the inquiry could not properly be considered jurisdictional. A
determination that a given set of alleged facts, even if proven, would not constitute a
violation of a legal right is, in effect, a holding on the merits. That would be the
consequence, for example, if a tribunal were to uphold an objection that a claim is
“manifestly without legal merit” under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5). Thus, so long as the
objection goes only to the authority of the Tribunal to hear claims for the breach of the legal
tight identified by the Claimant, the Tribunal’s review of the sufficiency of the legal

allegations, like its review of the factual allegations, is limited.

A fundamentally different approach is required, however, for issues that are directly
determinative of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction—such as, for example, issues of consent,
nationality, covered investment, territoriality, or the temporal scope of treaty protection. If
the Tribunal is to make jurisdictional determinations on such issues in a threshold
jurisdictional stage (rather than joining them to the merits), the Tribunal must reach
definitive findings of fact and conclusions of law. Without such determinations, the

Tribunal cannot satisfy itself that it has jurisdiction to hear the merits of the dispute.

This is because the investment treaty context brings with it specific, threshold jurisdictional
requirements that are articulated in the relevant investment treaty, and (in some cases such as
this one) in the ICSID Convention. For example, the Switzerland-Paraguay Treaty may be
invoked only by an investor of a Contracting Party, as defined in Article 1(1) of the Treaty.
Likewise, under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, an ICSID tribunal may hear only a
legal dispute between a Contracting State and a national of another Contracting State. It is
not sufficient merely to allege the nationality of the investor in order to determine that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction rationae personae, nationality must be established conclusively at the

jurisdictional stage.

Where the Tribunal’s jurisdiction with respect to threshold requirements of the Treaty or

I

   

ID Convention turns on the ex

 

istence (or absence) of certain disputed facts, the Tribunal
cannot merely take Claimant’s factual allegations as true, and wait until the merits stage to
ascertain whether those facts are established. Such disputed facts must be proven at the
jurisdictional stage, so that the Tribunal can make a definitive determination of its own

jurisdiction. If the evidence is insufficient to ascertain the facts, the Tribunal can choose to

15

join the jurisdictional determination to the merits stage for further development of the
evidence—but it cannot determine that it has jurisdiction on a pro tempore basis, without

assuring itself that the necessary facts are proven.

56. As stated by the Tribunal in Inceysa v. E/ Salvador, “because the ICSID Convention obligates
the Arbitral Tribunal to decide its own competence, it implicitly gives the Tribunal the right

to analyze all factual and legal matters that may be relevant in order to fulfill this

9920

obligation.” With respect to facts that go to the issue of jurisdiction, this Tribunal agrees

with the Inceysa tribunal’s conclusion that it is “obligated to analyze facts and substantive

normative provisions that constitute premises for the definition of the scope of the

Tribunal’s competence.”

57. The Tribunal’s approach here is also consistent in this particular respect with that in Phoenix
Aation v. Czech Republic, where the tribunal concurred with the respondent that in addition to

alleging sufficient facts to support one or more claims on the merits, “the claimant must prove

9922

the facts necessary for the establishment of jurisdiction.” The Phoenix tribunal went on to

endorse this “double approach” to facts relevant to the merits and facts relevant to
jurisdiction.” As to the former, the tribunal stated that “they have indeed to be accepted as
such at the jurisdictional stage, until their existence is ascertained or not at the merits level.””*
However, as to the latter, a different approach is required: “On the contrary, if jurisdiction

rests on the existence of certain facts, they have to be proven at the jurisdictional stage.”

2 Inceysa Vallisoletana, S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador, CSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award, 2 August 2006, at para, 149
(“Inceysa v. El Salvador, Award”) (referring to Article 41 of the ICSID Convention, which states “The Tribunal shall be
the judge of its own competence”).

21 Inceysa v, Bl Salvador, Award at pata. 155; see also Ioan Micula et al. v. Romania, SID Case No. ARB/05/20, Decision on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 24 September 2008, at para. 66 (“[A] tribunal need not go beyond determining whether
the facts alleged by a claimant, if established, are capable of constituting violations of the provisions that are invoked.
However, when a jurisdictional issue hinges on a factual determination that may also relate to the merits of the claims,
the Tribunal must proceed to a determination of the facts that are presented to it to the extent necessary for
jurisdictional purposes. ‘Therefore, a tribunal can make definitive factual findings at the jurisdictional stage too. For
example, a tribunal must determine the nationality of a claimant in order to establish its jurisdiction ratione personae in a
definitive manner.”).

2 Phoenix: Action, Ltd. v. The Czech Republic, SID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, 15 April 2009, at para. 59 (emphasis
added) (“Phoenixe Action, Award”).

> Phoenixe Action, Award at para. 62.
4 Phoenix Action, Award at para. 61.

> Phoenix: Action, Award at para. 61; see also id. at paras. 63-64.

16

Claimant suggested at the hearing that the Tribunal should accept as true a// factual
assertions of the Claimant, both those that go to threshold questions of jurisdiction and
those needed to make out its claims on the merits. But that cannot be the case, because it
would require the Tribunal to forgo the very inquiry it is required to undertake, ie,

determining whether or not the Tribunal has jurisdiction.”

As the Pan American v. Argentina
tribunal noted in another jurisdictional context, “if everything were to depend on
charaterisations made by a claimant alone, the inquiry to jurisdiction and competence would
be reduced to naught, and tribunals would be bereft of the compétence de la compétence enjoyed
by them under Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention.” Either at a preliminary
jurisdictional stage, or before proceeding to the merits if the tribunal has joined jurisdiction
to the merits, an ICSID tribunal must conclusively determine all issues that are necessary to

establish its jurisdiction, including by making all necessary factual findings.
JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS OF THE BIT AND THE ICSID CONVENTION

Respondent advanced multiple objections to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction, several of which
crystallized between its Memorial submissions and its Reply. In light of the different
standards to be applied (as just discussed in Section IIIB above), the Tribunal will separate
the objections into those that rest on specific jurisdictional limitations imposed by the terms
of the Treaty or the ICSID Convention, addressed in this Section IV, and those that
challenge the adequacy, for purposes of jurisdiction, of the claims stated, to be addressed in

Section V below.

2 See, e.g, Dissenting Opinion of Sir Franklin Berman, Industria Nacional de Alimentos, SA. and Indalsa Perit SA. v. Republic
of Pern, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4, Decision on Annulment, 5 September 2007, at para. 17 (“[I]f particular facts are a
critical element in the establishment of jurisdiction itself, so that the decision to accept or to deny jurisdiction disposes
of them once and for all for this purpose, how can it be seriously claimed that those facts should be assumed rather than
proved?”

2 Pan American Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Co. v. The Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/03/13 and
BP America Production Co. et al. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/8, Decision on Preliminary Objections,
27 July 2006, at para. 50. The Pan American tribunal was considering the parties’ conflicting positions on the proper
characterization of various issues as either “jurisdictional” or “merits” issues.

A. Was There a Valid Expression of Consent?

60. The first of Respondent’s jurisdictional objections to which we turn is its contention that the
Republic of Paraguay has not consented to the arbitration of this dispute under ICSID’s

auspices.

61. In both of its Memorial submissions, Respondent argued that, although Paraguay is a party
to the ICSID Convention, it has not expressed its consent to ICSID jurisdiction with respect
to this dispute, as required under the Convention. Respondent pointed to the Preamble of
the ICSID Convention, which declares that “no Contracting State shall by the mere fact of
its ratification, acceptance or approval of this Convention and without its consent be
deemed to be under any obligation to submit any particular dispute to conciliation or

arbitration.”

62. Respondent contended that, according to Paraguayan law, Paraguay’s consent to arbitration
must be exercised by a representative of the State with full powers, ie, one constitutionally

authorized to bind Paraguay

 

Respondent maintained that the sole authority capable of
giving Paraguay’s consent to ICSID jurisdiction over this dispute is the President of

Paraguay, and that he has not given such consent.

63. Respondent further contended that domestic law prohibits the international arbitration of

 

Claimant’s claims, as the Paraguayan Constitution mandates judicial sovereignty in matters of

   

public law. Respondent argued that Paraguay’s Constitution bars the arbitration of claims

such as this, which affect Government patrimony.

64. Respondent did not reiterate this objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in its Reply or at the
hearing. However, the Reply was characterized as being “in further support” of

Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction, and “in addition to the bases set forth in the

3929

 

Republic of Paraguay’s previous submissions.” Accordingly, the Tribunal understands that

Paraguay maintains the objection, and that the Tribunal is required to rule upon it.

*8 Preamble, ICSID Convention.

2 Respondent’s Reply, Introduction.

66.

69.

70.

18

Claimant pointed to Article 9 of the BIT as evidence of Paraguay’s express written consent
to ICSID jurisdiction for the resolution of this dispute, which in turn meets the written
consent requirement of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. Claimant maintained that
no further action by Paraguay was required to perfect or confirm its consent to ICSID

arbitration of this dispute.

Claimant argued that, pursuant to Article 27 of the Vienna Convention, Respondent cannot
invoke its domestic law to excuse or ignore its international obligations. The arbitrability of
the dispute under Paraguayan law therefore cannot and does not affect the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. Claimant also maintained that the dispute és arbitrable under Paraguayan law,

because under Paraguay’s Constitution the BIT is incorporated into Paraguayan law.

 

In the Tribunal’s analysis, it is a straightforward matter to conclude that Respondent has

consented to ICSID arbitration of this Treaty dispute.

Respondent is, of course, correct that Paraguay’s ratification of the ICSID Convention did
not, standing alone, constitute consent by Paraguay to ICSID arbitration of this particular
dispute. The Preamble and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention are both clear that the
Contracting State in question must “consent in writing” to submit a given dispute to the

Centre for arbitration; the ICSID Convention is not itself an instrument of consent.

Respondent errs, however, in its claim that no such express written consent has been given
by Paraguay. Paraguay explicitly consented to ICSID jurisdiction of this and any other
“disputes with respect to investments between a Contracting Party [to the BIT] and an
investor of the other Contracting Party [to the BIT]” in Article 9 of the Switzerland-

Paraguay Treaty. BIT Article 9(4) provides that “[eJach Contracting Party hereby consents

 

to the submission of an investment dispute to international arbitration.” Article 9(2)

ptovides that if “consultations do not result in a solution within six months,” “the investor

may submit the dispute... to international arbitration,’

between (a) ICSID arbitration, and (b) ad hoc arbitration under the UNCITRAL arbitration

and gives the investor a choice

tules.

Although it was the subject of some discussion in the early years of investment treaty

arbitration, it is now uniformly accepted that the ratification of a bilateral investment treaty

19

containing such provisions constitutes a State’s written consent to arbitration of covered

disputes.”

The State’s consent in a BIT is often described as an “open invitation” or a
“standing offer” to covered investors to submit such disputes to international arbitration,
which the investor “accepts” by giving its own written consent to resort to such arbitration

(whether prior to or in its Request for Arbitration).”"

71. Paraguay concluded and ratified the Switzerland-Paraguay BIT. Paraguay has not argued
that the BIT was not properly ratified, or that it never entered into force. The BIT—and
Article 9’s unequivocal “consent[] to the submission of an investment dispute to
international arbitration”—therefore constitutes a binding international obligation of the
Republic of Paraguay. This is not an “indirect means” of finding that Paraguay has
consented to ICSID arbitration of this dispute, as Paraguay has claimed.” Article 9 of the
BIT represents a direct and express consent by Paraguay to arbitration of the dispute under
ICSID’s auspices (provided, of course, that the other jurisdictional requirements of the BIT

and the ICSID Convention are satisfied).

72. Paraguay nevertheless maintained that some additional act or statement by the Head of State
is required under Paraguayan law to bestow the State’s consent to arbitration. However, no
such limitation or conditionality is anywhere to be found in Article 9 of the BIT; Paraguay
did not qualify Article 9(4), for example, in any way. Thus Paraguay’s international
obligation to submit to ICSID arbitration if the investor so chooses is not limited by any
such domestic law requirement. And Claimant is correct that Respondent cannot invoke its

domestic law to avoid its obligations under international law. Article 27 of the Vienna

% See Lanco International Inc. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/6, Preliminary Decision on Jurisdiction of
the Arbitral Tribunal, 8 December 1998, at paras. 43-44 (“Lanco v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction”); see also, 0g,
Inpregilo v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 108; SGS ». Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 31;
Christoph H. Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY at pp. 190-91, 205-06 (24 ed. 2009) (“Schreuer,
COMMENTARY”).

 

3 See, eg, Lanco v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at paras. 31-33; Georges Delaume, ICSID Arbitration: Practical
Considerations, 1 J. INT'L ARB. 101, 104 (1984) (“Consent may also result from the investor’s acceptance of a unilateral
offer from the Contracting State involved, when that State has already consented to ICSID arbitration in relevant
provisions of its investment legislation or of a bilateral treaty with the Contracting State of which the investor is a
national.”); Schreuer, COMMENTARY at p. 9 (“Alternatively, consent may be contained in a standing offer by the host
State which may be accepted by the investor in appropriate form....A standing offer may also be contained in a treaty to
which the host State and the investor’s State of nationality are parties.” (citations omitted); see generally Antonio Parra,
ICSID and New Trends in International Dispute Settlement, 10/1 NEWS FROM ICSID 7, 8 (1993) (discussing emergence of
“general ‘offers”’ in bilateral investment treaties to submit disputes to ICSID arbitration).

s Memorial on Jurisdiction (26 June 2008 Submission) at p. 4.

32R 1

73.

74.

75.

76.

20

Convention provides that “[a] party may not invoke the provisions of its internal law as

justification for its failure to perform a treaty... .” Accordingly, Paraguay’s claims that
domestic Paraguayan law imposes certain procedural or substantive limitations on its
consent cannot change or derogate from the unequivocal consent given—and binding on

Paraguay as a matter of international law—in the BIT.

The Tribunal concludes that Paraguay has given the requisite consent in Article 9 of the BIT
to international arbitration of this dispute under ICSID’s auspices, and that that provision

likewise constitutes Paraguay’s written consent under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

B. Is There a Covered Investment?

Article 2(1) of the BIT provides, in pertinent part, that the BIT “shall apply to investments
in the territory of one Contracting Party, made in accordance with its legislation, including
possible admission procedures, prior or after the entry into force of the [BIT] by investors of
the other Contracting Party.” All of Claimant’s claims are stated as claims for breach of the
BIT, which will be applicable in the first instance only if these Article 2(1) conditions are

met.

Paraguay has not disputed that SGS is a qualified investor of Switzerland for purposes of the
nationality requirements of the BIT (and the ICSID Convention). It is undisputed that SGS
is a company constituted under Swiss law, with its seat and real economic activities in
Geneva, Switzerland. As such, the Tribunal concludes that SGS meets the definition of an
“investor” under Article 1(1)(i)(b) of the BIT, which refers to “legal entities, including
companies, corporations, business associations and other organisations, which are
constituted or otherwise duly organised under Swiss law and have their seat, together with
real economic activities, in the territory of the Swiss Confederation.” Likewise, it is
undisputed that SGS had the nationality of Switzerland, an ICSID Contracting State, at the
time it filed its Request for Arbitration, thus meeting the nationality requirement of

Article 25(2) of the ICSID Convention.

Respondent does, however, object that Claimant has not made a covered investment within
the meaning of the BIT and the ICSID Convention. Absent a proper “investment,” there

can be no “dispute[] with respect to [an] investment” (BIT Article 9(1)) nor a “legal dispute

77.

78.

79.

21

arising out of an investment” (ICSID Convention Article 25(1)) over which this Tribunal
could exercise jurisdiction. Respondent’s objection is multifaceted and intertwined, but it
can be separated for analytical purposes into three questions, each of which will be

addressed in turn:

(1) Are Claimant’s alleged investments of the type that is covered by the
protections of the BIT, and by the ICSID Convention (to the extent they

may differ)?

(2) Does Claimant have an investment or investments “in the territory of”

Paraguay, as tequired in order to obtain the BIT’s protections?

(3) Was the investment “made in accordance with [Paraguay’s] legislation,” as

also required to be covered under the BIT?

1. Nature of the Investment

Respondent contends that Claimant’s claimed investments do not meet the “investment”
requirements of the BIT, or, in the alternative, the requirements of Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention. If the claimed investments are not investments within the meaning of
the Treaty, that would foreclose the Tribunal’s jurisdiction entirely. Accordingly, we turn
first to the question of whether Claimant has made an investment within the meaning of

Article 1(2) of the BIT.

a. The Switzerland-Paraguay BIT

Article 1(2) of the BIT defines “investment” to include “every kind of assets and
particularly”, inter alia, (c) “claims to money or to any performance having an economic
value,” and (e) “concessions under public law, including . . . rights given by law, by contract

ot by decision of the authority in accordance with the law.

Claimant in its Request stated that it had made an investment “on the basis of’ the Contract
that qualified as an investment under the BIT. In its Counter-Memorial, Claimant

identified “the Contract and [its] performance” or “the Contract in itself and SGS’s rights

% Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, 16 October 2007, at para. 18.

80.

81.

82.

22

thereunder” as its investments, a phrasing echoed in the Rejoinder’s references to “the
Contract and associated rights.”** Claimant also pointed out that pursuant to the Contract it
had established liaison offices in Asuncién, Ciudad del Este, and Encarnacién, which
Claimant alleged cost approximately US$ 2.225 million per year to maintain and were staffed

by approximately 70 local and foreign personnel.

Claimant contended that the Contract and associated rights, as well as the liaison office, are
assets of value, meeting the foundational “every kind of assets” requirement of Article 1(2).
Furthermore, Claimant maintained that they also fall within several of the “particular”
examples of such assets listed in Article 1(2), in that the Contract gives SGS claims to money

and claims to performance having an economic value (Article 1(2)(c)) and it also

 

encompasses rights given “by decision of the authority” involving the provision of public
setvices, making it, in Claimant’s view, “akin to” a “concession under public law” (Article

12)@).

Respondent objected that Paraguay has not made a protected investment under the BIT.
Respondent contended that the Contract is not an asset and suggests that SGS may not have
in fact treated the Contract as an asset for accounting purposes. Respondent further
contended that the Contract is not a right to a claim to money because it is not a document
evidencing a liquidated debt, such as a promissory note or a judgment. Respondent argued
that the Contract is not a concession under Paraguayan law, as it was purely a right to receive
payment for services performed abroad, not a right granted under public law. And with
respect to the liaison office, Respondent argued that the establishment of such an office was
not required under the Contract, and that it was incidental to the performance of the

Contract.

It is not disputed that a contract was entered into by SGS and the Ministry of Finance of
Paraguay, that in the exercise of that contract SGS performed pre-shipment inspections and
certifications of imports to Paraguay, and that the contract provided that Paraguay would

pay SGS for such services. Furthermore, Respondent did not dispute that SGS established

4 See, eg, Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 22 September 2008, at paras. 67, 74 (“Claimant’s Counter-
Memorial”).

% See, e,g., Claimant’s Rejoinder at paras. 49-64.

23

an office of considerable size in Paraguay that was responsible for handling certain aspects

of SGS’s inspection and certification services, at some meaningful expense to SGS.

83. The Tribunal is satisfied that the Contract itself, and certainly in conjunction with the
setvices performed under it and the offices in Paraguay, constitutes a covered investment
under Article 1(2) of the BIT. They qualify under the general BIT definition, as “assets.”
While the Contract and SGS’s rights thereunder may be intangible, they are proprietary to
SGS and they have economic value that accrues to SGS. Likewise, the liaison office is a
tangible manifestation of SGS’s activities under the Contract. The Tribunal is not
persuaded, as Paraguay argued, that the characterization of something as an “asset” for
purposes of the BIT’s “investment” definition should turn on the Claimant’s accounting
treatment of the claimed investment—ze., whether the Contract is recorded on SGS’s books
as an asset.” Rather, the question of what constitutes an asset (whether tangible or
intangible) must be viewed more broadly, in terms of the item’s economic value, rather than

limited to the potentially artificial confines of accounting treatment.

84. The Tribunal is also persuaded that the Contract and associated rights are encompassed
within the “particular” examples cited by Claimant in Article 1(2). The Contract and the
Parties’ performance of it give rise to “claims to money or to any performance having an
economic value” (Article 1(2)(c)). Claimant will of course have to prove its particular claims
to be meritorious in the next phase of the arbitration, but for the purpose of defining an
“investment,” the Tribunal’s determination that, on its face, the Contract contemplates
payment in exchange for services rendered that may give rise to such claims is sufficient.
The Tribunal is not persuaded by Respondent’s contention that assets in the form of “claims
to money” under Article 1(2)(c) are limited to promissory notes or judgments or other
documents evidencing liquidated debts.” The ordinary meaning of the BIT text itself signals
no such limits, and the textual pairing of “claims to money” with the undoubtedly broad
“claims...to performance having economic value” together in Article 1(2)(c) suggests that a

similar degree of breadth and flexibility should apply to both. In the Tribunal’s opinion,

8 See Respondent's Reply at para. 47.

 

¥ According to Black’s Law Dictionary, “[a] debt is liquidated when it is certain what is due and how much is due”
whether by agreement of the parties or by operation of law. BLACK’s LAW DICTIONARY (6" ed. 1990) at 930.

24

Article 1(2)(c) can properly encompass assets in the form of unliquidated just as well as

liquidated claims to money.

85. We note that the tribunal in SGS' ». Pakistan did not hesitate to classify a SGS pre-shipment

inspection services contract and SGS’s rights thereunder as investments within the

   

Switzerland-Pakistan treaty’s “claims to money” provision, which is identical to the
Switzerland-Paraguay BIT provision at issue here.” The SGS v. Philippines tribunal did not
consider the question directly, as the Philippines apparently had not objected to jurisdiction
on that basis. But it applied a definition of “investment” substantially identical to Article
1(2) of the Switzerland-Paraguay BIT—including an entirely identical “claims to money”
ptovision—to conclude that “SGS made an investment...under the CISS Agreement,

. 2939
considered as a whole.””

The BIVAC tribunal did not reach the question, having
determined that BIVAC’s pre-shipment inspection services contract gave it “rights granted
under public law,” one of the examples of “investment” within the definition of the

Netherlands-Paraguay BIT at issue in that case.”

86. The Tribunal is also persuaded that the Contract and SGS’s rights thereunder fall within the
example of covered assets stated in BIT Article 1(2)(e): “concessions under public law . . . as

well as other rights given by law, by contract or by decision of the authority in accordance

with the law.”

87. We need not, for this purpose, conclude that the Contract is a concession as that term is
specifically defined in Paraguayan law. Paraguay has argued that the Contract is an
administrative contract, which it maintains is distinct from a concession under Paraguayan
law. The BIT, however, describes a broader category of assets, in that it includes not only

“concessions,” but also “other rights given by law, by contract or by decision of the

authority in accordance with the law.” Thus, Claimant argues only that the Contract was

38 See SGS v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 135.

8 SGS n, Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 112.

See BIVAC », Paraguay, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 93.

41 There is a difference in this respect between the English text of the Switzerland-Paraguay BIT and the French and
Spanish texts. The latter both refer simply to “concessions,” whereas the English text—“concessions under public
law”—adds a clause. The BIT provides (in its concluding paragraph) that in the event of a discrepancy among the three
texts, the English text shall prevail. In this case, however, the Tribunal does not consider that any point of significance
in its analysis turns on the distinction (if any) between a concession and a concession under public law.

 

  

88.

89.

25

“akin to” a concession under public law, and rests also on the fact that the Contract
encompasses rights granted “by a decision of the authority in accordance with the law”—
namely, granted by the Ministry of Finance in accordance with Presidential Decree No.

12311 of 31 January 1996 (Ex. C-6).

In this vein, it seems clear that the services carried out by SGS were services of a public
nature, or at the very least were intimately intertwined with the administration of State
functions. Absent inspections and certifications by an entity such as SGS, it would be the
function of the State to inspect cargoes, identify and value the goods, and collect the
requisite customs duties and taxes on the imports. Paraguay delegated certain of these tasks
to SGS, according to Decree No. 12311, to “optimiz[e] the tax collections volume in order
to obtain the revenue levels” and to “improve the control mechanisms of compliance with

vd

tax liabilities.” The services performed by SGS under the Contract were apparently integral
to the State’s import operations, including the collection of import duties and taxes: the
certifications issued by SGS (or by BIVAC under its corresponding contract) pursuant to
inspections were required by law in order to clear a cargo through Paraguayan customs.”
Whether or not SGS’s certifications were final and binding, in the sense that Paraguay
contends that its customs authorities retained the right to re-inspect shipments previously

certified by SGS,“* SGS’s certifications were apparently integral to the Paraguayan

authorities’ customs clearance and duty collection procedures.

As noted above, the BIVVAC tribunal concluded that BIVAC’s similar if not identical

contract with Paraguay conferred “rights granted under public law” upon BIVAC, per one of
the examples of covered assets in the Netherlands-Paraguay BIT’s definition of investment.”
While the asset example set out in Article 1(2)(e) of the Switzerland-Paraguay BIT is worded

differently from the definition contained in the Netherlands-Paraguay BIT, it embraces a

* Presidential Decree No. 12311, 31 January 1996, at Preamble (Ex. C-6) (“Decree No. 12311”); see also Preamble,
Contract (Ex. C-4). Respondent reiterated this purpose of the Contract in its Memorial on Jurisdiction (8 April 2008
Submission) at p. 4 (Ministry entered into the Contract “with the view of increasing tax revenues and of improving the
control mechanisms for the enforcement of the tax obligations relating to the import transactions subject to the Pre-
shipment Inspection Services”).

+8 See Decree No. 12311, Art. 2 (Ex. C-6); see also Resolution No. 1171/96, Art. 4 (Ex. RL-3B).

+4 See Respondent's Reply at paras. 28, 30 (citing Resolution No. 1171/96, Art. 21 (Ex. RL-3B)).

+8 See BIVAC ». Paraguay, Decision on Jurisdiction at paras. 84-91.

26

sufficiently similar concept that we think it worth taking note of the BIVAC tribunal’s
comparable conclusion. Our conclusion is also consistent with that of the SGS ». Pakistan
tribunal, which characterized an SGS inspection services contract (albeit a contract not
before us here) as “confert[ing] certain powers [on SGS] that ordinarily would have been
exercised by the Pakistani Customs service (the identification and valuation of goods for
duty purposes).”“° ‘That tribunal concluded that “Pakistan effectively granted SGS a public
Jaw concession,” and that the SGS contract there “amounted to ‘a concession under public

oT

Jaws’ falling well within the [Switzerland-Pakistan] BIT’s definition of investment.

90. In sum, the Tribunal holds that the Contract, SGS’s associated rights thereunder, and its
operations undertaken in conjunction with the Contract constitute an “investment” within

the definition of Article 1(2) of the BIT.

b. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention

91. Having concluded that the BIT’s requirements for a covered “investment” are satisfied and
pose no barrier to this Tribunal’s exercise of jurisdiction over Claimant’s BIT claims, the
next question confronting the Tribunal is whether anything in the ICSID Convention
compels a different result. Claimant elected under Article 9(2) of the BIT to pursue
arbitration of those Treaty claims before ICSID. As a result, Claimant must meet not only
the jurisdictional requirements of the BIT, but also the jurisdictional requirements of the
ICSID Convention. The question here is whether, and if so, how, those requirements differ

with respect to the nature of the “investment” out of which Claimant’s claims must arise.

92. Although Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention extends jurisdiction to legal disputes arising
directly out of an investment, it does not define “investment.” The Report of the Executive
Directors on the ICSID Convention specifically explains that “[n]Jo attempt was made to
define the term ‘investment’ given the essential requirement of consent by the parties, and
the mechanisms through which the Contracting States can make known, in advance, if they

so desire, the classes of disputes which they would or would not consider submitting to the

46 SGS v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 135.

* SGS », Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction at paras. 135, 140 (emphasis omitted).

93.

94.

27

948

 

Centre... As the tribunal in Mihaly v. Sri Lanka elaborated, “the definition was left to be
worked out in the subsequent practice of States, thereby preserving its integrity and
flexibility and allowing for future progressive development of international law on the topic
of investment.” Thus, the Tribunal agrees with Claimant that “it was understood that the
contracting states would determine the scope of protected and excluded investments in their

9950

respective instruments of consent,””” such as in the bilateral investment treaty at issue here.

It would go too far to suggest that amy definition of investment agreed by states in a BIT (or
by a state and an investor in a contract) must constitute an “investment” for purposes of
Article 25(1). To cite the classic example, one would not say that a simple contract for the
sale of goods, without more, would constitute an investment within the meaning of Article
25(1), even if defined as such in a BIT or in the contract itself. But the fact that one can
conceive of such an outlier example does not change the fact that, in most cases—including,
in the Tribunal’s view, this one—it will be appropriate to defer to the State parties’
articulation in the instrument of consent (e.g. the BIT) of what constitutes an investment.
The State parties to a BIT agree to protect certain kinds of economic activity, and when they
ptovide that disputes between investors and States relating to that activity may be resolved
through, inter alia, ICSID arbitration, that means they believe that that activity constitutes an
“investment” within the meaning of the ICSID Convention as well. That judgment, by
States that are both Parties to the BIT and Contracting States to the ICSID Convention,
should be given the greatest weight.” A tribunal would have to have very strong reasons to

hold that the mutually agreed definition of investment should be disregarded.

The BIVAC tribunal approached the question from this direction: “At a formal level, the
question may be put as follows: does the definition [of investment] in the BIT exceed what is

permissible under the Convention?”” For the Netherlands-Paraguay BIT, the BIV/AC

+8 Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States, 18 March 1965, at para. 27 (“Report of the Executive Directors”).

* Mihaly International Corp. v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/2, Award, 15 March 2002,
at para. 33.

5° Claimant’s Counter-Memorial at para. 37.

5 Gf Rompetral Group N.V. v. Romania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/3, Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections
on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 18 April 2008, at paras. 81, 83 (adopting similar approach with respect to criteria of

nationality)

 

52 BIV-AC v. Paraguay, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 94.

95.

96.

97.

28

tribunal concluded that “the answer is self-evidently negative. The definition in the BIT
follows the approach adopted in many other BITs concluded around the world. Paraguay
would have to argue that its own BIT is inconsistent with the requirements of the ICSID

Convention. Sensibly, it has chosen not to go down that path.”

We find that approach compelling. The BIT’s offer of ICSID arbitration for investments
covered by the Treaty may fairly be taken as an averment by the State that it believes that all
such covered investments are “ICSID investments” as well. Thus, if the State were to claim
in an arbitration that an investment that satisfies the BIT’s definition is nevertheless not an
investment within the ICSID Convention, it would contradict its prior stance to the

contrary. *

We thus come to the same conclusion with respect to the Switzerland-Paraguay BIT as did
the BIVVAC tribunal under the Netherlands-Paraguay BIT. Nothing in the Switzerland-
Paraguay BIT’s definition of investment would support characterizing it as an aberration that
tisks capturing economic activity clearly outside the ICSID Convention’s intended reach
with respect to investments. Accordingly, it is reasonable to proceed on the basis that if a
claimed investment satisfies the BIT’s definition of investment (as we have held above that it

does here), it is also consistent with the ICSID Convention’s understanding of investment.

This is a question on which ICSID tribunals have differed. Some tribunals and ad hoc
committees have proceeded to test claimed investments—investments that may very well
satisfy the jurisdictional definitions of investment found in the applicable treaty or
contract—against a separate, abstract conception of what an investment pursuant to the
ICSID Convention must comprise. This test, however, appears nowhere in the ICSID
Convention itself. Its elements, which tribunals have applied as cumulative (2, if one
feature is missing, a claimed investment will be ruled out of ICSID jurisdiction), are not
found in Article 25(1). Rather, the test seeks to create and enforce a universal definition of

“investment” for the ICSID Convention”—despite the fact that its drafters and signatories

33 BIVAC ». Paraguay, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 94.
*4 Cf Devashish Krishan, A Notion of ICSID Investment, 6:1 TRANSNAT’L Disp. MGMT. (March 2009) at p. 7 & n.22.

5 See, e.g, Joy Mining Machinery Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Award on Jurisdiction, 6
August 2004, at para. 53; Vidor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v, Republic of Chile, 1CSID Case No. ARB/98/2,

29

decided that it should not have one. In our view, however, criteria announced by tribunals
do not qualify, narrow, or take precedence over the plain meaning of the BIT’s definition of
investment. It is not for this Tribunal to impose additional requirements beyond those

agreed to by the States in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and in the BIT.

98. Some of the elements discussed in this test might prove to be useful in the event that a
tribunal were concerned that a BIT or contract definition of investment was so overreaching
that it might have captured a transaction that manifestly was not an investment under any
acceptable definition. These elements could be useful in identifying such aberrations.
Indeed, of late tribunals and ad hoc committees have expressed the view that these elements
should be viewed as non-binding, non-exclusive means of identifying (rather than defining)

investments that are consistent with the ICSID Convention.”

99. In this case, however, the Parties dedicated considerable argument to the question of
whether SGS’s claimed investment is compatible with the various criteria catalogued in Salini

v. Morocco.” Respondent, taking the position that the criteria are compulsory, argued that

 

Award, 8 May 2008, at para. 232; Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, \CSID Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision
on the Application for Annulment of the Award, 1 November 2006, at paras. 29, 33.

56 See Report of the Executive Directors at para. 27 (“No attempt was made to define the term ‘investment’ given the
essential requirement of consent by the parties....”). ‘The /raranxe préparatoires of the ICSID Convention with respect to
this question are reviewed in detail in Malaysian Historical Salvors Sdn. Bhd. v. Government of Malaysia, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/05/10, Decision on the Application for Annulment, 16 April 2009, at paras. 63-71 (“MHS 1. Malaysia,
Annulment”).

5 See, e.g, Biwater Gaff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, CSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Award, 24 July 2008,
at paras, 312-18; MHS v. Malaysia, Annulment at paras. 75-79; of, MCI Power Group, LC and New Turbine, Inc. v. Republic of
Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/6, Award, 31 July 2007, at para. 165; RSM Production Corp. v. Grenada, ICSID Case
No. ARB/05/14, Award, 13 March 2009, at paras. 236-38. The first tribunals to confront directly an objection that
claimant lacked an “investment” under the ICSID Convention did not search for or apply definitions. In Fedax N.V. v.
Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 11 July 1997,
the tribunal merely surveyed prior cases involving investments under the Convention before concluding that the
promissory notes before it also qualified; in Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, a.s. v. The Slovak Republic, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/97/4, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 24 May 1999, the tribunal resisted respondent's call
to apply a definition, stating that while the “elements of the suggested definition...tend as a rule to be present in most
investments, [they] are not a formal prerequisite for the finding that a transaction constitutes an investment as that
concept is understood under the Convention.” Id at para. 90. For more on the distinction between identifying and
defining investments, see Prof. Emmanuel Gaillard, Identify or Define? Reflections on the Evolution of the Concept of Investment in
ICSID Practice, in INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT LAW FOR THE 218' CENTURY: ESSAYS IN HONOR OF CHRISTOPH
SCHREUER (2009) “Gaillard, Identify or Define?’).

58 See Salini Construittori SpA. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. The Kingdom of Morocco, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001 (“Saliné ». Morocco, Decision on Jurisdiction”), at para. 53. Contrary to some suggestions, the
“Salini test” elements for an investment—commitment of capital or resources; a certain duration; regularity of profits
and returns; an element of risk; and (in some tribunals’ views) contributions to the development of the host state—were
not previously identified as requirements. Professor Christoph Schreuer in his 2001 first edition of his COMMENTARY on

 

100.

101.

102.

30

SGS’s claimed investments fall short and that this Tribunal therefore lacks jurisdiction under
the ICSID Convention. Claimant, while maintaining that the Sa/ini criteria are typical but
not exclusive features of ICSID Convention investments, insisted that all of the criteria are
satisfied. The Tribunal is persuaded that Claimant’s investment meets the Sa/ini criteria,
whether or not such criteria are applicable. Given the limited extent to which such criteria
might be relevant (if at all), the Tribunal will set out here only briefly the basis for that

assessment.

‘The criteria in question include: (i) commitment of resources or assets in the host state; (ii) a
certain duration in time; (iii) an element of risk; and (iv) contribution to the economic

development of the host state.”

With respect to the commitment of resources, it appears to be undisputed that Claimant has
committed significant monetary and in-kind assets to the operation of liaison offices in
Paraguay. Those offices, in turn, apparently played a critical role in the operation of the
Paraguayan customs process: inspections performed by SGS abroad led to the issuance of
final certifications by those offices in Paraguay, which certifications in turn were required
under Paraguayan law in order to clear cargoes through customs in Paraguay. In order to
distinguish this activity from the contractually mandated office that the tribunal in SGS ».
Philippines found to be a sufficient investment in the territory of the Philippines, Respondent
has argued that in this case, a liaison office was not required by the Contract. We are not
persuaded that this distinction makes a difference; the key is that the offices were established
in Paraguay and played an integral part of the performance of SGS’s inspection and

certification services under the Contract.

The Tribunal also takes note of the fact that, in connection with the inspection operations,
SGS necessarily committed substantial economic resources at the behest of and for the
direct benefit of Paraguay under the Contract. We do not agree with Respondent’s

contention that the location where those economic resources were deployed necessarily

 

the ICSID Convention described them only as typical characteristics of investments: “[t]hese features should not

necessarily be understood as jurisdictional requirements.

 

.” Christoph H. Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A

COMMENTARY (1s ed. 2001) at p.140; see also id. (2°4 ed. 2009) at p. 128.

%» See Salini v. Morocco, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 52.

103.

104.

105.

31

disqualifies them for purposes of identifying an “investment.” In this context, at least—a
contract entered into directly with the State, whose benefits accrued in the State—the whole
of the resources committed to implement the Contract may be taken into consideration.
(This issue may be of greater significance with respect to the requirement of an investment

“in the territory” of Paraguay, discussed in the next section, although there too we ultimately

   

are not persuaded that Claimant’s activities can be divided and allocated to distinct

 

locations.)

Claimant also contended that it contributed time, human, and data resources in training
Paraguayan customs officials and assisting Paraguay in modernizing its customs
infrastructure. Respondent claimed that the technical assistance required under the Contract
was not provided (or at a minimum that Claimant did not prove that it was provided).

Because of our findings above, we need not resolve the factual dispute at this time, and we

   

do not rely upon Claimant’s claimed technical assistance to Paraguay to reach our conclusion

that SGS committed resources in and for the state of Paraguay.

With respect to duration, the Tribunal notes that, quite apart from the fact that the Contract
ptovides for an initial three-year term and for automatic renewals thereof absent notice of
termination, it is undisputed that Claimant did in fact provide services under the Contract
for an extended period (nearly three years, according to Claimant). Respondent objects that
the Contract’s three-year term is, in effect, illusory, because Respondent had the right to
terminate the Contract at its convenience (and to refuse to renew it). But in the face of
Claimant’s actual activity over an extended period, the duration element is established,

without any need to delve into the specific terms of the Contract.

With respect to the element of risk, while it is undisputed that under the Contract Claimant
received a minimum fee for each inspection performed, that minimum did not make the
Contract a risk-free undertaking. Claimant’s total fees payable were dependent upon both
the volume and value of the imports into Paraguay, which fees might or might not exceed its
costs of providing the services. Claimant also encountered risk as a result of direct
competition with BIVAC to perform inspection services for Paraguay-bound cargoes. If

importers chose BIVAC inspections over SGS inspections, SGS’s volume of inspections

106.

107.

32

60

might not be sufficient to cover SGS’s costs.’ As such, the Tribunal is persuaded Claimant

did, contrary to Respondent’s contention, bear the risks—profit or loss—of “participation in

the outcome of the investment.”

Finally, with respect to a contribution to the economic development of the host state (or,
alternatively, a contribution to the economy of the host state), the Tribunal sees that
element as met by the purpose of the Contract itself, as expressed in its preambular language
stating that the Ministry entered into the contract with the objective of optimizing tax
collection volume and improving the control mechanisms for compliance with tax liabilities.
Both objectives serve the State, not least by contributing to its coffers. The analysis does not
depend on an arithmetic balance sheet calculation of whether Paraguay paid out to SGS
more or less than it obtained in increased tax revenues, as Respondent suggests. To the
extent the question is one of development, Respondent itself characterized the services of
SGS and BIVAC as constituting a “transitional measure” to be used until the State reaches
the point where “national customs authorities are able to carry out these tasks on their
own’”®—in other words, until the State’s capabilities develop sufficiently. It is no great leap
to see the “transitional measure” (the Contract) as facilitating and contributing to that
development, based not only on technical assistance (the existence and sufficiency of which
is a disputed issue between the Parties) but also on the inspection and certification services
themselves. To the extent the question is one of contributing to the economy, Claimant’s
economic activity in and for the benefit of Paraguay is sufficient to establish such a

contribution.

This analysis illustrates the need for special caution before resorting to this criterion, in
particular. Should a tribunal find it necessary to check for an aberrational transaction falling
outside any reasonable understanding of investment, the first three criteria of resources,

duration, and tisk would seem fully to setve that objective. The contribution-to-

© See Claimant’s Rejoinder at paras. 30-31.

8! Respondent’s Reply at para. 18. The Tribunal therefore need not reach the question whether, as argued by Claimant,

the US

 

$ 250,000 performance bond that it provided to the Ministry also reflected the kind of risk on SGS’s part that

should be taken into account for purposes of the Sa/ini “risk” element.

© See Phoenise Action, Award at para. 85 (arguing that a contribution to host state “development” is impossible to ascertain
and that a contribution to the “economy” of the host state is a more appropriate requirement).

6 Respondent’s Reply at para. 39.

33

development criterion, on the other hand, would appear instead to reflect the consequences
of the first three criteria, bringing little independent content to the inquiry." At the same
time, it invites a tribunal to engage in post hoc evaluation of the business, economic, financial
and/or policy assessments that prompted the claimant’s activities—a form of second-

gues

 

sing that would not appropriately drive a tribunal’s jurisdictional anal

 

108. In sum, while the Tribunal does not see the features of investments identified in Sa/ini as a
definitional test, nor does it believe that it is necessary to even look for those elements here
absent any suggestion that the BIT’s definition of investment is improperly overreaching, it
has nevertheless considered the Sa/ini elements in light of the Parties’ extensive briefing of
the issue. The Tribunal finds all of those elements to be present in Claimant’s claimed

investments.

2. In the Territory

109. As noted above, Article 2(1) of the BIT specifies that the Treaty applies only to “investments

in the territory” of the host state (here, Paraguay).®° Respondent objects that the Contract
was principally performed by SGS outside the territory of Paraguay, and that SGS’s claims
relate to (non)payment for those services rendered abroad, not to any injury to SGS’s assets
in Paraguay. Accordingly, Respondent contends that this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over

Claimant’s claims as they do not pertain to an investment in the territory of Paraguay.

110. This issue is potentially intertwined with the question (above) of whether the nature of the
investment is such that it is protected under the BIT and subject to dispute resolution under
the ICSID Convention. If a tribunal finds occasion to inquire into the Sa/ini elements, the
first of those is typically articulated in terms of a contribution of resources in the host state.

Analytically, however, the question is more properly addressed separately—an approach

reinforced here by the fact that the BIT itself imposes a territorial requirement in addition to

(not as part of) the “investment” requirement.

& Apparently this fourth criterion (contribution to the host state’s economic development) was, in fact, originally
proposed as a more flexible alternative to the first three criteria, However, the Salini tribunal and those following it have
added it as a fourth required element in the definitional test. See Gaillard, Identify or Define? at pp. 405-06.

6 Treaty, Art. 2(1).

The Saini decision itself referred only to “contributions.” Sa/ini v. Morocco, Decision on Jurisdiction at paras. 52-53.

34

111. Respondent principally objects that the preponderance of Claimant’s performance under the
Contract took place outside the territory of Paraguay, in connection with Claimant’s
inspection activities abroad. Respondent notes that the Contract specifically provides that it
was for the performance of “services to be rendered abroad.” While acknowledging the
existence of SGS’s liaison offices in Paraguay, Respondent contends that the Contract did
not require the use of offices within the territory of Paraguay and that the activities of those

es in other

 

offices were incidental or ancillary to SGS’s principal activity of inspection acti
countries. Moreover, Respondent contends that Claimant’s claims turn on alleged
nonpayment for the services performed abroad and not on acts and omissions affecting
SGS’s in-country activities (as would be the case, for example, if SGS were complaining of
an expropriation of the liaison office in Asuncion). Thus, in Respondent’s view, Claimant’s

claims do not arise out of investments made in the territory of Paraguay.

112. Claimant contends that it performed services and incurred expenditures in Paraguay in
accordance with the Contract, including in connection with the liaison office in Asuncién
and the employees who worked there, as well as the training of Paraguayan officials and the
development of a customs database. Furthermore, the purpose of those services was aimed
at increasing Paraguay’s customs revenues, and the effect of those services was felt in
Paraguay alone. In Claimant’s view, these activities in the territory of Paraguay, particularly
when coupled with the fact that the benefits of its activities outside Paraguay were
experienced in Paraguay, are sufficient to constitute investment “in the territory” of Paraguay

that is covered by the Treaty and its protections.

113. In the Tribunal’s view, Respondent’s approach rests on a parsing of SGS’s investments and
its activities under the Contract that is not sustainable. Like the tribunal in SGS' ».
Philippines, this Tribunal does not consider it consistent with the facts presented to
subdivide Claimant’s activities into services provided abroad and services provided in
Paraguay, and to then attribute Claimant’s claims solely to the former category. SGS’s
inspections abroad were not carried out for separate purposes, but rather in order to enable
it to provide, in Paraguay, a final Inspection Certificate on which the Paraguayan authorities

& See, eg, Preamble, Provision Concerning the “Nature and Subject-Matter of the Agreement,” Contract (Ex. C-4).

 

6 See SGS v. Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction at paras. 100-101.

35

relied to enter goods into the customs territory of Paraguay and to assess and collect the
resulting customs revenue. These inspections, and the resulting information that was
conveyed to the liaison offices in Paraguay, were indispensable operations for the issuance of

69

the final certifications in Paraguay."” Thus they were also indispensable to the benefits of the

Contract that were received by the Paraguayan state.

114. It is undisputed that as part of these intertwined operations under the Contract, SGS
maintained several offices in Paraguay, including in particular a sizeable office in Asuncion
that employed a significant number of people. Whether or not the Contract required or
merely contemplated the operation of such offices in Paraguay,” it is the case that Claimant
did in fact operate them in Paraguay in connection with the Contract, and injected funds and
resources into the territory of Paraguay for the sake of those operations. There is no
suggestion in the BIT that an investment in the territory of the State is limited to only those
investments that a State rquires to be made in its territory; it covers any qualifying

investments that merely ave in the territory.

115. And because the Claimant’s investment is not divisible in the way Paraguay contends, the
suggestion also fails that this dispute does not arise directly out of an investment in the
territory of Paraguay. The services provided by SGS in Paraguay were not severable or
ancillary; they were part and parcel of the services for which SGS expected to be paid under
the Contract. Even if it were possible to segregate the services in the manner Respondent

suggests, on the facts presented, it is not plausible to maintain that Paraguay’s alleged non-

 

payment relates solely to SGS’s services abroad. SGS claims that its invoices for the periods

after June 1996 (with only one exception) went unpaid in their entirety. There has been no

suggestion by Paraguay that it paid some portions of those invoices that were attributable to

© Respondent sought to rely on the distinction suggested in SGS n. Philippines, in which the tribunal indicated that the
result might have been different if the certificates were issued abroad rather than in the putative host state. See SGS v.
Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 102, Respondent contended that in this case, SGS prepared its certificates
outside Paraguay. Claimant responded with evidence showing that, while certificates were prepared provisionally in
other jurisdictions, such drafts were reviewed in Paraguay and the final certificates were issued in Spanish in Paraguay at
the liaison offices. Having reviewed this evidence, the Tribunal is persuaded that the final certificates were issued in
Paraguay, although it notes that a contrary conclusion would not have compelled it to conclude that SGS lacked an
investment in Paraguay.

 

 

7 The Tribunal notes that the Contract clearly anticipates that SGS would establish a liaison office: Art. 3.4 specifies that
SGS shall receive at its liaison office various inspection-related documents for each shipment, and Art. 3.5 provides that
the Ministry will assist SGS to arrange, e.g. work permits as required for the liaison office, See Arts, 3.4 & 3.5, Contract

(Ex. C-4).

 

116.

117.

118.

36

in-country services while leaving unpaid only those portions attributable to services rendered
outside Paraguay. Thus, for purposes of ICSID Convention Article 25(1)’s jurisdictional
requirement, the Tribunal holds that Claimant’s claims give rise to the requisite “legal dispute

arising directly out of an investment”.

Furthermore, the Tribunal is of the view that the Contract’s designation of SGS’s services as
being performed abroad does not change the analysis. Claimant made a reasonable case that
that language of the Contract reflected the parties’ agreement that SGS would not be taxed
in Paraguay. Clearly, the domestic tax treatment of SGS’s investment is not determinative of
the territorial situs of the investment for purposes of the BIT. The two issues arise under
distinct legal orders. The SGS v. Philippines tribunal succinctly explained that “[t]he tax
treatment of investments is a matter for local law with its own regime of rules as to where

income is considered to have been earned, a regime distinct from that of the BIT.”

We note that our conclusion is consistent with that of all three tribunals to have examined
similar contractual arrangements in disputes brought under investment treaties. In SGS ».
Pakistan, the tribunal held that an investment resting on comparable pre-inspection services
was “in the territory of the host State” because there had been an “injection of funds into
the territory of Pakistan for the carrying out of SGS’s engagements under the PSI
Agreement.” As noted, the SGS v. Philippines tribunal likewise insisted that SGS’s activities
were to be considered as an integrated undertaking, a sufficient portion of which took place
in the host state.” And in BIVAC ». Paraguay, the tribunal likewise had “little difficulty” in
concluding, with respect to a contract virtually identical to the one before the Tribunal here,
that BIVAC had made an investment in the territory of Paraguay for purposes of the

Netherlands-Paraguay BIT’s comparable “in the territory” requirement.”

3. Made in Accordance with Law

Article 2(1) of the BIT further limits the scope of the Treaty’s application to investments

“made in accordance with [here, Paraguay’s] legislation, including possible admission

7 SGS ». Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 107.

7 See SGS v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 136.

*3 SGS », Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 101.

74 BIVAC v. Paraguay, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 104.

37

procedures...” ” Although the framing of its argument evolved over the course of its
pleadings, Respondent in its Reply argued directly that Claimant’s investment was not made

in accordance with Paraguayan legislation.

119. Respondent grounded this objection on the contention that, because it is a contract for
services, the Contract could not be registered as an investment under Paraguay’s Law No.
60/90, a law providing certain incentives for the investment of capital (including foreign
capital), and therefore, according to Respondent, it cannot be an investment under
Paraguayan law. Claimant insisted that even if the Contract might not fall within the scope
of investments eligible for registration and benefits under Law No. 60/90, the BIT
requirement that an investment be “made in accordance with [the Contracting Party’s]
legislation” concerns the legality of the investment, not the definition of the investment.
Respondent, however, maintains that it is not seeking to rely on this domestic law to
“define” investment, which it accepts is to be defined instead by reference to the BIT, but
rather it insists that the law sets the limits of which investments (among those that might be

identified as such under the BIT) can be deemed to be “in accordance with” Paraguayan law.

120. The Tribunal is not persuaded by Respondent’s proffered distinction. Respondent does
conflate the definition of an investment with the /gality of an investment. Respondent
contends that because the SGS investments cannot be registered under Law No. 60/90, they
are not “in accordance” with Paraguayan law. But that contention necessarily rests on a
definition: Respondent reasons that the SGS Contract cannot be so registered because it
does not meet the domestic law’s definition of an investment subject to registration (which is
claimed to exclude services contracts). Thus Respondent is, in effect, seeking to substitute
Law No. 60/90’s definition of investment for the definition found in the BIT—an approach

that we cannot deem compatible with our obligation to interpret and apply the Treaty itself.

121. Our purpose is not to determine whether or not Claimant’s investment can be registered and
receive incentives under Law No. 60/90; we must determine whether the investment is
“made in accordance” with Paraguay’s laws, as required by the Treaty. Respondent does not

contend that the Contract was invalid, or in any way illegal or improper, under Paraguayan

*3 Treaty, Art. 2(1).

38

law. Indeed, such a suggestion would be surprising given that the Contract was entered into
pursuant to Paraguayan law, namely Decree No. 12311. Nor does Respondent contend that
SGS’s activities under the Contract (such as the customs inspections, or the operation of the
liaison offices in Paraguay) were illegal under Paraguayan law. Thus, the assets that this
Tribunal has identified as “investments” of SGS within the meaning of the BIT are not
alleged to have violated Paraguayan law. Moreover, Respondent does not contend that Law
No. 60/90 constitutes a mandatory or exclusive procedure for the admission of foreign
investments into Paraguay; there is no suggestion that investments made outside its

parameters are not permitted in Paraguay.

122. Nor is our analysis affected by Respondent’s argument pointing to the fact that the
Switzerland-Paraguay BIT contains this “in accordance with [the host state’s] legislation”
requirement, whereas other BITs signed by Paraguay (such as with France, Germany, and
the Netherlands) do not.” Respondent contends that this difference reinforces the need to
give effect to Article 2(1) here. Quite apart from any claimed distinctions among Paraguay’s
treaties, however, the fact is that this Tribunal’s reading does give effect to Article 2(1), as we
must, by requiring that an investment is not illegal or invalid at the time it is made. The
Tribunal’s reading does not give Article 2(1) the more broadly sweeping effect that
Respondent would have liked us to attribute to it, but that does not mean the provision is

deprived of effet utile.

123. In the Tribunal’s view, the object of Article 2(1)’s “in accordance with [the host state’s]
legislation” provision is to deny the Treaty’s benefits to investments that transgress the host
state’s laws at the time the investment was made—a situation not alleged to exist here.”

Accordingly, Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction on this ground is rejected.

% See Respondent's Reply at para. 69.

 

7 This situation thus differs from, for example, that faced by the SGS . Pakistan tribunal. There, Pakistan indicated that
there were questions about the lawfulness of SGS’s actions in entering into the inspection services contract which were

 

the subject of proceedings in Switzerland and Pakistan, and which, if borne out, could be the basis for objections to the
tribunal’s jurisdiction on the grounds that SGS had not invested “in accordance with the laws and regulations” of
Pakistan, as required under the Switzerland-Pakistan BIT, (The tribunal deferred consideration of the issue because
there were, at that point, only potential allegations of illegality.) See SGS ». Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction at paras.
141-43,

124,

125.

126.

127.

128.

39

JURISDICTION OVER CLAIMANT’S CLAIMS AS STATED

We turn now from some of the specific jurisdictional limits imposed by the BIT and the
ICSID Convention to Respondent’s broader jurisdictional objections that Claimant has not
stated claims under the Treaty over which this Tribunal has jurisdiction, or which are

admissible.

A. Contract Claims and the Impact of the Contract’s Forum Selection Clause

Before turning to the particular substantive Treaty provisions under which Claimant has
articulated its claims, however, it is appropriate first to address an issue that potentially
affects all of the claims: whether our jurisdiction is precluded by the claims’ contractual roots

and, as a consequence, by the Contract’s forum selection clause.

Respondent has objected, in many variations and forms, to this Tribunal’s exercise of
jurisdiction over this dispute because Article 9 of the Contract states that “[a]ny conflict,
controversy or claim deriving from or in connection with this Agreement, breach,
termination or invalidity, shall be submitted to the Courts of the City of Asuncién under the

Law of Paraguay.” In Respondent’s view, Claimant’s claims are, at their core, claims for
breach of the Contract, over which Article 9 of the Contract vests exclusive jurisdiction in

the domestic courts of Paraguay.

Claimant argues that the Contract’s forum selection clause cannot divest the Tribunal of
jurisdiction because Claimant has advanced no claims under the Contract. Claimant
maintains that it has asserted claims only for breach of the BIT. Claimant acknowledges
that, as a factual matter, the acts and omissions that found its BIT claims may also constitute
breaches of the Contract by Paraguay, but Claimant points to the distinction between
contract and treaty claims enumerated by previous tribunals, and argues that treaty and

contract claims can co-exist and be subject to separate dispute resolution procedures.

In the Tribunal’s view, the distinction between treaty and contract claims is well established,
and it disposes of Respondent’s core objection here. Claimant has advanced claims for
breach of the Switzerland-Paraguay BIT: it claims that SGS suffered unfair and inequitable

treatment in violation of Article 4(2) of the BIT; that its use and enjoyment of its investment

129.

130.

131.

40

was impaired by undue and discriminatory measures of the authorities of Paraguay in
violation of Article 4(1) of the BIT; and that the Republic of Paraguay failed to constantly
guarantee the observance of commitments it had entered into with respect to the

investments of SGS, in violation of Article 11 of the BIT.

Claimant has not asked this Tribunal to decide claims by SGS under the Contract for breach
of that Contract. We note in passing that the Treaty’s dispute resolution provisions are
arguably broad enough that Claimant would have been entitled to do so: Article 9 provides
for the resolution of “disputes with respect to investments between a Contracting Party and
an investor of the other Contracting Party,” and, as discussed in Section IV.A above, Article
9(2) contains Paraguay’s consent to international arbitration of such a dispute. There is no
qualification or limitation in this language on the types of “disputes with respect to

investments” that a Swi:

 

investor may bring against the Republic of Paraguay. The ordinary
meaning of Article 9 would appear to give this Tribunal jurisdiction to hear claims for
violation of Claimant’s rights under the Contract—surely a dispute “with respect to”
Claimant’s investment—should Claimant have chosen to bring them before us. But

Claimant has not done so.

Of course, it is apparent that several of Claimant’s claims under the Treaty will stem from
Respondent’s alleged failure to pay for SGS’s services under the Contract. That is an action
that may (or may not) also constitute a contractual breach, but we are not called upon to
decide that question as such. We are called upon to decide whether Respondent’s actions,
such as its alleged non-payment, breach the aforementioned Articles of the Treaty. In doing
so, we are in concert with the well-established jurisprudence regarding the distinction

between contract claims and treaty claims.
The ad hoc committee in Vivendi I aptly described this distinction:

[W]hether there has been a breach of the BIT and whether there has
been a breach of contract are different questions. Each of these
claims will be determined by reference to its own proper or
applicable law — in the case of the BIT, by international law; in the

132.

133.

41

case of the Concession Contract, by the proper law of the
contract...”

The committee rightly noted that “[a] state may breach a treaty without breaching a contract,

2979

and vice versa.””’ It is also possible that the same act of the State will breach both the treaty

and a contract, but in this case we are asked to consider only the former question.

Other investment treaty arbitration decisions are in accord. The tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan
averted that “[a]s a matter of general principle, the same set of facts can give rise to different
claims grounded on differing legal orders: the municipal and the international legal orders.”
Likewise, the tribunal in Impregilo v. Pakistan held that “contrary to Pakistan’s approach in this
case, the fact that a breach may give rise to a contract claim does not mean that it cannot
also — and separately — give rise to a treaty claim. Even if the two perfectly coincide, they

remain analytically distinct, and necessarily require different enquiries.”

And the Azurix
tribunal was clear that claims that are rooted in contractual performance are not thereby
excluded from the treaty sphere: “Even if the dispute as presented by the Claimant may
involve the interpretation or analysis of facts related to performance under the Concession
Agreement, the Tribunal considers that, to the extent that such issues are relevant to a
breach of the obligations of the Respondent under the BIT, they cannot per se transform the
dispute under the BIT into a contractual dispute.”

Respondent has insisted that to adopt and apply this distinction between treaty claims and
contract claims here is to improperly defer to Claimant’s mere “labeling” of its claims.
According to Respondent, the Tribunal “need not accept uncritically SGS’s characterization

. . s dati 9983
of its claim as a treaty violation.”*

Respondent would have us examine Claimant’s claims
and conclude that they are in fact contract claims that have merely been dressed as BIT

claims.

°8 Compaitia de Aguas del Aconguija SA. and Vivendi Universal v, Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on
Annulment, 3 July 2002, at para. 96 (“Iivendi I, Annulment”).

” Vivendi I, Annulment at para. 95.

8 SGS v, Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 147.

81 Impregilo v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 258.

82 Azunix: Corp. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 December 2003, at para. 76
(“Azunix v, Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction”).

8S Respondent’s Reply at para. 79.

42

134. In Respondent’s view, the reason the claims are properly characterized as strictly contractual
is because Claimant has alleged no more than non-performance of contractual obligations
(principally, the obligation to make payment). Respondent maintains that a State’s non-
performance of a contract cannot, without more, give rise to a breach of a BIT; Claimant
must show (and in Respondent’s view it has not shown) more: sovereign interference, jure

imperii, acts beyond the ordinary conduct of a commercial counterparty.

135. The Tribunal notes here the challenge of drawing a line between an ordinary commercial
breach of contract and acts of sovereign interference or jure imperii, particularly in the context
of a contract entered into directly with a State organ (here, the Ministry of Finance).

Logically, one can characterize every act by a sovereign State as a “sovereign act’

 

including
the State’s acts to breach or terminate contracts to which the State is a party. It is thus
difficult to articulate a basis on which the State’s actions, solely because they occur in the
context of a contract or a commercial transaction, are somehow no longer acts of the State,

for which the State may be held internationally responsible.

136. In any event the Tribunal need not, and cannot, at this stage decide whether Claimant has
made a showing of Treaty breach. As we explained in Section III.B above, the threshold at
the jurisdictional stage is whether the facts alleged by Claimant could, if proven, make out a
claim under the Treaty. Claimant maintains it has alleged sufficiently “sovereign” acts in
connection with contractual non-performance; Respondent maintains it has not. Resolution
of that dispute is properly reserved to such time as both Parties have fully presented their

evidence and arguments.

137. Returning to the question whether Claimant has adequately articulated claims under the
Treaty (rather than the Contract), this Tribunal, like the tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan, is
generally of the view that “at this jurisdiction phase, it is for the Claimant to characterize the

claims as it sees fit’

As the Vivendi I ad hoc committee observed, “[ijt was open to
Claimants to claim, and they did claim, that these acts [in breach of administrative law or the

contract] taken together, or some of them, amounted to a breach of Articles 3 and/or 5 of

4 §GS v, Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 145.

138.

139.

140.

43

the [France-Argentina] BIT.” Likewise, here, it is open to Claimant to contend that acts or
omissions of the Paraguayan authorities—acts or omissions that may (or may not) have
breached the Contract—also breached the provisions of the Switzerland-Paraguay BIT.
Whether Claimant has managed to state claims under those Articles that are legally and
factually adequate for jurisdictional purposes is a question we will address claim-by-claim in

Section V.B below.

Given that the Tribunal does not adopt Respondent’s characterization of Claimant’s claims
as contractual rather than treaty claims, the Contract’s forum selection clause is readily
disposed of. That is, if Claimant had not advanced claims for breach of the Treaty and had
brought forward only claims for breach of the Contract, we would be faced with different
questions, including the relationship between Article 9 of the Contract (providing for dispute
resolution of contract claims in the courts of the City of Asuncién) and Article 9 of the BIT
(providing for resolution of “disputes with respect to investments”). Here, however, we
accept that Claimant has stated claims under the Treaty, and so the question before us is
simply whether a contractual forum selection clause can divest this Tribunal of its
jurisdiction to hear claims for breach of the Treaty. The answer to that question is

undoubtedly negative.

On this point, both the Vivendi I tribunal and the Vivendi I annulment committee were in
agreement. According to the tribunal, a forum selection clause of a contract “does not
divest this Tribunal of jurisdiction to hear this case because that provision did not and could
not constitute a waiver by [claimant] of its rights under Article 8 of the BIT to file the
pending claims against the Argentine Republic.” The forum-selection clause “of the
Concession Contract cannot be deemed to prevent the investor from proceeding under the
ICSID Convention against the Argentine Republic on a claim charging the Argentine

Republic with a violation of the Argentine-French BIT.”

And according to the ad hoc committee:

85 Vivendi I, Annulment at para. 112.

8 Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija SA. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Award, 21
November 2000, at para. 53 (“Iivendi I, Award”).

87 Vivendi I, Award at para. 54.

44

In the Committee’s view, it is not open to an ICSID tribunal having
jurisdiction under a BIT in respect of a claim based upon a
substantive provision of that BIT, to dismiss the claim on the ground
that it could or should have been dealt with by a national court. In
such a case, the inquiry which the ICSID tribunal is required to
undertake is one governed by the ICSID Convention, by the BIT and
by applicable international law. Such an inquiry is neither in principle
determined, nor precluded, by any issue of municipal law, including
any municipal law agreement of the parties.

 

Moreover the Committee does not understand how, if there had been
a breach of the BIT in the present case (a question of international
Jaw), the existence of Article 16(4) of the Concession Contract could
have prevented its characterisation as such. A state cannot rely on an
exclusive jurisdiction clause in a contract to avoid the characterisation
of its conduct as internationally unlawful under a treaty.**

141. — It further explained:

[W]here “the fundamental basis of the claim” is a treaty laying down
an independent standard by which the conduct of the parties is to be
judged, the existence of an exclusive jurisdiction clause in a contract
between the claimant and the respondent state or one of its
subdivisions cannot operate as a bar to the application of the treaty
standard.”

 

142. In anticipation of the analysis of Claimant’s claims under Article 11 of the Treaty in Section
V.B.3 below, we note that in our view, this rule applies with equal force in the context of an
umbrella clause. It has been argued that, if the umbrella clause violation is premised on a
failure to observe a contractual commitment, one cannot say (in the Vivendi I annulment
committee’s words) that the “fundamental basis of the claim’ is a treaty laying down an
independent standard by which the conduct of the parties is to be judged”—because, for

that type of umbrella clause claim, the treaty applies no legal standard that is independent of

88 Vivendi I, Annulment at paras. 102-03.

® Vivendi I, Annulment at para. 101, Conversely, according to the Virendi I ad hoc committee, “{i]n a case where the
essential basis of a claim brought before an international tribunal is a breach of contract, the tribunal will give effect to
any valid choice of forum clause in the contract.” Vivendi I, Annulment at para, 98. ‘The committee made that statement
in reliance on the Woodruff case, in which jurisdiction was declined based upon a contractual waiver of international
rights to claim against the state. See Vivendi I, Annulment at paras. 97-99 (citing Woodruff Case, IX Rep. of Int'l Arb.
Awards 213 (1903) (Venezuela Mixed Claims Commission) (“Woodruff Case”)). As we have noted, because Claimant
here presses claims under only the Treaty, we have no occasion to address this aspect of the Vivendi I committee’s
analysi

 

45

the contract. But that argument ignores the source in the treaty of the State’s claimed
obligation to abide by its commitments, contractual or otherwise. Even if the alleged breach
of the treaty obligation depends upon a showing that a contract or other qualifying
commitment has been breached, the source of the obligation cited by the claimant, and

hence the source of the claim, remains the treaty itself.”
B. Has Claimant Stated Claims over Which the Tribunal Has Jurisdiction?

143. | We turn now to the question whether Claimant has adequately set forth claims for violation

of Articles 4(2), 4(1), and 11 of the Treaty.
1. Fair and Equitable Treatment

144. Article 4(2) of the Treaty provides that “[eJach Contracting Party shall ensure fair and
equitable treatment within its territory of the investments of the investors of the other

contracting Party.” Claimant maintains that Respondent has breached this Treaty obligation.

145. Respondent objected to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over this claim because, according to
Respondent, even if proven on the merits, Claimant’s allegations would fail to establish any
breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard. At the core of Respondent’s objection is
the premise that, to support a claim for Treaty breach, Claimant must allege acts or
omissions beyond those that an ordinary counterparty to a contract may take. Respondent
argued that Claimant’s claim rests on allegations of non-payment under the Contract, and
that no breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard can be shown based on simple

non-payment.

146. The Tribunal considers that the facts alleged by Claimant, if proven, are capable of coming
within the purview of the fair and equitable treatment provision of the BIT. First, a State’s
non-payment under a contract is, in the view of the Tribunal, capable of giving rise to a
breach of a fair and equitable treatment requirement, such as, perhaps, where the non-
payment amounts to a repudiation of the contract, frustration of its economic purpose, or

substantial deprivation of its value. Whether anything more than a wrongful refusal to pay,

% See also discussion at Section V.B.3 below.

147.

148.

149,

150.

46

and, if so, what more, is required to prevail on a claim of breach of a fair and equitable

treatment standard are questions for the merits.

Second, whether or not one were to accept Respondent’s premise that a State’s non-payment

 

under a contract, alone, cannot give rise to a Treaty breach, it is the case that, here, Claimant
alleges more than mete non-payment. It is true that, fundamentally, Claimant contends that
Respondent arbitrarily and unjustly refused to compensate SGS for services rendered, and
unjustly enriched the State by enjoying the benefits of SGS’s services for nearly four years

without paying for them. Claimant claims that Respondent thereby breached the Treaty b)

 

frustrating SGS’s legitimate expectations.

But while Claimant contends that SGS was entitled to expect that Paraguay would abide by
the Contract and Paraguayan law, and that it would be compensated for services rendered to
the State under the Contract, Claimant’s Article 4(2) claim does not rest on that alone. In
addition to this baseline expectation of contractual compliance, Claimant contends that it
had also specific legitimate expectations based on multiple written and oral representations
allegedly made by representatives of Paraguay to SGS, in which, according to Claimant, the
State acknowledged the debt owed and promised that it would honor the Contract and make
payment. Those expectations, according to Claimant, were frustrated when Paraguay failed

to live up to any of its alleged undertakings.

Claimant also contends generally that Respondent acted in bad faith, capriciously, arbitrarily
and in a non-transparent manner towards SGS. In particular, Claimant alleges that
Respondent subjected SGS to spurious administrative investigations that, according to
Claimant, were not required by law or fact but instead were conducted with the purpose of
thwarting or delaying payments due to SGS. According to Claimant, these internal
administrative investigations lacked transparency, were untimely and unnecessary and again
contradicted various Paraguayan officials’ alleged acknowledgments of the debt owed to SGS

at the time the investigations were conducted.

Of course, our recitation of these allegations does not reflect any views on the Tribunal’s
part about their veracity or about whether Claimant will be able to prove them at the merits

stage. The point is simply that Claimant’s allegations with respect to unfair or inequitable

47

treatment by Paraguay extend beyond mere non-payment in breach of the Contract. Thus
the necessary premise of Respondent’s objection—that Claimant is alleging only non-

payment—fails, and its objection to jurisdiction on that ground must be rejected.

151. For both of the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal is content that Claimant has met—at this
stage—the requirements for a claim for breach of Article 4(2) of the BIT, and Claimant’s fair

and equitable treatment claim should be taken up on the merits.

2. Undue and Discriminatory Measures

152. Article 4(1) of the Treaty provides that “[e]Jach Contracting Party...shall not impair, through
undue or discriminatory measures, the management, maintenance, use, enjoyment,
extension, sale and, should it so happen, liquidation of such investments.” Claimant
contends that Respondent impaired SGS’s use and enjoyment of its investments through

undue and discriminatory measures in violation of this Treaty protection.

153. Claimant’s claims under Article 4(1) rest on many of the same factual allegations discussed
under Article 4(2) above. Claimant focuses, however, on what it sees as the allegedly
unjustified nature of Respondent’s acts and omissions—that is, the “undue” prong of the

quoted provision of Article 4(1).”"

154. Claimant thus argues that the alleged decision of Paraguay not to abide by the Contract was
unjustified and unreasonable, and was taken for political purposes and in bad faith.
Claimant contends that Respondent’s continued refusal to pay SGS’s debt was likewise
unreasonable in view of the alleged repeated acknowledgements by Paraguayan officials
regarding the existence and amount of the outstanding debt, and in light of the alleged
results of Paraguay’s own internal investigations concerning the Contract. In this vein,
Claimant alleges, for example, that the Ministry of Finance willfully refused to disburse

amounts allocated in the national budget for payments to SGS, and that this action

° Both Claimant and Respondent are apparently content to equate the adjectives “undue and discriminatory” in Article
4(1) with “arbitrary.” Indeed, Claimant’s Rejoinder even uses the heading “Undue and Arbitrary Measures” for its
discussion of its Article 4(1) claim. The Tribunal does not take issue with this approach, but merely takes note that
Claimant has not advanced arguments that Respondent's actions were discriminatory in the sense of singling out SGS as
a Swiss investor (or otherwise).

155.

156.

157.

158.

48

demonstrates that the Government’s failure to make payment to SGS was based on political

reasons.

Claimant also argues that Respondent’s non-payment was a breach of Article 4(1) because,
Claimant contends, it occurred in disregard of Paraguayan domestic law and international
Jaw. Claimant further alleges that the administrative investigations instigated by Respondent
Jacked factual or legal justification, and that Respondent’s alleged refusals to abide by the

results of its own internal reports amounted to a willful disregard of due process of law.

Respondent objected that Claimant failed to allege any undue or discriminatory measures
that impaired its investment. However, most of Respondent’s objections in this instance
were based on the facts themselves and not on any claimed insufficiency of Claimant’s
factual allegations. For example, Respondent claimed that the alleged debt to SGS was not
acknowledged, and that the internal reports cited by Claimant are not binding under
Paraguayan law. On that basis, Respondent maintained that it was not unreasonable for
Respondent to refrain from paying the amounts claimed by SGS. As another example,
Respondent alleged that investigations of SGS were justified by the cost of the Contract to

Paraguay and by corruption in the pre-shipment inspection industry.

Just as Claimant will have a full opportunity to adduce evidence in support of its factual
allegations, Respondent will have a full opportunity to rebut those allegations—at the merits
stage. Disputes over the facts, however, are not a proper basis for an objection that
Claimant has failed to state a sufficient claim under Article 4(1) over which this Tribunal can
exercise jurisdiction. Whether Paraguay’s investigations were justified or unjustified, for
example, is a question for the merits; for purposes of exercising jurisdiction, however, the
allegation that they were unjustified—and thus allegedly “undue”—is sufficient to state a
ptoper claim under Article 4(1). To the extent Respondent challenged Claimant’s Article
4(1) claims on the facts, Respondent’s arguments present no obstacles to this Tribunal’s

jurisdiction.

Even those objections that were articulated in terms of the sufficiency of Claimant’s claims
(rather than in terms of contesting Claimant’s factual allegations) are also tied up in factual

and legal contentions that must be resolved on the merits. For example, Respondent

49

maintains that the debt claimed by SGS is unliquidated, and that Claimant therefore cannot
have suffered any impairment because Paraguay has not refused to pay a final judgment
against it. In effect, this invites an assessment of whether Paraguay’s alleged non-payment is

excusable—clearly a question for the merits.

159. Likewise, Respondent’s objection that an omission to include the alleged debt in Paraguay’s
national budget is still nothing more than a failure to pay, and lacks jure imperii, does not
exclude jurisdiction. As noted above, the Tribunal doubts whether a State’s failure to pay
under a contract necessarily lacks jure imperii, or (stated differently) whether an additional
showing of jure imperii is required. But even if one were to assume arguendo that jure imperii
was required, the answer to whether it was present here would depend on inquiries, such as

an inquiry into the nature of Paraguay’s budgeting process, that are beyond the scope of a

 

jurisdictional analysis. It is sufficient at this stage that the alleged budget episodes could

(perhaps depending on their details) make out a claim for undue or arbitrary treatment.

160. | Respondent also contended that Claimant can assert no due process violations, because SGS
has never sought its day in court in Paraguay. Whether or not one could be persuaded that
concepts of due process ate applicable only to court proceedings, as Respondent claimed,”

this argument simply rests too much on Claimant’s passing use of the term “due process.”

In essence, Claimant maintains that Respondent’s behavior—ie., non-payment

notwithstanding alleged internal government reports that were claimed to be in SGS’s

favor—was “undue” or arbitrary. Regardless of whether or not that behavior can also be
characterized as contrary to due process, the question before the Tribunal is whether it can
be characterized as “undue or discriminatory” within the meaning of Article 4(1)—and that
is a question to be resolved on the merits. Accordingly, Respondent’s argument does not

ptesent a basis for declining jurisdiction over this aspect of Claimant’s Article 4(1) claim.

161. In sum, we consider that the facts alleged by Claimant, if proven, are capable of coming

within the purview of Article 4(1)’s prohibition on impairment of an investment by undue

 

and discriminatory measures. Claimant’s undue and discriminatory measures claims will be

considered on the merits.

°2 See Respondent's Reply at para. 111.

162.

163.

164.

165.

50

3. Observance of Commitments

Article 11 of the Treaty provides, in its entirety, that “[e]ither Contracting Party shall
constantly guarantee the observance of the commitments it has entered into with respect to

the investments of the investors of the other Contracting Party.”

Claimant contends that Respondent failed to observe the commitments it entered into with
respect to Claimant’s investment, in violation of Article 11 of the BIT. Specifically, Claimant
argues that Respondent’s failure to pay the amounts due to SGS under the Contract
constituted a breach of Respondent’s commitments to Claimant. In addition, Claimant
argues that Respondent’s failure to abide by subsequent alleged promises to honor the
Contract and to pay such debts also represents a breach of Respondent’s Treaty obligation

under Article 11.

Respondent objected that Claimant failed to allege a breach of Article 11. Respondent
argued that an “umbrella clause” provision in a BIT such as Article 11 cannot “elevate a pure

9993

breach of a commercial contract into a treaty violation.””” In its Reply, Respondent argued
that an umbrella clause is implicated only if the host state abuses its power or exerts undue
governmental interference in breaching a contract or any other type of undertaking. In
Respondent’s view, any ordinary commercial counterparty could fail to pay under a contract,
and Claimant has failed to allege that Paraguay committed any other wrongful action

constituting an abuse of governmental power. On that basis, Respondent contended that

Claimant did not allege a viable claim under Article 11.

Respondent adopted additional arguments in its later submission discussing the BIV/AC ».
Paraguay decision (which was issued after the Parties’ original briefing and the hearing on
jurisdiction). While maintaining its argument that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over
Claimant’s Article 11 claim as stated, Respondent argued, in the alternative, that this
Tribunal should follow the BIVAC tribunal’s approach and find the Article 11 claim to be
inadmissible in light of the Contract’s forum selection clause in favor of the courts of the

City of Asuncion.

°3 Respondent's Reply at para. 88.

51

 

166. As a first step in our analysis, we turn back to Claimant’s claims under Article 11. As noted
above, Claimant has not asked this Tribunal to adjudicate directly any claims for breach of
the Contract as such. Claimant has, however, put before us Treaty claims under Article 11.
The predicate for those claims is one or more breaches of the State’s commitments to
SGS—some of which commitments are, indeed, to be found in the Contract. But that does
not alter the fact that, for purposes of the long-recognized distinction between contract and
treaty claims discussed in Section V.A above, we are presented with claims under Article 11

of the Treaty.

167. On this basis, we have little difficulty in finding jurisdiction over Claimant’s claims under
Article 11. That article creates an obligation for the State to constantly guarantee observance
of its commitments entered into with respect to investments of investors of the other Party.
The obligation has no limitations on its face—it apparently applies to all such commitments,
whether established by contract or by law, unilaterally or bilaterally, etc. Not all of
Claimant’s Article 11 claims are predicated on breach of the Contract itself: Claimant has
also alleged that Paraguayan officials subsequently made various oral and written
commitments to respect the Contract and to make payment of amounts owed to SGS, which
commitments were allegedly breached. But even as to the Article 11 claims that are
ptedicated directly on Paraguay’s alleged breach of the Contract, we have no hesitation in

treating the Contract’s obligations as “commitments” within the meaning of Article 11.

 

168. Given the unqualified text of Article 11 of the Treaty, and its ordinary meaning, we see no
basis to import into Article 11 the non-textual limitations that Respondent proposed in its
Reply. Article 11 does not exclude commercial contracts of the State from its scope.
Likewise, Article 11 does not state that its constant guarantee of observance of such
commitments may be breached only through actions that a commercial counterparty cannot
take, through abuses of state power, or through exertions of undue government influence.

°° of umbrella clauses cannot take

Respondent’s appeal to the putative “true meaning’
ptecedence over the plain language of the umbrella clause that is before us. In effect, we see

no basis on the face of the clause to believe that it should mean anything other than what it

°% Respondent's Reply at para. 86.

52

says—that the State is obliged to guarantee the observance of its commitments with respect

to the investments of the other State party’s investors.

169. The Tribunal necessarily acknowledges that in so holding, it is parting ways with the decision

in SGS v, Pakistan, which addressed an umbrella clause in the Switzerland-Pakistan BIT that

 

is worded identically to Article 11 of the Switzerland-Paraguay BIT.” In SGS' v. Pakistan,

concerns that “the scope of [the umbrella clause]...appears susceptible of almost indefinite
expansion,” and that the consequences of reading the clause literally to include contractual
commitments would be “far-reaching in scope,” led the tribunal to decide that the clause’s

ordinary meaning could not be followed unless it saw clear and convincing evidence that the

96

State party signatories intended those consequences.” To the contrary, we believe that

Article 11’s ordinary meaning must be respected, as required by the Vienna Convention
(Article 31(1)). Without revisiting the extensive legal commentaries that have engaged the
umbrella clause issue since the SGS v. Pakistan decision, we note that it has emerged that at
least one State party indeed intended the provision to have its literal reach: the Swiss
government is on record objecting to the SGS ». Pakistan holding and opining that a
violation of such a contractual commitment is covered by the umbrella clause and should be

subject to the Treaty’s dispute settlement procedures.”

170. In permitting the umbrella clause to encompass host State commitments of all kinds,

including contractual commitments, we are in agreement with the tribunals in SGS v.

°° The SGS v, Philippines tribunal suggested that it reached a different result from the SGS ». Pakistan tribunal and gave
full effect to the umbrella clause based at least in part on differences between the umbrella clause language of the
Switzerland-Philippines BIT and the supposedly less direct or less specific language of the umbrella clause in the
Switzerland-Pakistan BIT. See SGS v. Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 119. However, the Swiss government,
in a note on its interpretation of the Switzerland-Pakistan BIT that was circulated following the SGS v. Pakistan decision,
described that same language—identical to the language before this Tribunal—as being directed to “a commitment to a
specific investment or a specific investor.” See “Interpretation of Article 11 of the Bilateral Investment ‘Treaty between
Switzerland and Pakistan in Light of the Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction of ICSID in Case No.
ARB/01/13 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. versus Islamic Republic of Pakistan,” Note under Cover of
Letter from Swiss Government to ICSID Deputy Secretary-General, 1 October 2003, 19 MEALEY’s INT'L ARB. REP. E-
1, E-2 (Feb. 2004) (Ex. CLA-47) (“Swiss Government Note”). ‘Thus the Swiss Government, at least, evidently did not
understand such language to be general or non-specific. Inasmuch as we reach the same result on jurisdiction as the
SGS v. Philippines tribunal, on the basis of the same Treaty language as was before the SGS », Pakistan tribunal, it follows
that this Tribunal does not see the language as meaningfully different. That is, we do not consider that the wording of
Article 11 of the Treaty is so general or hortatory as to preclude reading it as an obligation of the State to comply with,
inter alia, its contractual commitments.

 

 

     

° SGS v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction at paras. 166-67.

7 See Swiss Government Note at p. E-2.

53

Philippines and BIVAC ». Paraguay, among others.” Like the BIVAC tribunal, we conclude

that the umbrella clause before us “establishes an international obligation for the parties to

the BIT to observe contractual obligation[s] with respect to investors” and that this
interpretation is necessary to give the umbrella clause purpose and effect.”

171. Thus the Tribunal finds that it has jurisdiction over Claimant’s claims under Article 11 that
Paraguay failed to observe commitments it allegedly made to SGS, both under the Contract
and under its alleged subsequent oral and written promises to make good on the claimed
debt to SGS. And having found jurisdiction, we are of course mindful of the Vivendi I
annulment committee’s admonition that a “[t}ribunal, faced with such a claim and having

validly held that it had jurisdiction, [is] obliged to consider and to decide it.”"”

172. It is from that standpoint that we must address the latest proposition put to us by

 

Respondent: that this Tribunal should adopt the rest of the BIV-AC tribunal’s analysis, and

  

find that we will not hear Claimant’s umbrella clause claims arising out of the Contract—
claims over which we have jurisdiction—because the parties to the Contract included a
forum selection clause directing disputes under it to Paraguayan domestic courts. The
BIVAC tribunal accepted that the umbrella clause in the Netherlands-Paraguay BIT
encompassed obligations under the BIVAC contract into the Treaty, giving the tribunal
jurisdiction, but insisted that all of the contract’s obligations—including its forum selection
clause—must then be given effect in that treaty setting." On that basis, the BIVAC
tribunal found the umbrella clause claims to be inadmissible and left open only the question
of whether to stay them or dismiss them outright. Given the extensive factual
commonalities of the cases confronting both tribunals, including Paraguayan contracts for
pte-shipment inspection services that are claimed to be substantially if not entirely identical,

we have of course considered carefully the reasoned analysis of that distinguished tribunal.

°8 See SGS v. Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction at paras. 114-28; BIV-AC ». Paraguay, Decision on Jurisdiction at paras.
134-42. See also Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/11, Award, 12 October 2005, at paras. 51-62;
Duke Energy Electroquil Partners & Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of Ecnador, CSID Case No ARB/04/19, Award, 18 August
2008, at paras. 317-25; Ereko B.V. v. Republic of Poland, Partial Award, 19 August 2005, at paras, 257-60.

 

 

 

% BIVAC », Paraguay, Decision on Jurisdiction at para 141. We reach that conclusion notwithstanding the fact that the
language of the umbrella clause before us arguably is not as broad or explicit as the Netherlands-Paraguay BIT
considered in BIVAC.

100 Vivendi I, Annulment at para. 112.

1 BIV-AC », Paraguay, Decision on Jurisdiction, at paras. 142-58.

173.

174.

wz «

54

In this Tribunal’s view, however, a decision to decline to hear SGS’s claims under Article 11
on the grounds that they should instead be directed to the courts of Asuncién would place
the Tribunal at risk of failing to carry out its mandate under the Treaty and the ICSID

Convention.

First, Claimant’s Article 11 claims are not co-extensive with claims under the Contract, and
they are not necessarily disposed of by the four corners of the Contract. Claimant has
advanced Article 11 claims not only for breach of the Contract’s payment obligation but also
for breach of alleged subsequent commitments by Paraguay’s representatives. Whether or
not both might be within the teach of the Contract’s broadly worded forum selection
clause," the latter cannot be judged under the Contract alone. Whether Paraguayan
representatives made the alleged commitments, whether those commitments could be relied
upon by SGS, and whether the commitments were breached, must all be decided by this
Tribunal with reference to the Treaty and the applicable bodies of law specified under it.
Accordingly, it would sweep too broadly to say that all umbrella clause claims—and, in
particular, all of the umbrella clause claims before us—can be disposed of on contractual

grounds by the contractual forum.

Second, even to the extent that certain of the Article 11 claims may be co-extensive with
claims under the Contract, the Tribunal is not persuaded that this presents a basis to find
them inadmissible. Respondent argued strenuously, in many forms, that the fundamental
basis of Claimant’s claims—and in particular Claimant’s umbrella clause claims—is the

Contract and not the Treaty. From that premise, as we noted earlier,”

one might contend
that, at least for the Contract-based claims, the Article 11 breach will not be assessed under
an independent, international law standard in the Treaty, but rather under the Contract. But
that is an argument for declining jurisdiction, not for inadmissibility, and this Tribunal has

already rejected that jurisdictional argument.

‘Any conflict, controversy or claim deriving from or in connection with this Agreement, breach, termination or

invalidity, shall be submitted to the Courts of the City of Asuncién under the Law of Paraguay.” Art. 9.1, Contract (Ex.

103 See discussion at para. 142 above.

55

175. For the reasons set forth in Section V.A and in the first part of this Section V.B.3, this
Tribunal—ike the BIVVAC tribunal—has found that we have jurisdiction over Claimant’s
Article 11 claims. And having so found jurisdiction, we do not see a basis for finding such
claims inadmissible. To the contrary, having found jurisdiction, we would have to have very

strong cause indeed to decline to exercise it."

176. Third, as noted above, one reason to read Article 11 as providing jurisdiction over
contractual claims is to give purpose and effect to that provision. The State parties to the
BIT intended to provide this Treaty protection in addition to whatever rights the investor
could negotiate for itself in a contract or could find under domestic law, and they gave the

investor the option to enforce it, including through arbitrations such as this one.""” It would

 

 

be incongruous to find jurisdiction on this basis, but then to dismiss the greater part of all

Article 11 claims on admissibility grounds—because the effect would be, once again, to
divest the provision of its core purpose and effect, to the same extent as if we had denied
jurisdiction outright. As Professor Gaillard put it when assessing the approach taken by the
tribunal in SGS v. Philippines (i.e, accepting jurisdiction but then staying the tribunal’s

resolution of the claim):

[T]o the extent this solution recognises, “in principle,” an investor’s
right to choose an international arbitral tribunal for the settlement of
its investment disputes and, in the same breath, requires that the
selected tribunal stay the proceedings on the basis of an exclusive
forum selection clause contained in the investment contract, it results
in the BIT tribunal having jurisdiction over an empty shell and
depriving the BIT dispute resolution process of any meaning."

104 See Vivendi I, Annulment at para. 102 (“In the Committee’s view, it is not open to an ICSID tribunal having
jurisdiction under a BIT in respect of a claim based upon a substantive provision of that BIT, to dismiss the claim on the
ground that it could or should have been dealt with by a national court. In such a case, the inquiry which the ICSID
tribunal is required to undertake is one governed by the ICSID Convention, by the BIT and by applicable international
law. Such an inquiry is neither in principle determined, nor precluded, by any issue of municipal law, including any
municipal law agreement of the parties.”).

15 See, ag, SGS v. Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction, Declaration of Prof. Crivellaro at paras. 3, 5.

106 Prof. Emmanuel Gaillard, Investment Treaty Arbitration and Jurisdiction over Contract Claims—the SGS Cases Considered, in
INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT LAW AND ARBITRATION: LEADING 38 FROM THE ICSID, NAFTA, BILATERAL
INVESTMENT TREATIES AND CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL LAW 325, 334 (2005). See also Thomas W. Wilde, Exergy
Charter Treaty-based Investment Arbitration, 5 J. WORLD INV. & TRADE 373, 393 (2004) (discussing SGS v. Philippines as
“impractical,” having “recognize{d] the effect of the ‘umbrella clause’ to bring a contract dispute to the level of

oO

     

 

 

international law but reversed this, in effect, by giving full effect to a national court’s jurisdiction clause”).

177.

178.

179.

56

Fourth, this Tribunal is concerned that to dismiss umbrella clause claims as inadmissible on
the ground that a forum selection clause is applicable to the parties’ commitments under the
Contract will be, in effect, to read an implied waiver of BIT rights into every investment
agreement that specifies a dispute resolution mechanism other than ICSID—a result we

would not embrace.

The BIVAC tribunal reasoned that because the claimant’s contract post-dated the BIT, it
should take precedence: “[t]he parties could have included a provision in [the forum
selection clause] to the effect that the obligations it imposed were without prejudice to any
rights under the BIT, including the possible exercise of jurisdiction by” a treaty tribunal
under the umbrella clause.""” While the same sequence is in play here—the Switzerland-
Paraguay BIT entered into force in 1992, while the Contract was concluded in 1996—we
would reverse the presumption. Given the significance of investors’ rights under the Treaty,
and of the international law “safety net” of protections that they are meant to provide
separate from and supplementary to domestic law regimes, they should not lightly be
assumed to have been waived. Assuming arywendo that the parties to the later-in-time
Contract could have expressly excluded the right to resort to arbitration under the extant
BIT, at least as to Contract-based claims under Article 11,’ they did not do so—and we

would not take their silence as effecting that same waiver of Treaty rights.

In this regard, we agree with the tribunal in Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia, which considered the
question of whether and under what circumstances a contractual forum selection clause
could be held to work a waiver of the treaty right to invoke ICSID jurisdiction. The Aguas
del Tunari tribunal drew a distinction between “(1) a separate document [/.. a contract] that
waives the right to invoke, or modifies the extent of, ICSID jurisdiction (where the intent of

the parties to alter the possibility of ICSID jurisdiction is direct); and, (2) a separate

17 BIV-AC ». Paraguay, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 146,

108 There is a serious question whether individuals are capable of waiving rights conferred upon them by a treaty between
two States. See SGS v. Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 154. The tribunals in Ayurix v. Argentina and Aguas del
Tunari v. Bolivia both sidestepped a direct ruling on the question, although the tribunal in Aguas del Tunari indicated it
would have been prepared to give effect to a clear, express waiver of ICSID jurisdiction. See Ayurix v. Argentina,
Decision on Jurisdiction at para, 85; Aguas del Tunari S.A. v. Republic of Bolivia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/3, Decision on
Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction, 21 October 2005 (“Aguas del Tunari v, Bolivia, Decision on Jurisdiction”), at
para, 118. ‘This Tribunal is similarly situated to those in Azunix and Aguas del Tunari: because we would not give effect to
an alleged waiver that is merely implied, we need not address the question whether we would have given effect to an
express waiver.

180.

181.

57

document that contains an exclusive forum selection clause designating a forum other than

ICSID (where the intent of the parties to alter the possibility of ICSID jurisdiction must be

implied).”"” As to the second circumstance—the one that we also face in the present case—

the Aguas del Tunari tribunal insisted that the mere designation of a non-ICSID forum in a
contract, without an express waiver of ICSID jurisdiction, was insufficient to cause the

tribunal to refrain from exercising its jurisdiction under the BIT:

The Tribunal does not find the authority under the ICSID
Convention for it to abstain from exercising its jurisdiction simply
because a conflicting forum selection clause exists. To the contrary,
it is the Tribunal’s view that an ICSID tribunal has a duty to exercise
its jurisdiction in such instances absent any indication that the parties
specifically intended that the conflicting clause act as a waiver or
modification of an otherwise existing grant of jurisdiction to ICSID.
A separate conflicting document should be held to affect the
jurisdiction of an ICSID tribunal only if it clearly is intended to
modify the jurisdiction otherwise granted to ICSID.""

 

 

We are in accord. In the instant case, there is no showing that the parties to the Contract
clearly intended to exclude the jurisdiction of a tribunal formed under the Treaty to review
SGS’s Treaty claims. Paraguay, at least, must be deemed to have known the content of its
own Treaty at the time its Ministry of Finance entered into the Contract; it either did not try,
ot did not obtain SGS’s agreement, to clearly waive SGS’s rights to seek separately
arbitration of claims under the Treaty (necessarily including claims under Article 11 thereof).
At least in the absence of an express waiver, a contractual forum selection clause should not
be permitted to override the jurisdiction to hear Treaty claims of a tribunal constituted under

that Treaty.

We are also in accord with Professor Crivellaro in his partial dissent in SGS v. Philippines,

when he argued that posing the question as whether a BIT dispute settlement clause should

9 Aguas del Tanari v. Bolivia, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 115.

110 Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 119. ‘The claims in Agras del Tunari did not include any
claims under an umbrella clause, but there is nothing in the Aguas del Tunari tribunal’s reasoning to suggest that its
analysis would apply any differently to an alleged implied waiver of umbrella clause claims. ‘The Woodruff case is not

contrary to our analy’

 

the Woodruff commission emphasized that its dismissal turned on the claimant’s express, written

waiver: “[A]s the claimant by his own voluntary waiver has disabled himself from invoking the jurisdiction of this
Commission, the claim has to be dismissed without prejudice on its merits, when presented to the proper judges.”
Woodruff Case at p. 223.

182.

183.

58

override a contractual forum selection clause (or vice versa, presumably) creates a conflict

 

where there need not be one. As Professor Crivellaro explained, both provisions “survive

and coexist”—both remain effective, with the only difference that the contract clause ceases

to be an “exclusive” forum from the investor’s perspective.’

As the Baymdir v. Pakistan
tribunal expressed it: “[W]hen the investor has a right under both the contract and the treaty,
it has a self-standing right to pursue the remedy accorded by the treaty.”''* That choice

should not be foreclosed.

Finally, certain other aspects of the Treaty counsel against letting the Contract’s forum
selection clause divest this Tribunal of its obligation to decide the Treaty claims over which
it has jurisdiction (including claims under Article 11). Provisions of the Treaty other than
Article 11, such as Article 9(1) and 9(6), contemplate that tribunals constituted under it will
be deciding contractual matters; they too should not be rendered inutile by the dismissal on

admissibility grounds of all such claims for breach of contract.

As previously noted, the BIT’s dispute resolution provisions (Article 9) are not on their

terms limited to claims for breach of the BIT itself. Article 9(1) arguably extends the Treaty

 

dispute settlement process to all manner of “disputes related to investments”—a category
broad enough to encompass contract disputes. But deference to a contractual forum
selection clause would significantly cut back Article 9’s scope. It will be the rare State
contract that has no dispute resolution clause of any kind. And faced with a contract
containing such a clause, we would expect that the same reasoning that led the BIVAC
tribunal to find contract-based umbrella clause claims inadmissible would presumably lead
one also to dismiss any contract claims against a State that are advanced directly under an
“any dispute’-style dispute resolution provision like Article 9. This approach would
effectively negate Article 9’s open-ended language, reducing it to a mechanism solely for

resolving claims of Treaty breach. If that were the Treaty patties’ intent, they presumably

11 See SGS v. Philippines, Decision on Jurisdiction, Declaration of Prof. Crivellaro at para. 4.

'2 Baymdir 2, Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction at para. 167.

59

could have said so." Their choice of language giving a broader scope to the dispute

resolution articles of the BIT should not be so readily disregarded.

184. Article 9(6) of the Treaty also contemplates that tribunals constituted under the Treaty will

 

 

engage in the resolution of contract claims. That provision states the law to be applied by

ICSID or UNCITRAL tribunals adjudicating disputes related to investments under Article 9:

The arbitral tribunal shall decide on the basis of the present
Agreement [/¢. the BIT] and other relevant agreements between the
Contracting Parties; of the terms of any particular agreement that
may have been concluded with respect to the investment; of the law
of the Contracting State party to the dispute, including its rules on
the conflict of laws; of such principles and rules of international law
as may be applicable.

The parties to the Switzerland-Paraguay BIT evidently had no qualms about the prospect
that disputes under the Treaty would call for the application of “the terms of any particular
agreement that may have been concluded with respect to the investment”—such as the
Contract at issue here. Yet a decision to exclude as inadmissible all contract-based umbrella
clause claims under Article 11 and contract claims that are directly advanced under Article 9
(unless the contract lacks a forum selection clause altogether) eliminates a large swath of
claims for which this clause of Article 9(6) is applicable. Given Article 9(6)’s readiness to
interpret and apply contracts to disputes, there is little reason to think that the State parties

were expecting to see it so underutilized.

"3 For example, in two treaties signed prior to the Switzerland-Paraguay BIT, Switzerland limited investor-state dispute
settlement to claims for breach of obligations under the respective treaty. The Switzerland-Turkey BIT (signed 3 March
1988) provides that, “for purposes of this Article [investor-state dispute settlement], what is meant by dispute relating to
an investment is a dispute in which is alleged the non-observance of rights and obligations created or conferred by this
Agreement.” Switzerland-Turkey BIT, Art. 8 (“Aux fins du présent article, on entend par différend relatif a un
investissement, le différend dans lequel est allégué le non-respect de droits et obligations conférés ou créés par le présent
Accord.”) ‘The Switzerland-Ghana BIT (signed 8 October 1991) provides for investor-state dispute settlement for
disputes “relating to an undertaking by the [host State] in the present Agreement.” Switzerland-Ghana BIT, Art. 12
(“différends entre une Partie Contractante et un investisseur de autre Partie Contractante relatifs a un engagement pris
par la premiére dans le présent Accord et un i d’un investisseur de Pautre Partie C

sur le territoire de la premiére”). See also Switzerland-Mexico BIT, Schedule II, Art. 2(2) (investor may bring “a claim
based on the fact that the other Party has breached an obligation under this Agreement”); Switzerland-Cuba BIT, Art. 10
(investor-state dispute settlement of disputes “relatifs 4 une obligation qui incombe 4 cette derniére en vertu du présent
Accord”); Switzerland-South Africa BIT, Art. 10 (same). Paraguay likewise has entered into BITs whose investor-state
dispute settlement provisions are limited to claims for treaty breach. See Paraguay-Venezuela BIT, Art. 9 (investor-state
dispute resolution for a “controversia entre un inversor de una Parte Contratante y la otra Parte Contratante respecto del
cumplimiento del presente Convenio en relacién con una inversion de aquel”), Paraguay-Spain BIT, Art. 11 (investor-
state dispute resolution for a “controversia relativa a las inversiones que surja entre una de las Partes Contratantes y un
inversor de la otra Parte contratante respecto a cuestiones reguladas por el presente Acuerdo”).

 

 

185.

VI.

186.

187.

188.

60

For all of the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal concludes not only that it has jurisdiction
under Article 11 over Claimant’s claims as stated, but also that those claims are admissible.

The Tribunal will exercise its jurisdiction over them on the merits.

COSTS

Each Party requested that the Tribunal award them costs and fees, including ICSID fees and
attorney’s fees, in the event that they prevail. The Parties confirmed these requests at the

hearing on jurisdiction.

The Tribunal takes note that Respondent has not complied with ICSID’s 27 April 2009 and
24 August 2009 requests for payment of each Party’s share of the advance on costs. Instead,
Claimant has paid the entirety of the requested advance on costs (including Respondent’s

share).

However, the Tribunal has decided to reserve its determination on costs until the conclusion
of the proceedings, consistent with Article 61 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 28 of the

Arbitration Rules.

Vil. DECISION
189. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides as follows

© The Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide Claimant’s claims under Articles 4(1), 4(2) and 11

of the Treaty. Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction are dismissed.

© The Tribunal’s determination on the Parties’ costs is reserved until the conclusion of the

proceedings.

190. The Parties are instructed to confer and seek to reach agreement on a schedule for the merits
proceedings, and to report to the Tribunal thereon within 30 days following the issuance of

this Decision.

 

Donald Francis Donovan Pablo Garcia Mexia

Arbitrator Arbitrator

FAL

Stanimir A. Alexandrov

President

