INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
Washington, D.C.

CASE No. ARB/01/13

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A.
(Claimant)

versus

Islamic Republic of Pakistan
(Respondent)

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
ON OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Judge Florentino P. Feliciano, President
Mr. André Faurés, Arbitrator
Mr. J. Christopher Thomas Q.C., Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Martina Suchankova

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent

Messrs. Frangois Stettler and Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan

Andrea Rusca, SGS Société Attorney General for Pakistan
Générale de Surveillance S.A. Messrs. Jan Paulsson and

Messrs. Emmanuel Gaillard and Nigel Blackaby, Freshfields
John Savage, Shearman & Sterling — Bruckhaus Deringer
Mr. Salman Talibuddin,
M/s Kabraji & Talibuddin

307

308 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

PART I: BACKGROUND TO THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS
A. Introduction

1. The Islamic Republic of Pakistan (“Pakistan” or the “Respondent”)
objects to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal on a number of grounds. Its princi-
pal ground is that the parties to this arbitration had previously agreed in a con-
tract between them (the “Pre-Shipment Inspection Agreement” or the “PSI
Agreement”) to refer “[a]ny dispute, controversy or claim arising out of, or
relating to” the Agreement, “or breach, termination or invalidity thereof,” to
arbitration in accordance with the Arbitration Act of the Territory (of
Pakistan) as presently in force.

2. Pakistan observes that at its request such an arbitral process was initi-
ated and that it predates the Claimant’s Request for ICSID Arbitration by
some eleven months. It requests this Tribunal to recognize the primacy of the
jurisdiction of the parties’ freely negotiated dispute settlement mechanism over
the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. This Tribunal was subsequently created by
virtue of the 12 October 2001 Request of the Claimant, Société Générale de
Surveillance S.A. (“SGS” or the “Claimant”), for ICSID arbitration pursuant
to Article 9(2) of the Agreement between the Swiss Confederation and the Islamic
Republic of Pakistan on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
(the “Treaty” or the “BIT”). Pakistan asks the Tribunal to dismiss the present
claims on the ground that a more specialized tribunal has already been estab-
lished by agreement of the parties and that tribunal’s jurisdiction can encom-
pass all of the claims presently before this Tribunal. In sum, according to
Pakistan, that tribunal, not this one, should hear the parties’ claims.

3. Pakistan therefore requests that the Tribunal order the dismissal of
SGS’s claims as set forth in its Request for Arbitration dated 12 October 2001,
and the Claimant to pay the full costs arising from its Request, including the
fees and expenses of Pakistan’s legal counsel.!

4. SGS opposes the objection. It asserts that once the Treaty entered into
force and an investment dispute arose between the parties, it was free at any
time to invoke the jurisdiction of this Tribunal. SGS argues that the PSI
Agreement arbitration must give way to this arbitration which has been initi-

' Respondent's Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction (“Objections”) at paragraph 151.

CASES. 309

ated pursuant to a treaty in which Pakistan made a general offer to arbitrate
investment disputes. SGS accepted Pakistan's offer to arbitrate by issuing its
own consent and ICSID jurisdiction has thus been constituted by the parties’
agreement to arbitrate.

5. SGS submits further that this Tribunal’s jurisdiction is broader than
that of the PSI Agreement arbitrator and includes jurisdiction not only over
alleged breaches of the Treaty, an inter-State agreement, but also both parties’
claims of alleged breaches of the PSI Agreement, a State-private investor agree-
ment.

6. SGS therefore requests that the Tribunal reject Pakistan’s Objections,
and retain jurisdiction over the claims raised by SGS in this arbitration; order
Pakistan to pay the full costs incurred by SGS in resisting Pakistan’s
Objections, including the fees and expenses of SGS’s legal counsel and expert
and proceed to hear the merits of SGS’s claims.”

7. The foregoing summaries of the parties’ submissions and requests for
relief identify, by way of introduction, the basic issues that divide them. The
Tribunal will review the parties’ specific arguments in greater detail below.

8. The Tribunal set a schedule for the filing of written pleadings as fol-
lows:

*  Pakistan’s Objections to Jurisdiction, to be filed on 22 October
2002;

* — SGS’s Reply to the Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction, to be
filed on 10 December 2002;

*  Pakistan’s Reply, to be filed on 10 January 2003; and
* — SGS’s Rejoinder, to be filed on 10 February 2003.

9. The parties’ pleadings were duly filed and an oral hearing was held on
13-14 February 2003 at the World Bank’s offices in Paris.

2 SGS's Reply at paragraph 228

310 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

B. The contractual relationship between the parties

10. It is necessary to recount the origins of the relationship between the
parties. While the parties diverge as to the PSI Agreement’s legal significance
for the purposes of the Objections, there is no doubt that the disputes which
have arisen between them emerged from a relationship defined initially by
contract. In setting out the factual background of this case, the Tribunal is not
making findings of fact and is either relying upon the facts as alleged by the
Claimant (which are taken to be true solely for the purposes of the Objections
to Jurisdiction) or on what appear to the Tribunal to be undisputed facts.

11. Following a series of discussions, written communications, and nego-
tiations, on 29 September 1994, the Government of Pakistan entered into a
contract with SGS whereby SGS agreed to provide “pre-shipment inspection”
services with respect to goods to be exported from certain countries to
Pakistan. SGS undertook to inspect such goods (i) abroad through its offices
and affiliates; and (ii) at Pakistani ports of entry jointly with Pakistani
Customs.‘ The objective of such inspection was to ensure that goods were clas-
sified properly for duty purposes and to enable Pakistan to increase the effi-
ciency of its customs revenues collection and thereby contribute to the nation-
al treasury. SGS was to (i) physically identify goods; (ii) verify their dutiable
value prior to shipment; and (iii) recommend appropriate customs classifica-
tions to the Pakistani authorities for goods to be imported into Pakistan.*
Once goods were pre-inspected, SGS was required to prepare a Clean Report
of Findings (CRF) containing the information gathered by the local SGS
office or affiliate in the different countries of supply, together with a recom-
mendation for a tariff rate for each particular item, and verification of the rel-
evant goods within Pakistani territory.° Pakistan was to rely upon the CRFs
issued by SGS for the purpose of collecting the correct duties and taxes levi-
able on inspected imports.

12. Article 4 of the PSI Agreement required SGS to prepare and submit to
Pakistan monthly reports. These reports were to set forth:

(a) The value of orders received and goods inspected by country of
supply;

 

3 SGS's Request for Arbitr:
4 Td, at paragraph 11.
5 Id.

 

ion (the “Request”, dated 12 October 2001, at paragraphs 5-10.

6 Id.

CASES 311

(b) The estimated amount of customs revenue generated by country
of supply;

(c) The incremental amount of duties and taxes realized by Pakistan
as a result of the PSI Agreement; and

(d) A description of SGS’s findings in the pre-inspection process.”
13. Pursuant to Article 5.7 and 5.8 of the PSI Agreement, SGS was given
permission to open one or more liaison offices in Pakistan and the
Government undertook to ensure that SGS obtained the necessary immigra-
tion and working permits and authorizations.® These offices were to convey
information to Pakistan’s customs authorities. The offices were to be “restrict-
ed to carrying out liaison activities and [could] not indulge in any commercial
or trading activities whatsoever.”? SGS established two such offices in Karachi
and Lahore as duly authorized by Pakistan’s Board of Investment.!°

14. The PSI Agreement had a term of five years that was renewable auto-
matically provided neither party objected to such renewal in writing. In addi-
tion, pursuant to Article 10.6, Pakistan had the right to terminate the PSI
Agreement after the first appraisal of SGS’s work, by giving three months
notice. “After the expiry of the first full financial year and the appraisal as
aforesaid, any of the two parties [had] the right to terminate the agreement at
any subsequent time after giving a three months notice of such termination to

the other party.”!!

15. The PSI Agreement contained a dispute settlement provision in its
Article 11, entitled “Arbitration and Governing Law,” the relevant part of
which stated:

Arbitration. Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of, or
relating to this Agreement, or breach, termination or invalidi-
ty thereof, shall as far as it is possible, be settled amicably.
Failing such amicable settlement, any such dispute shall be set-
tled by arbitration in accordance with the Arbitration Act of

7 PSI Agreement, Article 4. Exhibit S3 to the Request for Arbitration.
8 [d., Article 5.7.
9 Letter from Pakistan’s Investment Promotion Board to SGS, dated 22 December 1994, at para-
graph i, Exhibie S4 to the Request for Arbitration.
SGS's Request at paragraph 13.
11 PST Agreement, Article 10.6.

312 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the Territory as presently in force. The place of arbitration shall
be Islamabad, Pakistan and the language to be used in the arbi-
tration proceedings shall be the English language.!?

16. The PSI Agreement entered into force on 1 January 1995. It was sub-
sequently performed by both parties in the sense that services were rendered
by SGS and invoices issued by it were paid by Pakistan. Both parties dispute
the adequacy of the other’s performance, but for the purposes of resolving
these Objections it is unnecessary to inquire into these matters of contractual
performance. On 12 December 1996, the Government of Pakistan notified
SGS that the PSI Agreement was terminated with effect from 11 March 1997.

17. In various fora, SGS has described Pakistan's act as follows: the
Agreement was not “validly terminated” by the Respondent;!> there was a
“wrongful repudiation of contract”;!4 there was an “unlawful and ineffective”
termination of the PSI Agreement;!> and there were “breaches of the PSI
Agreement as well as violations of the BIT” that “therefore give rise to
Pakistan’s liability to SGS for breach of contract, as well as its liability to SGS

for infringement of the BIT.”!6

18. Pakistan has defended its actions as lawful and justified and on 11
September 2000 filed a claim against SGS in the PSI Agreement arbitration
alleging various breaches of that agreement on SGS’s part.!7

Cc. Chronology of post-PSI Agreement termination events

19. After notice of termination was given by Pakistan, communications
were exchanged between the two parties as well as between the Government of
the Swiss Confederation and the Government of Pakistan. These communica-
tions did not lead to a resolution of the dispute and on 12 January 1998, SGS

12 Id, Article 11.

13 Petition filed by SGS with the Court of First Instance of Geneva, at page 12. Exhibit 3 to the
Respondent's Objections to the Claimant’s Request for Urgent Provisional Measures.

\4 Paragraph C.5 of SGS's “Reply on Behalf of the Respondent” in the matter of /slamic Republic
of Pakistan v. Société Générale de Surveillance S.A., Application under Section 20 of the Arbitration Act
1940, dated 7 April 2001. Exhibit $26 to Claimant's Reply to the Respondent's Objections to
Jurisdiction,

SGS's Request at paragraph 16.

16 [d., at paragraph 36.

17 Pakistan has annexed its Statement of Claim dated 18 October 2002 and filed with the PSI
Agreement arbitrator shortly before that arbitration was stayed pending resolution of the present
Objections. Exhibit P15 to the Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction.

CASES. 313

initiated a commercial claim in the courts of Switzerland seeking relief against
what it alleged was Pakistan's unlawful termination of the PSI Agreement.

1. The Swiss legal proceedings

20. SGS’s Petition in the Court of First Instance of Geneva, Switzerland,
alleged wrongful termination of the PSI Agreement. That Agreement, accord-
ing to SGS, was perfectly performed by SGS from 1 January 1995 to 11
March 1997. Pakistan had never, before 29 December 1997, pretended that
the contract was null ab initio; to the contrary, Pakistan on 12 December 1996
purported to terminate the contract ex nunc. Moreover, during the period
from 1 January 1995 to 11 March 1997, the Government of Pakistan had,
without reservations, partially paid the invoices issued by SGS Geneva. The
Government of Pakistan hence, still owed the following amount for services
rendered by SGS before 12 March 1997, which amounts were due in accor-
dance with Article 6.5 of the PSI Agreement:

In capital: U.S.$8,368,430.49
In interests: U.S.$1,065,371.75'8

21. SGS’S prayer for relief asked the Geneva Court of First Instance:
(a) to declare its jurisdiction to decide the Petition;

(b) to determine that the PSI Agreement had not been validly termi-
nated ab initio by Pakistan;

(c) to require Pakistan to pay to SGS the amounts of
In capital: U.S.$8,386,430.49
In interests until December 31, 1997: U.S.$1,065,371.75
(d

To order Pakistan to pay SGS interest at the rate of 7.5% in
accordance with Article 6.6 of the PSI Agreement (LIBOR for
three (3) months plus 2%) on the mentioned capital amount
from January 1, 1998 without prejudice to any other claims of
SGS in particular for damages “for abusive termination of con-
tract;” and;

18 English translation of the Petition to the Court of First Instance, dated 12 January 1998.
Exhibit 3 to Respondent's Objections to the Claimant's Request for Urgent Provisional Measures.

314 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

(ce) Finally, to dismiss the contrary submissions of Pakistan and to
require Pakistan to pay all legal costs.'?

22. Pakistan opposed this claim on various grounds but principally on the
ground that the parties had agreed to the arbitration of any disputes arising out
of the PSI Agreement rather than to submit to the courts of any country and
on the ground that as a sovereign State it was immune to the legal process of
the Swiss courts.

23. On 24 June 1999, the Court of First Instance rejected SGS’s claim,
principally on the first ground asserted by the Respondent.2? SGS then
appealed to the Court of Appeal of Geneva. On 23 June 2000, the Court of
Appeal dismissed the appeal but on grounds (basically, that of sovereign
immunity) different from those specified by the Court of First Instance.! SGS
then appealed to the Swiss Federal Tribunal.

24. The Swiss legal proceedings concluded with the denial of the
Claimant’ final appeal on 23 November 2000. Both appellate courts, the
Court of Appeal of Geneva and the Swiss Federal Tribunal upheld the judg-
ment of the Geneva Court of First Instance, but on the ground of sovereign
immunity. These legal proceedings (the “Swiss legal proceedings”) unfolded
over a period of some twenty-two months.

25. No further appeal was available in the Swiss court hierarchy once the
Federal Tribunal dismissed SGS’s appeal.

2. Pakistan’s initiation of the PSI Agreement arbitration

26. On 11 September 2000, after the judgments of the first two Swiss
courts were rendered, but before the judgment of the Swiss Federal Tribunal
was issued, Pakistan formally invoked Article 11.1 of the PSI Agreement to
commence arbitration proceedings in Pakistan. (The Tribunal will refer to this
proceeding as the “PSI Agreement arbitration.”) Pakistan applied to the Court
of the Senior Civil Judge, Islamabad, pursuant to s. 20 of the Pakistan
Arbitration Act, 1940, for an order that the dispute between the parties be

19 Id

20 Judgment on Exception of the Court of First Instance. Exhibit 4 to the Respondent's
Objections to the Claimant’s Request for Urgent Provisional Measures.

2 Court of Appeal of Geneva’s decision in the Civil Case, June 23, 2000. Exhibit 2C to the
Respondent's Index of Swiss Court Proceedings.

CASES. 315

referred for decision by an arbitrator to be appointed by the Court.?? (Pakistan
did not file a Statement of Claim at this time.)

27. SGS then appeared before the Senior Civil Judge by filing, on 7 April
2001, a set of preliminary objections to the PSI Agreement arbitration and,
without prejudice to such objections, a counter-claim against Pakistan for
alleged breaches of the PSI Agreement.

28. With respect to the merits, SGS alleged that there had been a wrong-
ful repudiation of the PSI Agreement and that:

...the wrongful repudiation of contract by the Government of
Pakistan and its subsequent, false, malicious and politically
motivated accusations have caused colossal loss and damages to
the Respondent...*4

29. SGS thus claimed the following relief:

(a) Payment of outstanding invoices for services rendered,
U.S.$8,368,430.48;

(b) Interest on unpaid invoices in the amount of U.S.$2,299,953.38;

(c) Damages for premature termination of the PSI Agreement,
U.S.$31,500,000;

(d) Demobilisation costs, U.S.$2,400,000;

(e) Reputation damage due to Pakistan’s allegedly defamatory state-
ments, U.S.$213,000,000;

(f) Damages for loss of opportunity, U.S.$70,000,000;
(g) Legal fees and expenses, U.S.$1,500,000; and

(h) Interest at the rate specified in the PSI Agreement from the date
of termination to the date of payment on all amounts claimed.?°

22 Exhibit $25 to the Claimant's Reply to the Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction.
23 Id.

24 Reply on behalf of the Respondent in the matter of Islamic Republic of Pakistan v. Société Générale de

Surveillance S.A., at counter-claim, paragraph 2. Exhibit 6 to the Respondent's Objections to the Claimant's
Request for Urgent Provisional Measures.
35 Id.

316 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

3. SGS’s consent to ICSID arbitration under the Treaty

30. Approximately eleven months after Pakistan initiated the PSI
Agreement arbitration and some six months after the filing of its objections to
jurisdiction and its counter-claim in the PSI Agreement arbitration, by letter
dated 10 October 2001, SGS wrote to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Pakistan (copied to the President and the Minister of Finance of Pakistan and
the Ambassador of Pakistan to the Swiss Confederation), referring to the
Treaty and observing that disputes had arisen between the two parties “in con-
nection with investments by SGS, and notably with the Pre-Shipment
Program established by SGS.”26

31. The letter went on to state:

These disputes concern, in particular, non-payment by
Pakistan of invoices submitted to SGS (sic), and Pakistan’s
attempts to terminate the SGS-Pakistan Agreement. Pakistan's
acts and omissions in this connection constitute violations of a
number of obligations owed to SGS pursuant to the Swiss-
Pakistan Agreement, as well as breaches of the SGS-Pakistan
Agreement.?”

32. SGS therefore informed Pakistan that it was now seeking resolution of
these disputes under the Treaty and that pursuant to its Article 9(2), SGS con-
sented to the submission of the said disputes to arbitration by the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID).?8

33. By letter dated 12 October 2001, SGS dispatched a Request for
Arbitration to the Secretary-General of the ICSID.?

34. At paragraphs 33-38 of the Request, SGS set out its claims and request
for relief as follows:

33. As introduced above, SGS performed its obligations
under the PSI Agreement in full and carried out the pre-ship-

26 Letter from SGS to Pakistan dated 10 October 2001. Exhibit $18 to the Request for
Arbitration.
7,

28 Id,
29 Request for Arbitration, dated 12 October 2001.

CASES.

ment inspections of goods to be imported into Pakistan from
January 1, 1995 until March 11, 1997.

34. In contrast, Pakistan unlawfully purported to terminate
the PSI Agreement, depriving SGS of the profits and opportu-
nities that it would have enjoyed had the contract continued
to be performed in accordance with its terms. Pakistan has also
failed to pay invoices in a total principal amount of
US$8,368,430.49. SGS has also suffered serious and unjusti-
fied damage to its reputation as a result of Pakistan’s conduct.

35. These acts and omissions by Pakistan constitute blatant
violations of its obligations to SGS under the BIT. In particu-
lar, Pakistan has:

— failed to promote SGS’s investment in violation of Article

3(1) of the BIT;

— failed to protect SGS’s investment, in violation of Article
4(1) of the BIT. Pakistan has, notably, impaired by its
unreasonable conduct the enjoyment by SGS of its
investment;

— failed to ensure the fair and equitable treatment of SGS’s
investment, in violation of Article 4(2) of the BIT; and

— taken measures of expropriation, or measures having the
same nature or the same effect, against SGS’s investment,
in violation of Article 6(1) of the BIT. This violation
exists, in particular, because Pakistan has not provided
SGS with effective and adequate compensation; and
failed to constantly guarantee the observance of the com-
mitments it has entered into with respect to SGS’s invest-
ments, in violation of Article 11 of the BIT. In particular,
Pakistan has failed to guarantee the observance of its con-
tractual commitments under the PSI Agreement.

36. In addition, most or all of Pakistan’s acts and omissions
described above qualify as breaches of the PSI Agreement as
well as violations of the BIT. They therefore give rise to

317

318

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

Pakistan’s liability to SGS in breach of contract, as well as its
liability to SGS for infringement of the BIT.

37.

In this proceeding, SGS will seek relief including the fol-

lowing items:

@
Gi)

(iii)

(iv)

(vi)

(vii)

payment of outstanding invoices (US$8,368,430.49);

compensation for profits lost as a result of Pakistan’s
unlawful acts and omissions, provisionally quantified at
US$31,500,000;

compensation for demobilization costs of the SGS Pre-
Shipment infrastructure, including its liaison offices in
Pakistan, amounting to US$ 2,400,000;

compensation for opportunities lost as a result of
Pakistan’s unlawful acts and omissions, provisionally
quantified at US$70,000,000;

compensation for damage to SGS’s reputation resulting
from Pakistan's unlawful acts and omissions, to be quan-
tified later in this proceeding;

the reimbursement of all costs incurred by SGS in pursu-
ing the resolution of the claims brought in this arbitra-
tion, including but not limited to the fees and/or expens-
es of the arbitrators, ICSID, legal counsel, experts and
SGS’s own staff;

compounded interest on all amounts awarded at an
appropriate rate or rates, and over an appropriate period
or periods; and

(viii) any other relief, that the Arbitral Tribunal shall deem

appropriate.

CASES. 319

38. This request for relief, together with all statements of fact
and law contained in this Request for Arbitration, will be
amplified during the course of this arbitration.>°

4, The ensuing court proceedings in Pakistan

35. Having initiated the present ICSID arbitration, SGS then took steps
to oppose the PSI Agreement arbitration. On 4 January 2002, SGS filed an
application with the Senior Civil Judge, Islamabad, for an injunction against
the PSI Agreement arbitration on the ground principally that SGS was enti-
tled to have the dispute settled through ICSID arbitration and that the PSI
Agreement arbitration should be stayed until the ICSID Tribunal determined
Pakistan's objection to its jurisdiction.>!

36. On 7 January 2002, the application was rejected by the Senior Civil
Judge who also directed both parties to submit the names of arbitrators, one
of whom could be appointed to arbitrate the PSI Agreement dispute. SGS
then appealed to the Lahore High Court. The Lahore High Court dismissed
that appeal on 14 February 2002.57

37.  SGS appealed further to the Supreme Court of Pakistan on 5 March
2002. Pakistan, for its part, filed its own appeal against one paragraph of the
Lahore High Court’s judgment and filed as well an application for an injunc-
tion to restrain SGS from pursuing the ICSID arbitration.>?

38. Following the parties’ respective petitions filed in the Supreme Court
of Pakistan, the Court, on 15 March 2002, allowed both petitions and grant-
ed leave to appeal. At the same time, the Supreme Court restrained both par-
ties from pursuing their respective arbitration proceedings pending a decision
on their appeals. While the two appeals were before the Supreme Court, on 17
April 2002, an application was made by the Government of Pakistan to the
Court to hold SGS in contempt of court because it had taken steps in fur-
therance of this ICSID arbitration. The contempt application has been
addressed in the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 2, and it is unnecessary to
discuss that further in the context of these Objections.

30 1,

31 Exhibit P1 to Respondent's Objections to the Claimant's Request for Urgent Provisional
Measures.

32 Id.

33 Id.

320 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

39. On 3 July 2002, the Supreme Court of Pakistan rendered its final deci-
sion on both appeals, dismissing the Claimant’s appeal and granting the
Respondent’s request to proceed with the PSI Agreement arbitration and
restraining the Claimant from pursuing or participating in the ICSID arbitra-
tion.>

40. The Supreme Court’s Reasons for Judgment were followed on 7 July
2002 with the appointment of Mr. Justice (Retd.) Nasir Aslam Zahid as sole
arbitrator to hear the PSI Agreement arbitration.°

41. The newly appointed PSI Agreement arbitrator accepted his appoint-
ment and scheduled a meeting with the parties for 18 October 2002. After
SGS’s application for interim measures of protection was heard by this
Tribunal at The Hague, The Netherlands, and this Tribunal recommended a
stay of that arbitration until this Tribunal determined whether it had jurisdic-
tion to consider the claims brought before it, the PSI Agreement arbitrator
agreed to stay that arbitration for the time being.>®

42. On 18 October 2002, Pakistan filed its Statement of Claim with the
PSI Agreement arbitrator. Pakistan alleged that SGS failed to perform its obli-
gations in accordance with the PSI Agreement and that Pakistan did not
receive the benefit therefrom that it had bargained for.” Accordingly,
Pakistan’s request for relief sought the following:

a) Restitution of the sum of US$43,211,553.00 paid to the
Defendant in respect of the aforementioned 85,945
CRFs;

b) Interest/compensation for moneys wrongfully received
and held at the rate of 18% per annum from the date of
receipt till the date of the decree on the award; and

34 I,

35 Judgment of the Supreme Court of Pakistan (Appellate Jurisdiction) on Civil Appeal Nos. 459
(Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Pakistan, through Secretary Ministry of Finance, Revenue Division,
Islamabad) & 460 (Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of Finance, Revenue Division, Islamabad v. Société
Générale de Surveillance S.A.), June 2002, at paragraph 78. Exhibit P21 to Respondent’s Objections to
Jurisdiction.

36 Letter fiom counsel for Pakistan to the Tribunal dated 22 November, 2002, caching the Stay
Order issued by the sole Arbitrator, Justice Nasir Aslam Zahid, on 12 November 2

37 Statement of Claim, Exhibit P17 to the Respondent's Objections to eration,

CASES 321

c) Any other relief that the Arbitral tribunal may deem fit
and appropriate in the circumstances.>*

PART II: PAKISTAN’S OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

43. Pakistan asserts that this Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over any
of the claims set forth in SGS’s Request for ICSID Arbitration. It observes that
SGS has acknowledged that the present dispute “arises out of Pakistan's actions
and omissions with respect to the Pre-Shipment Inspection Program and the
PSI Agreement” [emphasis in original].*? The claims, “irrespective of how
SGS labels them, are entirely contractual in nature.”4°

44, Pakistan relies upon a recent ICSID ad hoc Annulment Committee
decision, in the Vivendi case,“! where the Committee stated:

In a case where the essential basis of a claim brought before an
international tribunal is a breach of contract, the tribunal will
give effect to any valid choice of forum clause in the con-

tract.42

45. Pakistan says that the essential basis of the present claims is breach of
contract and that even if the labels in the Request for Arbitration were accept-
ed at face value and SGS’s claims were analyzed in terms of the three categories
of “Contract, Defamation and BIT” claims, the broad PSI Agreement arbitra-
tion clause requires the parties to bring any dispute to the PSI Agreement arbi-
trator, regardless of whether such claims sound in contract, tort, or treaty.43

46. Pakistan makes a number of other objections to this proceeding based
on the doctrines of lis pendens, waiver, and estoppel.“ It also goes on to raise
a separate and independent basis for dismissal of SGS’s claims, namely, that
the investment in question was not made “in the territory” of Pakistan as
required by the BIT. Even if it was, the claims fail because SGS ignored a con-

38 Jd., av paragraph 63.
39 Objections, at paragraph 60, quoting the Claimant's Request for Arbitration at paragraph 61.
1d,

‘| Compaiiia de Aquas del Aconquija, S.A. and Compagnie Générale des Eaux v. Argentine Republic
(‘Vivendi” or * Vivendi Annulment’), Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment of 3 July 2002.

“2 [d,, at paragraph 98.

43 Objections at paragraph 61.

“4 Td., at paragraphs 97-100, and 129-33.

322 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

dition precedent to the bringing of a BIT claim. Rather than observe the 12-
month consultation period imposed by the Treaty, SGS filed the Request for
Arbitration with the ICSID Secretariat only two days after it notified Pakistan
that it had a BIT claim.4>

47. During the hearing, counsel for Pakistan set out four propositions,
each of which was said to be sufficient to command the dismissal of the claim:

(a) No ICSID arbitration because of the existence of another prior
agreement;

(b) Alternatively, no ICSID arbitration because of waiver;

(c) Alternatively, no ICSID arbitration because of contractual
claims; and

(d) In the final alternative, ICSID arbitration would at any rate be
premature.46

48. In its principal argument, Pakistan submits that under the ICSID
Convention and under the principle of pacta sunt servanda, this Tribunal does
not have jurisdiction where the parties have agreed to submit disputes else-
where. The jurisdiction of ICSID tribunals is limited to the adjudication of
disputes that the parties have actually agreed to submit to the Centre and not
to an alternative forum.*” Conversely, if the parties agree to submit their dis-
putes to a forum other than ICSID, Article 26 of the ICSID Convention
requires the ICSID tribunal to respect their agreement.4®

“5 [d., at paragraph 62.

46 Transcript of the Hearing (“Transcript”), Volume 1, p. 7, lines 15-23.

47 Objections at paragraphs 63-64. Pakistan refers in this regard to Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention which states that the Centre's jurisdiction shall only extend to legal disputes “which the par-
ties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre.”

48 Article 26 states: “Consent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention shall, unless oth-
erwise stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to the exclusion of any other remedy. A Contracting
State may require the exhaustion of local administrative or judicial remedies as a condition of its consent
to arbitration under this convention.” Pakistan refers in this respect to works such as Professor Christoph
Schreuer’s The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, awards of other ICSID tribunals, and decisions of
national courts. Objections, at paragraphs 65-69.

CASES. 323

49. In Pakistan’s submission,

... no ICSID tribunal has ever held that it has jurisdiction over
claims for breach of a particular contract containing a non-
ICSID arbitration clause, regardless of whether or not the tri-
bunal concluded it had jurisdiction over any related claims
arising under a bilateral investment treaty or some other source
of rights for foreign investors against the state.*?

50. A series of ICSID cases, beginning with the Kléckner case, are said to
support this proposition.*° Pakistan places particular reliance on the Vivendi
Annulment Committee decision as affirming the principle of party autonomy;
that Committee held that the parties’ agreement to refer disputes arising under
a concession contract to the courts of the province of Tucumén, Argentina, did
not prevent the ICSID tribunal from dealing with BIT claims relating to the
same facts. However, the Annulment Committee expressly stated that it was
not holding that the ICSID tribunal had jurisdiction over claims for breach of
the concession agreement. Rather, it made the statement earlier quoted, name-
ly, that in a case where the “essential basis of a claim brought before an inter-
national tribunal is a breach of contract, the tribunal will give effect to any
valid choice of forum in that contract.”>!

51. Pakistan contrasts the present case to Vivendi, noting that Section 11.1
of the PSI Agreement contains the parties’ agreement exclusively to submit
“[a]ny dispute, controversy or claim arising out of, or relating to this
Agreement or breach, termination or invalidity thereof” to the PSI Agreement
arbitrator. Based on this, the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over SGS’s
“Contract Claims.”

52. Even if both tribunals could exercise jurisdiction over the “Contract
Claims,” Pakistan argues that the contractual choice of forum should control,

* Objections, at paragraph 70.

5° Kléickner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH, et al. v. United Republic of Cameroon (“Klackner”), C:
ARB/$1/2, Decision on Annulment, 3 May 1985, Tradex Hellas S.A. v. Republic of Albania (“Tradex
Hellas”), Case No. ARB/94/2, Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 December 1996, 14 ICSID Review—EL.L,J.
161 (1999), Salini Costrutorri SpA and Italstrade SpA v. Kingdom of Morocco (“Salini”), Case No.
ARB/00/4, Decision on Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001, 1 J.D.1. 196 (2002), Lanco International Inc. v.
Argentine Republic (“Lanco’), Case No. ARB/97/6, Preliminary Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 December
1998, 40 ILM 457 (2001), Compattia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine
Republic (“Vivendi”) Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment of 3 July 2002, 41 ILM 1135 (2002).

51 Objections at paragraphs 78-80. The passage from Vivendi Annulment is cited at paragraph 80
of the Memorial.

 

324 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

where it broadly provides for mandatory arbitration of all disputes, the parties
are identical, the claims for breach of the BIT include a pure claim for breach
of contract, and the Claimant when it filed its ICSID request was already par-
ticipating in contract arbitration proceedings with overlapping claims con-
cerning the same facts and circumstances and seeking the same relief. As a
result, the application of the lis pendens doctrine requires dismissal of the sec-
ond proceeding.*? Pakistan urges the Tribunal to follow the “clearly expressed
intention of the parties as set forth in the PSI Agreement” and dismiss all
claims in the Request for “breach of contract.”°

53. Pakistan refers to SGS’s having previously argued that this Tribunal has
concurrent jurisdiction over the “Contract Claims” by virtue of Article 11 of
the BIT. That article states:

Either Contracting Party shall constantly guarantee the obser-
vance of the commitments it has entered into with respect to
the investments of the investors of the other Contracting Party.

54. SGS has argued that Article 11.1 of the BIT “elevates” all contract
claims to the level of claims of a breach of the BIT. Pakistan submits that
claims under this Article are “second order” claims (7.¢., claims that will not
ripen until after a prior determination has been made of a “first order” claim
that a contract commitment has been breached).* In its submission, the tri-
bunal with the authority to make that primary determination is the PSI

Agreement arbitrator.°>

55. Even if SGS were correct, Pakistan argues, the BIT’s general provisions
would be superseded by the PSI Agreement’s specific agreement to arbitrate. If
the Tribunal accepted SGS’s view of Article 11, it would eviscerate the parties’
specific arbitration agreement in this case. Previous cases have recognized that
ICSID tribunals should avoid interpretations of contract provisions, in partic-
ular, arbitration clauses, that would render the clauses totally ineffective or
violative of “common sense.”>

52 Id., at paragraph 97.

53 [d., at paragraph 84.

54 Transcript, Volume 1, at pp. 15-16, p. 112, lines 2-7.

55 Objections at paragraphs 87.

56 jd, at paragraph 88. Holiday Inns S.A. and others v. Morocco (“Holiday Inns”), Case No.
ARB/72/1 (an unpublished ICSID award discussed in Pierre Lalive, “The First ‘World Bank’ Arbitration
(Holiday Inns v. Morocco) Some Legal Problems”, 1 ICSID Reports 645) also affirmed the principle of
ut res magis valeat quam pereat.

CASES. 325

56. If the Tribunal accepted SGS’s logic, it would negate routine forum
selection clauses in thousands of State-investor contracts where States subject
to BITs make routine commitments to investors.°”

57. Pakistan notes that the Claimant also seeks compensation for damages
to its “reputation resulting from Pakistan's unlawful acts and omissions,”
allegedly resulting from the manner in which the PSI Agreement was termi-
nated. Pakistan describes this as a “Defamation Claim.” Whether it sounds in
tort or contract, Pakistan says, the only forum competent to hear SGS’s
“Defamation Claim” is the PSI Agreement arbitration.>®

58. Pakistan notes that there is no provision in the BIT that would give the
Tribunal jurisdiction over the “Defamation Claim.” Consequently, Pakistan
argues that the Tribunal should dismiss the “Defamation Claim” in SGS’s
Request and refer SGS to the PSI Agreement arbitration.>?

59. Pakistan also controverts SGS’s suggestion that this Tribunal could
claim jurisdiction over Pakistan’s own breach of contract claims against SGS.
It asserts that it has only one possible forum in which to bring its own con-
tract claims against SGS. It is bound firstly under Section 11.1 of the PSI
Agreement to pursue its claims in the PSI forum. Second, nothing in the BIT
provides Pakistan with any rights on which it could bring its PSI Agreement
non-performance claims before an ICSID Tribunal. SGS’s reliance on Article
9 of the BIT is in error as it refers merely to “disputes with respect to invest-
ments” and this cannot be construed as creating rights for Pakistan to submit
any contract claims it has with SGS to ICSID arbitration.°!

60. In Pakistan’s view, the doctrine of lis pendens bars SGS from submit-
ting the “Contract Claims” and “Defamation Claim.” Where, as here, there is
an identity as to parties and claims brought before two tribunals, the one
receiving the claims later in time should dismiss its proceedings in favour of
the first proceedings.

57 Id., at paragraph 89.
58 Id, at paragraph 91.
59 Id., at paragraphs 92 and 93.
© d., at paragraph 94.
61 Jd., at paragraph 96.
© Id, at paragraph 97.

326 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

61. In this case, in contrast to ICSID cases where the doctrine’s applica-
tion was rejected, Pakistan argues, the PSI Agreement arbitration commenced
(including SGS’s counter-claim): (i) before SGS consented to ICSID jurisdic-
tion; (ii) with the identical parties; (iii) with identical relief being sought by
SGS; and (iv) involving identical causes of action for SGS. The doctrine of Lis
pendens thus requires dismissal of the “Contract” and “Defamation” claims.

62. In Pakistan’s view, the “essential basis” of the “BIT Claims” is contrac-
tual; those claims are also therefore subject to the PSI Agreement arbitrator's
exclusive jurisdiction. For four years SGS has argued that Pakistan’s acts or
omissions were alleged breaches of contract and no reference was made to a
claim of expropriation, failure to provide fair and equitable treatment, or fail-
ure to promote or protect an investment under the BIT.® SGS filed contrac-
tual claims in the Swiss courts and contractual counter-claims in the PSI
Arbitration. Pakistan argues that SGS then “re-labeled” its claims as “BIT
Claims.” However, nothing in the Washington Convention or in ICSID
jurisprudence requires the Tribunal to accept that a particular claim arises
under a treaty simply because a claimant says so.°°

63. According to the Vivendi Annulment decision, the test of whether the
claim sounded in contract or treaty turned on the claim's “essential” or “fun-
damental basis.”°” To Pakistan, the essential nature of SGS’s claims “is and
always will be contractual.”6* From December 1996 to October 2001, no
mention was made of a possible treaty claim; yet the BIT was in force from
May 1996. The “Contract,” “Defamation” and five “BIT Claims”©? are based
on “the same limited factual allegations.””° In addition, the prayers for relief
in the Request for ICSID Arbitration and the PSI counter-claim are virtually
identical. No special relief is sought for alleged BIT breaches. The Request
itself states: “this dispute arises out of Pakistan’s actions and omissions with

63 Id., at paragraph 100.

4 Transcript, Volume 1, pp. 95-96.

% Id., Volume 1, p. 104, lines 7-8.

66 Objections at paragraph 102. During the hearing, counsel for Pakistan reviewed the Request
for Arbitration and asserted that it “does not allege facts which if proven would rise to a level of a breach
of the BIT; accordingly, they fall to be determined by the PSI Agreement to arbitration as contract claims
where they currently stand, and not before this Tribunal.” Transcript, Volume 1, p. 84, lines 10-14 et seq.

©? Vivendi Annulment, pp. 38-39, at paragraphs 98-101.

68 Objections, at paragraph 104.

© The BIT claims are: failure to promote SGS's investment, failure to protect its investment, fail-
ure to provide fail and equitable treatment, expropriation, and failure constantly to guarantee the obser-
vance of Pakistan's commitments to SGS.

70 Objections at paragraph 105.

CASES. 327

respect to the Pre-Shipment Program and the PSI Agreement.””! Further, SGS
specifically admits that “most or all of Pakistan’s acts and omissions...qualify
as breaches of the PSI Agreement as well as violations of the BIT.”7?
Accordingly, Pakistan submits that the Tribunal should treat the “BIT Claims”
as contract claims and dismiss them.73

64. Pakistan submits further that even if SGS has separate “BIT Claims,”
Article 11.1 of the PSI Agreement is sufficiently broad to encompass claims for
breach of a treaty.

65. The principle of generalia specialibus non derogant (general words do
not derogate from special words) should apply: the specific agreement takes
precedence over the general agreement in the BIT.74

66. Pakistan asserts that the “arising out of or relating to” formula used in
Section 11.1 is a universally regarded broad arbitration clause. Courts and tri-
bunals have consistently held that the “arising out of or relating to” formula-
tion encompasses any and all disputes touching on the contract in question
regardless of whether they sound in contract, tort, statute or treaty.”> Thus,
Pakistan argues, SGS’s “BIT Claims” are subject to arbitration before the PSI
Agreement arbitrator.

71 Request, at paragraph 61.

7 Td., at paragraph 36.

73 Objections, at paragraphs 105-109. At the hearing, counsel for the Respondent stated: “...what
the Tribunal has to look at is the claim as stated by the Claimant, and to ask itself the question, the facts
as alleged, which we say are purely contractual breaches, it’s all they have alleged, is that sufficient if they
prove everything that they claim they wish to prove, is that sufficient to bring them into ... the breach
of the BIT?” Transcript, Volume 1, p. 106, lines 11-17.

74 Objections at paragraph 112. The Respondent cites the Holiday Inns, Ameo Asia, Lanco, and
Salini cases in support of this proposition to determine whether a claim is subject to a particular dispute
resolution clause. At the hearing, extensive argument was devoted to the point that the PSI Agreement
arbitrator could consider claims that Pakistan breached the Treaty. Transcript, Volume 1, pp. 23-27.

Pakistan refers to various texts and to such cases as Pennzoil Exploration and Production Co. v.
Ramco Energy Ltd., Partial Award in ICC Case No. 7319 of 1992, and Judgment No. 8375 of 16 November
1987 in this regard. It also cites J/. Ryan & Son Inc. v. Rhone Poulenc Textile, S.A for the proposition that
an arbitral clause that is worded “all disputes arising in connection with the present contract” must be
construed to encompass a broad scope of arbitral issues and every dispute between the parties that has a
significant relationship to the contract regardless of the label attached to the dispute. /d,, at paragraph 113,
citing J.J. Ryan & Son Inc. v. Rhone Poulenc Textile S.A, 863 F.2d 315, 321 (4th Cir.1988). [Pakistan's
emphasis.) Pakistan also cites both Redfern and Hunter and Fouchard Gaillard Goldman who, it says,
agree that the phrase “arising out of” will embrace all disputes capable of being submitted to arbitration
and arbitrators have jurisdiction as long as the terms of arbitration are wide enough to demonstrate the
parties intended it to be so.

328 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

67. In Pakistan’s submission, since the PSI Agreement encompasses the
“BIT Claims,” the only remaining question is whether this Tribunal has con-
current jurisdiction over them or whether it must dismiss them in favour of
the PSI Agreement arbitration. In its submission, the Tribunal does not have
concurrent jurisdiction and must dismiss the “BIT Claims” in favour of the
PSI Agreement arbitration.”

68. Pakistan argues further that this Tribunal should defer to the PSI

Agreement arbitrator because even if, status quo ex ante, this Tribunal could
have had concurrent jurisdiction, “that ship has sailed.”’7 The PSI arbitrator:
(i) was seized with jurisdiction over the claims of both parties first; and (ii) has
a broader ability to resolve the entire dispute among the parties.”

69. Pakistan then addresses the effect of Article 26 of the ICSID Conven-
tion on this case. Article 26 provides that:

Consent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention
shall, unless otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such arbi-
tration to the exclusion of any other remedy. A Contracting
State may require the exhaustion of local administrative or

76 Objections at paragraphs 120-128.

Pakistan cites Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (“SPP”),
Case No. ARB/84/3, for the proposition that “a specific agreement between the parties to a dispute
would naturally take precedence with respect to a bilateral treaty between the investor's State and [a par-
ticular sovereign]...[This hierarchy] reflects the maxim generalia specialibus non derogant.” It also cites
Professor Schreuer’s Commentary which states that a document with a dispute settlement clause which is

 

  

more specific in relation to the parties and to the dispute should be given precedence over a document
of more general application such as the BIT. Pakistan asserts that, contrary to SGS's assertion that the
a specific agreement

regarding dispute resolution and should be given precedence over the more general provisions of the BIT.
Pakistan also distinguishes the Vivendi Annulment decision from the present case by noting that
although both cases present superficially similar facts, in that the Vivendi Annulment Committee held
that a contractual choice of forum clause did not supersede the parties’ choice of ICSID to resolve the
BIT claims, that case differs from the present one in that the clause in the operative contract provided
only that “for purposes of interpretation and application of this Contract the parties submit themselves

specific agreement of the parties should be rendered valueless, the PSI Agreement is

 

to the [local courts.” This was a narrow clause clearly limited to contract claims and not to BIT claims,
whereas the clause in the PSI Agreement is a broad form of arbitration clause.
Similarly, in Lanco and Salini, Pakistan says that those cases turned either on a more narrowly

 

drafted clause ot on one that was not a true choice of forum clause since it vested jurisdiction over dis
putes in local courts who, as a matter of law, already had compulsory jurisdiction over the disputes. These
are in contrast with the broad clause in question because it is not limited to “interpretation and appli-
cation” of the contract but extends to any and all claims “arising out of or relating” thereto.

77 Objections at paragraph 128.

78 Id.

CASES. 329

judicial remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration
under this Convention.

70. Pakistan argues that Article 26, which the negotiating history shows is
merely a rule of interpretation, precludes parties from pursuing their claims in
multiple fora simultaneously.” Once the choice of the forum for dispute res-
olution has been made, the parties are bound by it. Pakistan argues that SGS
has clearly made its choice to resolve the dispute by PSI Agreement arbitration
and its submission to ICSID is seeking “another remedy in the same matter”
in that the counter-claims in the PSI Arbitration are identical to the relief
sought before this Tribunal. SGS thus seeks “another remedy in the same mat-
ter.” SGS is clearly precluded from bringing a claim before ICSID and cannot
benefit from the ICSID exclusivity rule.8?

71. Pakistan asserts that SGS could have raised its “BIT Claims” in the PSI
Agreement arbitration. Under the general principles of ne bis in idem and res
judicata, the fact that it did not do so is irrelevant.*! It was for this reason that
the Supreme Court of Pakistan held SGS was estopped from pursuing its
claims before ICSID.°?

72. SGS has made its choice by filing first in the PSI Agreement arbitra-
tion and cannot avoid the consequences of this choice.*?

73. Pakistan notes that SGS has already argued that even if there is con-
current jurisdiction, the tribunal with narrower jurisdiction should defer to
the tribunal with broader jurisdiction. Pakistan submits that the forum with
the most comprehensive jurisdiction is the PSI Agreement arbitration because:

(a) only the PSI Agreement arbitrator has jurisdiction over SGS’s
“Contract” and “Defamation Claims”;

79 At the hearing, counsel for Pakistan directed the Tribunal to the negotiating history of what
became Article 26 of the Convention. The Tribunal was given excerpts from the ICSID’s History of the
ICSID Convention, a two volume work that reproduces the travaux préparatoires of the Convention.
Counsel observed that the records show that the delegates to the negotiations were assured that the pro-
posed convention would not operate so as to disrupt settled expectations or pre-existing arrangements.
‘Transcript, Volume 1, pp. 38-47, p. 69, lines 13-16.

89 Objections at paragraphs 130-131.

81 Jd., at paragraph 132.

82 Judgment of the Supreme Court of Pakistan, in Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic
Republic of Pakistan, Exhibit P21 to Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction, at p. 33, paragraph 54.

83 Objections at paragraph 133.

330 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

(b) only the PSI Agreement arbitrator has jurisdiction over Pakistan's
claims against SGS for breach of the PSI Agreement; and

(c) at most, the PSI Agreement arbitrator and ICISD have concur-
rent jurisdiction over the “BIT Claims.”$4

74. Accordingly, SGS’s claims should be dismissed in their entirety.

75. Pakistan then advances a separate argument against jurisdiction: SGS’s
activities under the PSI Agreement did not constitute an investment within
the territory of Pakistan within the meaning of Article 2(1) of the BIT because
SGS’s obligations were performed outside Pakistan.

76. Pakistan argues that the pre-inspection of goods being imported into
Pakistan was conducted by pre-existing SGS controlled or affiliated entities
outside Pakistan and while SGS may have invested in offices and personnel in
various ports around the world in order to be able to perform its obligations
under the PSI Agreement, this does not involve an investment in the territory
of Pakistan.®°

77. The liaison offices established in Pakistan which SGS presents as evi-
dence of its investment were simply to process and convey information and to
bill; there was no revenue-generating activity in Pakistan, as agreed by both
parties.®© Finally, Pakistan points to what it calls an admission by SGS in the
Swiss legal proceedings that its activities pursuant to the PSI Agreement did
not constitute an investment in the territory of Pakistan within the meaning
of Article 2(1) of the BIT.8”

 

78. Pakistan also observes that possibly unlawful conduct of SGS and its
employees in respect of the PSI Agreement is being investigated. In the event
that it is found that the PSI Agreement was procured through bribery and cor-
ruption, Pakistan reserves its right to argue that the Tribunal does not have
jurisdiction over the claims in any event because SGS did not invest “in accor-
dance with the laws and regulations of” Pakistan as required in Article 2 of the

BIT.88

84 Id., at paragraph 136.
85 [d., at paragraph 139.
86 I4., at paragraph 140.
87 Jd, at paragraph 143.
88 [d,, at paragraphs 144-145.

CASES 331

79. Pakistan also contends that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction on the
ground that SGS failed to comply with a mandatory 12-month consultation
period before requesting ICSID to register its claim.

80. Article 9 of the BIT states:

(1) For the purpose of solving disputes with respect to invest-
ments between a Contracting Party and an investor of the
other Contracting Party and without prejudice to Article 10 of
this Agreement (Disputes between Contracting Parties), con-
sultations will take place between the parties concerned.

(2) If these consultations do not result in a solution within
twelve months and if the investor concerned gives written con-
sent, the dispute shall be submitted to the arbitration of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes,
instituted by the Convention of Washington of March 18,
1965, for the settlement of disputes regarding investments
between States and nationals of other States...

81. In Pakistan’s submission, under the BIT, SGS was barred from bring-
ing an ICSID arbitration against Pakistan until the conclusion of a 12-month
consultation period regarding the alleged BIT violations. SGS_ notified
Pakistan of its belief that a dispute within the ambit of the BIT existed only
two days before it submitted a Request for ICSID Arbitration. The Tribunal
must give effect to the terms of the Treaty which give Pakistan one year to dis-
cuss, analyze and potentially settle SGS’s “BIT Claims” before proceeding to
ICSID arbitration.°?

82. Finally, in its Reply and at the hearing, Pakistan asserted that an
ICSID arbitration would be premature at this time. The only forum capable
of resolving the contract claims is the PSI Agreement arbitration and this
Tribunal should stay this proceeding until that arbitration is concluded; oth-
erwise, there would be greater costs to the parties, risks of inconsistent awards,
and so on.

89 [d., at paragraph 151.
°° Reply at paragraphs 116-120. Transcript, Volume 1, pp. 115-124.

332 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

PART III: SGS’S RESPONSE TO THE OBJECTIONS

83.  SGS responds to Pakistan’s objections by firstly pointing out that it
does not accept the characterization of SGS’s claims as “Contract,”
“Defamation” and “BIT Claims.”! All of SGS’s claims are “BIT Claims” in
the sense that they are brought before this Tribunal on the basis of the BIT. It
is for the Claimant, not the Respondent, to formulate its claims; they must be
taken as they are, not as Pakistan would like them to be.

84. — SGS alleges five breaches of the BIT (including a claim based upon
what it calls the Article 11 “umbrella clause”) and asserts that “most or all of
Pakistan’s acts and omissions described above qualify as breaches of the PSI
Agreement as well as violations of the BIT”:°?

In other words, SGS brings before this Tribunal (i) claims
alleging violations by Pakistan of a number of specific provi-
sions of the BIT, including the “umbrella clause” at Article 11
of that instrument and, in the alternative to its claims alleging
the violation of Article 11 of the BIT, (ii) claims alleging
breaches of contract by Pakistan which do not constitute vio-
lations of the BIT.

85. In SGS’s view, for the Tribunal to have jurisdiction over the dispute,
the conditions set forth in Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention must be
met.” Article 25 sets out the conditions for jurisdiction as follows:

(a) the dispute must be a “legal” one;
(b) it must “aris[e] directly out of an investment”;

(c) it must be between a Contracting State...and a national of anoth-
er Contracting State; and

9! Claimant's Reply to the Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction (“Reply”) at paragraphs 31-
35. SGS also filed an expert report and a supplementary report by Professor Christoph Schreuer.

°2 Reply at paragraph 34.

93 Id.

94 Article 25 states:

‘The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of an
investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre, When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent uni-
laterally.

CASES. 333

(d) the parties to the dispute must “consent in writing to submit [it]
to the Centre.”

86. In SGS’s view, Pakistan disputes only the fourth condition. The bur-
den is on Pakistan to prove that this is not met. There is a written consent;
Pakistan contests whether that consent, and therefore the Tribunal’s jurisdic-
tion, covers the claims before this Tribunal.°°

87. The parties’ written consent consists of (i) the written offer of ICSID
arbitration made by Pakistan, in Article 9 of the BIT, and (ii) the written
acceptance by SGS in its letter to Pakistan of 10 October 2001.27

88. Pakistan’s Objection cannot be sustained because the parties’ consent
covers all of the claims made in the Request for Arbitration. In this regard,
SGS submits that it can be established:

(a) that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction extends to SGS’s claims as formu-

lated by SGS;

(b) that the forum selection clause in the PSI Agreement does not
diminish this Tribunal’s jurisdiction;

(c) that in the event of prima facie overlapping arbitration provisions,
this Tribunal’s jurisdiction must prevail;

(d) that the /is pendens principle does not bar this Tribunal from hear-
ing SGS’s claims;

(e) that SGS did not waive its right to pursue ICSID arbitration, nor
is it estopped from presenting its claims to this Tribunal;

(f) that this dispute is with respect to investments within the mean-

ing of the BIT; and

(g) that non-observance of the waiting period set out in the BIT does
not affect this Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

°5 Reply, at paragraph 37.
6 Id., at paragraph 39.

% Id., at paragraphs 39-40.
98 Id., at paragraph 41.

334 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

89. Pakistan ignores the basic principle that it is a claimant's prerogative to
formulate the claims that it is asking the judges to resolve, a principle consis-
tently applied by ICSID tribunals.”

90. In SGS’s view, it is only at the merits phase that the Tribunal will have
to consider whether SGS’s characterization of its claims is correct, and whether
its claims succeed as a result.!0° The Tribunal must decide whether claims
alleging violations of the BIT, including violations of Article 11, are within its
jurisdiction, It will also have to decide whether it has jurisdiction over SGS’s
claims alleging only breaches of the PSI Agreement, pleaded in the alternative
to the alleged breaches of Article 11. What the Tribunal cannot do at this stage
is decide whether SGS’s claims alleging violations of the BIT are in fact, as
Pakistan alleges, “contractual claims” or claims of any sort other than as stated
by SGS.101

91. SGS observes that the BIT sets forth international law obligations of
the Contracting Parties.!°? An alleged violation of the BIT is therefore a
breach of international law, requiring a determination based on international
law standards. A breach of contract, on the other hand, is usually determined
by reference to national law standards.

92. Even though a claim for breach of contract and a claim for violation
of the BIT may be based on similar or identical facts, they rely on fundamen-
tally different legal bases and are assessed according to different standards. SGS
refers in this regard to the Vivendi Annulment Committee which accepted that
questions of breach of contract and violation of the BIT could be closely
related:

A state may breach a treaty without breaching a contract, and
vice versa... The characterization of an act of a State as inter-
nationally wrongful is governed by international law. Such
characterization is not affected by the characterization of the
same act as lawful by internal law.!3

9° Id., at paragraph 44. Transcript, Volume 1, pp. 135-139.

100 7d. at paragraph 48.

101 7d. at paragraph 49.

102 7d. at paragraph 50.

103 Vivendi Annulment, at paragraphs 95-96, quoted in the Reply at paragraph 53.

CASES. 335

93. However, SGS submits that this does not mean that a tribunal may not
consider contractual issues when determining if there has been a breach of the
BIT, 104

94.  SGS submits that Pakistan concedes that Article 9 of the BIT covers
claims alleging violations of the BIT. Such claims fall within the parties’ con-
sent to ICSID arbitration and this Tribunal has jurisdiction over them.
Pakistan’s position is that only contractual claims rather than claims alleging
violations of the BIT fall outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and claims alleg-

ing violations of the BIT remain within it.!>

95.  SGS submits that it is perfectly proper for a tribunal to interpret a con-

tract and consider issues of contractual performance in order to determine
whether there has been a breach of international law.

96. An ICSID tribunal can make determinations based on the contract
and on national law in order to decide whether a State has committed a viola-
tion of its international law obligations through a breach of the BIT. SGS
alleges that Pakistan’s actions relating to the PSI Agreement are a breach of
Articles 3(1), 4(1), 4(2) and 6(1) of the Treaty. These obligations, related to
the promotion of investments, the protection of investments, the fair and
equitable treatment of investments, and expropriation, are international law
obligations. The fact that they are in relation to the performance of a contract
does not detract from the qualification of SGS’s claims as international law
claims. In deciding those BIT claims, the Tribunal must consider the terms
and performance of the PSI Agreement.!0°

97. This is also the case regarding SGS’s claim that Pakistan breached the
“umbrella clause” at Article 11 of the BIT. That provision states:

Either Contracting Party shall constantly guarantee the obser-
vance of commitments it has entered into with respect to the
investments of the investors of the other Contracting Party.!°7

104 Reply, at paragraph 55.

105 jd, at paragraph 58. SGS cites Salini and Vivendi for the “uncontroversial principle” that a tribunal
constituted under a BIT has jurisdiction over claims alleging violations of that BIT. Vivendi adds that even if
the contract in question refers contractual disputes to the courts of a domestic jurisdiction, it does not affect
the jurisdiction of che Tribunal to consider a claim based on the provisions of a BIT,

% Id, at paragraphs 61 and 62.

107 jd., at paragraph 63.

336 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

98. In SGS’s view, the inclusion of an “umbrella clause” such as Article 11
of the BIT has the effect of elevating a simple breach of contract claim to a
treaty claim under international law.!°8 $GS’s claim of a breach of Article 11
of the BIT is formulated as an international law claim alleging a breach of the
Treaty. In deciding this, however, the Tribunal must consider whether Pakistan
breached the PSI Agreement.!°? Nothing prevents this Tribunal from “taking
into account and interpreting the PSI agreement and its performance” when it
considers whether the Respondent has breached the BIT.!!°

99. Article 11 of the Treaty is characterized by the Claimant as an “umbrel-
la clause which says that each time you violate a provision of the contract,...,
you also violate norms of international law, you violate the treaty by the same
token.”!!! Counsel later elaborated on this characterization of Article 11 as
follows:

...I myself prefer to call it a mirror effect clause, because in fact
it is a mirror effect which it creates.

You have a violation of the contract, and the Treaty says, as if
you had a mirror, that this violation will also be susceptible to
being characterized as a violation of the Treaty. So the same
facts, the same breach will be a violation of the contract in
itself, and a violation of the Treaty, !!?

And,

If I am the government and if I breach a contract, by the same
token I will breach a treaty, so the useful effect of this is to cre-
ate this mirror effect, to say that I will elevate in essence, and

108 7d., at paragraph 64 and Transcript, Volume 1 at pp. 140-183 and Volume 2 at pp. 74-106.
SGS refers to, among others, R. Dolzer and M. Stevens, who commented in their book, Bilateral
Investment Treaties, on the importance of umbrella clauses in protecting the investor's contractual rights
against any interference which might be caused by either a simple breach of contract or by administra-
tive or legislative acts. Umbrella clauses are included because it “is not entirely clear under general inter-
national law whether such measures constitute breaches of international obligations.” (Dolzer and
Stevens at p. 82.) SGS also refers in this regard to a comment of the late Ibrahim Shihata (former
Secretary-General of ICSID) and to Professor Schreuer's opinion.

109 Reply, at paragraph 68.

110 7d, at paragraph 72.

111 Transcript, Volume 1, p. 130, lines 23-25, p. 131, lines 1-3, pp. 140-168.

112 [d., Volume 1 at p. 141, lines 15-23.

CASES. 337

that’s what it does, it may be far-reaching but that’s what it

does, to elevate breaches of contract as breaches of a treaty.!!>

100. | SGS also maintains that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over claims by
SGS which allege breach of contract as opposed to a violation of the BIT.
These claims are raised in the alternative, to be decided only if the Tribunal
rejects the claims that Pakistan violated the “umbrella clause.”!!4 This juris-
diction to decide contract claims results from the broad terms of Article 9 of

the BIT which refers to “disputes with respect to investments.”!!>

101. In light of the terms of Article 9 of the BIT, Pakistan is bound to sub-
mit all disputes to ICSID arbitration including SGS’s claims for breach of con-
tract as distinct from a breach of the BIT.!!¢

102. SGS argues that Pakistan’s contention that Article 11.1 of the PSI
Agreement excludes or diminishes this Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Article 26
of the ICSID Convention is without merit. The question to be confronted is
whether there was any stipulation contrary to ICSID’s exclusive jurisdiction in
the consent to arbitration.

103. Pakistan consented to ICSID’s exclusive jurisdiction in Article 9 of the
BIT which contains no reservations or “statement otherwise.” SGS’s consent
comes from its Request for Arbitration. SGS argues that “the consent of each
of the parties to submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of this Tribunal was

unequivocal, and at no time did either of the parties ‘otherwise state’.”!!7

104.  SGS goes on to submit that a long line of ICSID decisions shows that
a forum selection clause in a contract will not apply to the exclusion of ICSID
jurisdiction.!!8 SGS points out that in every case on which Pakistan relies
(Klockner, Tradex Hellas, Lanco, Salini and Vivendi Annulment), the ICSID tri-
bunal retained jurisdiction.

105. SGS concludes that in conformity with the text of the ICSID
Convention and the weight of ICSID precedent, the Tribunal must hold that

113 Id, Volume 1 at p.146, lines 16-21.

114 Transcript, Volume 1, p. 130, lines 12-16.
115 Reply at paragraphs 74-79.

16 Id, at paragraph 81.

17 Id, at paragraph 93.

118 [d., at paragraph 97.

338 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the forum selection clause in the PSI Agreement does not and cannot exclude
the jurisdiction of this Tribunal with respect to SGS’s claims. At the very most,
the Islamabad arbitrator may have, prima facie, concurrent jurisdiction over
some aspects of the current dispute relating to the interpretation and per-
formance of the PSI Agreement. However, even then, this Tribunal’s jurisdic-
tion must prevail.!!9

106. This Tribunal must prevail because the BIT’s dispute resolution provi-
sion supersedes the PSI Agreement’s forum selection clause, to the extent they
both cover the same ground.!?° International methods of dispute settlement
take precedence over domestic arbitration. BITs are intended to promote and
protect investments and ensure their equitable treatment which gives investors
substantive rights under international law, such as the right to have their dis-
putes heard by an international tribunal.!7!

107. In SGS’s submission, Pakistan’s argument that the Islamabad arbitra-
tor has jurisdiction over the “BIT Claims” is flawed:

(a) Although some BITs include a matrix of fora available to
claimants, this BIT does not. Article 9(2) speaks only of ICSID
jurisdiction and Article 26 of the Convention gives this Tribunal
exclusive jurisdiction;

(b) A contract forum selection clause cannot extend the jurisdiction
of a domestic court or tribunal to claims of breach of a treaty (see
Vivendi both in its discussion of Lanco and the case before it);

(c) At the time that the PSI Agreement was concluded, the BIT did
not exist and therefore the parties could not have intended to
cover claims that could not have been made at the time; and

(d) Finally, the Supreme Court of Pakistan concluded that the BIT
had not been incorporated into the law of Pakistan and no court
could enforce any treaty rights arising from the BIT. Moreover,
the Supreme Court stated that the PSI Arbitration shall be con-
fined to the claims based on the terms and conditions of that
agreement. !2?

119 Id, at paragraph 113.
120 [d., at paragraph 115.
121 [d., at paragraphs 117-118.

122 [d., at paragraphs 131-135.

CASES. 339

108. In respect of the Respondent’s arguments that this Tribunal has no
jurisdiction over SGS’s “Defamation Claims” or Pakistan's potential counter-
claims, SGS argues that this Tribunal has jurisdiction over all ancillary claims
and counter-claims that arise directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute
as long as they are within the scope of the consent of the parties.!23 Such con-
sent extends to all “disputes with respect to investments” under Article 9 of the
BIT, including SGS’s request for compensation for damage to its reputation as
a result of Pakistan's violations of the BIT.!24 The consent also covers any even-
tual counter-claims that might be presented by Pakistan.

109. In SGS’s view, there is nothing remarkable about an ICSID tribunal
considering a State party's counter-claim when its jurisdiction arises out of a
BIT. “It must have been expressly contemplated by Pakistan and Switzerland
in this case [that the ICSID tribunal could consider a State party’s counter-
claim] because Article 9(3) of the BIT provides that “each party may start the
procedure.” !?5

110. Pakistan has argued that the maxim generalia specialibus non derogant
should apply such that the PSI Agreement’s arbitration clause would take
precedence over the BIT’s ICSID arbitration clause. SGS argues that the rele-
vance of the ICSID case on which Pakistan relies, SPP v. Egypt, is limited to
its particular facts.!2°

123 Article 46 of the ICSID Convention states that:

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal shall, if requested by a party, determine

any incidental or additional claims or counter-claims arising directly out of the subject-

matter of the dispute provided that they are within the scope of the consent of the parties

and are otherwise within the jurisdiction of the Centre.

24 Reply, at paragraph 13

125 /d., at paragraphs 139- Tal, SGS observes that in at least one ICSID case, Alex Genin Eastern
Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v. The Republic of Estonia, Case No. ARB/99/2, the State bought a
counter-claim alleging violations of Estonian banking law and the tribunal's jurisdiction over the count-
er-claim was never questioned. SGS has also expressly confirmed its agreement to the submission of
Pakistan's eventual counter-claims to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal.

"26 In SPP, the tribunal interpreted Egyptian investment legislation which gave an investor three
options for resolving disputes: any method agreed between the parties, resolution under a bilateral invest-
ment treaty or resolution under the ICSID Convention. The tribunal found that the intention of the leg-
islacure was to give precedence to a specific agreement of the parties. But as there was no sch agreement
between the parties, the tribunal concluded they had given their consent to ICSID arbitration as one of
the options provided for by the legislation. However, in the present case, there is no domestic legislation
providing for a hierarchical order of alternatives for dispute resolution, “The Switzerland-Pakistan BIT is
the only relevant ‘investment law’ at issue in this case and it provides exclusively for ICSID arbitration.”
Even if SPP did purport to establish a general principle that a contractual forum selection clause should
have precedence over a dispute resolution clause in a BIT, it has not been followed by any other ICSID
tribunal facing this question, The maxim generalia specialibus non derogant has no application here because
the two dispute settlement clauses at issue in this case relate to different standards of protection. The BIT’s
Article 9 provides the investor with an essential procedural guarantee that cnnot be ousted by the forum
selection clause in the PSI Agreement. (Reply, at paragraphs 142-148.)

340 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

111. SGS submits further that the doctrine of /is pendens is inoperative here.
That doctrine deals with “overlap between two pending proceedings.” In the
instant case, there is at best concurrent jurisdiction arising from possible over-
lap between the scope of the two dispute resolution mechanisms.!*” Any
prima facie concurrent jurisdiction of the Islamabad arbitrator on the basis of
the forum selection clause in the PSI Agreement would be overridden by this
Tribunal’s jurisdiction, based on Article 9 of the BIT which clearly takes
precedence. As a result, only this Tribunal has actual jurisdiction over the pres-
ent dispute and the argument of lis pendens is moot.!

112. Even supposing the /is pendens theory did have some prima facie appli-
cation here, Pakistan says that the theory would require this Tribunal to yield
to the Islamabad arbitrator for three reasons: (a) the two matters allegedly
involve the same parties; (b) the matters allegedly involve the same causes of
action; and (c) the PSI Agreement arbitration is said to have commenced prior
to the present proceeding, |”?

113. In SGS’s submission, /is pendens cannot apply here because the first

two of the three requisite elements are not present.'>°

114. For the is pendens principle to apply, the two tribunals must be of
equal status and in SGS’s view they are plainly not in this case. International
jurisprudence shows that international tribunals are not subject to lis pendens
when the parallel case is pending in a domestic forum.!3! The inequality of the
two tribunals is underscored by the fact that only one, namely, this Tribunal,
has jurisdiction over SGS’s claims alleging violations of the BIT. The lis pen-

127 1d, at paragraph 149.

128 Id., at paragraph 150.

129 [d., at paragraph 151.

130 Id, at 154.

131 [d,, at paragraph 157. For example, in the Selwyn Case, the British-Venezuelan Mixed Claims
Commission noted that “international arbitration is not affected jurisdictionally by the fact that the same
question is in the courts of one of the nations.” SGS also cites Socaciu v. Romania, where the Romanian-
Austrian Mixed Arbitral Tribunal held that once international proceedings have begun, proceedings
before the domestic courts had no object. In the Jean-Baptiste Caire Case, the French-Mexican Mixed
Claims Commission refused to impose supplementary admissibility requirements (not provided for in
the governing Convention) on the claimants merely because parallel proceedings were pending in a
domestic forum. The commission viewed the domestic proceedings as irrelevant to the question of its
jurisdiction and the admissibility of the claims presented to it.

SGS cites a more recent authority where the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal held in E-Systems v. Iran
& Bank Melli that the Government of Iran should request that Iranian court proceedings be stayed until
proceedings in the international tribunal were completed. Similar language was used in the second
Holiday Inns jurisdiction decision which also stated that international tribunals have a superior status in
comparison to domestic proceedings.

CASES 341

dens principle cannot apply here because it would leave SGS without a forum
in which to pursue its BIT claims.!22

115. — Lis pendens also does not apply because the two proceedings do not
relate to the same causes of action. Lis pendens is based on the principle of ne
bis in idem (not twice in the same matter), which means that the object (peri-
tum) and the ground (causa petendi) of the two claims are the same. Lis pen-
dens will not apply even ifa claimant makes identical requests if those requests
are based on different legal grounds (i.e., where the petition is identical, but
the causa petendi is different).!93 SGS notes that in a number of BIT cases the
lis pendens doctrine has not been applied.'34

116.  SGS also points out that in the PSI Agreement arbitration Pakistan has
raised claims the sole cause of action of which is restitution, whereas in this
case, SGS is pursuing claims alleging: (i) violations of the BIT including its
“umbrella clause” and in the alternative, (ii) claims of breach of contract but
not violations of the BIT. Restitution is not pleaded in this case. Therefore,
SGS argues, the causes of action in the two jurisdictions are different and /is
pendens cannot apply.'9>

117. To SGS, the /is pendens argument is based on an incorrect premise,
namely, that “SGS submitted its claims in the PSI Agreement arbitration
first.” But, SGS merely filed a defensive counter-claim, expressly subject to
objections to jurisdiction. In any event, this ICSID arbitration effectively pre-
cedes the PSI Agreement arbitration because the latter has only recently
begun.!9° The arbitrator was appointed by the Pakistani courts on 2 July
2002, and Pakistan filed its Statement of Claim only on 18 October 2002.

132 Reply at paragraph 164.

133 Jd., at paragraph 166.

134 Td, at paragraphs 167. In the Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic case and the CME Czech Republic
B.V. v. Czech Republic case, the respondent's lis pendens arguments were rejected by both tribunals because they
involved different parties and different causes of action (under different BITs).

SGS also questions Pakistan's use of S.A.R.L. Benvenuti & Bonfant v. Peoples Republic of the Congo
(‘Benvenuti & Bonfant”), ICSID Case No. ARB/77/2, and Ameo Asia Corporation v. Republic of Indonesia
(‘Ameo Asia”), ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, as cases in support of its argument of lis pendens. In both cases, the
tribunal rejected the principle’s application. SGS asserts, moreover, that these cases were dismissed not merely
because the parties in the pending actions were not the same, but also because there was also a lack of identity
in the causes of action. In Benvenuti & Bonfant the tribunal found the principle not to be applicable where there
was no identity of the parties and no identity of “object and cause of action in the proceeding pending before
both tribunals.” Likewise, in Amco Asia the tribunal held that neither the parties involved nor the claims raised
were identical.

135 [d., at paragraph 174.

136 [d., at paragraph 176.

342 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

118. Pakistan has argued that SGS waived its right to seek relief under the
ICSID Convention when it initiated the Swiss legal proceedings and present-
ed counter-claims in the PSI Agreement arbitration. It also alleges estoppel on
the same facts. But objections on waiver and estoppel assume that the causes
of action and relief sought in the different proceedings are all identical. This is
not so here and where there is no identity of cause of action or remedy sought,
there can be no waiver or estoppel.!3”

119. Finally, in its decision of 3 July 2002, the Supreme Court of Pakistan
noted that the BIT had not been incorporated into the laws of Pakistan and
that no Pakistan court could enforce any “treaty rights” arising from the BIT.
SGS questions how the Islamabad arbitrator would have jurisdiction to con-
sider SGS’s claims arising from the BIT when there is a denial of such rights
in the Pakistan courts. The Supreme Court of Pakistan expressly stated that the
“[Islamabad] arbitration proceedings shall be confined to the claims based on
the terms and conditions of the [PSI] agreement.” 138 SGS asserts that Pakistan
cannot argue that, by not giving its consent to ICSID arbitration prior to the
commencement of the PSI Agreement arbitration (commenced on 7 April
2001) and the Swiss legal proceedings (commenced on 12 January 1998), SGS
has waived its rights to consent to the jurisdiction of ICSID:

“... at neither of those times did SGS have an existing right to
pursue its claims through ICSID arbitration. This right only
arose on October 10, 2001, when SGS accepted Pakistan's

offer to arbitrate its disputes with SGS in ICSID arbitra-

tion.”!39

120. The BIT does not require the investor to consent to ICSID arbitration
within any designated period of time.

137 [d., at paragraphs 177-178. SGS also denies Pakistan's assertion that SGS has waived its right
to pursue its claims before an ICSID tribunal when it commenced the Swiss legal proceedings or when
it filed its counter-claims in the PSI Agreement arbitration. SGS argues that this right arose only when
SGS accepted Pakistan's offer to arbitrate its disputes with SGS in ICSID arbitration. It was only from
the date of that agreement (10 October 2001) that Article 26 of the ICSID Convention and the exclu-
sivity rule therein applied to prevent SGS from seeking relief in other fora. Pakistan cannot argue that
SGS should have given its consent to ICSID arbitration before 10 October 2001, and that by not doing
so, it waived its right to consent to the jurisdiction of ICSID by proceeding in the Swiss courts and PSI
Agreement arbitration. Reply, at paragraphs 181-182.

138 Reply, at paragraph 135.

139 Id, at paragraph 181.

CASES. 343

121. In SGS’s view, a party can be taken to have waived its right to consent
to ICSID arbitration by first pursuing claims in local courts only if the BIT
contained a “fork-in-the-road” clause providing a choice to pursue claims in
domestic courts or in international arbitration. Once the investor's choice has
been made, it is final. However, the Treaty here contains no such fork-in-the-
road.!40

122. Finally in this regard, SGS argues that it is not estopped from pursu-
ing its claims before the ICSID Tribunal by anything done in the domestic
proceedings. Estoppel usually applies where a party has misrepresented the
existence of facts and another party has acted upon this misrepresentation to
its detriment. It does not apply where a claimant has used several remedies to
pursue its rights. SGS has never represented to Pakistan that it would not seek
to pursue claims in different fora.!4! SGS describes its participation in the PSI
Agreement arbitration as merely defensive and says that the Swiss proceedings
did not make any findings on the merits of the dispute. Therefore, SGS argues
it is “seeking to find the appropriate forum for the resolution of the claims it
has now raised” and under these circumstances, no objection of estoppel or
waiver can lie,!4

123. SGS then turns to Pakistan’s claim that it has not invested within the
territory of Pakistan and therefore the dispute before the Tribunal is not “with
respect to an investment” as stipulated in Article 9 of the BIT. It notes that
Pakistan did not contest that this dispute arises directly out of an investment
within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

124.  SGS observes that in Article 1(2) of the BIT the word “investment” is
specified to include “every kind of asset” including (inter alia): (c) claims to
money or to any performance having an economic value; and (e) concessions
under public law, including concessions to search for, extract or exploit natu-
ral resources as well as all other rights given by law, by contract or by decision
of the authority in accordance with the law. The PSI Agreement grants SGS
“claims to performance having an economic value” and “rights given...by con-
tract.”!43 In addition, SGS argues that it made “substantial investments with-

140 [7., at paragraph 189. Also, SGS’s participation was without prejudice to its legal rights under
international law. The Swiss proceedings were dismissed without findings on the merits of the dispute
and therefore did not resolve its claim.

141 [d., at paragraphs 192-194.

12 Id., at paragraph 189.

143 Id, at paragraph 197.

344 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

in the meaning of Article 1(2) when it leased, equipped and operated its liai-
son offices, which were essential to the performance of the PSI Agreement.”!44
SGS also submits that ICSID jurisprudence holds that an investment need not
be physically or directly made in the territory to satisfy requirements of provi-
sions such as Article 2(1) of the BIT.!45

125. Regardless of where activities arising out of the PSI Agreement
occurred, SGS’s investment was, in any event, made within the territory of
Pakistan because a significant transfer of value was made into Pakistan's terri-
tory. The Pre-Shipment Inspection Programme was intended to allow Pakistan
to increase its customs’ revenues by up to U.S.$650 million, which was intend-
ed to flow into the State of Pakistan and arose directly from SGS’s perform-
ance. Further, SGS imported significant revenue-building know-how into
Pakistan through assisting the Pakistani Revenue and Customs officials in
improving their verification and inspection of goods by the establishment of
Clean Reports of Findings. Training was provided to those officials through
SGS internal seminars held in Pakistan.!4°

126. Even if the PSI Agreement and SGS’s activities do not meet the “tra-
ditional” notion of an investment, they nevertheless fall within the category of
new investments covered by BITs as illustrated by the Fedax and CSOB cases
which demonstrate that ICSID is moving away from traditional notions of

investment. !47

127. Assuming that a direct or physical investment in Pakistan's territory
were required, SGS did make such a direct and physical investment in
Pakistani territory. The offices in Karachi and Lahore were “an instrumental
part of the PSI Agreement and overall investment.”!48 While the pre-shipment
inspections occurred outside Pakistan, the critical results of those inspections
were funneled to and processed within the liaison offices in Pakistan. SGS
staffed the offices with about 160 local and foreign employees and spent sig-
nificant amounts in wages and training. It also paid rent and for their day-to-
day maintenance. The offices contained moveable assets (including comput-
ers, office furniture and vehicles) valued as early as in 1993 at in excess of

1 7g

145 1d, at paragraphs 200-204.

146 Jd, at paragraphs 205-206.

M47 Jd, at paragraph 207. Fedax N.V. (Netherlands Antilles) v. Republic of Venezuela (“Fedax’).
ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3 and Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, S.A. v. The Slovak Republic (“CSOB’),
ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4.

148 7, at paragraph 212.

CASES. 345

U.S.$1.5 million."49 SGS asserts that it forwarded “hundreds of thousands” of
US dollars to a local bank to ensure the operation of the offices.

128. SGS believes that Pakistan itself recognized that SGS was making an
investment. It required SGS to obtain an authorization from its Board of
Investment for the opening and operation of the offices. The objection that
these offices had no revenue-earning commercial activities is irrelevant because
these offices were vital to the performance of the PSI Agreement.!°°

129. Further, to the extent that intangible investments such as “claims to
money” and “rights under contract” recognized in the BIT can be located any-
where, they were situated in Pakistan.

130. With respect to its alleged non-compliance with the BIT’s 12-month
consultation period, SGS submits that waiting periods in BITs are not prereq-
uisites for jurisdiction, but rather procedural rules intended to encourage con-
sultations or negotiations that may lead to an avoidance of arbitration.!>!
Where it is clear that negotiations would have been futile, a claimant may
submit its claims before the waiting period has expired.

131. SGS notes that nothing prevented Pakistan from initiating negotia-
tions or discussions after SGS’s Request for Arbitration was filed. It is reason-
able to believe that waiting out the 12-month consultation period would have
been futile.'>? If jurisdiction were denied on the ground that a waiting period
in a BIT dispute resolution clause is a jurisdictional requirement, SGS could
resubmit its claims to ICSID and proceedings would begin again after 12
months. This would only result in additional delay and more expense for both
parties.

149 Id., at paragraph 215.

150 [d., at paragraph 217.

151 Jd, at paragraph 223. SGS also refers in this regard to Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Arab Republic of
Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4.

152 Id., at paragraph 224. In this regard, SGS cites Ethyl Corp. v. Canada and Ronald S. Lauder v.
The Czech Republic.

346 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

PART IV: THE TRIBUNALS DECISION
A. The legal issues to be resolved

132. Considering the principal objections to the jurisdiction of this
Tribunal and the arguments adduced by the Respondent to support those
objections, and having regard to the principal claims and arguments submit-
ted by the Claimant to resist the Respondent's objections and to sustain the
jurisdiction of this Tribunal, we believe that the principal issues that we must
address in this Decision may be usefully formulated in the following manner:

(a) Has the Claimant made an “investment” “in the territory” of the
Respondent?

(b) What effect may be given to the Claimant's characterization of its
own claims, for purposes of these proceedings on jurisdiction?

(c) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to determine the Claimant's
BIT claims, that is, claims of violation of certain provisions of the
Swiss-Pakistan BIT?

(d) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to determine the Claimant's
contractual claims that is, claims of violation of the PSI
Agreement?

(ce) Does Article 11 of the Swiss-Pakistan BIT transform purely con-
tract claims into BIT claims?

(f) Does the Claimant’s conduct in the Swiss legal proceedings and
in the PSI Agreement arbitration give rise to estoppel?

(g) Does the Claimant’s conduct in the Swiss legal proceedings and
in the PSI Agreement arbitration amount to waiver of its rights
under the Swiss-Pakistan BIT?

(h) Does the doctrine of lis pendens preclude the Claimant from pur-
suing its claims before the Tribunal?

(i) What effect may be given to the requirement of consultations
between the parties in Article 9 of the Swiss-Pakistan BIT?

(j) Should this Tribunal dismiss or stay these proceedings as urged by
the Respondent until the contract claims are addressed?

‘We address each of the above issues below.

CASES. 347

B. Findings and Conclusions

1. Has the Claimant made an “investment” “in the territory” of the
Respondent?

133. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention requires that there be an “invest-
ment” dispute, that is, a “legal dispute arising directly out of an investment,”
between a Contracting Party and a national of another Contracting Party, in
order that the ICSID’s jurisdictional requirements may be satisfied. The
ICSID Convention does not delimit the term “investment,” leaving to the
Contracting Parties a large measure of freedom to define that term as their spe-
cific objectives and circumstances may lead them to do so.!°9 In this case, the
BIT between the Swiss Confederation and the Islamic Republic of Pakistan
does contain a definition of “investment.”

134. That BIT definition is broad. “Investment” is defined so as to
. include every kind of asset and particularly: ...

(c) claims to money or to any performance having economic
value;

and

153 That freedom does not, however, appear to be unlimited, considering that “investment” may
well be regarded as embodying certain core meaning which distinguishes it from “an ordinary commer-
cial transaction” such as a simple, stand alone, sale of goods or services. Thus, in Fedax, the Tribunal, in
finding that six promissory notes issued by the Government of Venezuela constituted an investment,
observed that “under both ICSID and the Additional Facility Rules the investment in question, even if
indirect, should be distinguishable from an ordinary commercial transaction.” (At paragraph 14 of the
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction.) The tribunal held that promissory notes did constitute an
investment within the meaning of the BIT, noting that the central characteristics of an investment
involve a “certain duration, a certain regularity of profit and return, assumption of risk, a substantial

 

commitment and a significance for the host State’s development.” Fedax also observed that only excep-
tionally has a treaty excluded claims to money that arise solely from commercial contracts for the sale of
goods or services from the definition of investment, citing Article 1139 of the NAFTA and the com-
ments of Mr. Antonio Parra, ICSID’s Deputy Secretary-General, that “[a] broad definition of investment
such as that included in the Agreement is not at all an exceptional situation. On the contrary, most con-
temporary bilateral treaties of this kind refer to ‘every kind of asset’ or to ‘all assets’, including the listing
of examples that can qualify for coverage; claims to money and to any performance having a financial
value are prominent features of such listing.” (At paragraph 20 of Fedax, citing Antonio Parra, “The
Scope of New Investment Laws and International Instruments” in Robert Prichard (ed.) Economic
Development, Foreign Investment and the Law (1996), pp. 27-44 at pp. 35-36 ‘ICSID and Bilateral
Investment Treaties’, News from ICSID, Vol 2, No. 1 (1985), pp. 12-20 at pp. 19-20.)

348 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

(e) concessions under public law, including concessions to search
for, extract or exploit natural resources as well as all other rights
given by law, by contract or by decision of the authority in
accordance with law. (Emphases added)

135. This non-exhaustive definition is, in our view, sufficiently broad to
encompass the PSI Agreement because: firstly, the Agreement’s performance,
by granting SGS the right to carry out pre-shipment inspection services, gave
rise to “claims to money;” secondly, Pakistan effectively granted SGS a public
law concession (“a concession under public law”), since SGS was conferred cer-
tain powers that ordinarily would have been exercised by the Pakistani
Customs service (the identification and valuation of goods for duty purposes);
and thirdly, such rights as SGS exercised pursuant to the PSI Agreement were
“rights given by law” and “by contract.”

136. The PSI Agreement defined the commitments of SGS in such a way
as to ensure that SGS, if it was to comply with them, had to make certain
expenditures in the territory of Pakistan. While the expenditures may be rela-
tively small (Pakistan's Reply estimates them as amounting to approximately
U.S.$800,000, while SGS presents the estimate of U.S.$1.5 million) ,!°4 they
involved the injection of funds into the territory of Pakistan for the carrying
out of SGS’s engagements under the PSI Agreement.!>°

137. The Respondent asserts that those expenditures were “pre-contractual
expenses” which, under the Mihaly International Corporation v. Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka’ case, are not to be taken as investments. We
do not believe that Mihaly offers material guidance in the present circum-
stances. The Claimant here did adduce evidence of expenditures it had
incurred in Pakistan to establish and operate liaison offices in Pakistan neces-
sary to enable it to perform its obligations under the PSI Agreement. It is not
disputed that that Agreement was in fact eventually signed and went into
effect. In Mihaly, no investment agreement was actually concluded by the par-

154 Pakistan's Reply at paragraph 109 and SGS's Reply at paragraph 19(vi) and Exhibits $21 and
$22.

155 [., at $69 to 71. These documents are said to evidence expenditures made in 1992-1993
related to the liaison offices in Pakistan.

56 Mihaly International Corporation v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (“Mihaly’),
ICSID Case No. ARB/00/2, Award of 7 March 2002, ICSID Rev.—FILJ, p. 142 (2002).

CASES. 349

ties; there was, in other words, no agreement to be performed by either party
and no investment actually made by the complainant.!%7

138. It is also important to note certain statements made by the
Government of Pakistan when it objected to the litigation pending in the
Swiss courts. Pakistan’s Brief on Objections to Jurisdiction filed with the
Geneva Court of First Instance described certain aspects of the PSI Agreement
as follows:

This Tender was made in the context of a delegation to the pri-
vate sector of part of the Customs power belonging to the State by
virtue of the Pakistan “Customs Act” 1969 more particularly
Art. 25 which gives competence to the federal public servants
to determine the value of the goods imported and export-
ed...”5

In enumerating the services to be performed by SGS it was : “gen-
erally speaking [to] take care of raising the Customs revenue by
putting into place trustful and simplified proceedings”, “con-
duct enquiries in conjunction with the Pakistan Customs,”
“educate the Pakistani Custom authorities on the techniques of
evaluation and application of Customs rules.!° (Emphases

added)

139. In the same submission, the Government of Pakistan explicitly
described the functions delegated to SGS as being jure imperii in character:

In the Contract of 29 September 1994, the Government of
Pakistan entrusted SGS with the right to exercise its activity of
control in the Customs field.

Identically to the right of a State to levy taxes, the right to levy
Customs duties is a right belonging to the State sovereignty by
essence. Only the State of Pakistan—excluding any individ-

157 The Mihaly tribunal pointed out that under the parties’ Letters of Intent, of Agreement and
of Extension, the Respondent had made it clear that until and unless a contract was actually signed by
the parties, no expenses incurred by the Claimant could be regarded as investment. (At paragraphs 59-
60.)

158 Brief on Objections to Jurisdiction filed with the Court of First Instance. Exhibit $58 to
Claimant's Reply to the Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction.

350 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

ual—has the power to levy Customs duties. If Pakistan
entrusted SGS with certain powers in that field normally
reserved to the State, it did so in the exercise of its public
power...

This link to the State sovereignty of Pakistan seems tighter if
one recalls that the activity of SGS was meant to increase the
Customs revenue of the State. By doing this, SGS did not per-
form a simple commercial activity for the account of the State
of Pakistan; it had to raise the financial revenue of the State
(which indeed SGS alleges to have done)...

 

It appears from what has been said that the legal nature of the
Contract of 29 September 1994 appears clearly to be a con-
cession of public law by which the State of Pakistan granted to
SGS the right (subject to acceptation) to be active—to the
exclusion of any other public entity—in a field which is nor-
mally left to the public power of the State.

 

By concluding the Contract of 29 September 1994, the State
of Pakistan acted jure imperii.!59 (Bold characters and italics in

the original; underscoring added)

140. Accordingly, we hold that the expenditures made by SGS pursuant to
the PSI Agreement constituted an investment within the meaning of the BIT
and that the PSI Agreement amounted to “a concession under public laws”
falling well within the BIT’s definition of investment. We hold, moreover, that
the ICSID Convention's requirement that there be a legal dispute arising
directly out of an “investment” is satisfied.

141. We note, finally, that in its Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction,
the Respondent stated that proceedings are currently underway in both
Switzerland and Pakistan involving the review of the lawfulness (under
Pakistan law) of certain alleged conduct on the part of SGS and its employees
relating to the conclusion of the PSI Agreement. The Respondent therefore
reserved the right to argue—in the event that it is found in those proceedings
that the PSI Agreement had been procured through bribery and corruption—
that this Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the claims set forth in the

159 J.

CASES 351

Request for Arbitration submitted to the ICSID on the additional ground that
the claimant SGS had not invested “in accordance with the laws and regula-
tions” of Pakistan as required by Article 2 of the BIT.'®°

142. The Claimant, in its reply (Counter-Memorial) did not respond to
this reservation, a fact pointed out by Pakistan in its subsequent Reply.!°! In
its Rejoinder, SGS stated it would deal with this issue if and when it arose.'62

143. Accordingly, we consider that the Tribunal is not in a position at this
time to address this potential additional issue. The Respondent’s reservation is
duly noted and placed on the record.!°

2. What effect may be given to the Claimant’s characterization of its
own claims, for purposes of these proceedings on jurisdiction?

144, The parties disagree on this threshold point, each adverting to passages
in the various cases that are adduced to support their respective contentions.
The Respondent asks the Tribunal to subject the claims to a certain degree of
scrutiny to determine whether they are properly characterized as alleged viola-
tions of the Treaty. For its part, SGS argues that Pakistan and the Tribunal
must accept, at this stage, the claims as these have been formulated by SGS;
the determination as to whether there truly have been breaches of the BIT is
for the merits phase of the present proceedings.

145. At this stage of the proceedings, the Tribunal has, as a practical matter,
a limited ability to scrutinize the claims as formulated by the Claimant. Some
cases suggest that the Tribunal need not uncritically accept those claims at face
value, but we consider that if the facts asserted by the Claimant are capable of
being regarded as alleged breaches of the BIT, consistently with the practice of
ICSID tribunals,!®4 the Claimant should be able to have them considered on

160 Respondent's Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction.

161 Pakistan's Reply at paragraph 111.

162 Rejoinder at paragraph 159.

163 By a letter dated 7 May 2003, the Respondent furnished the Tribunal, through its Secretary,
as well as the Claimant and its counsel, a copy of a decision of the Swiss Supreme Court dated 4 April
2003, affirming a decision of the Chambre diaccusation du Canton de Gendve of 15 January 2003, which
admitted the Government of Pakistan as a civil party to the criminal proceedings in Switzerland against
Ms. Benazir Bhutto, Mr. Arif Ali Zardari (her husband) and Mr. Jens Schlegelmilch (her advisor), in
respect of Mr. Schlegelmilch. Ms. Bhutto and Mr. Zardari did not appeal the decision of the Chambre
accusation.

164 Fg, Ameo Asia at paragraph 38.

352 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

their merits.!°5 We conclude that, at this jurisdiction phase, it is for the
Claimant to characterize the claims as it sees fit. We do not exclude the possi-
bility that there may arise a situation where a tribunal may find it necessary at
the very beginning to look behind the claimant's factual claims, but this is not
such a case.

3. Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to determine the Claimant’s
BIT claims, that is, claims of violation of certain provisions of
the BIT?

a. General considerations—Claims of violation of BIT provisions

and claims of violation of contract provisions: BIT claims v.
contract claims.

146. The central question which the Tribunal must address is whether we
have jurisdiction to pass upon and determine SGS’s claims which are ground-
ed on alleged violations by Pakistan of certain provisions of the BIT (“the
Claimant's BIT claims”), or its claims grounded on alleged breaches of certain
provisions of the PSI Agreement (“the Claimant's contract claims”), or both
such types of claims. Before, however, addressing this central issue, it is useful
to examine in general terms BIT claims and contract claims.

147. As a matter of general principle, the same set of facts can give rise to
different claims grounded on differing legal orders: the municipal and the

165 Ar the hearing, the Claimant contended that the fact that the Request for Arbitration was reg-

istered by the ICSID Secretariat showed that the dispute was not manifestly outside the jurisdiction of
the Centre and that took care of the prima facie test because that test was applied by the Secretariat itself,
‘Transcript, Volume 1, pp. 131-132. The Tribunal does not consider this persuasive. The Secretariat's
screening exercise is minimal and cannot be equated to a subsequent tribunal’s evaluation of its jurisdic-
tion to hear the case. For its part, the Respondent contended in response that the Tribunal should use
the analysis employed by the Klickner ad hoc Annulment Committee and subject the claims to careful
scrutiny to ensure that they fall within its mandate. Transcript, Volume 2, pp. 41-52. While the Tribunal
agrees with Respondent's point that careful professionalism is warranted in establishing jurisdiction to
pronounce on a State's obligations vis-a-vis an investor, the Tribunal finds the approach posited by the
Respondent as too exacting at the present stage. The role of an ad hoc Annulment Committee is to review
a tribunal decision to ensure that it meets the requirements of the ICSID Convention and does not
offend any of the grounds set out in its Article 52. This ‘after the fact’ role is necessarily different from
the role of a tribunal at the outset of the case. If the facts as pleaded are plainly incapable of supporting
a finding of breach of the Treaty, part or all of the claim might be struck (see United Parcel Service of
America, Inc. v. Government of Canada, Award on Jurisdiction, at paragraphs 33-37, available at
www.dfait-maeci.gc.ca/tna-nac/document/jurisdiction%20Award.22Nov02.pdf). However, the
Tribunal cannot subject the Request for Arbitration to too rigorous a standard of review at this stage as
the Claimant is not obliged to set out extensive allegations of fact and arguments as to how the acts com-
plained of might give rise to a breach of the Treaty.

CASES. 353

international legal orders. Both the Claimant and Respondent in the present
case do not dispute the soundness of this proposition.!© In the event, this
proposition has recently been discussed and documented in extenso in the
Vivendi Annulment decision where the Annulment Committee said:

95. As to the relation between breach of contract and breach of
treaty in the present case, it must be stressed that Articles 3 and
5 of the BIT do not relate directly to breach of a municipal con-
tract. Rather they set an independent standard. A state may breach
a treaty without breaching a contract, and vice versa, and this is
certainly true of these provisions of the BIT. The point is made
clear in Article 3 of the ILC Articles, which is entitled “Charac-
terization of an act of a State as internationally wrongful”:

The characterization of an act of a State as inter-
nationally wrongful is governed by international
law. Such characterization is not affected by the
characterization of the same act as lawful by
internal law...

96. In accordance with this general principle (which is undoubt-
edly declaratory of general international law), whether there has
been a breach of the BIT and whether there has been a breach of
contract are different questions. Each of these claims will be deter-
mined by reference to its own proper or applicable law—in the
case of the BIT, by international law; in the case of the Concession
Contract, by the proper law of the contract, in other words, the
law of Tucumén. For example, in the case of a claim based on
a treaty, international law rules of attribution apply with the
result that the state of Argentina is internationally responsible
for the acts of its provincial authorities. [Reference to authori-
ties omitted.) By contrast, the state of Argentina is not liable
for the performance of contracts entered into by Tucumén,
which possesses separate legal personality under its own law
and is responsible for the performance of its own contracts.

166 Transcript of Oral Hearing on Objections to Jurisdiction, Volume 1, at p. 21, lines 7-17 (by

the Respondent) and at p. 187, lines 6-9 (by the Claimant).

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

97. The distinction between the role of international and
municipal law in matters of international responsibility is
stressed in the commentary to Article 3 of the ILC Articles,
which reads in relevant part as follows:

(4) The International Court has often referred
to and applied the principle. For example in
the Reparation for Injuries case, it noted that
“laJs the claim is based on the breach of an
international obligation on the part of the
Member held responsible... The Member can-
not contend that this obligation is governed by
municipal law”. In the ELSI case, a Chamber
of the Court emphasized this rule, stating that:
“Compliance with municipal law and compli-
ance with the provisions of a treaty are different
questions. What is a breach of treaty may be law-
ful in the municipal law and what is unlawful in
the municipal law may be wholly innocent of vio-
lation of a treaty provision. Even had the Prefect
held the requisition to be entirely justified in
Italian law, this would not exclude the possibil-
ity that it was a violation of the FCN Treaty.”

Conversely, as the Chamber explained:

“...the fact that an act of a public authority may
have been unlawful in municipal law does not
necessarily mean that that act was unlawful in
international law, as a breach of treaty or other-
wise. A finding of the local courts that an act
was unlawful may well be relevant to an argu-
ment that it was also arbitrary; but by itself,
and without more, unlawfulness cannot be said
to amount to arbitrariness... Nor does it fol-
low from a finding by a municipal court that
an act was unjustified, or unreasonable, or
arbitrary, that that act is necessarily to be
classed as arbitrary in international law, though
the qualification given to the impugned act by

CASES.

148.

a municipal authority may be a valuable indi-
cation.”

(7) The rule that the characterization of conduct
as unlawful in international law cannot be
affected by the characterization of the same act as
lawful in internal law makes no exception for
cases where rules of international law require a
State to conform to the provisions of its internal
law, for instance by applying to aliens the same
legal treatment as to nationals. It is true that in
such a case, compliance with internal law is rel-
evant to the question of international responsi-
bility. But this is because the rule of interna-
tional law makes it relevant, e.g. by incorporat-
ing the standard of compliance with internal
law as the applicable international standard or
as an aspect of it. Especially in the fields of
injury to aliens and their property and of
human rights, the content and application of
internal law will often be relevant to the ques-
tion of international responsibility. In every
case it will be seen on analysis that either the
provisions of internal law are relevant as facts
in applying the applicable international stan-
dard, or else that they are actually incorporat-
ed in some form, conditionally or uncondi-
tionally, into that standard.'67 (Emphases
added)

355

BIT claims and contract claims appear reasonably distinct in principle.

Complexities, however, arise on the ground, as it were, particularly where, as
in the present case, each party claims that one tribunal (this Tribunal or the
PSI Agreement arbitrator) has jurisdiction over both types of claims which are
alleged to co-exist. In the Vivendi Annulment decision, the Annulment
Committee went on to say that:

167 Vivendi Annulment, supra, at paragraphs 95 and 97.

356 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

98. Ina case where the essential basis of a claim brought before
an international tribunal is a breach of contract, the tribunal

will give effect any valid choice of forum clause in the contract.'°8

101. On the other hand, where the fundamental basis of the
claim is a treaty laying down an independent standard by which
the conduct of the parties is to be judged, the existence of an
exclusive jurisdiction clause in a contract between the claimant
and the respondent state—cannot operate as a bar to the applica-
tion of the treaty standard. At most, it might be relevant—as
municipal law will often be relevant—in assessing whether

there has been a breach of the treaty. (Emphases added)

b. Jurisdiction of the Tribunal to determine claims of violation of
certain provisions of the BIT.

149. The pertinent portions of Article 9 of the BIT need to be recalled:
Article 9

Disputes between a Contracting Party and an investor of the
other Contracting Party

(1) For the purpose of solving disputes with respect to invest-
ments between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party and without prejudice to Article 10 of this
Agreement (Disputes between Contracting Parties), consulta-
tions will take place between the parties concerned.

(2) If these consultations do not result in a solution within
twelve months and if the investor concerned gives a written con-

168 The Committee went on to observe in a footnote and subsequent paragraph:

That is, unless the treaty in question otherwise provides. See ¢.g., Article II (1) of the Claims
Settlement Declaration of 19 January 1981, 1 Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal Reports p. 9, which overrode
exclusive jurisdiction clauses concerning United States courts but not Iranian courts: see the cases cited
by CN. Brower & J.D. Brueschks, The Jran-United States Claims Tribunal (The Hague, Martinus
Nijhoff, 1998), pp. 60-72. The Committee does not need to consider whether the effect of Article 8 of
the BIT is to override exclusive jurisdiction clauses in contracts underlying investments to which the BIT

applies.

CASES. 357

sent, the dispute shall be submitted to the arbitration of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes, insti-
tuted by the Convention of Washington of March 18, 1965,
for the settlement of disputes regarding investments between
States and nationals of other States. (Emphases added)

150. A treaty interpreter can scarcely avoid noting the sparseness of the lan-
guage used in Article 9(1) and (2) of the BIT. Textually, Article 9(1) and (2)
refer neither to disputes based on claimed violations of the BIT nor to disputes
based on claimed violations of some contract between the investor of one
Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party. But if Article 9 relates to
any dispute at all between an investor and a Contracting Party, it must com-
prehend disputes constituted by claimed violations of BIT provisions estab-
lishing substantive standards of treatment by one Contracting Party of
investors of the other Contracting Party. Any other view would tend to erode
significantly those substantive treaty standards of treatment.

151. The difficult question has commonly been whether the jurisdiction to
determine issues of violation of certain BIT provisions is exclusively vested in
the ICSID tribunal formed under, e.g, Article 9(2) of the BIT, or is shared
with some other tribunal or a sole arbitrator constituted under some other
agreement or instrument. It is important in this connection to observe that
Article 9(2) of the BIT provides only one recourse to an investor, that is,
recourse to a tribunal constituted under the ICSID Convention. No other
option is given to the investor by the BIT. There is, therefore, no fork-in-the
road provision in Article 9 requiring an investor to stay with the forum it has
opted for, whether in respect of BIT claims or of any other kind of claims. At
the same time, the BIT does not set out any requirement of prior recourse to
the municipal courts of the Contracting Party involved.

 

152. Cast in slightly different terms, in the BIT itself, the Contracting
Parties have not stated that the jurisdiction of the ICSID-constituted tribunal
is not exclusive. The written consent of the Claimant to the jurisdiction of this
Tribunal is similarly silent on this specific point; it does not state that the juris-
diction of the Tribunal to determine claims of violation of the BIT is not
exclusive.

153. It is also pertinent to recall that the PST Agreement was concluded by
the parties on 29 September 1994, while the BIT was signed by the

358 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Contracting Parties on 11 July 1995. It hence cannot be reasonably assumed
that the parties to the PSI Agreement intended to vest in an arbitrator appoint-
ed under that Agreement and the Pakistan Arbitration Act, 1940, Section 20,
authority to pass upon and decide claimed violations of the BIT which was
then still hidden in the future. At the same time, it should be noted that the
BIT, by its express terms (Article 2), is made applicable to investments made
in the territory of a Contracting Party on 2 September 1954 and onward.
Thus, disputes arising in respect of investments made as early as 2 September
1954, in other words, pre-BIT disputes, may be brought before an ICSID tri-
bunal constituted pursuant to the BIT.

154. — Still another circumstance which bears noting is that, to the knowl-
edge of the Tribunal, no claims grounded on violation of the substantive stan-
dards of the BIT have been submitted by either party to the arbitrator appoint-
ed pursuant to the PSI Agreement. The Claimant SGS has not done so. It
would be difficult to suppose that the Respondent would do so, in the face of
the 3 July 2002 decision, which has become final, of the Supreme Court of
Pakistan!® to the effect, inter alia, that the BIT has no legal effect inside
Pakistan. Nevertheless, Pakistan has argued before us that the arbitrator seized
of claims grounded on violation of the PSI Agreement would have jurisdiction
not only over such contract claims but also over the BIT claims. We are not
persuaded that SGS’s BIT claims against Pakistan are subject to the jurisdic-
tion of the Islamabad arbitrator if only because such claims are based not on
the PSI Agreement, but rather allege a cause of action under the BIT. Even if
BIT claims were somehow brought before the PSI Agreement arbitrator, and
the arbitrator were to take cognizance of them, such filing will not divest the
Tribunal of its jurisdiction to determine the Claimant's BIT claims.

155. We conclude that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to pass upon and deter-
mine the claims of violation of provisions of the Swiss-Pakistan BIT raised by
the Claimant. We do not consider that that jurisdiction would to any degree
be shared by the PSI Agreement arbitrator.

169 See the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 2, dated 16 October 2002, on the Claimant's Request
for Provisional Measures.

CASES. 359

4, Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to determine the Claimant’s
contractual claims, that is, claims of violation of the PSI
Agreement?

156. The Respondent argues vigorously that the Tribunal is bereft of juris-
diction to pass upon and decide the Claimant’ claims which are based on
alleged violations by Pakistan of certain provisions of the PSI Agreement. Pakistan
has its own claims based on alleged breaches by SGS of the PSI Agreement;
these claims of Pakistan are, however, clearly not before this Tribunal since
these have been lodged before the PSI Agreement arbitrator and nowhere else.
On the other hand, SGS asserts that this Tribunal has jurisdiction to take cog-
nizance of and decide, not only the BIT claims of SGS, but also SGS’s claims
that Pakistan has breached the PSI Agreement. These claims of SGS ground-
ed on contract are, however, asserted only in the alternative, that is, they are
submitted to the Tribunal only if and to the extent that the Tribunal does not
accept SGS’s view of the legal effect of Article 11 of the BIT. SGS in effect con-
tends that through the juridical medium of Article 11 of the BIT, SGS’s claims
grounded on alleged violation of the PSI Agreement have been transmuted or
“elevated” into claims grounded on alleged breach of the BIT, specifically
Article 11 thereof. Considering the conclusion we reach below in respect of the
application of Article 11 of the BIT in the circumstances of this case, we do
not believe that transmutation of SGS’s contract claims into BIT claims has
occurred. Accordingly, we must here address the issue of whether we have
jurisdiction to determine claims grounded solely on contract, that is, contract
claims which do not include any element of, or amount to, violation of a sub-
stantive BIT standard.

157. The evidence before the Tribunal is that when the PSI Agreement was
under negotiation, the parties agreed that any disputes arising out of their rela-
tionship should be resolved by arbitration rather than by proceedings in the
courts of Pakistan. SGS proposed UNCITRAL arbitration; Pakistan coun-
tered that the arbitration must be governed by the arbitration statute in force
at the time in Pakistan. At the hearing on SGS’s application for interim meas-
ures of protection, the Tribunal was informed by both parties that this was
considered to be a “deal-breaker” for Pakistan and SGS therefore agreed to
arbitration under Pakistan law.'7°

170 Transcript of hearing on the Claimant's Application for Provisional Measures held at The Hague on
23 September 2002, at p. 48, lines 27-28.

360 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

158. The resulting PSI arbitration clause is cast in the following terms:

11.1 Arbitration. Any dispute, controversy or claim aris-
ing out of, or relating to this Agreement, or breach, termination
or invalidity thereof, shall as far as it is possible, be settled ami-
cably. Failing such amicable settlement, any such dispute shall
be settled by arbitration in accordance with the Arbitration Act of
the Territory as presently in force. The place of arbitration shall
be Islamabad, Pakistan and the language to be used in the arbi-
tration proceedings shall be the English language.!7! (Empha-
ses added)

159. The Tribunal is not faced with a situation where the parties have
entered into different contracts establishing differing dispute resolution mech-
anisms. The question is more fundamental: How does the parties’ contractu-
ally established dispute settlement mechanism relate to a general offer made by
Pakistan to arbitrate disputes arising under a BIT that entered into force afier
the PSI Agreement? Does the prior contractual dispute settlement mechanism
take priority over the BIT for some or all of the disputes between the parties,
or does the BIT take priority over the PSI Agreements mechanism for some or all
of the disputes between the parties? These are the questions that this Tribunal
must confront.

160. By any objective reading, Article 11.1 of the PSI Agreement encom-
passes at a minimum contractual and other non-treaty-related disputes arising
out of the PSI Agreement, including its alleged unlawful termination. While
SGS rejects Pakistan’s characterization of its claims as “Contract,”
“Defamation,” and “BIT Claims,” we do not take SGS to be contending that
allegations of breach of the PSI Agreement and related claims are not covered
by the PSI Article 11.1. Indeed, it could not seriously be contended that this
was so. SGS argues instead that the PSI Agreement procedure must give way
to the ICSID procedure contemplated in the BIT (Article 9) precisely because
the contract claims are transformed into BIT claims by the operation of Article
11 of the BIT.

161. We recognize that disputes arising from claims grounded on alleged

violation of the BIT, and disputes arising from claims based wholly on sup-
posed violations of the PSI Agreement, can both be described as “disputes with

171 Pre-Shipment Inspection Agreement, Article 11.1.

CASES 361

respect to investments,” the phrase used in Article 9 of the BIT. That phrase,
however, while descriptive of the factual subject matter of the disputes, does not
relate to the Jegal basis of the claims, or the cause of action asserted in the
claims. In other words, from that description alone, without more, we believe
that no implication necessarily arises that both BIT and purely contract claims
are intended to be covered by the Contracting Parties in Article 9. Neither,
accordingly, does an implication arise that the Article 9 dispute settlement
mechanism would supersede and set at naught all otherwise valid non-ICSID
forum selection clauses in all earlier agreements between Swiss investors and
the Respondent. Thus, we do not see anything in Article 9 or in any other pro-
vision of the BIT that can be read as vesting this Tribunal with jurisdiction
over claims resting ex hypothesi exclusively on contract. Both Claimant and
Respondent have already submitted their respective claims sounding solely on
the PSI Agreement to the PSI Agreement arbitrator. We recognize that the
Claimant did so in a qualified manner and questioned the jurisdiction of the
PSI Agreement arbitrator, albeit on grounds which do not appear to relate to
the issue we here address. We believe that Article 11.1 of the PSI Agreement
is a valid forum selection clause so far as concerns the Claimant’ contract claims
which do not alo amount to BIT claims, and it is a clause that this Tribunal
should respect. We are not suggesting that the parties cannot, by special agree-
ment, lodge in this Tribunal jurisdiction to pass upon and decide claims
sounding solely in the contract. Obviously the parties can. But we do not
believe that they have done so in this case. And should the parties opt to do
that, our jurisdiction over such contract claims will rest on the special agree-
ment, not on the BIT.

162. We conclude that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction with respect to
claims submitted by SGS and based on alleged breaches of the PSI Agreement
which do not also constitute or amount to breaches of the substantive stan-

dards of the BIT.

5. Does Article 11 of the BIT transform purely contractual claims
into BIT claims?

163. Article 11 of the BIT states:
Either Contracting Party shall constantly guarantee the obser-

vance of the commitments it has entered into with respect to
the investments of the investors of the other Contracting Party.

362 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

As noted earlier, during the hearing on the Respondent’s Objections to
Jurisdiction, counsel for the Claimant characterized this clause as an “elevator”
or “mirror effect” clause that takes breaches of contract under municipal law
and elevates them immediately to the level of a breach of an international
treaty.!7 Counsel for the Claimant freely acknowledged that this interpreta-
tion was “far-reaching”, but asserted that nevertheless this is what the article
means and that the Claimant's view of its meaning was supported by the com-
mentary on articles of this type found in other bilateral investment treaties.'75

164. It appears that this is the first international arbitral tribunal that has
had to examine the legal effect of a clause such as Article 11 of the BIT. We
have not been directed to the award of any ICSID or other tribunal in this
regard, and so it appears we have here a case of first impression. We begin, as
we commonly do, by examining the words actually used in Article 11 of the
BIT, ascribing to them their ordinary meaning in their context and in the light
of the object and purpose of Article 11 of the Swiss-Pakistan Treaty and of that
Treaty as a whole.

165. A treaty interpreter must of course seek to give effect to the object and
purpose projected by that Article and by the BIT as a whole. That object and
purpose must be ascertained, in the first instance, from the text itself of Article
11 and the rest of the BIT.!74 Applying these familiar norms of customary
international law on treaty interpretation, we do not find a convincing basis
for accepting the Claimant's contention that Article 11 of the BIT has had the
effect of entitling a Contracting Party’s investor, like SGS, in the face of a valid
forum selection contract clause, to “elevate” its claims grounded solely in a
contract with another Contracting Party, like the PSI Agreement, to claims
grounded on the BIT, and accordingly to bring such contract claims to this
Tribunal for resolution and decision.

166. Firstly, textually, Article 11 falls considerably short of saying what the
Claimant asserts it means. The “commitments” the observance of which a
Contracting Party is to “constantly guarantee” are not limited to contractual

172 Transcript, Volume 1, pp. 140-187.

173 Id., at p. 149, lines 5-6.

174 ADF Group Inc. v. United States of America, (‘ADF’) ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1, Final
Award, available at www.state.gov/documents/organization/16586.pdF.

CASES. 363

commitments.!7> The commitments referred to may be embedded in, ¢.g., the
municipal legislative or administrative or other unilateral measures of a
Contracting Party. The phrase “constantly [to] guarantee the observance” of
some statutory, administrative or contractual commitment simply does not to
our mind, necessarily signal the creation and acceptance of a new internation-
al law obligation on the part of the Contracting Party, where clearly there was
none before. Further, the “commitments” subject matter of Article 11 may,
without imposing excessive violence on the text itself, be commitments of the
State itself as a legal person, or of any office, entity or subdivision (local gov-
ernment units) or legal representative thereof whose acts are, under the law on
state responsibility, attributable to the State itself. As a matter of textuality
therefore, the scope of Article 11 of the BIT, while consisting in its entirety of
only one sentence, appears susceptible of almost indefinite expansion. The text
itself of Article 11 does not purport to state that breaches of contract alleged
by an investor in relation to a contract it has concluded with a State (widely
considered to be a matter of municipal rather than international law) are auto-
matically “elevated” to the level of breaches of international treaty law. Thus,
it appears to us that while the Claimant has sought to spell out the conse-
quences or inferences it would draw from Article 11, the Article itself does not
set forth those consequences.

167. Considering the widely accepted principle with which we started,
namely, that under general international law, a violation of a contract entered
into by a State with an investor of another State, is not, by itself, a violation of
international law, and considering further that the legal consequences that the
Claimant would have us attribute to Article 11 of the BIT are so far-reaching
in scope, and so automatic and unqualified and sweeping in their operation,
so burdensome in their potential impact upon a Contracting Party, we believe
that clear and convincing evidence must be adduced by the Claimant. Clear
and convincing evidence of what? Clear and convincing evidence that such
was indeed the shared intent of the Contracting Parties to the Swiss-Pakistan

175 The Claimant has, for instance, not tried to distinguish between (a) a contract between a
Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party, the applicable law of which is the
national law of the Contracting Party and (b) a State contract with a private investor the applicable law
of which is specified as “international law” or “general principles of law.” The seminal lectures of Prosper
Weil, Problémes Relatifs aux Contrats Passés Entre un Etat et un Particulier, Hague Recueil des Cours (Vol.
III, 1969), Tome 128, pp. 157-188, explored the theoretical consequences of “internationalization” of
contracts the /ex contractus of which is determined to be international law or general principles of law,
such as the natural resources concessions granted, in an earlier day, by, e.g., Iran, Abu Dhabi and Qatar.
The Claimant's reading of Article 11 of the BIT apparently extends to every contract, or other commit-
ment, that a Contracting Party has entered into or assumed, or may in the future enter into or under-
take with respect to an investor of the other Contracting Party.

364 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Investment Protection Treaty in incorporating Article 11 in the BIT. We do
not find such evidence in the text itself of Article 11. We have not been point-
ed to any other evidence of the putative common intent of the Contracting
Parties by the Claimant.

168. The consequences of accepting the Claimant's reading of Article 11 of
the BIT should be spelled out in some detail. Firstly, Article 11 would amount
to incorporating by reference an unlimited number of State contracts, as well
as other municipal law instruments setting out State commitments including
unilateral commitments to an investor of the other Contracting Party. Any
alleged violation of those contracts and other instruments would be treated as
a breach of the BIT. Secondly, the Claimant's view of Article 11 tends to make
Articles 3 to 7 of the BIT substantially superfluous. There would be no real
need to demonstrate a violation of those substantive treaty standards if a sim-
ple breach of contract, or of municipal statute or regulation, by itself, would
suffice to constitute a treaty violation on the part of a Contracting Party and
engage the international responsibility of the Party. A third consequence
would be that an investor may, at will, nullify any freely negotiated dispute set-
tlement clause in a State contract. On the reading of Article 11 urged by the
Claimant, the benefits of the dispute settlement provisions of a contract with
a State also a party to a BIT, would flow only to the investor. For that investor
could always defeat the State’s invocation of the contractually specified forum,
and render any mutually agreed procedure of dispute settlement, other than
BIT-specified ICSID arbitration, a dead-letter, at the investor's choice. The
investor would remain free to go to arbitration either under the contract or
under the BIT. But the State party to the contract would be effectively pre-
cluded from proceeding to the arbitral forum specified in the contract unless
the investor was minded to agree. The Tribunal considers that Article 11 of the
BIT should be read in such a way as to enhance mutuality and balance of ben-
efits in the inter-relation of different agreements located in differing legal
orders.

169. Another consideration that appears to us to support our reading of
Article 11 of the BIT, is the location of Article 11 in the BIT. The context of
Article 11 includes the structure and content of the rest of the Treaty. We note
that Article 11 is not placed together with the substantive obligations under-
taken by the Contracting Parties in Articles 3 to 7: promotion and admission
of investments in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Contracting
Party (Article 3); prohibition of impairment, by “unreasonable or discriminat-
ing measures,” of the management, use, enjoyment, e¢c. of such investments

CASES. 365

and according “fair and equitable treatment” to investors of the other
Contracting Party (Article 4); free cross-border transfer of payments relating
to the protected investments (Article 5); prohibition of expropriation or other
measures having the same nature or effect, unless taken in the public interest,
on a non-discriminatory basis, under due process of law and with provision for
effective and adequate and prompt compensation (Article 6); and the most-
favored-investor provision (Article 7). These substantive standards are marked
off by Article 8 (“Principle of Subrogation”) from the two dispute settlement
procedures recognized in the BIT: investor v. Contracting Party (Article 9);
and Contracting Parties inter se (Article 10). Then follows Article 11
(“Observance of Commitments”) which in turn is followed by the “Final
ions” (Article 12) and the signature clause.

 

Provi

 

170. Given the above structure and sequence of the rest of the Treaty, we
consider that, had Switzerland and Pakistan intended Article 11 to embody a
substantive “first order” standard obligation, they would logically have placed
Article 11 among the substantive “first order” obligations set out in Articles 3
to 7. The separation of Article 11 from those obligations by the subrogation
article and the two dispute settlement provisions (Articles 9 and 10), indicates
to our mind that Article 11 was not meant to project a substantive obligation
like those set out in Articles 3 to 7, let alone one that could, when read as SGS
asks us to read it, supersede and render largely redundant the substantive obli-
gations provided for in Articles 3 to 7.176

171. We believe, for the foregoing considerations, that Article 11 of the BIT
would have to be considerably more specifically worded before it can reason-
ably be read in the extraordinarily expansive manner submitted by the
Claimant.!’” The appropriate interpretive approach is the prudential one

176 We do not, of course, here suggest that the particular location by itself of a provision within
the Treaty affords anything like conclusive indication of the specific intent of the Contracting Parties.
We are saying that the interpretation urged by the Claimant raises questions as to the coherence of the
structuring of the BIT.

17”'The Claimant also invites our attention to Article II (2) of the UK-Pakistan BIT and contends
that on the basis of the most-favored-investor clause in Article 7 of the Swiss-Pakistan BIT and Maffezini
v. Kingdom of Spain (“Maffezini”), 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision on Jurisdiction, 25 January
2000, paragraphs 38-64, the Claimant is entitled to the benefit of the UK-Pakistan BIT. Without pass-
ing upon the applicability of Article 7 of the Swiss-Pakistan BIT to the specific issue we are addressing,
we consider that Article II(2) of the UK-Pakistan BIT does not exhibit the kind of clarity and specifici-
ty that is appropriately demanded in this respect by a treaty interpreter. We do not see a significant dif-
ference between Article 11 of the Swiss-Pakistan BIT and Article 1(2) of the UK-Pakistan BIT.

366 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

summed up in the literature as in dubio pars mitior est sequenda, or more terse-
ly, in dubio mitius.'78

172. The Claimant vigorously submits that any view of Article 11 of the
BIT other than the one urged by it, would render Article 11 inutile, a result
abhorrent to the principle of effectiveness in treaty interpretation. We are not
persuaded that rejecting SGS’s reading of Article 11 would necessarily reduce

178 See in this connection, ¢,g., Appellate Body Report, EC Measures Concerning Meat and Meat
Products (Hormones), WT/DS26/AB/R; WT/DS48/AB/R, adopted 16 January 1998, paragraphs 163-
165. Footnote 154 in this Appellate Body Report sets out a representative collection of the pertinent lit-
erature on this interpretative principle.

In the very recent decision in The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of
America (‘Loewen’), ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, 26 June 2003, available at www.state.gov/docu-
ments/organization/22094.pdf, the claimants contended that NAFTA Article 1121, which requires an
investor to waive its right to initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court under the
law of any Party to NAFTA any proceedings with respect to the measure of a Party, if the investor wish-
es to proceed under Chapter Eleven of the NAFTA, in effect dispenses with the requirement that a deci-
sion of a lower court be challenged through the judicial process before a Party can be held responsible
for a breach of international law constituted by a judicial decision. The Loewen Tribunal rejected this
contention and refused to read NAFTA Article 1121 as the claimants urged. The Loewen Tribunal said:

160. An important principle of international law should not be held to have been tacitly dis-

‘pensed with by international agreement, in the absence of words making clear an intention to

do so (Elettronica Sicula SpA (ELSI) United States v. Italy (1989) ICJ 15 at 42). Such an

intention may be exhibited by express provisions which are at variance with the continued oper-

ation of the relevant principle of international law.

161. Although the precise purpose of NAFTA Article 1121 is not altogether clear it

requires a waiver of domestic proceedings as a condition of making a claim to a NAFTA

tribunal. Professor Greenwood and Sit Robert Jennings agree that Article 1121 “is not

about the local remedies rule”. One thing is, however, reasonably clear about Article 1121

and that is that it says nothing expressly about the requirement that, in the context of a judi-

cial violation of international law, the judicial process be continued to the highest level

162. Nor is there any basis for implying any dispensation of that requirement. It would be

strange indeed if sub silentio the international rule were to be swept away. And it would be

very strange ia Stare were to be confronted with liability for a breach of international law

committed by its magistrate or low-ranking judicial officer when domestic avenues of

appeal are not pursued, let alone exhausted. If Article 1121 were to have that effect, it
would encourage resort to NAFTA tribunals rather than resort to the appellate courts and
review processes of the host State, an outcome which would seem surprising, having regard

to the sophisticated legal systems of the NAFTA Parties. Such an outcome would have the

affect of making a State potentially liable for NAFTA violations when domestic appeal or

review, if pursued, might have avoided any liability on the part of the State, Further, it is

unlikely that the Parties to NAFTA would have wished to encourage recourse to NAFTA arbi-
tration at the expense of domestic appeal or review when, in the general run of cases, domestic

eal or review would offer more wide-ranging review as they are not confined to breaches of
international law,

164. For the reasons given, Anticle 1121 involves no waiver of the duy to pursue local
remedies in its application to a breach of international law constituted by a judicial act.
(Emphases added)

We agree with the interpretative approach of the Loewen Tribunal.

CASES. 367

that Article to “pure exhortation”, that is, to a non-normative statement. At
least two points may be usefully made in this connection. Firstly, we do not
consider that confirmation in a treaty that a Contracting Party is bound under
and pursuant to a contract, or a statute or other municipal law issuance is
devoid of appreciable normative value, either in the municipal or in the inter-
national legal sphere. That confirmation could, for instance, signal an implied
affirmative commitment to enact implementing rules and regulations neces-
sary or appropriate to give effect to a contractual or statutory undertaking in
favor of investors of another Contracting Party that would otherwise be a dead
letter. Secondly, we do not preclude the possibility that under exceptional cir-
cumstances, a violation of certain provisions of a State contract with an
investor of another State might constitute violation of a treaty provision (like
Article 11 of the BIT) enjoining a Contracting Party constantly to guarantee
the observance of contracts with investors of another Contracting Party. For
instance, ifa Contracting Party were to take action that materially impedes the
ability of an investor to prosecute its claims before an international arbitration
tribunal (having previously agreed to such arbitration in a contract with the
investor), or were to refuse to go to such arbitration at all and leave the investor
only the option of going before the ordinary courts of the Contracting Party
(which actions need not amount to “denial of justice”), that Contracting Party
may arguably be regarded as having failed “constantly [to] guarantee the
observance of [its] commitments” within the meaning of Article 11 of the
Swiss-Pakistan BIT. The modes by which a Contracting Party may “constant-
ly guarantee the observance of” its contractual or statutory or administrative
municipal law commitments with respect to investments are not necessarily
exhausted by the instant transubstantiation of contract claims into BIT claims
posited by the Claimant.

173. The Tribunal is not saying that States may not agree with each other
in a BIT that henceforth, all breaches of each State’s contracts with investors
of the other State are forthwith converted into and to be treated as breaches of
the BIT. What the Tribunal is stressing is that in this case, there is no clear and
persuasive evidence that such was in fact the intention of both Switzerland and
Pakistan in adopting Article 11 of the BIT. Pakistan for its part in effect denies
that, in concluding the BIT, it had any such intention. SGS, of course, does
not speak for Switzerland. But it has not submitted evidence of the necessary
level of specificity and explicitness of text. We believe and so hold that, in the
circumstances of this case, SGS’s claim about Article 11 of the BIT must be
rejected.

368 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

174. _ In view of the conclusion we have reached in respect of the application
of Article 9 of the BIT to the facts of this case, the Tribunal finds it unneces-
sary to address Article 26 of the ICSID Convention in any detail.

6. Does the Claimant's conduct in the Swiss legal proceedings and in
the PSI Agreement arbitration give rise to estoppel?

175. The Tribunal notes that the estoppel argument has been advanced by
the Respondent on a general basis regarding SGS’s contract and tort claims
and its BIT claims. However, as SGS points out, whatever may have occurred
in the prior proceedings, SGS has not alleged a breach of the BIT either in the
Swiss courts or in its counter-claim before the PSI Agreement arbitrator.

176. Unlike some BITs and investment protection treaties, the Swiss-
Pakistan BIT does not contain a “fork in the road” provision akin to Article
8(3) of the France-Argentina BIT, which provides that “[o]nce an investor has
submitted the dispute to the courts of the Contracting Party concerned or to
international arbitration, the choice of one or the other of these procedures is
final.”!7? Neither does the BIT set out a provision like Article 1121 of the
NAFTA which requires that the would-be claimant must waive its “right to
initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court under the law
of any Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any proceedings with
respect to the measure of the disputing [NAFTA] Party that is alleged to be a
breach” of Section A of Chapter Eleven of NAFTA!®? and must desist from
pursuing claims for damages in relation to such measure.

177. In the absence of such treaty language, we are not free to read into the
Swiss-Pakistan BIT a requirement that would preclude a would-be claimant
from resorting to other remedies in respect of contract claims prior to the exer-
cise of its BIT rights. Moreover, given the general purpose of the ICSID
Convention and the object and purpose of the BIT, we would be hesitant to
imply estoppel (or waiver for that matter) with respect to BIT claims that have
not in fact been alleged in another forum. As they have not been advanced,
and SGS did not hold out in any way that they would not be advanced, we
cannot find that it is estopped from advancing its BIT claims now.

  

179 United Nations Treaty S

es, vol. 1819, p. 456.
180 NAPTA, Article 1121.

CASES. 369

7. Does the Claimant's conduct in the Swiss legal proceedings and in
the PSI Agreement arbitration amount to waiver of its rights under
the BIT?

178. In its pleadings and at the oral hearing, Pakistan emphasized that SGS
of its own volition not only objected to the jurisdiction of the PSI Agreement

arbitrator, but also filed a counter-claim in the PSI arbitration proceeding,

179. The counter-claim filed by SGS did contain a general reservation, stat-
ing that SGS’s participation in that arbitration was conditional!®? and “with-
out prejudice to the respondent's other legal rights under the laws of Pakistan
as well as such other law of the domicile of the respondent or international law
as may be applicable.”!®3 Pakistan countered, arguing that SGS’s objections
were baseless, and that SGS had gone further than what was necessary to do
in order to object to the jurisdiction of the Islamabad arbitrator by filing a
counter-claim setting out substantive claims, and that none of SGS’s objec-
tions referred at all to the possibility of ICSID arbitration.!®4

180. The Tribunal must note that SGS did object to the jurisdiction of the
PSI Agreement arbitrator and did reserve its rights “without prejudice to [its]
..tights under...international law.” While it is true that in doing so SGS
made no reference to the possibility of ICSID arbitration, it cannot be said
that SGS unequivocally submitted to the jurisdiction of the PSI Agreement
arbitrator. Since the BIT does not contain a provision that requires a would-
be claimant to refrain from pursuing claims for damages in other fora in order
to invoke ICSID jurisdiction, the Tribunal cannot read such a requirement
into the BIT.

181. Pakistan describes the BIT claims as “dressed up” contract claims.
Whatever the merits of the BIT claims (and we do not speak to those merits
at this time), SGS has alleged them as separate BIT claims, and it is entitled to
have this Tribunal pass upon them.'8° To accept the argument of the
Respondent that the BIT claims are in reality contract claims and that SGS has
waived the right to come to this Tribunal, would deny the Claimant its right
to make out its arguments that they are not and would require the Tribunal to

18!Transcript, Volume 1, pp. 60-65.

182 Transcript, Volume 1, p. 73, lines 17-23.
183 Respondent's Reply. Exhibit $26.

184 Transcript, Volume 1, pp. 73-83.

185 Transcript, Volume 1, pp. 129-130.

370 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

pass upon, here and now, the merits of the BIT claims. While SGS has pre-
sented contractual counter-claims in the PSI Agreement arbitration and has
sought relief that in six of seven heads is identical to that claimed in this pro-
ceeding, SGS has not presented claims expressly based on alleged violations of
the BIT before any other court or tribunal. We must reject the waiver argu-
ment with respect to the Claimant’s BIT claims.

8. Does the doctrine of lis pendens preclude the Claimant from pur-
suing its claims before the Tribunal?

182. The Tribunal’s earlier finding that it has no concurrent jurisdiction
over the PSI Agreement claims leads it to the conclusion that the lis pendens
doctrine has no application in this case. Pakistan asserted that the doctrine of
ne bis in idem dictates a dismissal; however, if the claims are not idem, bis does
not arise. As the causes of action are not identical, the doctrine of lis pendens
cannot operate to preclude us from exercising jurisdiction over the BIT claims.

9. What effect may be given to the requirement of consultations
between the parties in Article 9 of the BIT?

183. The Respondent underscores the fact that SGS filed its Request for
Arbitration only two (2) days after filing its consent to the ICSID arbitration
under the BIT. Article 9(1) of the BIT provides that “for the purpose of solv-
ing disputes with respect to investments between a Contracting Party and an
investor of the other Contracting Party,...consultations shall take place
between the parties concerned.” Article 9(2) goes on to state that “[iJf these
consultations do not result in a solution within twelve months” and the
investor concerned gives its consent, the dispute shall be submitted to ICSID
arbitration.

184. Tribunals have generally tended to treat consultation periods as direc-
tory and procedural rather than as mandatory and jurisdictional in nature.'®°
Compliance with such a requirement is, accordingly, not seen as amounting to
a condition precedent for the vesting of jurisdiction. The investor's consent
was given in October 2001 and the Respondent has not (to our knowledge)
tried to enter into consultations in respect of the BIT claims. Indeed, consid-
ering what the Supreme Court of Pakistan has said about the BIT, it would

186 Eg, Ethyl Corporation v. The Government of Canada, Award on Jurisdiction, 24 June 1998,
38 LL.M. 708, 724

CASES 371

have been surprising had the Respondent manifested an inclination to comply
with Article 9’s consultation provisions. It should also be noted that in the pro-
longed period of time from termination of the PSI Agreement by Pakistan to
the submission of SGS’s written consent under the BIT, there was little indi-
cation of any inclination on the part of either party to enter into negotiations
or consultations in respect of the unfolding dispute. Finally, it does not appear
consistent with the need for orderly and cost-effective procedure to halt this
arbitration at this juncture and require the Claimant first to consult with the
Respondent before re-submitting the Claimant's BIT claims to this Tribunal.

10. Should this Tribunal dismiss or stay the proceeding as urged by the
Respondent until the contract claims are addressed?

185. The Respondent urges the Tribunal to dismiss or stay this proceeding
because all of SGS’s BIT claims will require a prior finding that Pakistan has
breached Sections 10.4 and 10.6 of the PSI Agreement.!¥7 Pakistan asserts that
in such circumstances, international tribunals have either dismissed or stayed
the claims, without prejudice to the claimant’s right to re-file its case when the
underlying factual claims are resolved or to stay proceedings until such factu-
al issues can be resolved. !88

186. This Tribunal has jurisdiction over the Treaty claims. The right to exer-
cise that jurisdiction does not depend upon the findings of the PSI Agreement
arbitrator; that is, such findings are not a factual or legal predicate for the con-
sideration of whether Pakistan violated the Treaty obligations to which SGS
points.'®? This Tribunal can and must consider all facts relevant to determi-
nation of the BIT causes of action, including facts relating to the terms of the
PSI Agreement. In doing so, we shall not seek to determine the claims assert-
ed under the PSI Agreement; we will determine only the BIT claims of the
Claimant. As the Vivendi Annulment Committee observed:

105. ... it is one thing to exercise contractual jurisdiction
(arguably exclusively vested in the administrative tribunals of
Tucuman by virtue of the Concession Contract) and another to

187 ty Transcript, Volume 1, at pp. 115-124.
Reply at paragraphs 113-114. Transcript, Volume 2, pp. 1126-128.
189 While SGS contended that the Tribunal was the judge of the contract breaches in light of Articles 9
and 11, it went on to say that “in any event if you were not, you don't need to be the judge of the contract in
order to be the judge of the violation of the treaty, be it the classic violations or be it the violations because of
the observance of commitments provision.” Transcript, Volume 2, p. 114, lines 3-7.

  

372 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

take into account the terms of a contract in determining whether
there has been a breach of a distinct standard of international

law...19 (Emphases added)

187. We agree with the above observation. This Tribunal is bound to exer-
cise its jurisdiction and proceed to consider the BIT claims that are properly
before it. Accordingly, we cannot grant the request for a stay of these proceed-
ings.

188. The Claimant can proceed with the BIT claims that are within the
subject-matter jurisdiction of this Tribunal without having the factual predi-
cate of a determination by the PSI Agreement arbitrator that either party
breached that Agreement. SGS would be in the same position as the claimant
in the Vivendi case. It is entitled to assert that the acts complained of, indi-
vidually or collectively, rise to the level of a breach of the BIT, but must make
a clear showing of conduct which is, in the circumstances, contrary to the rel-
evant BIT standard.!9!

189. The determination of the PSI Agreement arbitrator as to whether the
Respondent (or the Claimant, for that matter) acted in accordance with that
Agreement is in any event not dispositive of whether Pakistan acted consis-
tently with its BIT obligations. The completion of the PSI Agreement arbitra-
tion is thus not a necessary pre-condition to the resolution of SGS’s BIT
claims.

PART V: DECISION

190. In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal decides as follows:

(a) This Tribunal has jurisdiction over SGS’s claims that Pakistan
breached the Agreement between the Swiss Confederation and
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan on the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments of 11 July 1995;

(b) This Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over SGS’s claims that
Pakistan breached the PSI Agreement or over Pakistan’s claims
that SGS breached the PSI Agreement;

190 Vivendi Annulment, supra, at paragraph 105.
191 [d., at paragraph 113.

CASES. 373

(c) The Tribunal’s second recommendation in its Procedural Order
No. 2, dated 16 October 2002, that the PSI Agreement arbitra-
tion be stayed pending a resolution of this jurisdictional objec-
tion is hereby withdrawn;

(d) The balance of Procedural Order No. 2 remains fully in effect;

(ec) Pakistan’s request that this Tribunal stay this arbitration pending
a resolution of the PSI Agreement arbitration is denied; and

(f) The Tribunal will proceed to the merits phase of the proceeding.

191. Both parties requested an award of costs. The Tribunal declines to issue
such an award at this time.

FLORENTINO P. FELICIANO.
President of the Tribunal

CHRISTOPHER THOMAS Q.C. ANDRE FAURES
Arbitrator Arbitrator

August 6, 2003


