Date of dispatch to the parties: February 6, 2007

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

SIEMENS A.G.
(CLAIMANT)
AND
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
(RESPONDENT)

ICSID CASE No. ARB/02/8

 

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President
Judge Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator
Professor Domingo Bello Janeiro, Arbitrator
Secretary of the Tribunal

Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent
Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil H.E. Osvaldo César Guglielmino
M. & M. Bomchil Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina
Buenos Aires Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina
Argentina Buenos Aires
Argentina
and

Dr. Peter Gnam
Siemens A.G.

FON >

Vi.

ep

a

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PROCEDURAL HISTORY .
THE JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBUNAL
APPLICABLE LAW

   
 

 

 

 

 

 

Positions of the Partie: 18
Considerations of the TriDUMal ............c.cscsceesesseeeseseseeeesesesesnesssesesesenesesneneneseaeee 21
THE FACTS woo.ceccecccccceeceseeecesceeecececesseseseseeeesaneesnecesesesesseseeseaneeseeee 23
ALLEGATIONS OF THE PARTIES .......c.cces cece ceceesescsenenseeeeeseecseanee 26
Memorial 26
Counter-Memorial 32
Reply 39
Rejoinder 49
MERITS OF THE DISPUTE... ccc cee ceeeeeeseesesnececeseseeeneeeeaas 55
Umbrella Clause 55

 

a) Positions of the Partie:

 

b) Considerations of the Tribunal

 

 

 

Consent of Siemens and SITS

Expropriation
a) Positions of the Partie: 61
b) Considerations of the Tribunal 0.0.0.0... cece cecececeeneeeeeeeeeeneeneeeeeeenee 75

 

i) Treaty claims and Contract Claims.
ii) Ordinary Courts’ Review of the Legality of the Expropriation and of the

Amount on Account of the Compensation under Article 4(2) of the Treaty......... 80
iii) Autonomy of the Measures constituting Creeping Expropriation................. 81
iv) Expropriation of Contractual Rights and Proper Law of the Contract.......... 82
v) _ Intent to Expropriate 83

 

vi) Was the Investment Expropriated? ..............cceee

 

 

vii) Was the expropriation in accordance with the Treaty?

 

 

Fair and equitable treatment ............cccccccsccecseseseeeeeesesnssesesesestenesesssnensseseseenenenes 85
a) Positions of the Partie: 85
b) Considerations of the Tribunal .............cccccccceecetssesesteesesesteeeessseensnessseeneneees 91

Arbitrary and Discriminatory Measures ..............cccescsccceesesteeesesesceeeseseseeneseseeeseeee 98
a) Positions of the Partie: 98
b) Considerations of the Tribunal .............cccccscccecssesesesneseseeeseetesesssnsteseensneneneees 101

Vil. COMPENSATION...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Positions of the Partie: 103

2. Considerations of the Tribunal ..............:ccccccceseseseeseseseeeeteesesestenesssesnenessseenenee 111
a) Applicable Law 111

b) Value of the Investment. 112

c) Method of Valuation 113

d) Evidence. 115

€) Currency of Compensattion...........c.cccccscceeescsecestesesesneseseeesnessesssnsneneesseenenees 116

f) — Amount of Compensation .............ccccccccsceeseetssessseeeeesessenesessseenesesssesnseneseeeas 116

g) Interest 124
VIN COSTS oo. cece ccsesnenecececsceessensessssseeesseceneseceseseeesssaneaneneeaee 127
IX. DECISION... cece cscs cseseeecesessesecececssenesssssessssaneeeecenesenenenee 128

I Procedural History

1. On May 23, 2002, the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) received from Siemens A.G.
(“Siemens” or “Claimant”) a request for arbitration against the Argentine Republic
(“‘Respondent”, “Argentina” or “Government”). On June 7, 2002, the Centre
acknowledged receipt of the request in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings
(‘Institution Rules”) and informed the Claimant that it would not take further
action until it had received the prescribed lodging fee as provided by Institution
Rule 5(1)(b). On June 13, 2002, the Centre acknowledged receipt of the
prescribed lodging fee by the Claimant and transmitted a copy of the request to
Argentina and to the Argentine Embassy in Washington, D.C. in accordance with
Institution Rule 5(2).

2. According to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (“the
Convention”), the Secretary-General of the Centre registered the request for
arbitration on July 17, 2002. In accordance with Institution Rule 7, the Secretary-
General notified the parties on the same date of the registration of the request
and invited them to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as
possible.

3. On August 7, 2002, the parties agreed that the Arbitral Tribunal
would consist of three arbitrators, one arbitrator to be appointed by each party
and the third, who shall serve as the President of the Tribunal, to be appointed by
the agreement of the parties. The Claimant appointed Judge Charles N. Brower,
a U.S. national, and the Respondent appointed Professor Domingo Bello Janeiro,
a Spanish national. However, the parties failed to agree on the appointment of
the third, presiding arbitrator. On October 21, 2002, the Claimant requested that
the third, presiding arbitrator be appointed in accordance with Article 38 of the
Convention and Rule 4 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”).

4. After consulting the parties, Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, a national of
Spain, was appointed by the Centre as the third, presiding arbitrator. In
accordance with Rule 6(1) of the Arbitration Rules, on December 19, 2002, the
Secretary-General notified the parties that all three arbitrators accepted their
appointment and that the Arbitral Tribunal was deemed to be constituted and the
proceedings to have begun on that date. On the same date, pursuant to ICSID
Administrative and Financial Regulation 25, the parties were informed that Mr.
Gonzalo Flores, Senior Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Arbitral
Tribunal. The Tribunal held its first session with the parties in Washington, D.C.
on February 13, 2003.

5. Mr. Guido Santiago Tawil of M. & M. Bomchil and Mr. Peter Gnam
of Siemens A.G. represent the Claimant. Messrs. Tawil and Gnam represented
the Claimant at the first session. Mr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino, Procurador del
Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, represents the Respondent. Messrs. Ignacio
Suarez Anzorena and Carlos Lo Turco, acting on instructions from the then
Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, and Mr. Osvaldo Siseles, from the
Ministerio de Economia, represented the Respondent at the first session.

6. During the first session, the parties agreed that the Tribunal had
been properly constituted in accordance with the ICSID Convention and the
Arbitration Rules and that they did not have any objections to any members of
the Tribunal. It was also noted that the proceedings would be conducted under
the Arbitration Rules in force since September 26, 1984.

7. During the first session, the parties also agreed on several other
procedural matters, which were later set forth in the written minutes signed by the
President and the Secretary of the Tribunal. Regarding the written submissions,
the Tribunal, after consulting with the parties, fixed the following time limits for the
presentation of the parties’ pleadings: The Claimant would file a Memorial within
90 (ninety) days from the date of the first session; the Respondent would file a
Counter-Memorial within 90 (ninety) days from its receipt of the Claimant's
Memorial; the Claimant would file a Reply within 60 (sixty) days from its receipt of
the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, and the Respondent would file a Rejoinder
within 60 (sixty) days from its receipt of the Claimant’s Reply.

8. The Tribunal further noted that, according to the Arbitration Rules,
the Respondent has the right to raise any objections to jurisdiction no later than
the expiration of the time limit fixed for the filing of its Counter-Memorial, and that,
in the event that the Respondent would raise objections to jurisdiction, the
following schedule would apply: the Claimant would file its Counter-Memorial on
jurisdiction within the same number of days used by Argentina to file its
objections to jurisdiction, but in any event, the Claimant would have a minimum
of 60 (sixty) days to file its Counter-Memorial on jurisdiction; the Respondent
would file its Reply on jurisdiction within 30 (thirty) days from its receipt of the
Claimant's Counter-Memorial on jurisdiction; and the Claimant would file its
Rejoinder on jurisdiction within 30 (thirty) days from its receipt of the
Respondent's Reply on jurisdiction. It was also agreed that, if the Respondent
would raise any objections to jurisdiction and proceedings would be resumed
following the filing of such objections (because the Tribunal dismisses the
objections or because it decides to join them with the merits of the dispute), the
calendar agreed for the merits would recommence, and the Respondent would
have the remaining number of days at the date of the filing of its objections to
jurisdiction for the filing of its Counter-Memorial on the merits.

9. On March 14, 2003, the Claimant filed its Memorial on the merits
and accompanying documentation.

10. On March 24, 2003, Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson, ICSID,
Counsel, replaced Mr. Flores as the Secretary of the Tribunal.

11. On April 8, 2003, the parties agreed that the hearing on
jurisdiction would take place on January 20-22, 2004, in Washington, D.C.

12. By letter of June 10, 2003, the Argentine Republic requested an
extension of time due to the institutional succession in the Argentine Government
to file its Counter-Memorial on the merits and/or to raise any objections to the
jurisdiction of the Centre until August 4, 2003. By letter of June 18, 2003, the
Claimant objected to the extension requested by the Respondent.

13. On June 23, 2003, due to the particular circumstances, the
Tribunal granted the extension sought by Argentina and informed the parties that
if Argentine filed its Counter-Memorial without objecting to jurisdiction, the
Claimant, if requested, would be granted a similar extension of time to file its

6

Reply on the merits. The Tribunal further noted that if the Argentine Republic
filed any objections to jurisdiction, the Claimant would have the same number of
days used by the Argentine Republic to file such objections for the filing of its
Counter-Memorial on jurisdiction.

14. On July 1, 2003, Mr. Horacio Daniel Rosatti informed the Tribunal
that he had been appointed Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina.

15. In accordance with Arbitration Rule 41(1), on August 4, 2003, the
Respondent filed a Memorial raising objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre
and the competence of the Tribunal. In its Memorial on jurisdiction, Argentina
requested the Tribunal for a 45 (forty-five) day extension of the time limit to file its
Counter-Memorial on the merits in the event that the Tribunal would declare that
it has competence over this matter.

16. Pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41(3), on August 7, 2003, the
Tribunal suspended the proceedings on the merits.

17. After inviting the Claimant to present any observations on the time
limit extension requested by the Respondent, the Tribunal informed the parties
on August 21, 2003, that it was premature to decide on the extension of the time
limit to file the Counter-Memorial on the merits requested by Argentina.

18. On October 16, 2003, the Claimant filed its Counter-Memorial on
jurisdiction. On November 17, 2003, the Respondent filed its Reply on
jurisdiction.

19. On December 10, 2004, the Respondent requested to postpone
the hearing on jurisdiction scheduled for January 20-22, 2004 until February 15,
2004. On December 11, 2004, the Tribunal invited the Claimant to present any
observations to the Respondent’s request. On the same date, the Claimant
presented its observations asking the Tribunal to reject the Respondent’s request
and to maintain the previous agreed schedule for the hearing on jurisdiction.

20. After considering the Respondent's request to postpone the
hearing on jurisdiction, the Claimant’s observations thereon, the fact that the
development of the proceeding would not be affected due to the brevity of the
postponement requested, the availability of the parties, and the agreement of the
same to have a two-day hearing, the Tribunal, by letter of December 19, 2003,

informed the parties of its decision to schedule the hearing on jurisdiction on
February 3 and 4, 2004.

21. On December 24, 2003, the Claimant filed its Rejoinder on
jurisdiction.
22. As previously decided by the Tribunal, the hearing on jurisdiction

took place in Washington, D.C. on February 3 and 4, 2004. At the hearing, the
Claimant was represented by Mr. Guido Santiago Tawil, Mr. Peter Gnam, Mr.
Stephan Signer and Ms. Maria Inés Corra. Messrs. Tawil and Gnam addressed
the Tribunal on behalf of the Claimant. The Respondent was represented by Ms.
Andrea Gualde, Ms. Ana Badillos, and Mr. Jorge Barraguirre from the
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, as well as by Messrs. Osvaldo
Siseles from the Ministerio de Economia, and Mr. Roberto Hermida from the
Embassy of Argentina in Washington, D.C. Ms. Gualde and Mr. Barraguirre
addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Respondent. During the hearing, the
Tribunal also questioned to the parties in accordance with Arbitration Rule 32(3).

23. On July 2, 2004, the Respondent requested to extend its 45-day
extension request to file its Counter-Memorial on the merits to 75 days, in the
event that the Tribunal would declare that it had jurisdiction.

24. On August 3, 2004, the Tribunal issued its Decision on
Jurisdiction, which is part of this Award, declaring that the dispute was within the
jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal.

25. On that same date, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1,
establishing the timetable for the continuation of the proceeding, after taking into
consideration the reasons expressed by the Respondent in its requests for an
extension of the time limit to file its Counter-Memorial on the merits and the
observations of the Claimant. The timetable was decided as follows: the
Respondent was to file its Counter-Memorial on the merits within 60 (sixty) days,
counting from the date of that Procedural Order; the Claimant was to file its Reply
within 60 (sixty) days from its receipt of the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, and
the Respondent was to file its Rejoinder within 60 (sixty) days from its receipt of
the Claimant’s Reply. Two alternate dates were set for the hearing on the merits,
and the parties were asked to inform the Secretariat on the number of days
needed for the hearing.

26. On August 10, 2004, both parties requested the hearing on the
merits to be held on April 4-15, 2005. Additionally, the Claimant reserved its right
to request an extension, if needed, to file its Reply, in the understanding that
such an extension should not change the hearing dates already set.

27. On August 16, 2004, Argentina notified the appointment of Mr.
Osvaldo César Guglielmino as Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacion Argentina.

28. On August 19, 2004, the Tribunal confirmed that the hearing on
the merits was to be held on April 4-15, 2005, and that, if needed, the Tribunal
would additionally be available on April 18-19, 2005. (Later on the parties
confirmed to the Tribunal that there would be no need to extend the hearing to
April 18-19, 2005).

29. On September 24, 2004, Argentina requested an additional
extension of 15 (fifteen) days of the time limit to file its Counter-Memorial on the
merits due to the recent appointment of Mr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino as
Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina. By letter of September 29, 2004,
the Claimant objected to the extension requested by the Respondent. After
considering the Respondent’s request and the Claimant’s observations, the
Tribunal, by letter also of September 29, 2004, granted the 15 day extension
requested by the Respondent to file its Counter-Memorial on the merits, on the
understanding that a similar extension, if requested, would be granted to the
Claimant, and informed the parties that no further extensions would be
authorized. The Tribunal also invited the parties to directly exchange their filings
in Buenos Aires to avoid further delays.

30. In accordance with the Tribunal’s decision, the Respondent filed
its Counter-Memorial on the merits on October 19, 2004. In its Counter-Memorial,
the Respondent requested the production of certain documents by the Claimant:
(i) forward contract in US dollars (“dollars or “$”), (ii) financial statements of
Siemens IT Services, S.A. (“SITS”) from its commencement of business in
Argentina, and (iii) financial statements of Siemens for the same period with
respect to the registration of all operations transacted between SITS-Siemens
and the rest of the affiliates of the Claimant parent corporation. By letter of
December 1, 2004, the Claimant informed the Tribunal that it would submit,
together with its Reply, a copy of SITS’ financial statements for the fiscal years

9

ended September 30 of 1997 to 2003 and the Annual Reports of Siemens for the
fiscal years ended September 20 of 1997 to 2003.

31. On December 1, 2004, the Respondent filed an application to
disqualify the President of the Tribunal under Article 57 of the Convention. On
December 7, 2004, in accordance with Arbitration Rule 9(6), the two co-
arbitrators informed the parties that the proceedings were suspended and that
the schedule for the parties’ submissions and the date for the hearing on the
merits were to be maintained.

32. On December 14, 2004, the Claimant requested a 15-day
extension to file its Reply on the merits, which was due on December 20, 2004.
By letter of December 21, 2004, the two co-arbitrators granted the extension
requested by the Claimant, in accordance with the Tribunal’s letter of September
29, 2004. Accordingly, the Claimant was to file its Reply on the merits no later
than January 4, 2005. The Claimant filed its Reply on the merits on December
27, 2004. However, due to the suspension of the proceedings, the Claimant's
Reply was circulated neither to the Tribunal nor to Argentina. After considering
several communications exchanged by the parties regarding whether to provide
a copy of the Claimant's Reply to the Respondent, the co-arbitrators decided,
with the agreement of the parties, that a copy of the Claimant’s Reply be
delivered directly to the Respondent in Buenos Aires and that the Respondent
was to file its Rejoinder within 60 (sixty) days from the receipt of the Claimant’s
Reply, i.e., no later than March 14, 2005.

33. By letter of February 3, 2005, the co-arbitrators, having
considered the parties’ request to delay for some days the hearing on the merits,
granted such request.

34. On March 2, 2005, the Respondent requested a 15-day extension
to file its Rejoinder due to translation difficulties. On March 3, 2005, the Claimant
expressed its opposition to granting the extension.

35. On March 10, 2005, the Secretariat sent the parties Judge
Brower’s and Professor Bello Janeiro’s separate opinions concerning Argentina’s
proposal for disqualification. In accordance with Arbitration Rule 9, the
proceeding was to remain suspended pending a decision on the disqualification
proposal, and, therefore, the date for the hearing on the merits was postponed

10

indefinitely. In addition, the 15-day extension requested by the Respondent to
file its Rejoinder was granted, which was then to be filed no later than March 29,
2005.

36. On March 16, 2005, the Deputy Secretary-General of ICSID
informed the parties that in accordance with Article 58 of the ICSID Convention,
the Chairman of the Administrative Council was to decide on the Respondent's
proposal for disqualification as the other members of the Tribunal were divided
on the proposal. In addition, the Deputy Secretary-General also informed the
parties that, because the President of the Tribunal had been a staff member of
the World Bank and as proceeded in an earlier similar ICSID case, the request
would be sent to the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration
(“PCA”) at The Hague to provide his recommendation on the disqualification
proposal.

37. As directed, on March 29, 2005, the Respondent filed its
Rejoinder on the merits.

38. On April 8, 2005, the parties were informed that the PCA would
not hold a hearing with the parties, as requested by Argentina, but that it had
agreed to receive any additional written information from the parties, besides that
already filed by them and provided by ICSID to the PCA. Accordingly, the parties
were informed on April 11, 2005, that considering Argentina’s intention to send
such additional information, the decision by the Secretary-General of the PCA on
the disqualification proposal was postponed until April 15, 2005. On such a date,
the Secretary-General of the PCA sent his recommendation to ICSID. Based on
that recommendation, the Secretary-General of ICSID informed the parties on
April 15, 2005 that the disqualification proposal was not sustained. In
accordance with Arbitration Rule 9, the proceeding was resumed with the
composition of the Arbitral Tribunal unchanged.

39. On April 15, 2005, two letters from the Respondent, dated
December 7, 2004 and February 25, 2005, that had been received while the
proceedings were suspended, were circulated. In its letters, the Respondent
insisted on its request for the production of evidence by the Claimant of: (i) a
copy of the “forward” contract, and (ii) a copy of SITS’ financial statements and

Siemens’ annual reports for the periods therein indicated. The Respondent also
requested a 30-day period for the examination of such documents.

40. On April 18 2005, the Claimant requested that the hearing on the
merits be scheduled to take place at the earliest possible time.

41. By letter of April 25, 2005, the Claimant, by invitation of the
Tribunal, filed its observations on the Respondent's letters of December 7, 2004
and February 25, 2005.

42. On April 26, 2005, the Tribunal informed the parties that the
hearing on the merits would be held on October 10-21, 2005, in Washington,
D.C.

43. Between June 7, 2005 and July 28, 2005, the parties exchanged
multiple communications regarding the Respondent's document request. The
Tribunal granted the Claimant and the Respondent, respectively, time to present
observations with respect to the Respondent's document request, as well as with
respect to the different documents presented by the Claimant in this regard,
(Tribunal’s letters of June 7 and 27, 2005, and July 15 and 26, 2005). On
September 2, 2005, after taking note of the Respondent's letter of August 17,
2005, objecting to the documents provided by the Claimant in connection with the
Respondent’s document request, as well as the Claimant’s response of August
22, 2005, the Tribunal informed the parties that the information filed by the
Claimant was not the information that the Tribunal had requested on July 15,
2005. Consequently, the Tribunal ordered the Claimant to furnish the requested
information no later than September 8, 2005.

44. On September 2, 2005, the parties filed a document with their
comments on the Tribunal’s directives concerning the organization of the hearing
on the merits. In addition, the parties requested the Tribunal to fix a time limit in
order for the parties to file additional documents to be used during the hearing.
According to the agreement of the parties, such documents were to be limited to:
(i) new issues brought up by the Respondent, its experts or witnesses in its
Rejoinder; (ii) documents in support of the examination of witnesses and experts,
and (iii) documents related to events that occurred after the parties’ pleadings.

45. As instructed by the Tribunal, on September 9, 2005, the
Claimant filed accounting information in connection with Siemens Nixdorf

12

Informationssysteme A.G. (“SNI”)’s investment in SITS. The Tribunal, by letter of
September 12, 2005, invited the Respondent to make any observations on the
documents filed by the Claimant no later than September 29, 2005.

46. Between September 9, 2005 and September 15, 2005, in
accordance with the Tribunal’s instructions of September 2, 2005, the parties
informed the Tribunal of the names of the witnesses and experts that they were
planning to examine and cross examine during the hearing as well as their
agreement on the order of appearance for the witnesses and experts.
(Respondent's letters of September 9 and September 14, 2006, and Claimant's
letter of September 15, 2006).

47. On September 15, 2005, the Tribunal set September 23, 2005 as
a deadline for the parties to object to the additional documents that were to be
filed respectively by the Claimant and the Respondent.

48. As instructed by the Tribunal, the parties filed their respective
additional documents on September 16, 2005, and on September 21, 2005, the
Claimant submitted further information with respect to the capital contributions
made by SNI in SITS.

49. On September 27, 2005, following the Tribunal’s invitation of that
same date, the Respondent made certain observations with regard to the
information filed by the Claimant on September 9 and 21, 2005 in connection
with SNI’s investment in SITS.

50. On September 28, 2005, the Claimant rebutted the observations
made by the Respondent by letter of September 23, 2005, with regard to the
additional documents that had been filed by the Claimant on September 16,
2005.

51. In connection with the Respondent’s observations filed on
September 27, 2005, the Claimant, by letter of October 3, 2005, offered, among
other things, to submit, if the Tribunal so requested, a copy of SITS’s books
related to its expenditures, as well as any other additional documentary
information that the Tribunal may consider appropriate.

52. On October 4, 2005, having taken into account the parties’
communications with regard to their additional documents, the Tribunal informed
the parties of its decision to: (i) reject certain additional documents filed by the

13

Respondent, which referred to an issue that had been known to the Respondent
since 1998, and had not been previously raised; (ii) request explanations from
both parties with regard to certain additional documents; (iii) admit other
additional documents filed by the Claimant for the reasons stated by the
Claimant's letter of September 28, 2005; and (iv) subject the admission of certain
exhibits filed by the Claimant to the timely submission of further explanations
from the Claimant in such respect. The Tribunal set October 6, 2005 as the
deadline for the parties to provide the information therein requested, and the
parties did so.

53. By letter of October 4, 2005, the Claimant agreed to the
modification of the schedule for the appearance of the witnesses and experts
during the hearing requested by the Respondent by a letter of that same date.

54. On October 5, 2005, following the Tribunal’s invitation of October
3, 2005, the Respondent filed observations with regard to the Claimant's
objections raised on September 30, 2005 to the inclusion of Mr. Claudio Antonio
Michalina as a member of Argentina’s delegation to the hearing on the merits.
According to the Claimant, Mr. Michalina was not part of the legal team, but
rather an assistant to one of the Respondent’s witnesses, Mr. Daniel Eduardo
Martin.

55. All the pending matters raised before the Tribunal were decided
on October 7, 2005, before the hearing on the merits took place. The Tribunal
ratified the rejection of the Respondent’s submission of certain additional
documents, because they had been known to the Respondent since 1998. The
Tribunal also decided that Mr. Michalina could attend the hearing because each
party decides who attends the hearings in its representation. Regarding the
Claimant's accounting information requested by the Respondent, the Tribunal
decided to accept the information provided by the Claimant, to take note of the
Claimant's willingness to submit SITS’ accounting books, should the Tribunal
need them, and to declare that the Claimant had complied with the filing of the
supporting documents in connection with SNI’s investment in SITS.

56. On October 7, 2005, the Respondent, referring to the Claimant’s
letter of September 28, 2005, ratified its objections of September 23, 2005 to the
new evidence filed by the Claimant.

57. The hearing on the merits took place on October 10-17, 2005, in
Washington, D.C., present at the hearing were:

Members of the Tribunal

Andrés Rigo Sureda, President

Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator

Domingo Bello Janeiro, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat
Claudia Frutos-Peterson, Secretary of the Tribunal

Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski, Consultant

On behalf of the Claimant

Peter Gnam (Siemens A.G.)

Stephan Signer (Siemens A.G.)

Rubén Daniel Slame (Siemens A.G.)
Guido Santiago Tawil (M. & M. Bomchil)
Rafael Mariano Mandvil (M. & M. Bomchil)
Maria Inés Corra (M. & M. Bomchil)
Ignacio Minorini Lima (M. & M. Bomchil)
Federico Campolieti (M. & M. Bomchil)
Agustin Garcia Sanz (M. & M. Bomchil)

On behalf of the Respondent

Osvaldo César Guglielmino (Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Argentina)

Jorge Alberto Barraguirre (Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina)
Fabian Rosales Markaida (Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Argentina)

José Luis Cassinerio (Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina)
Maria Luz Moglia (Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina)
Adriana Lilian Busto (Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina)

Luis Eduardo Rey Vasquez (Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Argentina)

Martin Guillermo Moncayo von Hase (Procuracién del Tesoro de la
Naci6én Argentina)

Claudio Antonio Michalina (Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Argentina)

Philippe Sands, Q.C.

Helen Mountfield

58. As per request of the Tribunal, the Claimant filed during the
hearing SITS’s accounting books (“Mayor”, “Caja” and “IVA”) for the relevant
periods.

59. As instructed by the Tribunal, on November 23, 2005, the parties
filed their post-hearing briefs.

60. On November 23, 2005, the Respondent filed certain
observations concerning the additional accounting information provided by the
Claimant during the hearing and, on November 30, 2005, filed a report with
accompanying documentation on the accounting documents provided by the
Claimant, as well as on “the assessment conducted and Siemens A.G.’s claim for
damages”. The Respondent's letter of November 23, 2005 was contested by the
Claimant on December 21, 2005. The Tribunal invited the Respondent to
present any observations on this letter by January 14, 2006.

61. On January 17, 2006, the Claimant noted that the Respondent
had not filed observations on the Claimant's letter of December 21, 2005 before
the deadline set by the Tribunal, and requested the Tribunal to declare the
proceeding closed pursuant to Arbitration Rule 38(1).

62. On January 26, 2006, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that
it had not received the Tribunal’s letter of December 27, 2005, and rejected the
Claimant's request for the closure of the proceeding.

63. On January 30, 2006, the Claimant sent a letter reiterating that
the deadline established by the Tribunal for the Respondent to file any

observations on its letter of December 27, 2005 had lapsed, and insisted on its
request to the Tribunal to declare the proceedings closed.

64. On February 1, 2006, the Respondent sent its observations on
the Claimant's letter of December 21, 2005, as well as supporting documentation
to justify why they had not received the Tribunal’s letter of December 27, 2005.

65. On February 16, 2006, the Tribunal, after considering the
Respondent's communications of January 26 and February 1, 2006, and that of
the Claimant of January 30, 2006, decided: (i) to accept the explanations given
by the Respondent with regard to its delay in filing observations to the Claimant's
letter of December 21, 2005; (ii) to admit the Respondent's letter of February 1,
2006; and (iii) to invite the Claimant to make, no later than February 23, 2006,
any observations it might have. The Claimant filed its observations on February
17, 2006.

66. On March 1, 2006, the Respondent sent a letter in reply to the
Claimant's letter of February 17, 2006, to which the Claimant answered on March
9, 2006. On March 13, 2006, the Tribunal informed the parties of its decision to
disregard such communications because they had not been requested by the
Tribunal, and the parties had already had several occasions to raise the
observations they had deemed pertinent in such regard (Respondent's letters of
November 23 and 30, 2005, January 26 and February 1, 2006, and Claimant's
letters of December 21, 2005, January 17, 30, and February 17, 2006).

67. On March 31, 2006, the Respondent requested the Tribunal to
reconsider its decision of March 13, 2006. On April 13, 2006, the Tribunal
confirmed its decision of March 13, 2006 for the reasons there established.

I. The Jurisdiction of the Tribunal

68. Argentina has invited the Tribunal to review its finding on
jurisdiction in light of recent decisions in the cases of Plama Consortium Ltd. v.
Republic of Bulgaria’ and Salini Construttori, S.p.A. & Italstrade, S.p.A. v.
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan’ on the application of the most-favored-nation

' Plama Consortium Ltd. v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on
Jurisdiction (February 8, 2005).

2 Salini Construttori, S.p.A. & Italstrade, S.p.A. v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, |CSID Case No.
ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction (November 29, 2004).

17

clause (“MFN clause”). The Claimant has for its part referred to the decision of
the tribunal in Gas Natural SDG S.A. v. the Argentine Republic? which reaches
similar conclusions as Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain* and the
Tribunal on the scope of the MFN clause. The Tribunal will not review what it has
already decided; it is inappropriate at this stage of the proceedings and the
Tribunal has no doubt about its findings. The Tribunal will limit itself to observe
that the cases adduced by the Respondent deal with the application of the MFN
clause to situations not akin to the instant case. Indeed, in Plama and Salini v.
Jordan, tribunals faced extensions of the MFN clause to situations widely
different from the facts considered by the Tribunal or for that matter considered in
Maffezini or Gas Natural. The Claimant in Salini sought to include, through the
application of a MFN clause, an umbrella clause where the basic treaty had
none. In Plama, there was no ICSID clause in the basic treaty. There had never
been any question that the parties to these proceedings agreed to ICSID
jurisdiction and the issue was avoidance, through the MFN clause, of a
procedural requirement that Argentina has consistently dispensed within the
investment treaties it has concluded since 1994.

Ill. Applicable Law
1. Positions of the Parties

69. Siemens argues that the Treaty on the Mutual Protection and
Promotion of Investments between the Federal Republic of Germany and the
Argentine Republic, dated July 9,1991 (“Treaty”), contains an explicit choice of
law in Article 10(5) which mandates the Tribunal to decide the merits of the
dispute “on the basis of this Treaty, and, as the case may be, on the basis of
other treaties in force between the Contracting Parties, the internal law of the
Contracting Party in whose territory the investment was made, including its rules
of private international law, and on the general principles of international law’.
Siemens then refers to Article 42(1) of the Convention which directs the Tribunal
to look first to the rules agreed by the parties. In this case, the rules agreed by
° Gas Natural SDG S.A. v. the Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/10, Decision on
Jurisdiction (June 17, 2005).

* Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision on
Jurisdiction (January 25, 2000).
18

the parties are the provisions of the Treaty that constitute a special bilateral
regime with respect to the matters regulated by it.

70. Siemens argues further that, in the case of lacunae, general
international law applies and it has a corrective role in the sense that it controls
and prevails over domestic law. In this respect, Siemens refers to Professor
Weil’s statement on the relationship between domestic law and international law
under Article 42(1) of the Convention, to wit: “[...] no matter how domestic law
and international law are combined, under the second sentence of Article 42(1),

”® Siemens

international law always gains the upper hand and ultimately prevails.
also refers to the Draft Articles on Responsibility of States adopted by the
International Law Commission (“ILC”) (“Draft Articles”), which state: “The
characterization of an act of a State as internationally wrongful is governed by
international law. Such characterization is not affected by the characterization of

the same act as lawful by internal law.”

71. Siemens contends that this conclusion is reinforced by Article 7(1)
of the Treaty which provides:

“If the laws and regulations of either Contracting Party or obligations under
international law existing at present or established hereafter between the
Contracting Parties in addition to this Treaty contain a regulation, whether
general or specific, entitling investments by nationals or companies of the
other Contracting Party to a treatment more favorable than is provided for
by the Treaty, such regulation shall to the extent that it is more favorable
prevail over this Treaty.”

Therefore, the Claimant argues that Argentine law may prevail over the
provisions of the Treaty only to the extent that it provides treatment to the
investment more favorable than the Treaty. Conversely, those provisions of
domestic law that may be less favorable are not applicable.

5 P. Weil, The State, the Foreign Investor, and International Law: The No Longer Stormy
Relationship of a Ménage a Trois, 15 ICSID Review — FILJ (2000), p. 409.

® Article 3 of the Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts,
adopted by the International Law Commission. Claimant's LA No. 49.

19

72. In any case, according to Siemens, the host State’s domestic law
is relevant only with respect to factual issues as held by the doctrine and the
International Court of Justice (“ICU”) in Case Concerning Certain German
Interests in Polish Upper Silesia (Germany v. Poland):

“From the standpoint of International Law and of the Court which is its
organ, municipal laws are merely facts which express the will and
constitute the activities of States, in the same manner as do legal
decisions or administrative measures. The Court is certainly not called
upon to interpret the Polish Law as such; but there is nothing to prevent
the Court’s giving judgment on the question whether or not, in applying
that law, Poland is acting in conformity with its obligations towards

Germany under the Geneva Convention.””

73. Furthermore, Siemens points out that, as held by the Annulment
Committee in Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v.
the Argentine Republic® and the tribunal in Técnicas Medioambientales
TECMED, S.A. v. the United Mexican States®, governmental measures that are
lawful under domestic law are not necessarily in conformity with international law.
Siemens concludes that domestic law is only relevant as evidence of Argentina’s
measures and conduct and needs to be analyzed through the lens of
international law.

74. Argentina contends that there is no express agreement between
the parties as to the law applicable to the dispute and that the Treaty does not
indicate the law to be applied and, therefore, the Tribunal should apply the
municipal law of Argentina. In this respect, Argentina affirms that the
constitutional law of Argentina is the first source of law to be applied, and
explains that the Argentine Constitution recognizes the right to property and the
right of the State to regulate it provided it is done by law and subject to principles

” Case Concerning Certain German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia (Germany v. Poland),
Judgment No.7, May 25, 1926, 1 World Court Reports (1934), 510, Claimant’s Legal Authorities
No. 31.

® Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. the Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment (July 3, 2002).

° Técnicas Medioambientales TECMED, S.A. v. the United Mexican States, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/2, Award (May 29, 2003).

20

of reasonableness and equality. As further explained by Argentina, these
principles mean that restrictions on individual rights must be warranted by the
facts and meet a social necessity or convenience and the limitation must be in
line with the ends sought. Argentina further points out that, under Article 75(22)
of the Constitution, treaties rank above the law and, under Article 27, treaties
must conform to the principles of public law set by the Constitution.

75. Argentina draws to the Tribunal’s attention that the constitutional
reform of 1994 recognized a number of international instruments on human rights
to have constitutional rank. Argentina claims that the human rights so
incorporated in the Constitution would be disregarded by recognizing the
property rights asserted by the Claimant given the social and economic
conditions of Argentina.

2. Considerations of the Tribunal

76. The Tribunal has been established under the provisions of the
Treaty and the ICSID Convention. Under Article 42(1) of the Convention, the
Tribunal is obliged to apply the rules of law agreed by the parties. The Treaty
provides that a tribunal established under the Treaty shall decide on “the basis of
this Treaty, and, as the case may be, on the basis of other treaties in force
between the Contracting Parties, the internal law of the Contracting Party in
whose territory the investment was made, including its rules of private
international law, and on the general principles of international law.” By accepting
the offer of Argentina to arbitrate disputes related to investments, Siemens
agreed that this should be the law to be applied by the Tribunal. This constitutes
an agreement for purposes of the law to be applied under Article 42(1) of the

Convention.

77. In regards to the arguments whether international law is referred
to in the Treaty or the Convention as a corrective to municipal law or as a filler of
lacunae in that law, the Tribunal refers to the finding of the Annulment Committee
in Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt in the sense that: “The law of
the host State can indeed be applied in conjunction with international law if this is

21

justified. So too international law can be applied by itself if the appropriate rule is

found in this other ambit.”'°

78. The Tribunal has found that it has jurisdiction over breaches of
the Treaty and will review the conduct of Argentina as a State party to the Treaty
in respect of the commitments undertaken in the Treaty. In so doing, and as
stated by the Ad Hoc Committee in Vivendi II, the Tribunal’s inquiry is governed
by the Convention, by the Treaty and by applicable international law. Argentina’s
domestic law constitutes evidence of the measures taken by Argentina and of
Argentina’s conduct in relation to its commitments under the Treaty.

79. In any case, the Treaty is not a document foreign to Argentine
law. As explained by Argentina, the Constitution and treaties entered into by
Argentina with other States are the supreme law of the nation, and treaties have
primacy over domestic laws."' In this respect, the Tribunal notes the reference
made by Argentina to international human rights law ranking at the level of the
Constitution after the 1994 constitutional reform and implying that property rights
claimed in this arbitration, if upheld, would constitute a breach of international
human rights law. This argument has not been developed by Argentina. The
Tribunal considers that, without the benefit of further elaboration and
substantiation by the parties, it is not an argument that, prima facie, bears any
relationship to the merits of this case.

80. The allegations of the parties will require that the Tribunal
interpret the Treaty. In this respect and as a general matter, the Tribunal recalls
that the Treaty should be interpreted in accordance with the norms of
interpretation established by the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of
1969 (“Vienna Convention”). The Vienna Convention is binding on the parties to
the Treaty. Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention requires that a treaty be
“interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to
the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.”

‘© Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Ad Hoc Committee
Decision on Application for Annulment (February 5, 2002), 41 /LM (2002), p. 941.
"' Section 31 and Article 75(22) of the Argentine Constitution.

22

IV. The Facts

81. On August 26, 1996, Argentina called for bids on the provision of
an integral service for the implementation of an immigration control (“the DNM'?
sub-system”), personal identification (“the RNP‘? sub-system”) and electoral
information (‘the DNE'* sub-system”) system (“the System” or “the Project”),
including the provision of all equipment necessary for data processing and the
intercommunication of such equipment, start-up, technical support and
maintenance services, and preparation, printing and home delivery of national
identity cards (“DNls”).

82. For the purpose of participating in the bidding, Siemens, acting
through SNI, a company legally integrated into Siemens, created SITS, a
domestic Argentine company as required by the Bidding Terms and Conditions.
SITS was organized as a special purpose company and used by Siemens for the
exclusive purpose of investing in the Project.

83. SITS submitted a bid which included, as required by Argentina, a
statement declaring that: (i) SNI had been integrated into Siemens since 1992,
Siemens being the owner of 100% of SNI’s stock; (ii) SNI was controlled by
Siemens, which appointed SNI’s directors and instructed them in relation to SNI’s
activities and projects; and (iii) as a result of SNI’s integration into Siemens, the
latter was jointly and severally liable for SNI’s obligations towards third parties.

84. Argentina selected SITS’ bid taking into consideration Siemens’
credentials and financial soundness. The contract for the provision of the System
(‘the Contract”) was awarded to SITS by Decree No. 199/98. The Contract
between SITS and Argentina was executed on October 6, 1998 and approved by
Decree 1342/98. The Contract took effect on November 21, 1998.

85. The compensation for the services to be provided under the
Contract consisted of the price of each DNI issued, including home delivery and
DNI updates, the fees for the immigration proceedings processed through the
System and the price for printing the voting rolls. All prices in the Contract were
"2 Direccién Nacional de Migraciones.

'8 Registro Nacional de las Personas.

“* Direccién Nacional Electoral.

23

denominated in Argentine pesos (“pesos” or “AR$”). At the time, pesos were
convertible into dollars at par pursuant to the Convertibility Law.

86. The Contract had a six-year term as from its effective date —
November 21, 1998 - and was automatically renewable twice for a three-year
term, i.e., for a total of twelve years, unless a notice of intent to the contrary had
been given by either party. However, the parties had agreed to give such notice
only if the purpose of the Contract had been fully met.

87. The execution of the Project had two stages: a System
engineering stage, which consisted of designing the System specifications and
acquiring the computer hardware, software and telecommunications networks
necessary for its implementation, and a System operation stage, to be managed
by the Government. SITS would receive compensation only during this second
stage.

88. Production of DNIs was scheduled to begin in August 1999 and
extend to the whole country. To this effect, it was necessary for the Argentine
government to reach agreements with the Provinces and the City of Buenos
Aires (“the External Circuit’).

89. In August 1999, Argentina requested SITS to postpone production
of the new DNls. According to the minutes signed by SITS and the Government,
the postponement was due to an extraordinary increase in demand for DNIs
because of the short period left before the elections scheduled on October 24,
1999, and to the fear that the introduction of the new mechanisms under such
circumstances would burden the public with inconveniences that should be
avoided. '® Thus DNIs production was postponed to October 1, 1999 for foreign
residents’ DNIs and November 1, 1999 for Argentine citizens’ DNIs. Production
of the respective DNIs started on those dates.

90. In the October election, Mr. Fernando de la Rua became
President-elect. The new authorities took office on December 10, 1999.

91. The DNM sub-system started to operate on February 1, 2000 and
its operation was halted on February 2, 2000. On that date, SITS requested an

‘5 Minutes dated August 18, 1999, approved by Decree No. 1054/99. Exhibit 40 to the Memorial.
24

explanation for the interruption. On February 7, SITS was informed that the
operation of the sub-system required a governmental authorization. The sub-
system continued to be interrupted indefinitely.

92. On February 24, 2000, Argentina suspended the production,
printing and distribution of all new DNls because, in the case of foreigners’ DNs,
the RNP sub-system printed the left thumbprint at the place reserved for the right
thumbprint. Argentina prohibited SITS from introducing any modification to the
System to correct this problem.

93. These two suspensions occurred in the context of statements
made by Government officers to SITS and Siemens in January 2000 to the effect
that the Government would seek to renegotiate the DNis price, and increase the
number of free-of-charge DNIs.

94. In March 2000, the Government set up a special commission
under the Ministry of the Interior to review the Contract and propose a course of
action (‘the Commission”). During the negotiations that ensued, Siemens made
several proposals and agreement was reached with the Commission on a
proposal on November 10, 2000. The Commission sent the negotiated proposal
to the Government and the Government gave Siemens a “Contract Restatement
Proposal” identical in its terms to the proposal submitted by the Commission for
the Government's approval.

95. Siemens’ representatives met with the President of Argentina on
December 19, 2000. Allegedly he promised to issue the decree approving the
negotiated terms of the Contract Restatement Proposal by December 31, 2000.
When the decree was not issued, Siemens addressed several notes in February
2001 to the Minister of the Interior expressing concern over the delay.'® The
Minister replied on March 12, 2001 and attributed the delay to the required

intervention of controlling agencies. '”

96. In November 2000, the Argentine Congress approved the
Economic-Financial Emergency Law (“the 2000 Emergency Law”) which

*® Exhibit 57 to the Memorial.
*” Exhibit 58 to the Memorial.

25

empowered the President to renegotiate public sector contracts. This law
became effective two days before the Contract Restatement Proposal was
submitted by the Commission to the Minister of the Interior. The Government
proposed to include the Contract under the provisions of the 2000 Emergency
Law and Siemens did not object, in the belief, according to Siemens, that this
step would speed up the approval of the Contract Restatement Proposal.

97. The Minister of the Interior was replaced and, in March 2001, the
new Minister, Mr. Mestre, claimed to be unaware of the Contract Restatement
Proposal. On May 3, 2001, SITS received a new Draft Proposal from the
Government which differed from the Contract Restatement Proposal. On May 8,
2001, SITS replied commenting on the new terms, and requesting the exhibits to
the proposal which had not been enclosed. The Minister informed Siemens that
the new proposal was not negotiable and, on May 18, 2001, the Contract was
terminated by Decree 669/01 under the terms of the 2000 Emergency Law. SITS
filed an administrative appeal which was rejected by Decree 1205/01.

V. Allegations of the Parties

98. The Tribunal will now describe at length the allegations of the
parties as they relate to the facts of the dispute.

1. Memorial

99. In its Memorial, Siemens has framed its claim in the context of the
Treaty, the Convertibility Law of 1991, Decree No. 2128/91, and the State
Reform Law of 1989. Siemens contends that it entered into the Project based on
the assurance of the authorities’ commitment and the legal security framework
provided by these instruments.

100. | Siemens explains that significant investments were made during
1999 and further investments were made in 2000, due to Argentina’s
requirements as a prerequisite for resuming income-generating operations, for an
aggregate amount of $284 million up to May 18, 2001. Additional expenses
exceeding $9.1 million were incurred after termination of the Contract and until
September 2002.

101. Siemens claims that the following results were achieved:
26

(i) as regards the DNM sub-system, establishment of the immigration
information center, and the immigration flows and border control
systems at three locations; the Government first hindered this
component from becoming operational and later hindered its
functioning, but Argentina has nonetheless benefited from better
processing, follow-up and control of immigration proceedings, and
the generation of single, non-duplicate files for each alien,
containing all identification data, which reduced tampering
possibilities;

(ii) as regards the RNP sub-system, the engineering stage was
completed by August 1999 and it became operational by August
19, 1999, the electronic loading of the Remaining Human Potential
File (“Back Record Conversion” or “BRC”) was performed (by
December 1999, 45.8 million individual records had been
digitalized), an ID personalization center was completed, hardware
and software were acquired, buildings were fitted, the
communications network was implemented, training courses were
held, more detailed and demanding System applications were
developed, and a pilot test not required under the Contract was
performed. However, because of the measures taken by Argentina,
only 3,189 DNIs were issued over a period of 147 days as opposed
to 12,000 DNls foreseen as the initial daily average;

(iii) as regards the DNE sub-system, the electoral information
component was completed by August 1999, and SITS carried out
the processing, printing and distribution of provisional lists and final
voting rolls for the national elections of October 24, 1999; and

(iv) physical and IT security equipment and technical support were
provided by SITS to the three implementation agencies.

102. | Siemens explains that the investments were financed through
capital contributions by Siemens through SNI in the amount of $27 million,
through loans made by one of the wholly owned subsidiaries or in minor amounts

27

by local financial institutions (later refinanced by Siemens directly or through SNI
and totaling approximately $242 million), and through non-financial funding by
the Siemens Group in the amount of $15 million approximately up to May 18,
2001. Siemens further explains that the investments were exclusively applied to
the Project since SITS was a special purpose company used by Siemens only for
the execution of the Project.

103. | Siemens alleges that, during the first year of the Contract,
Argentina failed to make budgetary provision for the obligations it had undertaken
under the Contract, to provide facilities for Project development, to assign
appropriate personnel to fill the different positions and take the corresponding
training courses. Siemens also alleges that Argentina delayed approval of the
Functional Operational Model (“FOM”) during seven months notwithstanding its
relevance, failed to execute with the provincial authorities the agreements to
carry out production of the new DNis throughout the country, failed to adopt the
measures necessary to replace the existing DNIs by those issued through the
System, and failed to discontinue the manual system of issuing DNis. Siemens
observes that these breaches of the contractual obligations were noted by the
independent auditor hired by the Government.

104. | Siemens recalls that in the context of these failures, in August
1999, Argentina requested SITS, on account of the October elections, to
postpone commencement of the new DNis production until October 1, 1999 for
foreign residents and November 1, 1999 for Argentine citizens. Later Argentina
requested that the discontinuation of the old DNIs be postponed to November 30,
1999, except for certain jurisdictions for which a new deadline of January 31,
2000 was established.

105. According to Siemens, after the October elections, the new
authorities failed to make budgetary provision for the second year of the Project
and to enter into agreements with the provincial authorities. Argentina also
delayed providing the technical definitions essential to complete the immigration
component and, as a result, it did not start to operate until February 1, 2000.

28

106. Siemens refers to the suspension of the DNM sub-system on
February 2, 2000, allegedly because of lack of authorization to operate the sub-
system given that public funds were at issue. According to Siemens, the
requirement of such authorization was not provided for in the Contract and was
not required for the border control component of the DNM sub-system. Siemens
alleges that SITS never got an adequate response and was never paid for the
documents actually processed.

107. Regarding the suspension of production of DNIs on February 24,
2001, Siemens affirms that this is a technical inconsistency that could have been
quickly solved by modifying one sentence in the printing software. Siemens
recalls that Article 17 of the Contract established a procedure in the event that
errors were detected but, instead of respecting it, the Argentine authorities
prohibited SITS from introducing any correction while the Contract was in effect.

108. According to Siemens, since January 2000 the newly elected
authorities had made public announcements reported in the press indicating their
intention to renegotiate the Contract to obtain a reduction in the DNI price, a
larger number of free DNIs and a postponement of the discontinuation of the
manual system. Siemens submits that the actions taken in February 2000 by
Argentina suspending the two income-generating activities of the Project had the
objective of pressuring SITS to re-negotiate the Contract at the point at which
most of the investment for the Project had been made.

109. | Siemens explains that, during the renegotiation of the Contract
with the Commission from March to November 2000, each proposal made by
SITS was rejected and resumption of the operation of the System was subject to
ever more demanding economic concessions. In November 2000, as explained
by Siemens, the parties agreed on the basic terms on which the Contract would
be reinstated and the immediate System operation would be resumed, namely, a
$5 reduction in the price of the DNls (in part to be compensated by a $3 increase
in airport passengers’ fees to be passed on to SITS), an increase in the annual
free-of-charge DNls from 75,000 to 250,000, and a reduction in the immigration
and voting roll printing fees. Siemens draws to the attention of the Tribunal that
the Ministry of Finance authorities opined favorably on the new terms as also did

29

the RNP, DNM and DNE. The restated terms were set forth in the Contract
Restatement Proposal provided by the Government to Siemens on November
30, 2000 with the understanding that this proposal would now be formalized by

the Government.

110. | Siemens explains that the 2000 Emergency Law was published
on November 21, 2000 and that, in order to facilitate the approval of the terms
agreed, the Commission proposed to include the Contract under the provisions of
the 2000 Emergency Law in a note to the Minister of the Interior dated November
23, 2000.'® The Minister declared the Contract subject to the 2000 Emergency
Law by Resolution No. 1779 of December 6, 2000.'°

111. | Siemens alleges that, when in March 2001 a new Minister of the
Interior was appointed, he claimed to be unaware of the agreement reached
between the two parties and the undertaking made by the President. The new
Minister ordered, on April 6, 2001, the inclusion in the administrative file of the
minutes, dated October 30, 2000, of a meeting of Directors of Provincial Registry
Offices rejecting the Contract continuation. According to Siemens, he also
instructed Sindicatura General de La Nacion (“SIGEN”), RPN, DNM and DNE to
re-analyze matters related to the Contract and these agencies reached different
conclusions from when they reviewed the Contract Restatement Proposal.

112. Siemens refers to the new Draft Proposal presented to Siemens
on May 3, 2001 with terms significantly different from those negotiated, mainly,
reduction of the number of DNls to be issued to almost one half as it did the
effective term of the Contract, and elimination of the obligation to discontinue
issuance of the old DNlIs. Siemens points out that the exhibits referred to in the
Proposal were not furnished to SITS. According to Siemens, the only purpose of
this proposal was to trigger a rejection and create an excuse to terminate the
Contract. In its Reply on May 8, Siemens recalled that the parties had already
reached an agreement and certain aspects had already been implemented, and
that the changes indicated above were unacceptable because they changed
completely the economic-financial equation, and requested the missing exhibits
*® Exhibit 55 to the Memorial.

*® Exhibit 60 to the Memorial.
30

to complete the evaluation. The Minister responded immediately indicating that
failure to accept such proposal as a whole would result in early termination of the
Contract. In fact, even when the proposal was presented to Siemens as a draft,
the instruction of the Minister was that the Proposal was to be notified for
acceptance or rejection.2°

113. Siemens argues that such a proposal was only an illegitimate tool
to avoid liability for frustrating the Contract. In this respect, inter alia, Siemens
points out a number of irregularities in the proceedings for the Contract
termination, such as the failure to obtain the Ministry of Economy’s consent to
subject the Contract to the 2000 Emergency Law and factual inaccuracies, e.g.
the covering letter from the Minister of the Interior to the President submitting
Decree 669/01 stated that the Contract costs were beyond the capabilities of the
Government notwithstanding that there were no supporting budgetary reports
and in November 2000 the Ministry of Economy had opined otherwise,”' and the
Government had approved the budget for the proposed restated terms of the
Contract which in turn had been approved by Congress on December 12, 2000
and the President on December 29, 2000.” Siemens also points out that said
letter reports errors in the System without supporting evidence (errors which
were disregarded by the President), it uses the Provinces’ opposition to the
Project notwithstanding that the Contract was undertaken by Argentina itself
within its exclusive powers,”° and it exaggerates deliberately the costs based on
RPN’s analysis.

114. Siemens points out that the Contract was terminated on the sole
grounds of the 2000 Emergency Law, which termination was ratified by Decree
No. 1205/01 rejecting SITS’s appeal against Decree 669/01. Siemens recalls that
Argentina denied SITS access to the administrative file for purposes of filing the
appeal and presenting evidence in support of its claims. Siemens alleges that the
administrative file was not made available until Siemens reported the secret
handling of the file and Siemens had filed the claim under the Treaty. After

°° Exhibit 66 to the Memorial.
*' Exhibit 53 to the Memorial.
Exhibit 70 to the Memorial.
* article 2 of Law No. 17,671. Exhibit 35 to the Memorial.

31

Contract termination, Siemens claims that Argentina caused delays in the
transfer and reception of equipment and in the assessment of the compensation,
and never returned the performance bond, which had lost its purpose once
Argentina terminated the Contract unilaterally. According to Siemens, SITS
continued to provide technical support, train personnel as agreed in cases of
Contract termination, assigned to the Government ownership of the computer
hardware, the installed communications equipment and fittings and the non-
exclusive licenses for use of application software, and requested the Ministry of
the Interior to arrange for the transfer of the satellite links.

115. Siemens points out the passivity of the Government during the
months that followed the termination of the Contract and that in November 2001,
the Ministry of the Interior called the SITS’ sub-contractors to conduct a test and
assess the possibility of resuming production of the DNis without Siemens.
According to Siemens, the tests conducted in Casa de Moneda were satisfactory
and Casa de Moneda proposed to produce DNs through the System provided by
SITS.

2. Counter-Memorial

116. In its Counter-Memorial, Argentina alleges that Siemens raised
false expectations by the statements made in the bid for the Contract. Siemens
had stressed its experience and that of its sub-contractors in high-performance
secure systems to meet automated data and image-capturing requirements for
issuing passports, foreign resident documents, drivers licenses, visas, frequent
traveler cards, health plan cards and DNls, but in reality neither Siemens nor SNI
had been involved in projects of a similar size because no country in the world
had undertaken a project of the complexity, size and significance of the Project.
According to Argentina, Siemens and SNI lacked the technical expertise to
provide a comprehensive service involving the operation and support of a secure
and reliable personal identification, migration control and electoral information
system.

117. As regards Siemens’ claim that Argentina delayed the approval of
the FOM and it is at fault for the non-implementation of the External Circuit,

32

Argentina argues that Siemens presents a traditional notion of contracts with the
parties’ obligations bearing a relationship of interdependence and does not take
into account the particularities and complexities surrounding the procurement of
information technology products and services. Argentina explains that the
Contract is a turnkey information technology contract including tailored software
development and it is inevitable that there will be some uncertainty as to the
actual completion date of the work.

118. | Argentina alleges that in this type of contract the reporting and
advisory duties of the information technology service provider and product
supplier play a key role in maintaining the balance between the parties. Argentina
recognizes that it received assistance from technical personnel who participated
in the guideline-setting stages for the technical definition of the System, but this
is not sufficient, argues Argentina, to eliminate the imbalance in technical
expertise level between the parties.

119. As regards the approval of the FOM, Argentina describes how, a
few days before the deadline for the presentation of the FOM, it requested SITS
to deliver the working papers so that RNP’s technical staff could advance with
the examination of the FOM. SITS never provided the documentation requested.
Argentina refers to a number of communications sent to SITS that show the
delay in the acceptance of the FOM by Argentina was due to inconsistencies in
the FOM proposed by SITS. To further support its argument, Argentina refers to
two reports prepared by RNP on the weaknesses of the FOM submitted by SITS
and the security of the FOM. In brief terms, several items in the FOM submitted
by SITS did not comply with applicable law, were defined on a general or
incomplete basis, or failed to provide specifications for the security, audit, and
quality and management control of the System. Argentina infers from the
foregoing that SITS’ technical qualifications were not sufficient to perform the
Contract and that it used the Project to gain experience.

120. As regards the External Circuit, Argentina explains that SITS and
Argentina through RNP agreed that the proposed model could not be
implemented as described in the Contract and SITS was requested to design an
External Circuit taking into account the following general guidelines: (i) flexible

33

terms for a gradual regional implementation; (ii) installation of computers in the
Manual Data Capture Centers under the charge of SITS to facilitate form
scanning; (iii) set-up of scanning and quality control centers in every provincial
capital, for purposes of resolving any possible rejection of the applications in the
applicant’s location; and (iv) the maintenance by the contractor of the investment
levels that had originally been agreed.

121. Argentina further explains that it is not surprising that the
Provinces were not interested in signing framework agreements for the External
Circuit since they were not advantageous from an economic point of view; under
them, the Provinces would receive lower compensation while the expenses they
had to incur for the System to work efficiently were higher. Argentina also refers
to the nature of its federal system of government where the Government cannot
oblige the Provinces to enter into agreements to cooperate in the performance of
functions that belong to the Federal Government.

122. Argentina argues that SITS was aware of the circumstances of
the country, it had admitted that the design of the External Circuit was not
consistent with the social reality of Argentina and it was necessary to do a
comprehensive review of the design, the External Circuit could not be
implemented until the FOM was approved on condition that SITS fulfilled certain
requirements, and, in the agreement signed between Argentina and SITS on
November 26, 1999, the Coordinator of the Project at RNP and the SITS’ Project
Director were empowered to introduce amendments to the System set-up
schedules and in the size of the Electronic Data Capture Centers.

123. Argentina also argues that, given the long presence of Siemens in
the country and as a product and service provider to the public sector, SITS
should have been aware of the political issues that would necessarily have an
impact on the performance of some stages of the Contract and compliance with
its obligations.

124. Argentina alleges that data capture for the External Circuit could
not be set up in the Provinces because of the suspension of manufacturing,
printing and distribution of DNIs on February 24, 2000. Argentina alleges also

34

non-compliance by SITS with its obligation to deposit the source codes in escrow
and transfer them to the Government upon completion of the Contract. Argentina
affirms that without the source codes it could not properly operate the System
after termination of the Contract. Furthermore, Argentina had detected errors in
the System and the source codes were necessary to correct SITS’ work.

125. Argentina contends that, contrary to Siemens’ claim that
Argentina did not comply with the schedule provided for in the Contract to cease
issuing DNIs manually, SITS had agreed to reformulate the terms of the Contract
applicable to begin issuing new DNls and consented to the extension of the term
for the discontinuation of manual DNI issuance.

126. Argentina explains that the Contract did not amend the law
regulating when DNIs are issued and updated. The law requires that a DNI be
issued when a baby is born and this document is updated when the child reaches
school age. Then a photograph is added to the identity document and the right
thumb fingerprint is stamped on the document. This DNI is replaced when a
person turns sixteen and a new photograph is taken. Then this DNI is updated
when a person turns thirty. In order to determine whether the Project was
economically advantageous, SITS should have calculated the number of DNIs
that had to be replaced.

127. According to Argentina, the RNP sub-system was the most
important undertaking since the revenues it would generate would guarantee the
expected return on the investment made by Siemens, and it was precisely in the
design of this sub-system that SITS failed to comply with its obligations. On
February 23, 2000, the RNP head of the Aliens Division reported that federal
police officers had discovered that on two DNis belonging to foreigners the
fingerprint was incorrectly identified, e.g., the left thumbprint was identified as the
right thumbprint. Argentina explains that the technical report states that the
fingerprint experts verified that the fingerprints had been correctly taken by RNP
staff. The head of the RNP Aliens Division concluded that the error was in the
design of the System which was entrusted exclusively to the Claimant, which
defeated the purpose of implementing an information technology system to avoid
the risk of human error.

35

128. Argentina contests that Article 17 of the Contract was applicable
in that situation. Argentina explains that such article is intended to regulate the
parties’ conduct in the event of any possible physical error of the identity
document and not an error involving the inappropriate design.

129. Argentina then turns to the 2000 Emergency Law and points out
that this law provided that the events of force majeure foreseen in sections 53
and 54 of Law No. 13,064 were considered to have occurred, that within 30 days
the Government should determine the contracts subject to the provisions of the
2000 Emergency Law, that government contracts would not be terminated if the
continuation of the works or the performance of the contract was possible on the
basis of the “shared sacrifice” principle, and that compensation payable in the
case of those contracts revoked on grounds of convenience, merit and
advisability would not include lost profit or unproductive expenses.

130. | Argentina further points out that in no circumstances did the
Contract entail the privatization of the System’s operation and that the goal of the
Commission established by Resolution No. 263/00 was to find a solution
ensuring the continuity of the Contract given the crisis in Argentina. Argentina
explains the doctrine of unforseeability that would apply in the emergency
situation:

“There is certainly no obligation for the Government to compensate the
contractor as the events causing the contractual imbalance are totally
beyond the Government's control. There is nothing that would prevent the
strict and specific application of the contract provisions and thus the
termination of the contract [...] However, no benefit for the public interest
can be derived from this situation; quite the contrary, the public interest
will not be satisfied by the abrupt interruption of the service provision.
Thus, the doctrine of unforeseeability or unforeseeable risk may be
applied to these cases. According to the doctrine, the Government has to
provide assistance to the concessionaire, sharing the risks that

36

unpredictability might have arisen for purposes of avoiding a total collapse
of the licensed service.”**

131. Argentina further explains that it is obliged to revoke a public
contract when the public need that would be satisfied by the contract
disappeared or new public demands require that it be terminated. Revocation by
reason of public interest is one of the cases of a Government's liability for lawful
actions and entails the obligation to compensate the contractor whose individual
right is sacrificed for the sake of the public, but compensation shall not include
lost profits or unproductive expenses.

132. Argentina disputes Siemens’ affirmation that the Government took
advantage of the passing of the 2000 Emergency Law allegedly to accelerate the
implementation of the agreement concluded with Siemens. Argentina explains
that it is correct that SITS participated in the report prepared by the Commission,
but it is not correct that such report had to be considered by the Government and
SITS as a formal and final renegotiation proposal. According to Argentina, the
report was an initial contract renegotiation proposal which included the
Contractor's point of view.

133. Argentina also questions the position taken by Siemens in respect
of the role of SIGEN and its refusal to furnish the cost structure of SITS’ services.
According to Argentina, SIGEN was unable to determine the reasonableness of
compensation to SITS because it had not access to conclusive information about
the cost of the services. Argentina disputes the allegation that the reduction of
the original DNls price reflected SITS’ share of the sacrifice to continue with
implementation of the Contract. Argentina recalls in this respect that Article 4.6.2
of the Contract required disclosure of SITS’ cost structure where extraordinary
and unforeseeable events materially and adversely affect the original economic
and financial equation of the Contract.

134. Argentina also takes issue with the characterization by the
Claimant of the 2000 Emergency Law as an instrument devised to hurt the
Claimant. Argentina also contests the truthfulness of the assertion by Siemens

24 Garcia-Enterria and T. Ramon Fernandez, Curso de Derecho Administrativo (1997), vol. |,
p. 732. Counter-Memorial, para. 555.

37

that it has been penalized by pursuing this arbitration and lists a number of public
sector contracts won by Siemens in recent years. According to Argentina,
Siemens continued to do business with the Government and with other public
sector players and provided new services after the termination of the Contract.

135. Argentina describes the steps involved in the reception of SITS’
assets to justify the delay, which it also ascribes to lack of cooperation by SITS at
that stage. Indeed, according to Argentina, SITS refused to participate in the
asset verification process because the inventories already submitted by SITS
included all necessary specifications for asset identification. In fact, according to
Argentina, SITS’ inventories in most cases referred to total quantities without a
breakdown that would permit actual verification of the assets’ existence and their
relevance to the System. Argentina claims that, in contrast, the Notary General’s
Office recorded the asset verification proceedings, including a list of the assets
present in the various agencies belonging to the System and unequivocal

information regarding each and every asset.”>

136. Argentina also refers to the issue of the verification of certain
computer equipment stored at the Siemens National Route 8 plant in San Martin
County in the Province of Buenos Aires. Argentina claims that the Government
was only informed of the existence of such equipment in a presentation made by
SITS to the Asset Reception Committee on September 4, 2001. Argentina
explains the difficulties that this revelation presented for the Government as,
among other matters, it was uncertain whether these assets were part of the
assets to be transferred under Article 10.7 of the Contract and, if they were, it
was unclear whether or not the Government should actually receive them
because of SITS’ refusal to transfer title to those assets until payment was made
to SITS. The Asset Reception Committee decided to accept the National Route
8 assets on December 17, 2001 and that on December 20, 2001, both parties
should agree on a procedure to receive them. The serious events that happened
on that date led to the worst ever political and institutional crisis in Argentina, but
once the new authorities were in place in Argentina, the Asset Reception

°5 Exhibit 144 to the Counter-Memorial.

38

Committee continued with its work and requested the Tribunal de Tasaciones de
la Nacion (“TTN”) to appraise the assets.

137. | Then Argentina describes the performance tests of the various
sub-systems at RPN, DNE and DNM and affirms that in all three cases the
technicians concluded that the sub-systems were not operative. Argentina
explains that SITS was invited to attend the tests but refused the invitation.
Furthermore, the tests had to be carried out without access to the source codes
that SITS should have turned over to Argentina at Contract termination.
According to Argentina, without the source codes it was not possible to
determine the degree of progress by SITS regarding the purpose of the Contract
and it was not possible to conduct an accurate appraisal.

138. Argentina provides the breakdown of the appraisal conducted by
the TTN, which in the aggregate amounts to AR$71,735,510, and explains that
the items appraised would be valuable only if, among other matters, SITS would
deliver the source codes, the licenses for basic software and databases, and the
use of SITS’ software licenses. Argentina reports that the TTN pointed out that it
was not certain that all licenses could be transferred as their respective contracts
did not provide for such possibility.

139. As regards the performance bond, Argentina argues that it ends
on termination of the Contract, provided that the Contractor has fulfilled its
obligations under the Contract, which has not been the case. Argentina in this
respect particularly emphasizes the fact that the source codes and the software
licenses have not been delivered by SITS to the Government.

3. Reply

140. In its Reply, the Claimant notes that Argentina recognizes the
fundamental facts of the case and the events that frustrated Siemens’
investment. The Claimant takes issue with the argument that Argentina was the
weaker party because of an alleged technology gap. The Claimant points out this
cannot be true when Argentina had designed the Bidding Terms and Conditions,
defined the characteristics of the service, and reserved the right to control and
manage the tasks during Contract performance.

39

141. Siemens disputes that there was a mutually agreed renegotiation
process. According to Siemens, the Government took advantage of the sunk cost
of Siemens’ investment to impose a renegotiation process not provided for in the
Contract. Siemens also questions the arguments based on security concerns.
Siemens first points out that lack of security or reliability of the System was not
the subject of any discussion between the parties during the performance of the
Contract, that these arguments were developed after the Contract termination,
and that the only audit report issued during the term of the Contract on the
security of the System was submitted to the authorities by the external security
auditor appointed by the Government, which audit report concluded that the
System reasonably complied with the security standards required by the
Contract. According to Siemens, this is confirmed by the termination of the
Contract with no finding of fault on the part of the Contractor (Decree 669/01) and
the ratification of the termination in September 2001 after the SIGEN reports had
been issued (Decree 1205/01).

142. Siemens also points out that the security concerns of the old
system which motivated the tender (Decree 1310/94) for a new system are still
valid, while the security and reliability of the System was never questioned before
this arbitration. Siemens surmises that if the real concern had been security, then
the logical course of action would have been to allow the Contract’s performance,
instead of discontinuing the Project and preserving the system that caused the
documentary emergency from which Argentina is still suffering.

143. Siemens argues that Argentina distorts reality and deliberately
intends to confuse the situation that led to the passage of the 2000 Emergency
Law with the economic and political crisis that resulted in the enactment of
Emergency Law No. 25,561 in 2002. Siemens explains that, contrary to the
description made by Argentina, the 2000 Emergency Law only declared the fiscal
accounts in emergency and empowered the new administration to repudiate
certain contracts concluded by its predecessor. According to Siemens, the
emergency was not related to “extraordinary and unforeseeable” events
unrelated to the State as claimed by Argentina, because public deficits fail to

40

meet such qualifications: the events that led to the enactment of the 2000
Emergency Law were attributable exclusively to the State itself.

144. Siemens contests Argentina’s allegations regarding its technical
qualifications. Siemens recalls that in the bidding process SITS was allocated the
best ratings in terms of experience in the implementation and or administration of
the System, and in project integration and capacity to handle the Project.
Siemens recalls that Argentina holds Siemens in such high regard that it has
repeatedly requested its intervention in other public projects, even after the

Contract’s termination.

145. | Siemens dismisses Argentina’s allegations regarding defects in
the Contract and recalls that, in compliance with Decree No. 1310/94, the
Ministry of the Interior approved the Bidding Terms of Conditions through
Resolution No. 2183/96, stating in the whereas clauses that RPN, DNM, DNE,
the Ministry of the Interior, the Attorney General’s office and SIGEN had been
involved in their preparation. RPN, DNM and DNE prepared reports for the
Technical Evaluation Committee which concluded: “it may be inferred from the
technical reports received, from which contents this Committee finds no reasons
to depart,”
items and amounts tendered, and that “it is appropriate to share the conclusions
reached by the Technical Agencies consulted [RNP, DNM, DNE], that SIEMENS
IT’s rating is 13.03% higher than the rating [...]."2” Furthermore, it is Siemens’

that the bidders have complied with all the provisions referring to the

contention that:

“Only Argentina was in a position to identify its own political, economic and
social needs involved in the System. It was also the one that had the duty
to set the requirements consistent with its own capabilities and limitations.
Contrary to its claims, it was Argentina and not the Contractor that had the
duty to inform its contractual party of the economic, political or social
limitations that could be encountered in the design, implementation and
subsequent development of the Project.””°

2° Reply, para. 137.
27 Ibid., para. 138.
28 Ibid., para. 142.

4l

146. As regards the delayed approval of the FOM and the allegation by
Argentina that SITS lacked the technical capacity to perform the Contract,
Siemens asserts that the reasons that delayed FOM approval were not of a
technical nature that could be ascribed to SITS, but originated in the indolent
attitude of the Government and its lack of cooperation with SITS.

147. | Siemens contests the presentation made by Argentina on the
failure of implementing the External Circuit and the implication that it was
Siemens that designed this circuit and determined its need. According to
Siemens, the model incorporating the External Circuit was created by Argentina
taking into account the country’s geographical extent and the rules applicable to
its personal identification and registration activity. Furthermore, Argentina has
justified not making the necessary budget allocations on the basis of ignorance of
the characteristics required for the buildings allocated to the External Circuit.
Siemens claims that this is not a valid reason because Argentina had all the
information to purchase the properties and prepared a budget estimate months
later when the System was paralyzed.

148. As regards the failure to discontinue the production of the old
manually produced DNls, Siemens recalls that the “cut-over” criterion was a
basic commitment of Argentina under the Contract and an essential component
of the Project, that, in any case, Argentina did not meet the new deadlines
agreed reluctantly by SITS, and that the error detected by the police occurred
several months after the original date of the “cut-over” and after the new
deadlines.

149. | Siemens contends that the decision to suspend the for-profit-
operations of the System were arbitrary. In the case of the fingerprint error,
Siemens insists that it originated in a mistaken software sentence found in the
programming of one of the applications. According to Siemens, SITS
acknowledged the error and offered to correct it immediately, but the
Government decided to suspend provisionally the processing of DNls for
Argentine nationals and foreigners throughout the System. The decision
remained in effect until the termination of the Contract.

42

150. Siemens contests the interpretation given by Argentina to Article
17 of the Contract. This Article does not distinguish between design errors and
errors related to individual documents; it simply refers to a DNI that may have
errors resulting from any cause, whether attributable to SITS or the Government.

151. Siemens recalls that the services provided by SITS to the DNM
and DNE were accepted by the relevant agencies and that, in the case of the
DNM sub-system, its operation was suspended because of the alleged lack of
formal authorization for the launch of the sub-system after one day of operation
and not because of the flaws that Argentina now points out, supported by a
report of SIGEN of September 2001, four months after termination of the
Contract and eighteen months after the suspension of the sub-system operation.
According to Siemens, the sub-system is in use by DNM to this date.

152. | Siemens questions the use of the technical studies presented by
Argentina in this arbitration when the Government did not consider that SITS had
committed breaches to allow the Contract’s termination, nor did it ever notify
SITS of the serious breaches now invoked in accordance with the procedures
provided for in the Contract, nor imposed any sanctions whatsoever based on the
alleged inconsistencies of the System. According to Siemens, SIGEN produced
its reports months after the System had started to operate with express approval
of RPN, and after the authorities had already decided to terminate the Contract.
Siemens claims that Argentina did not convey the reports or their
recommendations to SITS or Siemens and refers to Article 10.2 of the Contract,
which provides that:

“Following Systems implementation, but prior to their being put into
operation, the security and high degree of inviolability of the Systems shall
be tested and certified by a world-class auditor appointed by mutual
agreement of the parties. The inexistence of observations from the State’s
Security Officer shall imply the acceptance of the Systems’ security and
inviolability test results.”

153. Siemens affirms that the only auditing reports provided for in the
Contract determined the reasonable accomplishment of the System’s security

43

standards, including the initial stage, SITS’ compliance with its contractual
obligations, and the Government's non-compliance with theirs. Siemens points
out that these reports were ignored by the Government and excluded from the
administrative files, probably, Siemens surmises, because their outcome was
deemed unfavorable to Argentina.

154. Siemens recalls that two months prior to the creation of the
Commission, and days before the suspension of for-profit operations, the new
authorities declared publicly before informing SITS of their intentions that the
Contract had to be reviewed. Siemens also recalls that the technical aspects
were irrelevant in the discussions to renegotiate the Contract, and that the issues
discussed were limited to the reduction in the number of DNis, migration
proceedings prices, the redesign of the External Circuit, the progressive
discontinuance of the manual system as opposed to the “cut-over”, an increase
in the amount of free-of-charge DNs, etc. Siemens submits that these were not
“external circumstances” or an “extraordinary and unforeseeable event that
materially affected the equilibrium of the relationship”, but reflected the opposition
of the new Administration to the obligations undertaken by its predecessor.
Siemens notes that, with a high degree of political opportunism, the Government
took advantage of the fact that by then most of the investment for the Project had
been made.

155. Siemens questions the correctness of the ius variandi as
understood by Argentina. First, Siemens refers to the acknowledgement by
Argentina that the power of the Government to vary the terms may be exercised
only to the extent to which the economic balance of the contract is preserved.
However, Siemens points out that Argentina neglects to mention the limitations to
the jus variandi. Indeed, the authority of the State to modify the terms and
conditions of the contract does not affect those provisions pertaining to
compensation and financial advantages, since it would be contrary to the
principle of good faith and to business security to allow the State to modify the
contract unilaterally and reduce compensation. Siemens refers to the limitations
imposed by the Argentine Constitution and law, in particular the property
safeguard (Article 17 of the Constitution), the proportionality principle (Article 28

44

of the Constitution), the pacta sunt servanda rule (Article 1197 of the Civil Code)
and the principle of good faith (Article 1198 of the Civil Code).

156. Siemens argues that, when Argentina called for foreign
investment to carry out its public sector transformation in 1990, Argentina
assumed that some of the legal features of the public contract could discourage
investors and deliberately self-limited its public powers and prerogatives.
Siemens points out that one of the most important limitations was directed at
preventing the unilateral modification or termination of contracts, even if
ostensibly in the ‘public interest.’?? Thus Article 33.6 of the Contract provides
that, “Any change or amendment to this Contract shall be agreed upon by the
parties and set forth in writing.” Article 26.1 limits early termination by the State to
cases of SITS’ fault, and Article 3.5.2 limits early termination by the State until all
existing DNis issued as of the date of the Contract had been replaced.

157. Siemens submits that ‘if the State does not comply with the
previously described limitations, it would be in breach of its duties and it should
be accountable for its wrongful acts by fully compensating the contractor for
having deprived it of its vested rights and/or having frustrated its legitimate
expectations (as appropriate).”°° Siemens also points out that Argentina does not
specify any new events that would justify a different assessment of the public
interest as it was when the Contract was awarded; a change of Administration is
not a valid legal ground. The renegotiation of the Contract was initiated, not as an
exercise of Argentina’s discretionary powers, but as an attempt to depart from its
contractual obligations.

158. Siemens insists that there was “no mutual will to renegotiate
following a change in circumstances, but a coerced process involving substantial
alterations of the initial conditions to the detriment of SITS, strongly conditioned
by the fact that — the investment already being made — the State suspended the
operations of the income generating systems [sub-systems] [...].”°"

29 Ibid., para. 225.
°° Ibid., para. 229.
5 Ibid., para. 242.

45

159. Siemens recalls the Argentine Supreme Court constitutionality
test for emergency measures that restrict individual rights, namely, they may last
only as long as necessary to allow the cause of the measures to disappear, and
“Even where a more intense exercise of police power is recognized in emergency
circumstances, the Supreme Court has repeatedly held that an individual’s own
property cannot be taken without a declaration of public use and prior
compensation.”*? The application of the 2000 Emergency Law to terminate the
Contract was a political decision and not, as alleged by Argentina, the result of
events “absolutely alien and independent from the administrative activity.”°°

160. | Siemens contends that the disclosure of SITS’ cost structure was
necessary only at a later stage and points out that, during the 14 months of
negotiations prior to SIGEN’s report in March 2001, this issue was never raised.
Furthermore, the Contract was based on a price cap and the cost to Argentina
did not depend on SITS’ cost structure, the conditions of Article 4.6.2 of the
Contract had not been met and the 2000 Emergency Law did not trigger them,
and even the Draft Proposal of May 2001 did not require any disclosure.

161. | Siemens notes that there was no “shared sacrifice” and that the
burden was exclusively on SITS is particularly evident in the May 2001 Draft
Proposal intended to provoke a rejection from SITS and to justify the termination
of the Contract on the basis of the 2000 Emergency Law. Siemens asserts that
its reply to the proposal was not a rejection, but that it only insisted on the need
to reach a solution that would respect the parties’ rights and previous
commitments, and requested the missing annexes for a correct assessment of
the proposal.

162. | Siemens recalls that the new Minister of the Interior ordered new
reports from RNP, DNM and DNE and that these agencies issued reports in April
2001 that differ from those issued in December 2000, particularly in the case of
RNP. The proposal of May 2001 shows that technical issues were not relevant
and the disclosure of the cost structure was not required by the State at the time
of formulating such proposal. The State had not required it as a condition of the

% Ibid., para. 259.
%8 Ibid., para. 262.

46

Contract when it was awarded nor was it part of the November 2000 Contract
Restatement Proposal.

163. | Siemens points out that it was denied access to the administrative
file until August 2001 —three months after termination of the Contract — and then
it realized that: the file had been started on December 13, 2000, it included
documents dated from as early as January 2000, and reports favorable to the
Contract’s continuation were absent. According to Siemens, such reports
apparently had been included in the file and then removed without indicating the
reason; notably, the SWIPCO reports were missing and were also ignored in the
Counter-Memorial.

164. Siemens then refers to the contracts that Argentina has reported
in the Counter-Memorial to have been terminated under the 2000 Emergency
Law to respond to the claim of discrimination, and argues that these contracts
were not comparable, that main contracts involving foreign investments had been
formally excluded, that most of them had been renegotiated and not terminated
and that the two public works terminated were in the end terminated because of
the contractors’ fault. Siemens points out that a passport contract between a
local company and the State is not included in the list presented by Argentina,
and was not subject to the 2000 Emergency Law notwithstanding how expensive

it was.

165. Siemens claims that, after termination of the Contract, the
behavior of Argentina was as arbitrary as before, namely, it denied access of
SITS to the administrative file, subjected SITS’ compensation to the performance
and to the physical tests of the System after it had been in the power of the State
since its transfer and over which SITS had lost control a long time before,
excluded SITS from the tests at Casa de Moneda, and issued reports
unfavorable to SITS without notifying SITS or including them in the administrative
file. Siemens claims that Argentina’s lack of good faith is confirmed by bringing
before this Tribunal a large number of contractual breaches absent any actual
decision of the Government pertaining to the Contract.

47

166. Siemens affirms that SITS took every possible action to overcome
the difficulties placed in its way by Argentina and to avoid the expropriation of the
Contract and recover its investment.

167. Siemens points out that it took Argentina 28 months to receive the
assets transferred from SITS. Siemens recalls how Argentina did not take
measures for the orderly transfer of the non-exclusive licenses for the use of the
applications software or the contract for the supply of satellite link services, and
all links between SITS’ help desk and the System were cut in May 2001.
Siemens claims that the passive behavior of Argentina caused losses and
jeopardized the System. Hence, SITS could not agree to any physical,
performance or functionality test carried out by the Government after its
damaging attitude.

168. | Siemens notes the positive results of the test at Casa de Moneda
in order to verify the overall operation of the System. Siemens refers to the
following statement in a letter provided by the President of Casa de Moneda to
the Under-Secretary of the Interior reporting on the test results:

“As per your request, | would like to inform you the positive result of the
verification test of the operativity [sic] of the General Persons Identification
System that forms part of the Argentine and International Public Bidding
Process No. 01/96, the contract of which was terminated by Decree
669/01.

Le]

Therefore, it has been verified that it is possible to print identity documents

at the plant.”°4

169. | Siemens also points out that SITS’ sub-contractors who were
present at the tests reported that they “[...] evidenced the successful operation of
the systems set up for the production of DNis, and that pursuant to Section 2 of
Decree No. 669/2001 those systems were received by the Government.”

Siemens refers to press reports on the satisfactory functioning of the System

% Ibid., para. 341, emphasis added by the Claimant.
% Ibid., para. 342, quotation from a note from Imaging Automation.

48

notwithstanding attempts by officials of RNP to prevent its operation to the extent
that floppy disks and software applications containing important information for
the issuance of the DNIs mysteriously were lost.°°

170. | Siemens maintains that the source code issue lacks any merit.
First, source codes were excluded from the Contract. The Government,
prompted by a question of SITS seeking confirmation that the only right to be
acquired by the Ministry of the Interior over the software would be a non-
exclusive use license, replied: “The requirement included in the bidding terms
and conditions related to the software is that the Ministry of the Interior be
transferred_a_ permanent _and_non-exclusive use license”, and “the bidder or
contractor may assign all or a portion of the ownership rights over the software if
it so accepted.”°” Siemens affirms that there is no reference in the Contract to
software source codes and, to have access to them, Argentina would need to
negotiate directly with the software copyright owners.

171. Siemens recalls that software and source codes are protected by
Argentine law and international law and that no third party has the right to
access, reproduce, execute, adapt and modify them without the copyright
holder’s express authorization.

172. Siemens notes that the Respondent never demanded compliance
with Article 10.12 of the Contract prior to this arbitration. As the evidence
attached to the Counter-Memorial shows, this article was invoked by Argentina
for the first time in April 2002, nearly a year after Contract termination and after
the provision had lost its effect. Furthermore, the allegation made by Argentina
that defects had been detected in the System that require access to the source
codes to be corrected is an argument first made by Argentina in its Counter-
Memorial.

4. Rejoinder

173. In its Rejoinder, Argentina points out that it is striking that,
notwithstanding the contractual concerns expressed by Siemens in_ this

% Ibid., paras. 344-345 and footnotes 402 and 403.
57 Ibid., para. 353, emphasis added by the Claimant.

49

arbitration, it never saw fit to initiate the dispute settlement provisions set out in
Article 30 of the Contract. Argentina emphasizes the seriousness of the breaches
of the Contract by SITS, and that Siemens agreed to renegotiate the Contract
and to the application of the 2000 Emergency Law to the renegotiation. Siemens
was aware of the consequences of renegotiating under that law. Argentina
explains that the final proposal was prepared after receiving the opinions of the
General Department of Legal Affairs of the Ministry of the Interior and of SIGEN.
Argentina also points out that the delay in compensation can be attributed to
institutional changes but also to the lack of cooperation of SITS with the Asset
Reception Committee.

174. — Argentina clarifies that it is true that Siemens won the bid on the
basis of Siemens’ qualifications as technology leader but the System failed to
perform the task identifying and registering individuals pursuant to Law No.
17,671. Argentina affirms that the FOM was never approved and hence the
System never existed, only some functions worked.

175. Argentina questions the political motivations alleged by the
Claimant at each step of the way. Argentina points out that the FOM approval
process already showed before the change of Government that SITS lacked the
technical expertise required. The FOM was approved on November 26, 1999,
subject to the observations made by RNP, and Argentina allowed SITS to start
printing the DNlis beforehand so that SITS could recover its investment. As
regards the External Circuit, Argentina clarifies that it was refused by the
Provinces because of economic reasons, that it would have been irresponsible to
oblige the Provinces considering how onerous the model was and the
impossibility of continuing efficiently with the development of the Project, and that
SITS agreed with the Government on November 26, 1999 to empower the
project coordinator of RNP and the project manager of SITS, together with the
Provincial Directors of Vital Records, to amend the schedules of implementation,
composition and size of the Electronic Data Collection Centers and established
December 20, 1999 as the deadline for implementation.

176. Argentina dismisses the contention that no budgetary allocations
were made and refers to pertinent provisions of the budget laws for 1999, 2000

50

and 2001, and alleges that it would have been irresponsible on the part of
Argentina to use the budget to develop a faulty product.

177. Argentina maintains that the manual system to issue DNls could
not be suspended because the System as such never worked. The mistake
detected by Argentine police officers was not a minor mistake; it was a major
design error in the sub-system. The DNM component also failed; it was installed
in less than 10% of the places and presented gross validation mistakes.
Argentina argues that SITS failed to bring any action against the measures taken
and only objected to Decree 669/01 and then for reasons different from those
adduced here.

178. Argentina insists that Article 17 of the Contract referred only to
errors related to the physical support and not to the design of the software, that it
was essential for the Government to secure the continuation of the System, that
the interruption was not a penalty, and that the mistake in the fingerprint did not
give rise to the revision of the Contract.

179. Argentina observes that Siemens has not objected to any of the
safety-related questions in the report of SIGEN; it simply asserts that it was not
notified. In respect of the date when the report was issued, Argentina dismisses
the point made by Siemens since surely a report needs some time to be
prepared and the date of the report is the date of its completion. Furthermore,
Argentina notes that SITS was aware of the preparation of the report since its
representatives attended the audit meetings organized by SIGEN.

180. | Argentina asserts that at no time has it affirmed that the Contract
was rescinded by the Contractor’s fault. The reports of the various agencies were
used to revise the Contract but the rescission was done under the 2000
Emergency Law. Argentina alleges that it did not inform SITS of any breaches
nor imposed any sanctions because it was its intention to preserve the Contract
and affirms that at all times it acknowledged that the rescission was a
consequence of the economic and financial emergency.

181. Argentina affirms that it does not confuse the emergency of 2000
with that of 2002; the circumstances detected in 1999, which gave rise to the

51

2000 Emergency Law, are the background to the crisis that burst in December
2001. Argentina asserts that the two crises are linked, contrary to the argument
made by Siemens.

182. Argentina explains that the Commission had no power to reach
agreement with SITS and, therefore, it could not commit or oblige the State.
Argentina describes the Contract Restatement Proposal prepared by the
Commission as an internal preparatory document indicating SITS’ point of view.

183. | Argentina further explains that the report of SIGEN was an
internal report of the Administration, and that due to their importance and effects
some documents are published on its website. Thus there is nothing surprising
that SITS learned of its existence that way rather than through a formal notice.
Argentina understands the business reasons for SITS’ disagreement with the
changes resulting from SIGEN’s report, but it does not understand the refusal of
SITS to reveal its cost structure which would have assisted the Government in
finding a more rapid and favorable solution for the parties.

184. | Argentina takes issue with the statements by Siemens that only
Siemens was required to do its part in aid of the shared sacrifice principle. To
maintain the Contract as Argentina tried to do, adapting it to the economic
circumstances of Argentina and its population represented a cost to Argentina
over simply letting the Contract collapse.

185. Argentina argues that, when the Claimant did not accept 10 of the
21 points in the Draft Proposal, Argentina concluded that the points accepted by
SITS were not sufficient to meet its savings expectations, and that Siemens may
not argue now that it did not reject the proposal and that the State frustrated the
Contract. Argentina recalls that SITS was informed that the 2000 Emergency
Law had passed and that the Contract should not be excluded from it since the
Contract was not a privatization contract, and affirms that the purpose of
Argentina, when it included the Contract under the 2000 Emergency Law, was
not to rescind the Contract but rather to reach an agreement that guaranteed its
survival. According to Argentina, Resolution MI No. 1779/00 was clear in stating
that the proposal made to the Contractor could be modified by the Contractor, but

52

in such case the Government could reject the modification and rescind the
Contract.

186. | Argentina recalls that the System never reached the C2 Security
Level required under Annex II, Appendix | of the Contract for the configuration
installed in the Document Production Centre (“DPC”) and the Central Scanning
Center. Argentina explains that SIGEN security reports in respect of the RPN and
DNM were started by SIGEN on December 21, 2000, and February 21, 2001,
respectively. The reports show that the Contract needed to be revised and
redrafted not only because of errors in the design related to printing of
fingerprints but also because of failures in IT security. Argentina explains that,
because the Contract was rescinded under the 2000 Emergency Law and not for
non-performance reasons, it was not necessary to have the final conclusions of
the three audits carried out by SIGEN. On the other hand, according to
Argentina, the SIGEN audits are a relevant element to bear in mind for the
appraisal of property and equipment delivered by SITS upon termination of the
Contract.

187. Argentina argues that the scope of the audit conducted by Pistrelli
was limited because of its terms and the time when it took place, and may not be
used validly to refute the recourse to SIGEN. Pistrelli’s audit was in the nature of
desk work and could analyze the System only in a preliminary phase because it
had not started to operate as a whole. On the other hand, affirms Argentina,
SIGEN carried out an integral audit after the System operated and the Project
was halted due to a mistake in its design. Argentina recalls that RPN criticized
the Pistrelli audit and requested elaboration of a number of points and that, as of
April 17, 2000, the authorities had not been able to prove whether the security
changes requested by RPN had been incorporated.

188. | Argentina observes that SITS refused to participate every time
tests were carried out in spite of several invitations made by the Government.
Argentina also points out that SITS refused to participate in the asset reception
process notwithstanding official invitations to this effect. Thus SITS did not
participate in the physical cross-checking, operative cross-checking or
performance cross-checking because: (i) the inventories of assets already

53

furnished contained accurate specifications, and (ii) since termination of the
Contract it had not been in charge of the operation of the System, did not have
access to the equipment and did not know the physical and operative situation.

189. | Argentina acknowledges that SITS has the right to compensation
and that it has taken all the measures leading to satisfy it.

190. Argentina confirms that the contractual performance bond has not
been returned because there has been no compliance of SITS with Article 10.12
of the Contract regarding deposit of the source codes and with Article 10.7
regarding the delivery of licenses for the use of applications software. According
to Argentina, the return of the performance bond is not required until the Asset
Reception Committee issues a decision as to compliance by SITS with its
contractual obligations.

191. Argentina maintains that the agreements between SITS and the
sub-contractors have been transferred to the State and that the amount to be
paid is included in the amount of compensation assessed by the TTN.

192. Argentina takes exception to the allegation that it has not been
diligent in respect of the transfer of the non-exclusive licenses and the satellite
links. Argentina contends that the licenses have not been delivered because
delivery was subject by SITS to prior payment by the Government. As regards
the assignment of satellite links, it was the choice of Argentina to continue or not
with the same provider.

193. Argentina rebuts the statements of Siemens on the test of Casa
de Moneaa. In the first place, the test was conducted outside the asset reception
process and there was no reason to invite SITS since the Contract by then had
been terminated. Furthermore, Argentina affirms that the test was not as
successful as the Claimant pretends since documents were printed only and not
produced and, even with the assistance of sub-contractors, it was not possible to
make the System work appropriately.

194. Argentina then turns to the source codes issue and re-affirms that
the codes were necessary for the purpose of determining the extent of
compliance by SITS with its obligations within the framework of the 2000

54

Emergency Law and Resolution ME No. 3/2001. Argentina also questions the
statement of Siemens that Argentina had never raised the issue of compliance
with Article 10.12. Argentina in fact requested the source codes at the request of
the TTN and SITS breached Article 10.12 by not providing them. Argentina
explains that the value of the source codes has been included in the assessment
carried out by the TTN.

Vi. Merits of the Dispute

195. Argentina has based its defense on its submission that the claim
of Siemens is grounded on issues of contractual performance, while Siemens
maintains that its claim is based on breaches of the Treaty, including the breach
of the umbrella clause — Article 7(2) of the Treaty. The Tribunal will address this
question first and, before turning its attention to the other specific claims related
to expropriation, fair and equitable treatment, and arbitrary and discriminatory
measures, it will consider the relevance of SITS’ and Siemens’ agreement to the
Contract Restatement Proposal and alleged agreement of SITS and Siemens to
include the revision of the Contract under the framework of the 2000 Emergency

Law.
1. Umbrella Clause
a) Positions of the Parties

196. The Tribunal will start by recalling the specific arguments of the
parties on the meaning of Article 7(2) of the Treaty. This article reads as follows:

“Each Contracting Party shall observe any other obligation it has assumed
with regard to investments by nationals or companies of the other
Contracting Party in its territory.”

197. | Siemens argues that Argentina breached Article 7(2) of the Treaty
by failing to comply with its obligations with regard to Siemens’ investment.
According to Siemens, such obligations may be contractual obligations in
agreements between States and investors or broader undertakings contained in
the States’ national investment legislation. The effect of Article 7(2) is to protect
investments against interferences with contractual rights and licenses elevating

55

them to violations of the Treaty regardless of breaches of Articles 2 and 4.
Siemens observes that this conclusion is even more compelling if the State does
so in bad faith, for political reasons and lacking public purpose. Siemens also
finds that this conclusion is confirmed by Article 10(1), which covers all
“[dlisputes concerning investments in the sense of this Treaty between a
Contracting Party and a national or company of the other Contacting Party [...].”

198. In its Counter-Memorial, Argentina reviews the history of the
umbrella clauses and in particular refers to the concept of the essential base of
the claim introduced in Woodruff v. Venezuela®® and used in Vivendi II for
purposes of determining the validity of the forum choice in the contract. Argentina
finds further support in its argumentation in Ronald S. Lauder v. the Czech
Republic, Alex Genin, Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v. the
Republic of Estonia*°, CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic
*" and SGS Societé Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of
Pakistan.” In the latter case, Argentina points out that the tribunal insisted that
the text of the clause has to be unambiguous and that there must be clear and
convincing evidence of the purpose of the umbrella clause to elevate contractual
claims to treaty claims. Argentina also finds support in SGS Société Générale de
Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines since both SGS tribunals were
moved by the goal of preventing the transformation of contractual claims into
international claims.

199. Argentina points out that the tribunal in SGS v. Philippines
restricts the commitments to which the clause is applicable: “For Article X(2) to
be applicable, the host State must have assumed a legal obligation, and it must
have been assumed vis-a-vis the specific investment — not as a matter of the
application of some legal obligation of a general character. This is very far from

°° Woodruff v. Venezuela, RIAA, Vol. IX, p. 213, AL RA No. 72.

%° Ronald S. Lauder v. the Czech Republic, Award (September 3, 2001), published in
www.mfcr.cz/Arbitraz/en/FinalAward.doc, Siemens LA No. 6.

0 Alex Genin, Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v. the Republic of Estonia, \CSID Case
No. ARB/99/2, Award (June 25, 2001), AL RA No. 73.

* CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Award
(May 12, 2005), AL RA No. 64.

2 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/13, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 18 ICSID Review 307, para. 163, AL RA No.
74,

56

elevating to the international level all ‘the municipal, legislative or administrative
or other unilateral measures of a Contracting Party.”“° Furthermore, according to
Argentina, if there is an exclusive contractual forum selection clause, the forum

specified in the contract is the forum with jurisdiction over contractual matters.

200. Applying these considerations to the instant case, Argentina
argues that “the clause can only be invoked vis-a-vis an Investment Agreement
in the case of breach of the Agreement and not vis-a-vis a concession contract
governed by domestic administrative law and containing an agreed upon forum
clause. Siemens intentionally confuses the Investment Agreement with the

investment, terms that are not equivalent and cannot be merged.”

201. In its Reply, Siemens affirms that Article 7(2) includes obligations
arising from a contract. Siemens finds that the attempt by Argentina to distinguish
between an investment agreement and domestic utility contracts has no support
under the terms of investment treaties or in their ordinary meaning. Siemens
points out that Articles 7(2) and 10(1) use the term “investments”, which is
broadly defined and that claims raised under an umbrella clause are additional to
and independent of claims based on the other protections under the Treaty.
According to Siemens, under an umbrella clause, “any violation of a contract thus
covered, becomes a violation of the BIT. The consequence is that the BIT’s
clause on dispute settlement becomes applicable to a claim arising from the

breach of the contract."*°

202. | Siemens argues that case law supports its claims under article
7(2) of the Treaty. First, it refers to the criticism of the SGS v. Pakistan in SGS v.
Philippines which termed that decision unconvincing because it failed to give any
clear meaning to the umbrella clause. Siemens points out that the facts of the
instant case are different because SGS v. Pakistan did not involve any allegation
of sovereign interference with the Contract. Second, Siemens recalls the
conclusion of the tribunal in the Philippines case: “[the umbrella clause] makes it

“8 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, \CSID Case No.
ARB/03/10, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction (January 29, 2004), para. 121, cited in the
Counter-Memorial, para. 1039.

“4 Counter-Memorial, para. 1047.

“© Reply, para. 591, citing Professor Schreuer’s legal opinion.

s7

a breach of the BIT for the host state to fail to observe binding commitments,
including contractual commitments, which it has assumed with regard to specific
investments.”*° Third, Siemens rebuts the argument of Argentina that a more
specific provision shall take precedence over a more general one. Relying on the
opinion of Professor Christoph Schreuer, Siemens contends that this argument in
fact favors Siemens’ position:

“The dispute settlement clause in the BIT is merely a standing offer to
investors. By accepting that offer an investor perfects a specific arbitration
agreement. The ICSID arbitration agreement, as perfected through the
institution of proceedings, applies only to the specific dispute. By contrast,
the dispute settlement clause in the Contract refers to any dispute arising
from the Contract. It follows that the ICSID arbitration agreement is the
more specific one. The principle generalia specialibus non derogant,
should work against the contractual forum selection clause and in favor of
ICSID."*”

Fourth, Siemens rejects the arguments on the essential claim base and the
contractual forum clause for having been already rejected by the Tribunal in its
decision jurisdiction.

203. Argentina in its Rejoinder denies as a primary submission that
there were any breaches of its obligations towards the Claimant and, if the
Tribunal would consider otherwise, then these would be a contractual matter to
be determined by the proper law of the Contract and not international law.
Furthermore, Argentina contests the meaning attributed by the Claimant to the
umbrella clause, and points out that, in the case of SGS v. Philippines, the
wording of the clause was different and it referred to “specific” investments, and
that, in any case, the tribunal found that the umbrella clause did not “convert the
issue of the extent or content of such obligations into an issue of international
law."“8 Argentina explains that the case law provides very little authority to

“© SGS v. Philippines, para. 128, quoted in the Reply, para. 599.
*” | egal opinion of Professor Schreuer, quoted in the Reply, para. 603.
“8 SGS v. Philippines, para. 128, quoted in the Rejoinder, para. 667.

58

support the approach embraced by the Claimant and that SGS v. Pakistan and
Salini v. Jordan“ are evidence of the unwillingness of arbitral tribunals to embark
on the resolution of contractual disputes. Argentina concludes by reminding the
Tribunal that the approach proposed by the Claimant would re-write the Treaty,
depart from the classical approach to the arbitral function under international law,
and bring into play the provisions of Article 52 of the Convention.

b) Considerations of the Tribunal

204. The Tribunal considers that Article 7(2) has the meaning that its
terms express, namely, that failure to meet obligations undertaken by one of the
Treaty parties in respect to any particular investment is converted by this clause
into a breach of the Treaty. Whether an arbitral tribunal is the tribunal which has
jurisdiction to consider that breach or whether it should be considered by the
tribunals of the host State of the investor is a matter that this Tribunal does not
need to enter. The Claimant is not a party to the Contract and SITS is not a party
to these proceedings.

205. In regards to the scope of Article 10(1), the Tribunal concurs with
the submission that reference to disputes related to investments would cover
contractual disputes for purposes of the consent of the parties to arbitration given
the wide meaning of the term “investments” and the terms of Article 7(2).
However, to the extent that the obligations assumed by the State party are of a
contractual nature, such obligations must originate in a contract between the
State party to the Treaty and the foreign investor as, for instance, in the SGS
cases.

206. The Tribunal does not subscribe to the view of the Respondent
that investment agreements should be distinguished from concession
agreements of an administrative nature. Such distinction has no basis in Article
7(2) of the Treaty which refers to “any obligations”, or in the definition of
“investment” in the Treaty. Any agreement related to an investment that qualifies
as such under the Treaty would be part of the obligations covered under the

“8 SGS v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, quoted in the Rejoinder, para. 673; Salini v. Kingdom of
Jordan, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/13, Award (January 31, 2006), quoted in the Rejoinder, para.
673.

59

umbrella clause. The Tribunal does not find significant, for purposes of the
ordinary meaning of this clause, that it does not refer to “specific” investments.
The term “investment” in the sense of the Treaty, linked as it is to “any
obligations”, would cover any binding commitment entered into by Argentina in
respect of such investment.

2. Consent of Siemens and SITS

207. The positions of the parties related to the argument advanced by
Argentina to the effect that SITS or Siemens agreed to the measures taken by
Argentina have already been described. The Tribunal recalls that such argument
is based on the fact that SITS and Siemens agreed to the Contract Restatement
Proposal in November 2000, that no administrative appeal was filed by SITS
except with respect to Decree 669/01, and that they did not object to the
ministerial Resolution placing the Contract under the regime of the 2000
Emergency Law.

208. As regards the agreement to the Contract Restatement Proposal,
Argentina itself contends that it was a preliminary agreement that was not
binding. In any case, Argentina modified the proposal and SITS did not accept
certain terms of the revised proposal. Thus it is difficult to understand how it can
be held that SITS or Siemens have agreed to the Contract Restatement Proposal
if its terms were not an agreement but, as argued by Argentina, an internal
document in which the views of the private party were expressed and Argentina
did not accept them.

209. The argument on the consent of Siemens and SITS to the
application of the 2000 Emergency Law to the Contract is even more puzzling to
the Tribunal. It is expected that individuals and companies will obey the law; it is
not a question of choice, as would be the option to accept a negotiated proposal.

210. It is a matter of dispute between the parties as to whether
Siemens or SITS did not object to the application of the 2000 Emergency Law
regime to the Contract because they were led to believe by the Respondent that
this would speed up the administrative processing of the Contract Restatement
Proposal. Whatever the reasons for not objecting, Argentina always had the

60

power to apply the 2000 Emergency Law to the Contract, irrespective of the
position of Siemens or SITS on the matter, and it did. It is clear from the evidence
that the expectation of Siemens was that the Contract Restatement Proposal
would not be modified even if this may have been possible under the 2000
Emergency Law. It would lack logic that a high official of Siemens would be
received by President de la Rua to plead that a decree be issued on terms
different from those negotiated.

211. To conclude, the Tribunal considers that, for purposes of
evaluating the measures taken by Argentina in light of its commitments under the
Treaty, the allegations based on the consent of Siemens or SITS are not
relevant.

212. The Tribunal will now turn to the other specific commitments
under the Treaty alleged by Siemens to have been breached by Argentina. Since
the parties understand these commitments differently, not only as they apply to
the facts of this case but also in their meaning, the Tribunal will describe first in
respect of each commitment the arguments made by the parties on its scope and

meaning.
3. Expropriation
a) Positions of the Parties

213. Siemens argues that its investment has been expropriated
indirectly as a result of measures taken by Argentina. According to Siemens,
whether or not Argentina intended to expropriate its investment is irrelevant, what
is of essence is the actual effect of the measures on the investors’ property:
“measures that indirectly, but effectively, deprive an investor of the use or
enjoyment of its investment, including the deprivation of the whole or a significant
part of the economic benefit of property, are as expropriatory as the seizure of an
investor's formal title to its property.”°°

214. | Siemens further argues that contractual rights and the right to

complete a project are part of the property rights that may be expropriated and
that government measures that frustrate such assurances and substantially

5° Memorial, para. 248.

61

deprive investors of their rights to have them respected amount to an
expropriation.

215. — According to Siemens, irrespective of whether or not the purpose
of a State measure affects its legality, it does not affect the State’s obligation to
compensate the investor promptly, adequately and effectively; as plainly stated in
Article 4(2) of the Treaty, the public purpose of expropriatory measures by either
State party in no way alters the legal obligation to compensate investors affected
by those measures. Failure to provide prompt, adequate and effective
compensation renders the expropriation unlawful whether or not it is for a public
purpose.

216. | Siemens claims that the acts and omissions of Argentina were
expropriatory measures that substantially deprived Siemens of the use and
enjoyment of its investment, and significantly reduced its value without payment
of any compensation. Siemens relied on the following assurances given and
obligations undertaken by Argentina: (i) replacement of all DNis previously
issued by new DNis issued through the System; (ii) discontinuation of the
issuance of manual DNls; (iii) implementation of the System on a nationwide
basis; (iv) processing of immigration proceedings through the System and
payment of the corresponding fees; and (v) adoption of all measures necessary
to fulfill the obligations under the Contract and regular collection of SITS’
revenues resulting from the fees and prices paid by the users.

217. According to Siemens, these assurances constituted essential
conditions of its investment and Argentina was aware of its meaning as
recognized in the report of the Commission:

“Progressive replacement of all DNis [...] is actually the State’s guarantee
rather than an obligation of the contractor, and defines the value of the
contract [...]

 

[...] the contract term, which is defined as a six-year term that may be
extended for two three-year periods, prescribes a mechanism that
guarantees returns on the investment made; this relates to the need to
have all existing DNIs replaced by the ones dealt with in the contract

62

LPs

218. Siemens affirms that the acts and omissions of Argentina qualify
as “measures” under Article 4(2) of the Treaty. According to Siemens, the term
“measures” is an all encompassing term for any actions attributable to a State
that may affect an investment and includes acts performed by its different organs
and subdivisions. In the case of its investment, Siemens refers to the following
measures that resulted eventually in its expropriation:

(i) From the date of execution of the Contract and up to August 1999
Argentina failed to meet the obligations it had undertaken to allow the
performance of the Contract on schedule; it did not make the necessary
budget allocations, it did not provide the funds and human resources
necessary to make the system operational, it delayed approval of the
FOM, it failed to execute agreements with the Provinces, and it did not
adopt the statutory and executive measures necessary to carry out the
replacement of existing DNIs by those issued through the System.

(ii) Argentina pressed SITS into postponing the initial date for DNI
production because of the then upcoming elections and into agreeing to
postpone until January 31, 2000 discontinuation of the manual issuance of
DNIs.

(iii) Argentina failed: (A) to adopt alternative measures to implement the
System throughout its territory even when the RNP had the exclusive
power to issue the DNls and gather the information to produce them, (B)
to provide budget allocations for the Project for the year 2000, (C) to
provide the technical definitions to complete implementation of the
immigration proceedings system and the imposition of new requirements
not included in the new Project, and (D) to provide the facilities to
implement the External Circuit to extend the System throughout the
national territory.

51 Quoted in para. 277 of the Memorial.

63

(iv) Argentina notified Siemens in January 2000 that it intended to reduce
the originally agreed-upon prices in the Contract and that agreement to
the reduction was a condition for the continuation of the Contract and, in
February 2000, unjustifiably halted immigration processing and DNI
production through the System.

(v) The negotiations that ensued were concluded in November 2000 with
the promise that the System’s revenue-generating operations would
immediately resume, and to speed approval of the new contractual terms
the Contract was subjected to the Emergency Law of 2000.
Notwithstanding assurances of the President of the Republic that a decree
would be issued approving the new terms before the end of the year, the

new terms were never approved.

(vi) New terms were proposed by Argentina in May 2001 on a take it or
leave it basis without providing the basic elements for an evaluation of the
proposal. The new proposal was not acceptable to SITS, which indicated
its willingness to consider alternatives. Argentina terminated the Contract
on May 18, 2001 invoking the power granted under the 2000 Emergency
Law and without reference to any technical or other reason related to the
fulfillment of the Contract by SITS.

(vii) After termination of the Contract, Argentina failed to pay
compensation, although it had acknowledged its obligation to do so,
denied the right of defense to SITS when SITS filed an appeal against
Decree 669/01, failed to receive the equipment, facilities and instruments
used in Project execution, and refused to return the Contract performance
bond although it was mandatory to return it at Contract termination.

(viii) Siemens’ investment was the only foreign investment expropriated
under the 2000 Emergency Law and the public purpose invoked to
terminate the Contract was merely an excuse to legitimize the measure
adopted by the Government for political convenience, since economic
studies carried out by the Ministry of Economy had recommended
renegotiation of the terms agreed by the parties.

64

219. | Siemens concludes by affirming that the aggregate of these
measures amounts to a creeping expropriation of its investment and submits
that, notwithstanding that Argentina’s conduct constitutes a case of creeping
expropriation, it seems reasonable to consider May 18, 2001, the date of Decree
669/01, as the date of expropriation for valuation purposes. Siemens adds that
the Treaty states that the value of an investment for purposes of compensation is
determined by reference to the date before the intention to expropriate became
known, and, therefore, the effects of the taking itself and any act related to the
taking, including threats to take the asset concerned, that may have diminished
the value of the property or enterprise on the date of the taking, shall not be
considered in the valuation and that Siemens is entitled to compensation for any
loss suffered before or after May 18, 2001 caused by Argentina’s creeping
expropriation.

220. In its Counter-Memorial, Argentina denies that it expropriated
Siemens’ investment and draws the Tribunal’s attention to the following sentence
of Article 4(2) of the Treaty: “The legality of the expropriation, nationalization or
similar measure, and the amount of the indemnification should be reviewable
through ordinary legal proceedings.” Based on this sentence, Argentina asserts
that it is entitled to apply this review option to any future decision of the Tribunal
in connection with the alleged expropriation.

221. Argentina challenges the qualification of events by Siemens. It is
Argentina’s contention that for events to lead to an expropriation each one of
them should affect the investment adversely. However, when the main feature of
a contract is to provide one set of goods -the System in the instant case-, it is not
possible to speak of successive acts, either the Contract is thwarted or not.
Argentina argues that Siemens is unable to provide evidence that the alleged
expropriatory events affected the investment adversely. In this respect, Argentina
refers to the statement of Siemens that it agreed to renegotiate the Contract not
only to save it but also because the Government had promised to resume the
System’s operation. This means, according to Argentina, that the Contract would
not have been thwarted and there could not be a creeping expropriation.
Argentina finds support for its line of argument in Generation Ukraine, Inc. v.

65

Ukraine, which admitted difficulty in finding many cases that fall under the
creeping expropriation category and stated:

“A plea of creeping expropriation must proceed on the basis that the
investment existed at a particular point in time and that subsequent acts
attributable to the State have eroded the investor’s rights to its investment
to an extent that is violative of the relevant international standard of

protection against expropriation.”

222. Argentina then develops the argument that Siemens’ claim is a
purely contractual claim and international law does not include regulations on
contracts, as acknowledged in Saudi Arabia v. Arabian American Oil Company
(Aramco), Robert Azinian, Kenneth Davitian & Ellen Baca v. The United Mexican
States®>, and by Professor Brownlie®*. Furthermore, Siemens has not
contributed evidence showing, as stated by the Annulment Committee in Vivendi
II, clear conduct contrary to the relevant standard in the circumstances of the
case. Argentina disputes the relevance of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal case law
because the law applicable to the cases before that tribunal is different from the
law applicable in this arbitration. That tribunal has to rule on contractual disputes,
can apply commercial usages and has highly discretionary powers in deciding
the applicable law. Argentina reminds the Tribunal that the applicability of the
legal principles developed by the Iran-US Claims Tribunal was explicitly rejected
in Pope & Talbot, Inc. v. Canada®> and S.D. Myers, Inc. v. The Government of
Canada® Argentina also argues in detail the inapplicability to the instant case of
holdings by the tribunals adduced by Siemens regarding acquired international
rights: (i) Aramco was concerned with the application of international law to a
contract that included its own stabilization clause, (ii) Revere Cooper & Brass,
52 Generation Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/9, Award (September 16, 2003),

ara. 20.26, quotation in the Counter-Memorial, para. 911.

8 Saudi Arabia v. Arabian American Oil Company (Aramco), 27 |.L.R. 117, 165, AL RA No. 45;
Robert Azinian, Kenneth Davitian & Ellen Baca v. The United Mexican States, |CSID Case No.
ARB (AF)/97/2, Award (November 1, 1999), ICSID Review, Foreign Investment Journal 1, 25, AL
RA No. 47, cited in the Claimant's Memorial, para. 917, 919.
54 |. Brownlie: Principles of Public International Law, Oxford University Press, 5" ed., 1998, 550,
551, AL RA No. 46, cited in the Claimant's Memorial, para. 918.
§5 Pope & Talbot, Inc. v. Canada, Interim Award (September 13, 2001), AL RA No. 50, cited in the
Counter-Memorial, para. 926.
8 SD. Myers, Inc. v. The Government of Canada, Partial Award (November 13, 2000), cited in
the Counter-Memorial, para. 926.

66

Inc. v. Overseas Private Investment Corporation®’ was a classic investment
agreement protecting the investment differently from an investment treaty and it
was internationalized by a stabilization clause, (iii) Antoine Goetz et consorts v.
Republic of Burundi*® was concerned with the revocation of a permit to operate
in a free trade zone, (iv) CME Czech Republic B.V. (the Netherlands) v. The
Czech Republic®® was not concerned with contractual guarantees by a State,
and (v) the findings of CME were contradicted by Lauder.

223. Argentina questions how Siemens has drawn the line to delimit
the State’s legitimate actions from actions entitling an investor to compensation.
Argentina argues that, if the effect of depriving a person of its property is the
criterion for this purpose, then any regulation would be expropriatory because
regulations have a damaging effect on regulated parties. Argentina refers to the
proportionality test advanced by Tecmed between the measures taken and the
public interest pursued by them, and to the deference due to the State when it
defines issues of public policy. Thus this requires a more complex analysis than
proposed by Siemens.

224. Argentina finds support in recent arbitral awards - Consortium
RFCC v. Royaume du Maroc®, Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican
States", Generation Ukraine, SGS v. Philippines - for arguing that a breach of
treaty is not a breach of contract, it is not enough to qualify a contractual breach
as a treaty violation, there should be a reasonable effort by the investor to obtain
compensation through the domestic channels under the law applicable to the
contract, and the State should not have used its sovereign powers to amend pre-
existing legal situations and the parties’ rights and obligations. In this respect,
Argentina affirms that:

57 Revere Copper and Brass, Inc. v. Overseas Private Investment Corporation, Award (August 24,
978).

58 Antoine Goetz et consorts v. Republic of Burundi, SCID Case No. ARB/95/3, Award
(September 2, 1998).

* CME Czech Republic B.V. (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, Partial Award
September 13, 2001).

° Consortium RFCC v. Royaume du Maroc, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/6, Award (December 22,
2003), para. 38 (AL RA 60), cited in the Counter-Memorial, para. 972.

®' Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, |CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award
(April 30, 2004), para. 171 (AL RA 61).

67

“(a) it did not act under its jus imperii powers; (b) it terminated the contract
with SITS under the habitual and ordinary forms provided therefor by
Argentine law; (c) such act did not thwart any right granted to the investor
or its affiliate under the law of the Contract; and (d) after the termination of
the Contract it was not engaged in any acts aimed at thwarting the rights
agreed upon with SITS for the termination.”©

225. Argentina also affirms that, like the Philippines in the SGS case, it
had “not issued any act (law or decree in sovereign function) aimed at
disregarding the possible contractual rights of SITS. Should there be any debt, it
would still exist."®

226. Argentina requests the Tribunal to focus on two aspects of
Generation Ukraine. First, arbitral tribunals do not exercise the function of an
administrative review agency. Second, arbitral tribunals should consider the
changes in the economy of the State hosting the investments when assessing
the investor’s legitimate expectations. Argentina also calls the attention of the
Tribunal to the holding in Waste Management II, to the effect that international
expropriation law is not meant to eliminate the ordinary risk assumed by foreign
investors, and to the fact that, under the Contract, SITS took responsibility for the
business risk.

227. — Argentina denies that it gave Siemens any warranty or profitability
assurance, and claims that Siemens agreed to revise the Contract when faced
with the failure of the essential features of the System and the substantial
alteration of the economic conditions under which the Contract was intended to
be carried out. Argentina contends that Siemens must comply with the Contract
before requesting its fulfillment and lists as breaches of the Contract concealed
from the Tribunal the following: delay in the design of the FOM and the Security
Operating Model, the imperfect designs for the Security Operating Model, the
External Data Capture Circuit and fingerprint taking, ignorance of the Argentine
personal identification system, failure to deliver the source codes, vulnerability of

® Counter-Memorial, para. 969.
% Ibid., para. 986.

68

the System, and the hindrances placed by SITS during the entire reception
process, including its refusal to participate.

228. In any case, pleads Argentina, even if the arguments of Argentina
were rejected, the mere “effect” criterion applied by the Iran-US Claims Tribunal
would not result in an expropriatory effect of the alleged actions of Argentina
under Argentine law applicable to the Contract.

229. In its Reply, Siemens rejects the allegation of Argentina that,
under Article 4(2), it has the right to submit to review before the local courts the
potential award of this Tribunal. Siemens explains that this Article grants the
investor, who is the only party affected by the expropriation measures, the right
to challenge the legality of the expropriation and the amount of the compensation
in ordinary judicial proceedings.

230. | Siemens then questions the definition of expropriation used by
Argentina in its allegations, namely, that expropriation may occur only directly or
through measures that autonomously and independently affect the investment
adversely, that deprivation of or substantial interference with contractual rights
does not constitute an expropriation under international law, and that the effect of
the measure should completely thwart the investment or be unreasonable,

231. Siemens notes that the Treaty includes measures tantamount to
expropriation and explains that provisions on indirect expropriation are usually
generic statements given the great variety of possible measures. Siemens refers
to the findings by the tribunals in Compania del Desarrollo de Santa Elena S.A.
v. The Republic of Costa Rica,“ CME, Metalclad Corporation v. The United
Mexican States, Tippetts, Abbett, McCarthy, Stratton v. TAMS-AFFA
Consulting Engineers of Iran, Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co.

° Compania del Desarrollo de Santa Elena S.A. v. The Republic of Costa Rica, |CSID Case No.
ARB/96/1, Award (February 17, 2000).

°° Metalclad Corporation v. The United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award
(August 30, 2000).

6 Tippetts, Abbett, McCarthy, Stratton v. TAMS-AFFA Consulting Engineers of Iran, Case No. 7,
Award No. 141-7-2- (June 22, 1984), 6 IRAN-U.S. C.T.R. (1986), 219, at pa. 225, Legal
Authorities No. 23, cited in the Memorial, para. 243.

69

S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt®’ and Tecmed to show the endorsement of the
notion of indirect expropriation by arbitral tribunals; such expropriation takes
place by a variety of measures that by themselves would not necessarily be
expropriatory or adversely affect the investment, nor would they need to be
intended to be expropriatory. Siemens refers to scholarly opinion on the notion of
creeping expropriation:

“In some, if not most other, creeping expropriations, however, that
intent [to expropriate], though possibly present at some level of the host
state’s government, will be difficult, if not impossible to discern. Discrete
acts, analyzed in isolation rather than in the context of the overall flow of
events, may, whether legal or not in themselves, seem innocuous vis-a-vis
a potential expropriation. Some may not be expropriatory in themselves.
Only in retrospect will it become evident that those acts comprised part of
an accretion of deleterious acts and omissions, which in the aggregate
expropriated the foreign investor's property rights.”©°

232. Siemens alleges that an analysis of Biloune and Marine Drive
Complex Ltd. v. Ghana Investments Centre,® Tradex Hellas S.A. v. Republic of
Albania,”” Santa Elena, Tecmed, Generation Ukraine and \ran-US Claims
Tribunal jurisprudence shows that expropriatory measures that take place step
by step should be analyzed in their aggregate effects and not “autonomously and
independently” as argued by Argentina. Siemens concludes that the termination
of the Contract was not the only expropriatory step but the last of a clear chain of
measures taken by Argentina since 1999 that destroyed the value of Siemens’
investment.

°” Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, |CSID Case
No. ARB/99/6, Award (April 12, 2002).

®8 M. Reisman et al, “Indirect Expropriation and its Valuation in the BIT Generation”, 74 BYIL
(2003) pp. 123-124, cited in the Reply, para. 422, emphasis added by the Claimant.

® Biloune and Marine Drive Complex Ltd. v. Ghana Investments Centre, Award on Jurisdiction
and Liability (October 27, 1989), 95 Int'l Law Reports (1994), 184, at pa. 210-11, Claimant's Legal
Authorities No. 35, cited in the Memorial, para. 372.

7 Tradex Hellas S.A. v. Republic of Albania, |\CSID Case, No. ARB/94/2, Award (April 29, 1999).

70

233. | Siemens disputes Argentina's assertion that there cannot be
expropriation following contractual breaches and repudiation of the Contract.
Siemens refers to the opinion of Professor Schreuer, who states that:

“[...] the mere fact that the investment was made on the basis of a
contract does not preclude a violation of the BIT [the Treaty]. Nor does an
allegation of contract violations mean that a BIT claim cannot arise from
the same facts. The standards are simply different. It is incumbent upon
the Claimant to demonstrate a violation of the BIT. This task is not made
impossible or more onerous by the simultaneous existence of contract

violations.””"

234. Siemens further disputes the argument that, when a contract is
subject to a domestic legal system, expropriation of rights under the contract
would be precluded. Siemens maintains that the law governing a particular
contract and whether contractual rights may be expropriated are two distinct and
unrelated questions; contractual rights may be expropriated as tangible property
may be expropriated. Siemens also questions the argument that a contract
cannot be governed by international law unless it contains a stabilization clause:
“the decisive point is that the absence of a stabilization clause does not mean
that the contract cannot be the object of an expropriation. The expropriation of
rights under a contract containing a stabilization clause would merely give rise to

an additional claim for violation of that clause.””

235. Siemens recalls that Article 1 of the Treaty defines as protected
investments “every kind of asset” and specifically “rights to funds used to create
economic value or to any performance with an economic value” and
“concessions conferred by public law entities.” Siemens alleges that judicial
practice unanimously supports a wide concept of property that includes rights
under contract, e.g., the decisions in Rudloff”, Norwegian Shipowners”™, Factory
at Chorz6éw’®, and the case law of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal.

7 Reply, para. 433.

” Ibid., para. 438, quotation from Professor Schreuer’s legal opinion.

3 Rudloff Case, Interlocutory Decision, 1903, 9 Reports of International Arbitral Awards (RIAA)
244, 250 (1959), Legal Authorities 40, quoted in the Reply, para. 442.

71

236. According to Siemens, a breach of contract or actions affecting
contract rights may constitute an expropriation when: (i) the breach consists of
one or part of a series of acts that combine to effect a creeping expropriation; (ii)
the breach is of such fundamental nature that it goes to the heart of the promised
performance and adversely affects the continuance of the project concerned; (iii)
regulatory conduct denies contract rights or requires their alteration; (iv) specific
contract rights or rights under a contract as a whole are repudiated, and (iv) a
stabilization clause is breached. Siemens affirms that most of these situations
apply in the instant case.

237. As regards the argument that Argentina did not act in its
sovereign capacity, Siemens finds the argument implausible given termination of
the Contract by decree, rejection of the appeal by decree, and termination based
not on contractual grounds but on the 2000 Emergency Law. Furthermore,
Argentina has argued that a decisive reason for the termination was that a
substantial number of Provinces refused to participate in the implementation of
the Project.

238. | Siemens explains that the purpose of the measures is not a
criterion to determine whether an expropriation has occurred. Under Article 4(2)
of the Treaty, public purpose is a criterion for the expropriation’s legality,
“Similarly, proportionality and reasonableness may play a role in assessing
whether the power to expropriate has been exercised properly. But these criteria
do not affect the question whether an expropriation exists or not.””° Commenting
on the cases relied on by Argentina, Siemens observes that they relate to
regulatory takings, while Siemens was deprived of its investment through
measures taken directly against it and not through regulatory measures.

239. Siemens rejects the argument that it needed to seek prior

recourse through domestic channels and observes that this is an attempt to
reintroduce an argument already put forward at the jurisdictional stage. Siemens

 

* Norwegian Shipowners’ Claims (Norway v. United States), Award (October 13, 1922), 1 RIAA
307, p. 325.

’8 Certain German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia (Germany v. Poland), Judgment (May 25,
1926), PCIJ Series A, No. 7, p. 44.

78 Reply, para. 465, quotation from Professor Schreuer’s legal opinion.

72

explains that, under Article 26 of the Convention, the Contracting Parties waive
the local remedies rule unless they state otherwise, which Argentina has not
done and, in any case, SITS and the Claimant made every reasonable effort to
obtain correction of Argentina’s measures through domestic means, including an
administrative appeal against Decree 669/01. Contrary to the factual situation in
the cases of Waste Management Ii and Generation Ukraine adduced by
Argentina, in the instant case Siemens’ loss is persistent, irreparable, caused by
the Government and not by low-level officials whose acts of maladministration
might easily be corrected.

240. | Siemens also dismisses the argument that it may not be entitled
to claim under the Treaty because it allegedly failed to perform its own
obligations. Siemens observes that Article 4(2) does not impose any duty with
regard to the investor; there is no defense based on the failure to comply with the
other party’s duties.

241. — Argentina in its Rejoinder affirms that Siemens fails to draw the
line between a contractual breach and the expropriation of an agreement, and
clarifies that it referred to Waste Management II in its argument because the
tribunal in that case established criteria for expropriation of an agreement,
namely, an effective repudiation of the property rights of the investor which
prevents it from exercising them entirely or to a substantial extent, and not
redressed by remedies available to the claimant. Argentina emphasizes the
reasonableness of the measures taken as part of the expropriation concept and
as held by the European Court of Human Rights and Tecmed.

242. Argentina contends that the measures were taken under the usual
and ordinary forms of terminating an agreement and Siemens failed to reply to its
arguments and focused instead on whether the measures were taken in the
exercise of its ius imperium. Argentina insists that there is a requirement of
making a reasonable effort on the part of the investor to obtain correction in the
domestic jurisdiction, and that this is a substantive requirement to distinguish
between an act of maladministration from an act which constitutes an
expropriation, “not because there is a requirement of exhaustion of local
remedies but because the very reality of conduct tantamount to expropriation is

73

doubtful in the absence of a reasonable — not necessarily exhaustive — effort by
the investor to obtain correction.””” In this respect, Argentina argues that SITS
failed to comply with its essential duties and agreed to re-negotiate the Contract
to conform to the fiscal possibilities of the State and the pocketbook of the
people.

243. Argentina takes issue with the contention of Siemens that the
defense of non-performance does not apply because investors may assert their
rights under the Treaty. Argentina argues that the exception non adimpleti
contractus is equally a principle of international law. Argentina maintains that the
conditions set in Waste Management II for contract expropriation are not met in
this case. According to Argentina, the actions taken before Decree 699/01 were
in response to technical errors and failures to deliver on the part of SITS and its
sub-contractors. Argentina insists that the termination of the Contract by Decree
669/01 was not only based on economic considerations but also on technical
grounds after receiving independent advice. Therefore, Decree 669/01 was a
legitimate, rational and proportionate response to a disappointing and inadequate
performance of SITS’ contractual obligations; it was not an expropriatory
measure since ‘i]t left intact the Claimant’s contractual rights, and in particular
the ability to have recourse to the national courts of Argentina to challenge acts

of its contractual partner which it considered to have breached the Contract.””®

244. Argentina further develops the argument that investment treaties
are not a guarantee of profits to foreign investors and contends that if Decree
669/01 were to be considered expropriatory by the Tribunal, then the
expropriation is a lawful expropriation because “it was a reasonable and
proportionate response to a national fiscal crisis; it was carried out for a public
purpose; it was not discriminatory on national or any grounds; and the decree
contained within its terms provision for compensating SITS for cancellation of the
Contract.” Argentina explains that there were at least two major public policy
reasons for the termination of the Contract: the massive fiscal crisis which
necessitated cutting back projects involving a high level of public expenditure,
7? Generation Ukraine, para. 20.30, quoted in Rejoinder para. 544.

78 Rejoinder, para. 571.
” Ibid., para. 572.
74

and the inability or unwillingness of a substantial number of Provinces to
participate in the Project given the fiscal crisis.

b) Considerations of the Tribunal

245. Before considering the arguments dealing with expropriation
proper, the Tribunal will address the issue of contractual claims as opposed to
treaty claims which has been argued by the parties in the context of the asserted
breach of Article 4(2) and also of Article 7(2) (the umbrella clause).
Subsequently, the Tribunal will discuss whether under Article 4(2) the findings of
this Tribunal are subject to review by the ordinary courts, whether each individual
measure in a creeping expropriation needs to be considered autonomously,
whether the proper law of the Contract is relevant for purposes of expropriation,
whether intent of the State to expropriate is necessary or only the effects of the
State’s measures need to be considered, whether an expropriation has taken
place, and, if so, whether it conformed with the Treaty requirements.

i) Treaty claims and Contract Claims
246. Argentina has argued that at no time in the course of the dispute
with SITS it took measures that could be regarded as an exercise of its police
powers as a State, including when it terminated the Contract under the 2000
Emergency Law. The Tribunal considers that Argentina’s view of when a State
acts jure imperii is exceedingly narrow and inconsistent with the arguments
advanced by Argentina itself.

247. The distinction between acts iure imperii and iure gestionis has
its origins in the area of immunity of the State under international law and it
differentiates between acts of a commercial nature and those which pertain to the
powers of a State acting as such. Usually States have been restrictive in their
understanding of which activities would not be covered by their immunity in
judicial proceedings before the courts of another State. Here we have the reverse
situation where the State party posits a wide content of the notion of jure
gestionis.

248. In applying this distinction in the realm of investor-State
arbitration, arbitral tribunals have considered that, for the behavior of the State as

75

party to a contract to be considered a breach of an investment treaty, such
behavior must be beyond that which an ordinary contracting party could adopt
and involve State interference with the operation of the contract:

“Pour qu’il y ait droit € compensation il faut que la personne de |’exproprié
prouve qu'il a été l'objet de mesures prises par l’Etat agissant non comme
cocontractant mais comme autorité publique. Les décisions aux cas
d’expropriation indirecte mentionnent toutes |’ ‘interférence’ de |’Etat
d'accueil dans l’exercice normal, par linvestisseur, de ses droits
économiques. Or un Etat cocontractant n’ ‘interfére’ pas, mais ‘exécute’ un
contrat. S’il peut mal exécuter ledit contrat cela ne sera pas sanctionné
par les dispositions du traité relatives a lexpropriation ou a la
nationalisation a moins qu’il ne soit prouvé que |’Etat ou son émanation
soit sorti(e) de son réle de simple cocontractant(e) pour prendre le rdle

bien spécifique de Puissance Publique. “°°

249. Waste Management II distinguished a number of categories to
determine whether it was faced with a matter of contract non-performance or
expropriation. In the first category are those cases “where a whole enterprise is
terminated or frustrated because its functioning is simply halted by decree or
executive act, usually accompanied by other conduct.”*' In the second category
fall instances of “acknowledged taking of property, and associated contractual
rights are affected in consequence.”® The third category includes cases “where
the only right affected is incorporeal.”®* In the latter cases, “the mere non-
performance of a contractual obligation is not to be equated with a taking of
property, nor (unless accompanied by other elements) is it tantamount to
expropriation. Any private party can fail to perform its contracts, whereas

nationalization and expropriation are inherently governmental acts.”**

250. ‘The tribunal in SGS v. Philippines excluded as a treaty claim the
debt owed to SGS because there had not been a “law or decree enacted by the

® Consortium R.F.C.C. v. Kingdom of Morocco, |\CSID Case No.ARB/00/6, Award (December 22,
2003), para. 65.

®" Waste Management Il, para. 172.

® Ibid., para. 173.

®8 Ibid., para. 174.

* Idem.

76

Philippines attempting to expropriate or annul the debt, nor any action
tantamount to an expropriation [...] A mere refusal to pay a debt is not an
expropriation of property, at least where remedies exist in respect of such a

refusal.”

251. In the Jalapa Railroad case, the US-Mexican Mixed Claims
Commission decided: “Here the Government of Veracruz stepped out of the role
of contracting party and sought to escape vital obligations under its contract by

exercising its superior governmental power.”®°

252. In Salini v. Jordan, the tribunal held:

“Only the State, in the exercise of its sovereign authority (puissance
publique), and not as a Contracting Party, has assumed obligations under
the bilateral agreement. [...] In other words, an investment protection
treaty cannot be used to compensate an investor deceived by the financial
results of the operation undertaken, unless he proves that his deception
was a consequence of the behavior of the receiving State acting in breach

of the obligations which it had assumed under the treaty.”®”

253. What all these decisions have in common is that for the State to
incur international responsibility it must act as such, it must use its public
authority. The actions of the State have to be based on its “superior
governmental power”. It is not a matter of being disappointed in the performance
of the State in the execution of a contract but rather of interference in the contract

execution through governmental action.

254. In the instant case, what actions did Argentina take to step out of
its role as a contractual party? In the first place, Argentina issued Decree 669/01
on the basis of the 2000 Emergency Law. Argentina has advanced the argument
that termination of the Contract by Decree 669/01 was based not only on the
fiscal emergency but also on the failures of the Contractor. This is not a credible
argument inasmuch as Decree 669/01 and Decree 1205/01 did not provide for

85 SGS v. Philippines, para. 161.
®© Referred to in Professor Schreuer’s legal opinion, p. 50. Whiteman, Digest of International Law
1976), vol. 8, pp. 908-909.

” Salini v. Jordan, para. 155.

77

termination based on non-performance and Argentina itself has manifested in
these proceedings that at no time had it affirmed that the Contract was rescinded
by the Contractor's fault.®°

255. Argentina itself has argued that the Tribunal should defer to
Argentina in deciding what is in the public interest of Argentina, and should
consider the measures taken by Argentina — the 2000 Emergency Law and
Decree 669/01 - as a response by the State to the impending financial and social
crisis. The Tribunal has no intention of second guessing the considerations that
led Argentina to declare a fiscal emergency in 2000. At this stage, the Tribunal
simply notes that this argument is not consistent with the submission that Decree
669/01 was a measure taken as a simple contracting party. Whether Decree
669/01 is a measure in breach of the Treaty is a question that the Tribunal will
address later.

256. In the view of the Tribunal, Decree 669/01 is not the only measure
that can be attributed to Argentina as a State. Argentina used its governmental
authority on other occasions. First, Argentina interfered in the contractual
relationship with SITS by requiring changes in the economic equation when the
change of Government occurred and nearly a year before the fiscal emergency
was declared. Argentina has claimed that, as a State, it has a right under
administrative law to request changes in a contract. The Tribunal considers that,
irrespective of whether the changes requested were or were not within the ius
variandi of the State (a disputed matter between the parties), this is a right that
Argentina claims as a State in order to control the deteriorating fiscal situation in
the country. This is an assessment by the State related to the public interest and
not one that would pertain to a regular contractual party.

257. Second, Argentina failed to enter into the agreements with the
Provinces related to the External Circuit. The Tribunal considers this matter to be
beyond a contractual breach because Argentina relies on its political structure to
excuse itself from the obligation undertaken and because it relied on it as a
matter of policy for terminating the Contract. As a State, Argentina should know

®© Paras. 222 and 232 of the Rejoinder.
78

what is possible for it to do (or not to do) with respect to its Provinces and the
extent to which it may honor its commitments because of its own political
structure.

258. — Third, the permanent suspension of the two main components of
the Project -the RPN sub-system and the DNM sub-system — also falls in the
non-contractual category. The fact that an authorization was needed and never
given for the immigration component is clearly a governmental act which had no
basis in the Contract and its need came to light only when the DNM sub-system
started to operate and in the context of Argentina expressing its intention to re-
negotiate the Contract. The alleged authorization requirement is suspect
because the Contract had been drafted by Argentina and all the agencies that
were involved later when the Contract was in effect had previously reviewed the
terms of the Contract. The “provisional” suspension of the RPN sub-system is
reasonable in terms of checking and correcting errors; what exceeds the
contractual role and does not fit with Argentina’s legitimate security concerns is
that SITS was not allowed to correct the error and that the manual system is still
in effect as it was when the Contract was open for bids. During the Contract
renegotiation, the resumption of the RPN sub-system was not linked to security
concerns.

259. Fourth, Decree 669/01 provides for compensation to be paid.
Argentina has not paid compensation, using arguments that go beyond its rights
under the Contract. We refer to the issue of the source codes. SITS may or may
not have complied with Article 10.12. At this stage it is immaterial because the
Contract has been terminated and this article only required that the source codes
be deposited with a notary public until the termination of the Contract. There is no
provision of the Contract that requires delivery of the source codes to Argentina
at Contract termination. There are provisions covering delivery of non-exclusive
licenses but not of source codes. This is such an important matter in the
technology field, as Argentina itself has argued, that it could not have been left to
interpretation and guesswork. If it had been really intended ab initio that the
source codes would have to be delivered to Argentina, the Contract would have
specifically provided for this obligation. This is confirmed by the answer given by

79

the Ministry of the Interior to Question No. 48 of SITS during the bidding stage of
the Contract. The Minister had been asked to confirm that, under Article 95 of the
Contract, the Ministry of the Interior's only right in respect of the software would
be a non-exclusive license to its use. The Minister replied that the Bidding Terms
and Conditions required that a permanent and non-exclusive license of use of the
software be transferred to the Ministry. The Minister added: “This
notwithstanding the bidder or the contractor may transfer in full or in part the
property rights to the software if it would be acceptable [to the bidder or the

contractor].” ©

260. The Tribunal concludes that, in the actions listed above, Argentina
acted in use of its police powers rather than as a contracting party even if it
attempted at times to base its actions on the Contract. As to the other allegations
made by Siemens, they relate to delays, non-budgetary allocations, or
continuation of the manual system to issue DNIs and are actions that, in the
context, could be construed as acts of a contractual party or of the sovereign
acting as such. They are not essential to a finding of expropriation and the
Tribunal will not consider them.

ii) Ordinary Courts’ Review of the Legality of the
Expropriation and of the Amount on Account of the
Compensation under Article 4(2) of the Treaty

261. Article 4(2) provides that the legality of the expropriation,
nationalization or equivalent measure, and the amount of compensation, may be
subject to review by the ordinary courts. Argentina has reserved its right to apply
this review option to any future decision of the Tribunal in connection with the
expropriation. The context of the sentence does not support any right of
Argentina in that respect. Article 4(2) is concerned with expropriation,
nationalization or measures tantamount to either taken by the parties to the
Treaty, and with the compensation paid. It is that expropriation or nationalization
or compensation that is subject to the review of the ordinary courts, not a

®° Exhibit 94 to the Memorial, emphasis added by the Tribunal. Translation by the Tribunal.
80

decision by this Tribunal. The objective of the sentence in question is to ensure
that the investor has access to the ordinary local courts to review actions by the
Government. It is a right that the parties accord to the investor, not to
themselves, in relation to decisions of this Tribunal.

iii) | Autonomy of the Measures constituting Creeping
Expropriation

262. Argentina has argued that each measure alleged by the Claimant
to be part of the process that results in a creeping expropriation must have an
adverse effect on the investment, and that in the instant case it is not possible to
speak of successive acts because if agreement had been reached on the
renegotiated Contract, the Contract would not have been thwarted, to use

Argentina's own words.

263. By definition, creeping expropriation refers to a process, to steps
that eventually have the effect of an expropriation. If the process stops before it
reaches that point, then expropriation would not occur. This does not necessarily
mean that no adverse effects would have occurred. Obviously, each step must
have an adverse effect but by itself may not be significant or considered an illegal
act. The last step in a creeping expropriation that tilts the balance is similar to the
straw that breaks the camel’s back. The preceding straws may not have had a
perceptible effect but are part of the process that led to the break.

264. We are dealing here with a composite act in the terminology of
the Draft Articles. Article 15 of the Draft Articles provides the following:

“(1) The breach of an international obligation by a State through a series
of actions or omissions defined in aggregate as wrongful occurs when the
action or omission occurs which, taken with the other actions or
omissions, is sufficient to constitute the wrongful act”.

265. As explained in the ILC’s Commentary on the Draft Articles:
“Paragraph 1 of Article 15 defines the time at which a composite act
‘occurs’ as the time at which the last action or omission occurs which,

81

taken with the other actions or omissions, is sufficient to constitute the
wrongful act, without it necessarily having to be the last of the series.”

266. | The concept could not be better explained.

iv) Expropriation of Contractual Rights and Proper Law of
the Contract

267. Argentina has linked the argument about expropriation of
contractual rights and the law applicable to the Contract and assumes that unless
a contract is internationalized through a stabilization clause, it is not susceptible
of expropriation. The fact that the Contract is subject to Argentine law does not
mean that it cannot be expropriated from the perspective of public international
law and under the Treaty. The two issues are unrelated. The Contract falls under
the definition of “investments” under the Treaty and Article 4(2) refers to
expropriation or nationalization of investments. Therefore, the State parties
recognized that an investment in terms of the Treaty may be expropriated. There
is nothing unusual in this regard. There is a long judicial practice that recognizes
that expropriation is not limited to tangible property. The Tribunal will refer, for the
sake of brevity, to the findings of the Permanent Court of Arbitration (“PCA”) in
the case of the Norwegian Shipowners’ Claims and the Permanent Court of
International Justice (“PClJ”) in the Factory at Chorzow Case.

268. The PCA held that “[...] whatever the intentions may have been,
the United States took, both in fact and in law, the contracts under which the
ships in question were being or were to be constructed.”®° The PClJ found that:

“L...] it is clear that the rights of the Bayerische to the exploitation of the
factory and to the remuneration fixed by the contract for the management
of the exploitation and for the use of its patents, licenses, experiments,
etc., have been directly prejudiced by the taking over of the factory by
Poland. As these rights related to the Chorzéw factory and were, so to
speak, concentrated in that factory, the prohibition contained in the last

°° Norwegian Shipowners’ Claims (Norway v. United States), p. 325.

82

sentence of Article 6 of the Geneva Convention applies in all respects to

them.”*"

269. These findings on the issue are conclusive and have been
followed by ICSID and NAFTA tribunals, and the Iran-US Claims Tribunal. The
Respondent has taken exception to the relevance of cases decided by the latter
tribunal on the basis of the law applicable to those cases. The Tribunal considers
that the findings of that tribunal are significant in that they show the consistency
of approach on this matter by different international jurisdictions.

v) Intent to Expropriate

270. Argentina has argued against taking into consideration only the
effect of measures for purposes of determining whether an expropriation has
taken place. The Tribunal recalls that Article 4(2) refers to measures that “a sus
efectos” (in its Spanish original) would be equivalent to expropriation or
nationalization. The Treaty refers to measures that have the effect of an
expropriation; it does not refer to the intent of the State to expropriate. The
quotation of the finding of the PCA in Norwegian Shipowners refers to “whatever
the intentions’ of the US were when the US took the contracts. A different
matter is the purpose of the expropriation, but that is one of the requirements for
determining whether the expropriation is in accordance with the terms of the
Treaty and not for determining whether an expropriation has occurred.

vi) | Was the Investment Expropriated?

271. The Tribunal has identified a series of measures that Argentina
took which cannot be considered as measures based on the Contract but on the
exercise of its public authority. Of all these measures, Decree 669/01 by itself
and independently can be considered to be an expropriatory act. It was not
based on the Contract but on the 2000 Emergency Law, it was a permanent
measure and the effect was to terminate the Contract. Had it not been for Decree

°" Certain German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia (Germany v. Poland), Judgment (May 25,
1926), PCIJ Series A, No. 7, p. 44.
° Norwegian Shipowners’ Claims, p. 325.

83

669/01, and if a revised contract proposal had been agreed, the measures taken
previously by themselves might not have had the effect and permanence
required to be considered expropriatory, but, as no agreement was reached and
the measures were never revoked, they stand as part of a gradual process
which, with the issuance of Decree 669/01, culminated in the expropriation of
Siemens’ investment.

272. Contrary to the facts of the cases adduced by Argentina, the acts
identified by the Tribunal as measures leading to the expropriation are acts of
Argentina, decided at the highest levels of government, and not “simple acts of
maladministration by low level officials.” For that reason, Argentina’s argument
that simple acts of maladministration by low-level officials should be pursued in
the local courts lacks validity in the circumstances of the instant case.

vii) Was the expropriation in accordance with the Treaty?

273. The Treaty requires that the expropriation be for a public purpose
and compensated. The Tribunal finds that there is no evidence of a public
purpose in the measures prior to the issuance of Decree 669/01. It was an
exercise of public authority to reduce the costs to Argentina of the Contract
recently awarded through public competitive bidding, and as part of a change of
policy by a new Administration eager to distance itself from its predecessor. On
the other hand, the public purpose of the 2000 Emergency Law was to face the
dire fiscal situation of the Government. This is a legitimate concern of Argentina
and the Tribunal defers to Argentina in the determination of its public interest.
However, while the Tribunal would be satisfied in finding that an expropriation
has occurred based only on Decree 669/01, and that the public purpose pursued
by this Decree, in the context of Argentina’s fiscal crisis and the 2000 Emergency
Law, would be sufficient to meet the public purpose requirement of expropriation
under the Treaty, the Tribunal cannot ignore the context in which Decree 669/01
was issued, nor separate this Decree from the other measures taken by
Argentina in respect of the investment that culminated in its issuance. Decree
669/01 became a convenient device to continue the process started more than a
year earlier long before the onset of the fiscal crisis. From this perspective, while

84

the public purpose of the 2000 Emergency Law is evident, its application through
Decree 669/01 to the specific case of Siemens’ investment and the public
purpose of same are questionable. In any case, compensation has never been
paid on grounds that, as already stated, the Tribunal finds that are lacking in
justification. For these reasons, the expropriation did not meet the requirements
of Article 4(2) and therefore was unlawful. The Tribunal will examine the issues of
compensation after addressing the alleged breaches of other obligations of
Argentina under the Treaty.

4. Fair and equitable treatment
a) Positions of the Parties

274. Siemens argues that the obligation to treat an investment fairly
and equitably requires arbitral tribunals to take into account the totality of the
circumstances in each case. The proposition that investments shall have fair and
equitable treatment and full protection and security constitutes the “overriding
obligation”, and other standards must be applied as part of this general one.
According to Siemens, fair and equitable treatment and full protection and legal
security are intended to accord foreign investors broad protection, including a
stable and predictable investment environment. Predictability is an essential
element of stability, the rules and practices that affect investments must be
predictable. A State violates the fair and equitable treatment standard when it
fails to respect the specific assurances that it had given to investors as an

inducement to invest and on which investors relied in making the investment

275. Siemens contends that Argentina provided assurances that SITS
would be allowed to complete the Project and obtain the earnings that were the
price of the System in an investment environment that was and would remain
stable and predictable. To induce Siemens to invest in the Project, Argentina
granted SITS the right to implement the complete and integral provision of the
System and to issue all the DNis to replace those existing on the date of the
Contract, and all new DNlis and their renewals after the System entered into
operation. The investment logically had to be made before the System startup

85

and the return on the investment was dependent on the issuance of the DNIs and
the processing of immigration proceedings.

276. According to Siemens, the acts and omissions previously
described destroyed irreparably the legal framework for Siemens’ investment,
and at all times prior to the unilateral termination of the Contract Argentina
promised that the Project would continue and the operation of the System would
be resumed. Furthermore, due to Siemens’ claim for compensation, Siemens has
faced serious problems in other activities in Argentina.

277. Siemens argues that the standard of just and equitable treatment
requires stable investment environments by ensuring transparency and
predictable rules and practices, which in turn mean that the investor may rely on
the undertakings made by the State to the investor. Additionally, fair and
equitable treatment means freedom from coercion and harassment, due process
and good faith. According to Siemens, RNP interposed serious obstacles to the
regular performance of the DNI sub-system, the new authorities after the
elections abused the vulnerable position of SITS and the renegotiation process
announced in January 2000 was carried out under the threat of the early
cancellation of the Contract. Siemens claims that Argentina committed gross
procedural improprieties by interrupting the income generating activities, by
denying SITS’ access to the administrative records, by denying SITS the right to
be heard on the May 2001 proposal and withholding information necessary for
the decision of SITS on the proposal, by failing to meet the core requirements for
terminating the Contract under the 2000 Emergency Law, and by removing
administrative files pointing to the Government's failures. Furthermore, after
termination of the Contract, SITS was denied information on the background of
Decree 669/01 and evidence in support of its position, internal reports were
issued without notice to SITS or without recording them in the administrative file,
and SITS was excluded from the DNI sub-system test carried out together with
SITS’ former sub-contractors.

278. According to Siemens, the actions referred to above show also
lack of good faith in the conduct of Argentina; in particular, the May 2001
proposal was done in bad faith to trigger the Contract’s termination. Siemens

86

adds non-payment of compensation, keeping the Contract performance bond,
not taking responsibility for the sub-contractors’ claims and the fact that all the
alleged contractual breaches on which Argentina bases its defense were never
notified to SITS or Siemens.

279. In its Counter-Memorial, as regards the violation of the full
protection and security obligation, Argentina argues that the Claimant has failed
to allege how this breach had taken place and affirms that this obligation refers
only to physical damage. Then Argentina objects to the concept of fair and
equitable treatment advanced by Siemens. Argentina argues that fair and
equitable treatment means no more than the minimal treatment afforded by
international law. It certainly does not mean that it gives arbitral tribunals the
power to decide on the basis of equity. Argentina refers approvingly to the
interpretation on this point by the NAFTA Free Trade Commission (“FTC”), recent
investment treaties signed by the US and the findings of tribunals in Genin, S.D.
Myers and Azinian.

280. Argentina disagrees with Siemens on the application of the
standard of just and equitable treatment to the facts of the case. Argentina refers
to the principle of good faith enshrined in this standard, how this standard applies
equally to investors and States and how Siemens breached it during the failed
negotiation that led to the rescission of the Contract. Thus Siemens
systematically refused to reveal its cost structure; and “[i]Jn a demonstration of
bad faith, Siemens went along with negotiations with the Commission named by
the Argentine Government, by successive reductions in the final price of IDs.”
Siemens also accepted the inclusion of the Contract in the 2000 Emergency Law
and is prevented now by the doctrine of estoppel to claim that it was unaware of
the implications, for “if its intention was to save the contract, it should have
undertaken to bear the consequences that resulted from this emergency and
adjust its expectations and claims so as to reach the shared burden of sacrifice”
established by this law.°* The need for shared sacrifice, according to Argentina,
stems from the good faith that the parties owe each other, and fair and equitable

°° Counter-Memorial, para. 1079.
°4 Ibid., para. 1080.

87

treatment “in essence constitutes a guarantee of appropriate and reasonable
treatment and that this should be viewed and analyzed taking into consideration
the concrete and specific historical circumstances of the treatment. Fair and
equitable treatment contains elements of good faith, consistency and
reasonableness, which should be evaluated always bearing in mind the events
that originated this arbitration.”®

281. Argentina also contends that the System did not provide the
intended security and refers the Tribunal to the multiple security deficiencies
pointed out in the audit performed by the Argentine authorities. In this respect,
Siemens is responsible for SITS’ failures. It is not possible to make a claim for
events affecting the subsidiary and at the same time avoid the legal
consequences of the subsidiary’s acts.

282. As a final argument under this heading, Argentina alleges that
SITS and Siemens consented to the 2000 Emergency Law in a case of
normative acquiescence. Argentina refers in this respect to the Preah Vihear
Temple case where the ICJ found: “It is an established rule that the plea of error
cannot be allowed as an element vitiating consent if the party advancing it
contributed by its own conduct to the error, or could have avoided it, or if the
circumstances were such as to put that party on notice of a possible error.”
Argentina argues that Thailand, the party pleading error, can be substituted by
the Claimant and SITS, which “accepted the emergency and their incorporation
to the emergency legal system.”°”

283. In its Reply, Siemens affirms that the allegation of Argentina that
the conduct of SITS or Siemens lacks good faith because of the failure to reveal
the cost structure is misplaced. Indeed, Article 2(1) addresses the duties of the
State to the investors and not the reverse, and neither the Contract nor the 2000
Emergency Law required such disclosure. As for the doctrines of estoppel! and
acquiescence invoked by Argentina, Siemens points out that both doctrines had
their origins in inter-State relations and it is doubtful that they can be extended to
° Ibid., para. 1082.
°° Temple of Preah Vihear (Cambodia v. Thailand), ICJ Reports (1962) p. 26, cited in para. 1090
of Counter-Memorial.
°” Ibid., para. 1092.

88

the area of investor-State relations. Siemens claims that there is no statement of
fact by Siemens on which Argentina could have relied to its own detriment, and
as regards acquiescence to the law, Siemens observes that the applicability of
legislation does not depend on the assent or protest of foreign investors or of any
other party subject to the law, and the fact that SITS did not take legal action
against Resolution No. 1779/00 of the Ministry of the Interior does not mean that
Siemens waived its rights under the Treaty against an uncompensated
expropriation or other actions violating the Treaty’s substantive standards.

284. Siemens denies that the protection accorded by the standard of
fair and equitable treatment is the minimum required of States under international
law:

“An interpretation that is in accordance with the BIT’s object and purpose
would also have to give some independent meaning to the fair and
equitable treatment standard. An interpretation that reduces its meaning to
standards that are contained already in customary international law would
deprive it of any independent meaning and would make the provision
redundant. The application of the general principles of international law is
already mandated by Article 10, paragraph 5 of the BIT. If Article 2(1) of
the BIT providing for fair and equitable treatment is to have an
independent meaning it must be in addition to the general principles of
international law.”®

285. | Siemens points out that the Neer standard has been rejected
consistently in recent decisions: (i) in ELS/, the ICJ considered that to be a
breach of the standard State conduct needs to show “a willful disregard of the
process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of judicial
propriety”, (ii) in Mondev Intl. Ltd. v. The United States of America and Loewen
Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. the United States of America, the
tribunals used the adjectives “improper and discreditable”, (iii) in Loewen, Waste
Management and MTD, the tribunals considered discrimination against
foreigners an important indicator of failure to respect fair and equitable treatment,

°° Reply, para. 504, quotation of Professor Schreuer’s legal opinion.

89

and (iv) in Waste Management and MTD the tribunals used terms such as
arbitrariness, idiosyncrasy, injustice, lack of good faith, lack of due process and
proportionality. °°

286. As regards the views of Argentina on the scope of “full protection
and security”, Siemens observes that the Treaty goes further than most
investment treaties when it refers to “legal” security and this reference is “a
strong indication that the provision, as contained in the BIT [Treaty]. goes beyond
mere physical violence and extends to the investor's legal position.”"°° Siemens
refers to the following measures or omissions that deprived it of its protection and
legal security: failure to make the budgetary allocations, suspension of the
income-generating activities, renegotiation of the Contract under extreme
pressure, and abusive use of the 2000 Emergency Law to terminate the
Contract.

287. In its Rejoinder, Argentina argues that, given the failure of SITS to
perform its obligations under the Contract and the circumstances of fiscal
stringency, the issuance of Decree 669/01 could not be considered an arbitrary,
grossly unfair, idiosyncratic measure, nor did it involve lack of due process.
Argentina contests the broad interpretation of fair and equitable treatment by
Siemens and takes issue with the approach taken by Tecmed and MTD in
applying this standard of protection. Argentina considers that the standard
applied by these tribunals does not reflect an accurate international standard.
Argentina submits that fair and equitable treatment does not encompass the
protection of legitimate expectations and the establishment of a stable
investment environment.

288. Argentina also submits that, even if the Tribunal were to apply an
expanded concept of fair and equitable treatment, there was no violation of this

°° Reply, para. 506, quotation of Professor Schreuer’s legal opinion, para. 299 et seq., where
reference is made to: (1) Neer v. Mexico, Opinion, United States-Mexico, General Claims
Commission, October 15, 1926, 21 AJIL 555 (1927); (2) Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United
States of America v. Italy), International Court of Justice, Judgment, July 20, 1989, ICJ Reports
1989; (3) Mondev Intl. Ltd. v. The United States of America, Award, October 11, 2002, 42 ILM85
(2003); (4) Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. the United States of America, Award,
(June 26, 2003);

°° Ibid., para. 559, quotation from Professor Schreuer's legal opinion, emphasis added by the
Claimant.

90

standard by Argentina. Argentina refers to the fact that the Claimant had never
raised the political motivation of Argentina’s acts before this arbitration and had
consented to the acts that it now questions. Argentina submits that Siemens
agreed on the laws that it now questions and that is, among other reasons, why
there was no violation of the Treaty by Argentina. Argentina wonders what
legitimate expectation can be affected by acts of the State to which the investor
has consented.

b) Considerations of the Tribunal

289. The parties’ allegations raise issues about the scope of standard
of fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security and its relevance
in this case. As regards the scope, the parties hold different views on whether the
obligation to treat an investment fairly and equitably refers to the minimum
standard of treatment of aliens under customary international law or requires
from the State a higher standard of conduct more in consonance with the
objective of the Treaty. They also differ on whether “security” refers to physical
security or to security in a wider sense. The Tribunal will first address these two
issues.

290. In their ordinary meaning, the terms “fair” and “equitable” mean
“just”, “even-handed”, “unbiased”, “legitimate’.'°"" As expressed in the Treaty
preamble, it is the intention of the State parties to intensify their economic
cooperation, and their purpose to create favorable conditions for the investments
of the nationals of a party in the territory of the other, while recognizing that the
promotion and protection of such investments by means of a treaty may serve to
stimulate private initiative and improve the well being of both peoples. It follows
from the ordinary meaning of “fair” and “equitable” and the purpose and object of
the Treaty that these terms denote treatment in an even-handed and just
manner, conducive to fostering the promotion and protection of foreign
investment and stimulating private initiative. The parties to the Treaty show by
their intentions and objectives a positive attitude towards investment. Terms such
as “promote” or “stimulate” are action words that indicate that it is the intention of
'! The Oxford English Dictionary. Similarly defines these terms Diccionario de la Lengua
Espafiola, 22nd edition, at www.rae.es.

91

the parties to adhere to conduct in accordance with such purposes. This
understanding is confirmed by Article 2(1) of the Treaty, whereby each party
even undertakes to promote the investments of nationals or companies of the
other party.

291. The specific provision of the Treaty on fair and equitable
treatment is found also in Article 2(1) after the commitment to promote and admit
investments in accordance with the law and regulations and as an independent
sentence: “In any case [the parties to the Treaty] shall treat investments justly
and fairly (“En todo caso tratara las inversiones justa y equitativamente’).”"~
There is no reference to international law or to a minimum standard. However, in
applying the Treaty, the Tribunal is bound to find the meaning of these terms
under international law bearing in mind their ordinary meaning, the evolution of
international law and the specific context in which they are used.

292. Argentina has indicated its support for the interpretation of Article
1105 of NAFTA by the FTC. The Tribunal observes first that this article bears the
heading “Minimum Standard of Treatment.” Paragraph 1 of this article states:
“Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party treatment in
accordance with international law, including fair and equitable treatment and full
protection and security.” As interpreted by the FTC and as indicated in the title of
the article, the standard of treatment is the minimum required under customary
international law.

293. | The question whether fair and equitable treatment is or is not
additional to the minimum treatment requirement under international law is a
question about the substantive content of fair and equitable treatment. In 1927,
the US-Mexican Mixed Claims Commission considered in the Neer case that a
State has breached the fair and equitable treatment obligation when the conduct
of the State could be qualified as outrageous, egregious or in bad faith or so
below international standards that a reasonable and impartial person would
easily recognize it as such. This description of conduct in breach of the fair and
equitable treatment standard has been considered as the expression of

102 article 2(1) of the Treaty.
92

customary international law at that time. For the Tribunal the question is whether,
at the time the Treaty was concluded, customary international law had evolved to
a higher standard of treatment.

294. It will be useful for this purpose to review the cases referred to by
the parties in support of their differing positions. Argentina has particularly relied
on Genin. In that case, the tribunal without engaging in a textual analysis of the
fair and equitable treatment clause in the US-Estonia BIT considered this
requirement to be an international minimum standard, which could only be
breached by “a wilful neglect of duty, an insufficiency of action falling far below
international standards, or even subjective bad faith.”' That tribunal found that,
in the circumstances of the case, Estonia did not breach the duty of fair and
equitable treatment; however, it hoped that the “Bank of Estonia will exercise its
regulatory and supervisory functions with greater caution regarding procedure in
the future,”"* and observed that “the awkward manner by which the Bank of
Estonia revoked EIB’s license, and in particular the lack of prior notice of its
intention to revoke EIB’s license and of any means for EIB or its shareholders to
challenge that decision prior to its being formalized, cannot escape censure.”'>

295. After the interpretation of the FTC, several tribunals established
under NAFTA have held that the customary international law to be applied is the
customary international law as it stood when that treaty was concluded and not in
1927. In Mondev, the tribunal held that “the content of the minimum standard
today cannot be limited to the content of customary international law as
recognized in arbitral decisions in the 1920s."'°° The same tribunal noted that the
State party in the dispute agreed that the international standard of treatment has
evolved as all customary international law has, and that the two other State
parties to NAFTA also agreed with this point.'°’ Therefore, that tribunal
considered that:

*03 Genin, para. 367.

104 Ibid., para. 372.

105 Ibid., para. 381.

'08 Mondev Intl. Ltd. v. United States of America, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award (October
11, 2002), para. 123.

107 Ibid., para. 124.

93

“the FTC interpretations incorporate current international law, whose
content is shaped by the conclusion of more than two thousand bilateral
investment treaties and many treaties of friendship and commerce. Those
treaties largely and concordantly provide for ‘fair and equitable’ treatment
of, and for ‘full protection and security’ for, the foreign investor and his

investments.”'%

And found that “To the modern eye, what is unfair or inequitable need not equate
with the outrageous or the egregious. In particular, a State may treat foreign

investment unfairly and inequitably without necessarily acting in bad faith.”'°°

296. The tribunal in Loewen came to a similar conclusion: “Neither
State practice, the decisions of international tribunals nor the opinion of
commentators support the view that bad faith or malicious intention is an
essential element of unfair and inequitable treatment or denial of justice

amounting to a breach of international justice.”''°

297. After reviewing arbitral awards under NAFTA, the tribunal in
Waste Management II reached the conclusion that:

“the minimum standard of treatment of fair and equitable treatment is
infringed by conduct attributable to the state and harmful to the claimant if
the conduct is arbitrary, grossly unfair, unjust or idiosyncratic, is
discriminatory and exposes the claimant to sectional or racial prejudice, or
involves a lack of due process leading to an outcome which offends
judicial propriety — as might be the case with a manifest failure of natural
justice in judicial proceedings or a complete lack of transparency and
candour in an administrative process. In applying this standard it is

108 Ibid., para. 125.

109 Ibid, para. 116. The tribunal in ADF affirmed the same point: “what customary international
law projects is not a static photograph of the minimum standard of treatment of aliens as it stood
in 1927 when the Award in the Neer case was rendered. For both customary international law
and the minimum standard of treatment of aliens it incorporates, are constantly in a process of
development.” ADF Group, Inc. v. United States of America, |CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1,
Award (January 9, 2003), para. 179.

"© | oewen, parr. 132.

94

relevant that the treatment is in breach of representations made by the

host State which were reasonably relied on by the claimant.”'"'

298. The parties have also referred to Tecmed, which describes just
and equitable treatment as requiring:

“treatment that does not affect the basic expectations that were taken into
account by the foreign investor to make the investment. The foreign
investor expects the host State to act in a consistent manner, free from
ambiguity and totally transparently in its relations with the foreign investor,
so that it may know beforehand any and all rules and regulations that will
govern its investments, as well as the goals of the relevant policies and
administrative practices or directives, to be able to plan its investment and

comply with such regulations.”'!

299. It emerges from this review that, except for Genin, none of the
recent awards under NAFTA and Tecmed require bad faith or malicious intention
of the recipient State as a necessary element in the failure to treat investment
fairly and equitably, and that, to the extent that it has been an issue, the tribunals
concur in that customary international law has evolved. More recently in CMS,
the tribunal confirmed the objective nature of this standard “unrelated to whether
the Respondent has had any deliberate intention or bad faith in adopting the
measures in question. Of course, such intention and bad faith can aggravate the
situation but are not an essential element of the standard.”""? That tribunal also
understood that the conduct of the State has to be below international standards
but not at their level in 1927 and that, as in Tecmed and Waste Management II,
the current standard includes the frustration of expectations that the investor may
have legitimately taken into account when it made the investment.

300. The Tribunal has already noted that the standards of conduct
agreed by the parties to the Treaty indicate a favorable disposition to foreign
investment. The purpose of the Treaty is to promote and protect investments. It

"' Waste Management Il, para. 98.

"? Tecmed, para. 154. Unofficial translation from the Spanish original published by ICSID on its
web site.

"8 CMS, para. 280.

95

would be inconsistent with such commitments and purpose and the expectations
created by such a document to consider that a party to the Treaty has breached
its obligation of fair and equitable treatment only when it has acted in bad faith.

301. The Tribunal will now turn to the question of the meaning of full
protection and security. According to Argentina, “security” refers only to physical
security while the Claimant attributes to this term a wider meaning, in particular
because the Treaty refers to “legal security.”

302. The Tribunal first notes that, although the parties have argued the
application of this standard as a single standard, the Treaty provides for the fair
and equitable treatment and full protection and security under two different
Articles. The parties do not seem to have found this separation to be significant
and the Tribunal will not dwell further on this point. The Tribunal also notes that
Argentina in its arguments did not address the fact that security was qualified by
“legal” in this instance.

303. As a general matter and based on the definition of investment,
which includes tangible and intangible assets, the Tribunal considers that the
obligation to provide full protection and security is wider than “physical” protection
and security. It is difficult to understand how the physical security of an intangible
asset would be achieved. In the instant case, “security” is qualified by “legal”. In
its ordinary meaning “legal security” has been defined as “the quality of the legal
system which implies certainty in its norms and, consequently, their foreseeable
application.”"* It is clear that in the context of this meaning the Treaty refers to
security that it is not physical. In fact, one may question given the qualification of
the term “security”, whether the Treaty covers physical security at all. Arguably it
could be considered to be included under “full protection”, but that is not an issue
in these proceedings.

304. Based on this understanding of fair and equitable treatment and
full protection and legal security, the Tribunal will now consider whether the

"4 Diccionario de la lengua espafiola, 22" edition, at www.rae.es. Translation by the Tribunal.
The original text in Spanish reads as follows: “cualidad del ordenamiento juridico que implica la
certeza de sus normas y, consiguientemente, la previsibilidad de su aplicacion.”

96

actions of Argentina, identified by the Tribunal as actions taken by Argentina
acting as a State, constitute a breach of this obligation.

305. Argentina has argued that Siemens and its subsidiary, for whose
conduct Siemens is responsible, acted in bad faith because they accepted the
laws of Argentina and alleged before this Tribunal political motives which were
never denounced during the long lasting re-negotiation of the Contract. Siemens
has argued likewise that it was never notified under the Contract of all the failures
that have been alleged by Argentina in these proceedings. The parties’ response
to these arguments is similar: both parties were intent on reaching a renegotiated
agreement that ultimately proved elusive.

306. The Tribunal considers that neither party may hold against the
other positions that it may have taken during a good faith negotiation." In any
case, acceptance of laws or regulations should not be held against a company
which has accepted them by the Government that adopted them. As stated
elsewhere by the Tribunal, to comply with the law is not understood to be an
optional matter. In this respect, the arguments advanced by Argentina on
acquiescence and estoppel are misplaced and have already been dealt with by
the Tribunal.

307. On the other hand, the Tribunal finds without merit the argument
made by Siemens that since filing its claim Siemens has encountered difficulties
to operate in Argentina. This statement is contradicted by the affirmation in
Siemens’ Reply that Argentina holds Siemens in such high regard that it has
repeatedly requested its intervention in other public projects, even after the
Contract’s termination

308. To conclude, the Tribunal finds that the initiation of the
renegotiation of the Contract for the sole purpose of reducing its costs,
unsupported by any declaration of public interest, affected the legal security of
Siemens’ investment. The Tribunal also finds that when a government awards a

"5 In the Factory at Chorzéw case, the PClJ pointed out that it could not “take into account
declarations, admissions or proposals which the Parties may have made during direct
negotiations between themselves, when such negotiations have not led to a complete
agreement.” Merits, PClJ, Series A (1928), p. 51.

97

contract, which includes among its critical provisions an undertaking of that
government to conclude agreements with its provinces, the same government
can not argue that the structure of the State does not permit it to fulfill such
undertaking. This runs counter to the principle of good faith underlying fair and
equitable treatment. The arguments made to justify delay in paying
compensation without basis in the Contract or Decree 669/01 and the denial of
access to the administrative file for purposes of filing the appeal against Decree
669/01 show lack of transparency of Argentina in respect of the investment,
particularly when Argentina itself has manifested in these proceedings that at no
time had it affirmed that the Contract was rescinded due to the Contractor's

fault."

309. For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that the full protection and
legal security and fair and equitable treatment obligations under the Treaty have
been breached by Argentina.

5. Arbitrary and Discriminatory Measures
a) Positions of the Parties

310. | Siemens argues that, based on the plain meaning of “arbitrary”,
the measures adopted towards Siemens’ investment meet the test of
arbitrariness: “not governed by any fixed rules or standard”, “performed without
adequate determination of principle and one not founded in nature of things”,
“without cause based upon the law”, or “failure to exercise honest judgment’,
“characterization of a decision or action taken by an administrative agency [...]
[as] willful and unreasonable action without consideration or in disregard of facts

or law or without determining principle.”"'”

311. According to Siemens, the intentional frustration of the
performance of the Contract when all the investment had been made to put the
System into operation was arbitrary. The measures were unreasonable, taken
unilaterally without due cause or justification. They caused serious damage to
Siemens for which it has not been compensated. The measures were also

"© Rejoinder, paras. 222 and 232.
"7 Memorial, para. 337, citing Black’s Law Dictionary, 1990, sixth edition, p. 104.

98

discriminatory in intent and effect. No other investor was treated like Siemens, no
measures such as those imposed on Siemens’ investment were adopted by
Argentina concerning contracts or investments of similar importance, in
particular, no other public contract was terminated by Argentina under the 2000
Emergency Law and compensation has never been paid. These discriminatory
measures impaired Siemens’ ability to manage, use and enjoy its investment.

312. In its Counter-Memorial, Argentina argues that the measures it
adopted were reasonable in proportion to their purpose and of general
application. Thus, they were neither arbitrary nor discriminatory. Argentina refers
to the concept of arbitrariness defined by the ICJ in ELSI: “It is a willful disregard
of due process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of
juridical propriety;”'!®
irregularity that may have been present would have to amount to bad faith, a

and the arbitral tribunal in Genin: “any procedural

willful disregard of due process of law or an extreme insufficiency of action.”"?
According to Argentina, the measures it took were in defense of vital security of
the State, to keep the data on its inhabitants secure since otherwise it would
violate rights enshrined in international treaties on the protection of human rights.

313. | Argentina also questions the qualification as arbitrary of the delay
in approving the FOM. The FOM presented by SITS was not in a condition to be
approved and Argentina showed diligence by requesting in advance information
that would have helped in speeding up the approval process and that SITS did
not provide. According to Argentina, a government may not be accused of being
arbitrary when it tries to protect and preserve the confidentiality of the data on its
inhabitants.

314. As to the meaning of “discriminatory”, Argentina contends, based
on ELSI and S.D. Myers, that, for a measure to be discriminatory, the measure
has to be harmful, favor a national against a foreign investor and be intended to
discriminate. Argentina argues that the measures it took were intended to protect
its citizens and as such could not be considered discriminatory. Furthermore, the
measures taken in relation to Siemens’ investment had nothing to do with any

"'® Genin, Counter-Memorial, para. 1108 citing ELSI, ICU Reports (1989), para. 128.
"8 ipid., para. 1110 citing Genin, para. 371.

99

differential treatment vis-a-vis any other investor group in the same situation
because Siemens was in a unique situation.

315. In its Reply, Siemens insists that in terms of Article 2(3) of the
Treaty actions are arbitrary if they are opposed to the rule of law or surprise a
sense of juridical propriety, or if a measure harming an investor cannot be
justified in terms of rational reasons that are related to the facts. Siemens
contests the argument of “voluntary consent” or “acquiescence” by SITS and
affirms that what occurred was an abusive exercise of the State’s authority that
left SITS powerless. According to Siemens, Argentina’s measures were “arbitrary
because they dismantled the entire legal framework that had led Siemens to
conduct its investment, contrary to the expectations of any reasonable and
impartial person. The political motivation behind Argentina’s actions only serves

to emphasize the arbitrariness of the measures adopted.”!2°

316. As regards discriminatory treatment, according to Siemens, the
criterion is whether the foreign investor has been treated less favorably than
domestic investors or investors of other nationalities; de facto discrimination is
sufficient even without violation of the host State’s domestic law. Siemens argues
that the measures taken towards Siemens’ investment were not of a general
nature; the Contract is the only significant contract terminated which involved a
foreign investor and the only foreign investment terminated unilaterally under the
2000 Emergency Law.

317. In its Rejoinder, Argentina recalls that the Contract was unique in
terms of its scope, importance, duration and expense. Argentina explains how
the Contract could not be compared to the passport issuance contract that the
Claimant adduced as evidence of discrimination. Passports are not obligatory,
while DNls are. In the face of an economic crisis, Argentina had a right to protect
its interests and those of its citizens. The measures taken by Argentina in
response to “the fiscal emergency were of general operation, for a public purpose
and did not introduce unreasonable discrimination.” Argentina further explains
that the fact that public utilities were excluded from the 2000 Emergency law
120 Reply, para. 571.

"21 Rejoinder, para. 643.
100

does not mean that the crisis did not impact their rights, e.g., foreign companies
that invested in the natural gas transport and distribution agreed to defer
adjustment of their fees as permitted in their contracts sixteen months before the
termination of the contract. Argentina concludes by asserting that, given the
enormous costs of the Contract, “it cannot be said that the measures taken to
terminate it early were unfair, unjust or disproportionate to the extent of the

problem in hand.”'72
b) Considerations of the Tribunal

318. In its ordinary meaning, “arbitrary” means “derived from mere
opinion”, “capricious”, “unrestrained”, “despotic.” Black's Law Dictionary
defines this term as “fixed or done capriciously or at pleasure; without adequate
determining principle”, “depending on the will alone”, “without cause based upon
the law.” There is also abundant case law on the interpretation of this term to
which the parties have referred. The Tribunal considers that the definition in
ELSI is the most authoritative interpretation of international law and it is close to
the ordinary meaning of the term emphasizing the willful disregard of the law.
The element of bad faith added by Genin does not seem to find support either in
the ordinary concept of arbitrariness or in the definition of the ICJ in ELS/.

319. In the instant case, certain measures taken by Argentina do not
seem to be based on reason. Argentina has explained that an authorization was
needed to start the operation of the DNM sub-system, but has failed to explain
why the authorization was never given after the investment was made and the
DNM sub-system had started to operate. Similarly, the Tribunal does not
question the importance to the vital interests of Argentina to have secure
identification of individuals, but applied to the suspension of the RPN sub-system
such argument would have justified requiring an immediate correction of the
error. No evidence has been submitted that the error could not be corrected.
Instead, SITS was denied the possibility of correcting the error. While the
Tribunal could accept that there may have been reasons to justify the temporary

122 Ibid., para. 657.
"3 The Oxford English Dictionary. This term is similarly defined in the Diccionario de la Lengua
Espafiola, 22” edition, at www.rae.es.

101

suspension of the DNM and RPN sub-systems, the Tribunal finds its permanent
suspension arbitrary.

320. As to discriminatory measures, under Article 3(1) and (2) of the
Treaty, the parties undertook to treat each other's nationals and companies not
less favorably than they treat their own investors or those of a third party.
Whether intent to discriminate is necessary and only the discriminatory effect
matters is a matter of dispute. In S.D. Myers, the tribunal considered intent
“important” but not “decisive on its own.”'** On the other hand, the tribunal in
Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador found
intent not essential and that what mattered was the result of the policy in
question.'® The concern with the result of the discriminatory measure is shared
in S.D. Myers: “The word ‘treatment’ suggests that practical impact is required to
produce a breach of Article 1102, not merely a motive or intent.” The
discriminatory results appear determinative in Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v.

126 where the tribunal considered different treatment on a

United Mexican States,
de facto basis to be contrary to the national treatment obligation under Article

1102 of NAFTA.

321. The Tribunal concurs that intent is not decisive or essential for a
finding of discrimination, and that the impact of the measure on the investment
would be the determining factor to ascertain whether it had resulted in non-
discriminatory treatment. The Claimant has based its arguments mainly on the
fact that the Contract was the only major contract, and the only contract with a
foreign investor, terminated under the 2000 Emergency Law, while the contract
of the Government with an Argentine national to issue passports was allowed to
stand notwithstanding the high costs associated with it. The Respondent has
explained to the Tribunal that the Contract was unique and that the mandatory
nature of DNI justified the difference in treatment. The Tribunal considers that,
while there are aspects in the actions of Argentina that seem discriminatory, the
allegations of the Claimant have not been fully substantiated. Given the holdings

124 SD. Myers, para. 254.

"5 Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, LCIA case No.
UN3467, Award (July 1, 2004), para. 177.

"6 Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. United Mexican States, |CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1, Award
(December 16, 2002), para. 184.

102

of the Tribunal under other protections of the Treaty, the Tribunal finds it
unnecessary to determine whether Argentina breached the non-discriminatory
treatment obligation.

Vil. Compensation
1. Positions of the Parties

322. Siemens claims that it is entitled to receive full and
comprehensive compensation for the breaches of the Treaty and to recover the
fair market value of its wrongfully expropriated investment, calculated for
valuation purposes immediately before the date of expropriation of May 18, 2001;
the loss of profits or /ucrum cessans and the additional damage caused as a
result of the expropriatory measures and acts, including those damages claimed
by subcontractors and suppliers of Siemens and/or SITS regarding the Project
and caused by Argentina’s expropriation. In addition, Siemens claims pre and
post-award interest of 6% compounded annually.

323. | Siemens argues that the expropriation was unlawful because it
did not meet the conditions of the Treaty and international law, namely, it did not
serve a public purpose, it did not satisfy the formal and substantive requirements
of due process, it did not comply with the legal standards of treatment set forth in
the Treaty and no compensation was paid. Based on the Factory at Chorzow
case, Siemens pleads that an illegal dispossession leads to a twofold obligation:
first, the obligation to restore the property in question or, if this is not possible, to
pay compensation corresponding to its value; and second, there is an obligation
to pay damages for any additional losses sustained as a consequence of the
taking.

324. Siemens observes that the value of the asset expropriated is not
affected by whether or not an expropriation is lawful, but the amount of
compensation due to an investor may be significantly affected. In the instant
case, Siemens claims that the value of the property at the moment of the taking
plus interest to the day of payment is a legal floor, and calls upon the Tribunal to
add any potential consequential damages so as to “wipe out all the

103

consequences of the illegal act and reestablish the situation which would, in all

probability, have existed if that act had not been committed.”'2”

325. | Siemens considers as appropriate the definition of fair market
value in Starrett Housing Corp. v. The Islamic Republic of Iran: “[T]he price that a
willing buyer would pay to a willing seller in circumstances in which each had
good information, each desired to maximize his financial gain, and neither was

under duress or threat.”'°

326. Siemens argues that the fair market value includes the lost future
profits that the enterprise would have gained had it been allowed to continue to
operate, points out that SITS was a single project company, and affirms that its
future revenues and profits were ascertainable on the basis of the commitments
made by Argentina. Siemens refers to Norwegian Shipowners, LETCO and the
concurring opinion of Judge Brower in Amoco International Finance Corporation,
which stated that “[...] where the expropriated property consists of contract rights,
the compensation must be defined by the anticipated net earnings that would
have been realized, as well as one can judge, had the contract been left in place

until completion.”'7°

327. | Siemens claims that SITS, as a single project company, had
foreseeable and ascertainable revenues and profits based on the commitments
made by Argentina. Furthermore, any negative effect of the taking itself or the
measures related to the taking must be excluded from the valuation. According to
Siemens, a State may not reduce its obligation to pay compensation simply by
creating a situation in which expropriation is to be feared before it occurs or by
breaching contractual obligations or other duties to the foreign investor.

328. According to Siemens, the appropriate method of valuation is the
book value method in its variant of actual investments. Based on this method,
Siemens claims that, as of May 17, 2001, the value of its investment amounts to
US$283,859,710. Siemens affirms that this amount is comparable to the

"7 Memorial, para. 392 citing the Factory at Chorzow case, Merits, PClJ, Series A, 1928, p. 47,
"28 Ibid., para, 394, citing Starrett Housing Corp. v. the Islamic Republic of Iran, Case No. 24,
Final Award No. 314-24-1, (August 14, 1987), Claimant's Legal Authorities No. 52.

"29 Ibid., para. 402.

104

amounts that could be obtained with the application of other alternative methods
of valuation. In addition, Siemens claims to be entitled to US$124,541,000 on
account of /ucrum cessans.

329. Siemens also claims additional damages based on the unlawful
nature of the expropriation measures and the behavior of Argentina prior to and
after the date of expropriation. On this account, Siemens claims: (i) the costs
incurred for maintaining a skeleton operation in Argentina to allow the conclusion
of the Project, (ii) storage costs because of a 20-month delay in the transfer of
assets to the Government, (iii) training costs and costs of technical support
services provided by SITS during a period in excess of 75 days after May 18,
2001 pursuant to Article 26.3 of the Contract, (iv) damages claimed or that may
be claimed by subcontractors involved in the Project’s execution as a result of
the expropriation, (v) unpaid invoiced services of SITS to the DNE agency in
1999, and (vi) the costs of this arbitration and of counsel. According to Siemens,
subcontractors’ damages amount to US$44,678,462 and the aggregate amount
of the other items is US$9,397,899.

330. Siemens claims pre-award compounded interest at the rate of 6%
per annum so that it is fully compensated for the loss suffered and considers that
May 18, 2001 should be the date of expropriation for valuation purposes,
including for the assessed value of the lost profits. In the case of the additional
damages, interest shall be applied from the dates in which they have been
caused.

331. | Argentina argues in its Counter-Memorial that Siemens is not
entitled to the compensation it has claimed: First, the Treaty in Article 4(2) states
that compensation shall correspond to the value of the investment expropriated.
Argentina interprets the reference to “value” of the investment — as opposed to
“fair market value” - to exclude future profits. To support this point, Argentina
reviews its own treaty practice and offers examples in four categories ranging
from compensation on the basis of fair market value of the investment to the
classical Hull formula, or a partial Hull formula or “the value” of the investment as
in the case of the Treaty. Argentina alleges that there is no uniformity in the
doctrine on the level of compensation.

105

332. Argentina questions the cases relied on by Siemens to argue the
extent of the damages claimed. According to Argentina, in Maffezini, neither
lucrum cessans nor future profits were redressed, and full compensation
awarded in the Factory at Chorzdw case does not correspond to fair market
value. Argentina requests the Tribunal to apply the principles of Tecmed, a case
that Argentina finds strikingly similar to this case and quotes approvingly its
reasoning under Mexican law. Argentina affirms that Argentine law applicable to
this case and the 2000 Emergency Law to which Siemens consented do not
grant the compensatory right claimed by Siemens.

333. Argentina also questions the currency of the claimed
compensation. Argentina argues that it did not guarantee the value of the
investment in terms of dollars. Argentina points out that the Contract was not a
dollar contract and that Siemens entered into a forward dollar contract to secure
US$190 million, the same amount of the alleged loans made by the parent
company to its Argentine affiliate. The existence of such contract, according to
Argentina, proves that Siemens never intended to enter into a contract with

Argentina in a foreign currency.

334. Argentina explains that under Decree 669/01 for Siemens to be
compensated in the amount calculated by the Appraisals Tribunal in accordance
with the Contract, the applicable law and the Treaty, Siemens has to deliver real
assets in condition to be used, otherwise Argentina would not receive any
consideration for its compensation. To achieve this objective, the Appraisals TTN
established the following conditions: delivery of the source codes, executable
programs correctly set up and approved, delivery of the licenses for base
software, databases and other necessary utilities, delivery of the licenses for
application software of the sub-contractors, delivery of documentation related to
applications, systems and training proved as to its usefulness, and ability to use
the Contractor's software licenses.

335. Argentina criticizes the valuation carried out by Siemens’ expert.
Argentina points out that: (i) he did just office work and had not checked the
market values to confirm that the amounts charged by suppliers to SITS reflect
the usual market practices, (ii) he did not consider whether the intra-Siemens

106

Group transfers were carried out at arm’s length, (iii) he did not carry out the task
personally and did not perform any due diligence, (iv) he accepted all of
Siemens’ assumptions at face value without verifying them, (v) he affirms to have
applied the book value method when he never analyzed where the alleged funds
of Siemens were invested and the same analysis should have been done in
respect of SITS’ liabilities, (vi) he maintains that the book value method and the
discounted cash flow analysis reach the same result when the figures are
different, and (vii) he made a number of mistakes in calculating future income.
Furthermore, the supporting documentation of the valuation is lacking.

336. In its Reply, Siemens argues that it is entitled to full compensation
and that “investment value” has to be given its plain and ordinary meaning.
Siemens points out that: (i) the Treaty does not qualify the reference to
investment value, (ii) “value” in its ordinary meaning is defined as “[t]he monetary
worth or price of something; the amount of goods, services, or money that
something will command in an exchange,” and (iii) in a free market economy the
exchange is conducted on the market. Therefore, “the plain and ordinary
meaning of ‘value’ is what one may expect to obtain in exchange for something,

that is to say its ‘fair market value.””"®°

337. | Siemens observes that the legal authorities referred to by
Argentina relate to the general debate on the extent of compensation under
customary international law and not to the interpretation of the Treaty which
contains a clear standard of full compensation. Siemens refers to CME where the
tribunal, drawing its conclusions from the Factory at Chorzow case, ruled that
“genuine value” in Article 5 of the Netherlands-Czech Republic BIT meant the fair
market value of the investment. Siemens also refers to Biloune which held that
the fair market value, which takes into account future profits, is the most accurate
measure of value of the expropriated property.

338. On the issue of future profits, Siemens draws the attention of the
Tribunal to how the ILC has expressed the principle that lost profits are awarded
where there is a reliable basis for the expectation of future income:

‘8° Reply, para. 620.
107

“In cases where lost future profits have been awarded, it has been where
an anticipated income stream has attained sufficient attributes to be
considered a legally protected interest of sufficient certainty to be
compensable. This has normally been achieved by virtue of contractual

arrangements or, in some cases, a well-established history of dealings.”'*"

According to Siemens, the contractual provisions concerning the production,
issuance and price of the DNIs and other fees constituted a “legally protected

interest of sufficient certainty.”'°2

339. Siemens points out that Argentina refers to documents which are
30 and 45 years old and pertain to debates already settled. Furthermore, in
Tecmed, and contrary to what Argentina has alleged, the tribunal awarded
compensation in accordance with the provisions of the relevant investment
treaty, on the basis of the market value of the assets concerned, lost profits and
compound interest.

340. Siemens argues that, for purposes of Siemens’ claim of
expropriation under international law, the domestic law of Argentina and the
provisions of the 2000 Emergency Law are irrelevant.

341. | Siemens also contends that, in any case, it is entitled to fair
market value on the basis of the Treaty’s most-favored-nation clause and other
investment treaties signed by Argentina that specifically provide for such
valuation of expropriated assets.

342. Siemens contests the affirmation by Argentina that there was no
unlawful expropriation and affirms that the requirements of public benefit,
compensation and compliance with the general principles of treatment provided
for in the Treaty had not been respected by Argentina. Siemens insists on full
damages and, given the unlawful nature of the expropriation, consequential
damages all paid in dollars. In this respect, Siemens recalls that the investment
was made in dollars and argues that the forward contract itself proves this point.
Siemens adds that it is entitled to the value of the investment immediately before

‘3 Ihid., para. 632.
182 Ibid., para. 633.

108

the date of the taking when the peso had parity with the dollar. Siemens also
recalls that, as it explained at the jurisdictional stage, its right to compensation
under the Treaty is distinct from SITS’ rights under the Contract and domestic
law, and that Argentina never offered nor even approved any compensation
under the 2000 Emergency Law.

343. Siemens points out the shortcomings of the valuation report of the
TTN, among others: (i) it was never submitted to SITS for consideration, (ii) it
was prepared long after termination of the Contract and a long time after SITS
lost control and supervision of the System, (iii) it evaluated items individually
rather than the System as a whole, and (iv) it was not done in the currency of the
investment. According to Siemens, the appraisal done by the TTN does not even
reflect the compensation due to SITS under the 2000 Emergency Law.

344. Siemens further points out that Argentina fails to provide a proper
response for the sub-contractors’ claims and the excuses for withholding the
performance bond under the Contract are unsustainable and constitute another
arbitrary measure taken by Argentina.

345. As regards Argentina’s criticisms of the valuation report prepared
by Siemens’ expert, Siemens argues that Argentina has misunderstood the task
of the expert, which was to evaluate the loss suffered by Siemens on the
investment and not to evaluate SITS’ loss under the Contract under Argentine
law. According to Siemens, it was not the task of this expert to value individual
assets: “Valuing hardware and software on a part by part basis, when the very
condition of those items are now the result of the expropriation, would provide no
support in valuing Siemens A.G.’s investment in the contractual right to operate
the System and to generate revenue and return on its investment.”'®? Siemens
adds that Argentina ignores the fact that the financial statements and accounting
records relied on by the expert had been audited by a leading auditing firm —
KPMG -, and refers to case law showing the appropriateness of the use of
audited accounting records to carry out a valuation task. According to Siemens,
Argentina also ignores the fact that SITS was a single project company, which

'88 Reply, para. 699. Quotation from Expert Lemar’s Rebuttal Report.
109

should answer the criticism that the expert never examined where the alleged
funds of Siemens were invested. Regarding the costs of the investment, Siemens
contends that, if Siemens’ global price was the lowest in the bidding for the
Contract, the individual cost and prices of the components would also be lowest
or extremely competitive compared to other tenders.

346. In its Rejoinder, Argentina argues that the fair market value of an
expropriated property as the measure of compensation for an expropriated
investment is not always applicable when an expropriation becomes necessary
for social policy reasons. If this would not be the case, it would be a serious
limitation on State sovereignty, and no social or economic reforms could be
accomplished by poorer nations. Argentina maintains that it had effectively
become bankrupt, and that to maintain that an expropriation is only lawful if full
market compensation is payable is incompatible with the principle of self-
determination. Argentina refers in this respect to professor Brownlie’s statement
that: “The principle of nationalization unsubordinated to a full compensation rule
may be supported by reference to principles of self-determination, independence,
sovereignty and equality.”'* Argentina also refers to the statement of the
European Court of Human Rights in James v. UK, which held that Article 1 of the
First Protocol does not “guarantee a right to full compensation in all
circumstances. Legitimate objectives of ‘public interest’ such as pursued in
measures of economic reform or measures designed to achieve greater social

justice, may call for less than reimbursement of full market value.”'°>

347. Argentina affirms that these considerations are applicable to the
situation in Argentina and are entirely consistent with the Treaty. Argentina
concludes that, even if there was an expropriation, the Claimant would not be
entitled to more than the direct losses and not to the /ucrum cessans.

'84 Rejoinder, para. 575.

*85 James v. UK, European Court of Human Rights, 1986, 8, EHRR 123, para. 48, Respondent's
Legal Authorities No. AL RA 86, quotation in the Rejoinder, para. 577. Emphasis added by the
Respondent.

110

2. Considerations of the Tribunal

348. The Tribunal will address the following issues raised by the
parties: applicable law for purposes of determining compensation, the meaning of
“value” of the investment, currency of compensation, whether compensation
should include /ucrum cessans and consequential damages, on what evidence it
should be based, the amount of compensation, the applicable rate of interest,
and whether it should be simple or compound interest.

a) Applicable Law

349. The Tribunal has found that Argentina took measures that had the
effect of expropriating the investment and that such expropriation is in breach of
the Treaty, and hence unlawful. The Tribunal has also found that the Respondent
breached its obligations to provide fair and equitable treatment and full protection
and security and that it adopted arbitrary measures in respect of the investment.
The law applicable to the determination of compensation for a breach of such
Treaty obligations is customary international law. The Treaty itself only provides
for compensation for expropriation in accordance with the terms of the Treaty.

350. The Draft Articles are currently considered to reflect most
accurately customary international law on State responsibility. Article 36 on
“Compensation” provides:

“1. The State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an
obligation to compensate for the damage caused thereby, insofar as such
damage is not made good by restitution.

2. The compensation shall cover any financially assessable damage
including loss of profits insofar as it is established.”

351. This Article relies on the statement of the PClJ in the Factory at

Chorzow case on reparation:

“The essential principle contained in the actual notion of an illegal act-—a
principle which seems to be established by international practice and in
particular by the decisions of arbitral tribunals — is that reparation must, so
far as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and

111

reestablish the situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that

act had not been committed.”'°

352. The key difference between compensation under the Draft
Articles and the Factory at Chorzow case formula, and Article 4(2) of the Treaty
is that under the former, compensation must take into account “all financially
assessable damage” or “wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act” as
opposed to compensation “equivalent to the value of the expropriated
investment” under the Treaty. Under customary international law, Siemens is
entitled not just to the value of its enterprise as of May 18, 2001, the date of
expropriation, but also to any greater value that enterprise has gained up to the
date of this Award, plus any consequential damages.

b) Value of the Investment

353. In the Factory at Chorzow case, the PClJ asked the experts to
calculate the value of the undertaking as of the date of the taking and as of the
later date of its prospective judgment, and such value to include the lands,
buildings, equipment, stocks and process, supply and delivery contracts, goodwill
and future prospects. It is only logical that, if all the consequences of the illegal
act need to be wiped out, the value of the investment at the time of this Award be
compensated in full. Otherwise compensation would not cover all the
consequences of the illegal act. While the Tribunal has determined that the
Treaty does not apply for purposes of determining the compensation due to
Siemens, which is governed by customary international law as reflected in
Factory at Chorzow, it is worth noting that the PClJ, as the Treaty itself, refers to
the value of the investment without qualification. To reach its conclusion, the
PClJ did not need to have “value” qualified by “full”. The Tribunal is satisfied that
the term “value” does not need further qualification to mean not less than the full
value of the investment. Having reached this conclusion, it is unnecessary for the
Tribunal to discuss the argument advanced by the Claimant that it is entitled to

'86 Factory at Chorzow, Merits, PCJ, Series A, No. 17, 1928, p. 47.
112

the fair market value of its investment on the basis of the MFN clause in the
Treaty.

354. Argentina has pleaded that, when a State expropriates for social
or economic reasons, fair market value does not apply because otherwise this
would limit the sovereignty of a country to introduce reforms in particular of poor
countries. Argentina has not developed this argument, nor justified on what basis
Argentina would be considered a poor country, nor specified the reforms it
sought to carry out at the time. Argentina in its allegations has relied on Tecmed
as an example to follow in terms of considering the purpose and proportionality of
the measures taken. The Tribunal observes that these considerations were part
of that tribunal's determination of whether an expropriation had occurred and not
of its determination of compensation. The Tribunal further observes that Article |
of the First Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights permits a
margin of appreciation not found in customary international law or the Treaty.

c) Method of Valuation

355. The Claimant has proposed that compensation be calculated on
the book value of the investment and that /ucrum cessans be arrived at through
discounting an estimate of profits calculated as a percentage of the revenues that
SITS would have received if the Project would have run its course on the basis of
the prices for its services set forth in the Contract. Usually, the book value
method applied to a recent investment is considered an appropriate method of
calculating its fair market value when there is no market for the assets
expropriated. On the other hand, the DCF method is applied to ongoing concerns
based on the historical data of their revenues and profits; otherwise, it is
considered that the data is too speculative to calculate future profits. Normally
the two methods are regarded as alternative means of valuing the same object.
Here, however, Siemens’s expert has applied the two in tandem because, under
the terms of the Contract, all Siemens’ costs would be incurred before the first
peso of revenue would be realized. Therefore, Siemens has calculated its
claimed loss of profits by applying a notional profit percentage to its projected
future net revenues under the Contract, and then discounting those claimed
profits to their present value via the DFC method, to which it then has added the

113

book value of its costs actually incurred, i.e., its “sunk costs”, which due to the
actions of Argentina never will be able to produce the projected (or any)
revenues. In other words, Siemens claims: (i) the present value of its estimated
lost profits or Jucrum cessans, plus (ii) the costs it actually incurred, which were
“wasted” in the effort to produce the revenues from which those profits would
have been derived.

356. | Siemens has defended its approach on the basis that SITS had
already by May 18, 2001 incurred most Project development costs, the future
costs could be estimated with reasonable certainty based on existing service
contracts, and the prices for the delivery of SITS’ services were known as were
the number of DNis to be produced. For these reasons, Siemens has argued that
an estimate of the present value of future profits could be calculated to
complement the book value of the investment. In this respect, the Lemar Report
uses the rate of profits on sales projections presented to the board of Siemens at
the time the Project was proposed for approval. At that time, the estimated profit
rate was 18%. Expert Lemar reduces it to 16% because of developments during
the first year of the Contract. Furthermore, Siemens’ expert compares this
estimated profit rate to other companies operating in Argentina with prices
subject to State regulation, substantial upfront infrastructure investment cost to
deliver the service, and the intention of the Government that they would produce

a reasonable return to the owners of the investment. '*”

For this purpose, the
expert uses information from the Argentine Comisién Nacional de Valores,
Bloomberg Services and the National Gas Authority of Argentina. Mr. Lemar
arrives at a cross-sector average profit rate of 16%.'°° Thus similar to that

projected by Siemens as adjusted.

357. | While the Tribunal understands the reasons for the admittedly
unusual approach followed by Siemens and considers that it has merit in the
particular circumstances of this case, it has some concerns, as later explained,
about how the valuation has been calculated, including the valuation of the
lucrum cessans.

‘87 Expert Lemar Report attached to the Memorial (“Lemar Report’), p. 23.
"8° Ibidem.

114

d) Evidence

358. The parties have taken different approaches in respect of what is
the adequate evidence of Siemens’ investment. For the Claimant, the audited
financial statements of SITS are sufficient evidence of the amounts invested. For
Argentina, there is a need to show how each dollar or peso was spent and relate
each dollar or peso to the item financed with it. Argentina has insisted that the
Tribunal use an expert to analyze the accounts of SITS and ensure that the
amounts spent by SITS were spent for purposes of carrying out the Project.

359. The Claimant has pointed out that the Project consisted of a
made-to-order integrated system to be carried out by a single purpose company
-SITS- as required by Argentina itself. Siemens contends that the financial
statements properly audited are sufficient evidence of Siemens’ investments, that
the financial statements of SITS were audited by KPMG, and that no evidence
has been presented to question KMPG’s audit.

360. The approach advanced by Argentina responds to the need to
assess the value to Argentina of Siemens’ investment for purposes of applying
Decree No. 669/01. The Tribunal has to apply customary international law.
Accordingly, the value of the investment to be compensated is the value it has
now, as of the date of this Award, unless such value is lower than at the date of
expropriation, in which event the earlier value would be awarded. It is not the
value of the investment to Argentina but the value of the investment in terms of
the sums invested in the Project. The Project had started to operate and no
convincing evidence has been submitted showing that the funds intended for the
Project made available to SITS, as loans or equity, were not used for the
intended purpose. The valuation made by the Respondent was made from a
perspective different from that required under customary international law months
after the Contract was terminated. For these reasons, the Tribunal saw no merit
in prolonging the proceedings and engaging an expert to analyze the accounts of
SITS and where the funds had been invested.

115

e) Currency of Compensation

361. | Argentina has argued that the Contract is denominated in pesos
and that it had not guaranteed to Siemens the parity of the peso in effect at the
time it entered into the Contract. This assertion is correct but it has to be
considered in the context of the requirement that the consequences of the illegal
act be wiped out. It would be hardly so if the parity of the currency would be
added as yet another risk to be taken by the investor after it has been
expropriated. In the instant case, the Claimant has pleaded that the Tribunal
accept May 18, 2001 as the date of expropriation. The Tribunal has considered
that the issuance of Decree 669/01 was determinant for purposes of its finding of
expropriation and it is also the date that would be in consonance with Article 15
of the Draft Articles on the date of occurrence of a composite act. On May 18,
2001, the peso was at par with the dollar. If such obligation would have been
met, the Claimant would have been compensated in pesos convertible at that
rate. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that compensation shall be paid in
dollars.

f) Amount of Compensation

362. Siemens claims $283,859,710 as the book value of the
investment to May 17, 2001.

363. Under the Contract (Annex VIII), SITS committed itself to invest
$201,486 million (“Plan de Inversiones” dated June 25, 1998 (“the Investment
Plan”)) and the variable costs such as satellite links, distribution costs of
documents, overheads and operational expenses listed in page 2, paragraph 1.1
of Annex VIII. It is clear from the Contract that the total investment would include
the items for which an amount is specified in the Investment Plan and those
variable costs for which no estimated amount is given.

364. At the time of the 2000 SWIPCO audit, financed by SITS but
carried out for the account of the Respondent, SITS had spent 126,235,000
pesos compared with the 241,486,000 envisaged in the Investment Plan. Both
figures are exclusive of the variable costs for which no amount was specified in
the Investment Plan.

116

365. After termination of the Contract and for purposes of the valuation
carried out by the TTN, SITS claimed to have invested AR$158,106,542. As
explained in the report of the TTN of December 27, 2002, '°° AR$47,237 pesos of
that amount correspond to subcontractors’ invoices and the remainder to
invoices of companies in the Siemens group. In addition, SITS claimed “non-
productive expenses” (AR$44,452,193), interest on investments and “non-
productive expenses” (AR$25,260,008 and AR$8,332,985, respectively), capital
contributions (AR$27 million), close-down costs (AR$31 million), certain paid and
unpaid invoices (AR$13,100,000), subcontractors’ claims (AR$40 million) and
lucrum cessans (AR$254,942,070), for a total in excess of AR$444 million. The
TTN considered, pursuant to the terms of Decree 669/01, only the
AR$158,106,542 on account of investments and valued them at AR$72,161,510.

366. Argentina in its comments of November 23, 2005 on the
accounting information provided by Siemens asserts that the investment made
reached AR$107,472,398.23. The Claimant disputes the amount and currency of
the latest value attributed to the investment by Argentina, and of the valuation of
the TTN. The Claimant also points out, inter alia, that “non-productive expenses”
and interest have been excluded, notwithstanding the submission of the related
invoices by SITS to the Ministry of the Interior on July 22, 2001.

367. Mr. Lemar, the Siemens’ expert, has concentrated on the
financing of SITS and has calculated the book value by adding Siemens’ capital
contributions, the loans made to SITS and the corresponding interest, as
recorded in SITS’s financial statements for 2001. Mr. Lemar concludes that the
book value of Siemens’ investment at May 17, 2001 was $283,859,710.

368. The Tribunal observes, that except for Mr. Lemar’s, none of the
valuations listed above respond to the criteria that need to be applied by the
Tribunal and, as explained forthwith, the Tribunal has difficulty in accepting the
value of the investment as calculated by Mr. Lemar. The Tribunal will use as a
starting point SITS’ audited financial statements. They have been audited by a
highly qualified firm of independent auditors, which confirmed the reliability of the

*8° Exhibit 161 to the Counter-Memorial.

117

accounting records, and no evidence has been submitted to the Tribunal which
proves otherwise. Mr. Lemar has capitalized all interest paid by SITS. Prima
facie, capitalization of interest during the development phase of an investment is
normal practice. However, the financing of the Project was highly leveraged.
Siemens paid-in 27 million pesos in equity and financed the rest primarily by
three-month credit at 12.08% in 1999, twelve-month credit at 9% in 2000 and
again with three-month credit at 14% in 2001. The high interest charged to the
Project and the short-term nature of the credit raise the issue of the extent to
which it is appropriate to recognize the full amount of interest claimed as part of
the value of the investment since it is a way of building into book value what
otherwise would have to be earned as profits. The Tribunal considers that it is
appropriate to capitalize interest on loans made to SITS for the Project, but in
case of loans made by Siemens or its subsidiaries such interest should reflect
the actual cost of funds to Siemens because the Tribunal’s task is to determine
the loss of Siemens itself. Therefore, the Tribunal will proceed to calculate '*° the
respective percentage of loans made to SITS by third parties, and Siemens and
its subsidiaries and the costs of funds to the latter.

369. According to the funding data in the table in paragraph 3.7 of the
Lemar Report, total loan funding by Siemens and its subsidiaries was
AR$224,906,029 and loan funding by others AR$12,194,531 up to April 30,
2001, and AR$225,726,812 and AR$17,241,306 up to May 31, 2001. The
Tribunal has adjusted these figures to May 17, 2001 by assuming that debt
funding by Siemens, its subsidiaries and third parties increased at a steady daily
rate during the month of May. The result is debt funding to May 17 of
AR$225,356,136 by Siemens and its subsidiaries, and AR$14,962,117 by third
parties. Therefore, Siemens and its subsidiaries provided 93.8% of all loans
made to SITS and third parties provided 6.2%.

370. For purposes of determining an appropriate interest rate on loans
made by Siemens or its subsidiaries, the Tribunal observes that, as a general
matter, corporations of Siemens’ size and creditworthiness hedge a substantial
portion of the interest rate risk inherent in their fixed rate borrowings through

‘4° Amounts have been rounded to the nearest integer.

118

floating interest rate swaps. Hence, the cost of borrowing that should be taken
into account is the floating rate that Siemens could have achieved using interest
rate swaps during the life of the Contract from November 26, 1998 to May 17,

2001. The average of such interest rate during this period was 2.35%.'4"

371. Now the Tribunal turns to the percentage of interest payments
made to Siemens and its subsidiaries that would be appropriate to capitalize
based on the assumed cost of funds to Siemens in addition to interest payments
paid to third parties. To arrive at such percentage, it is necessary to calculate the
ratio of 2.35% to the annual average interest rate charged to SITS as reflected in
SITS’ financial statements. '*? Thus, 2.35% is: (i) 18.35% of 12.08% (the average
interest rate charged in fiscal year 1998-1999), (ii) 26.11% of 9% (the average
interest rate charged in fiscal year 1999-2000), and (iii) 16.78% of 14% (the
average interest rate charged in fiscal year 2000-2001). Therefore, the
percentage of interest payments to be capitalized out of payments made to
Siemens and its subsidiaries is 18.35% in 1998-1999, 26.11% in 1999-2000 and
16.78% in 2000-2001.

372. As recorded in its financial statements, SITS paid on account of
interest: AR$150,828 in fiscal year 1997-1998, AR$1,383,596 in fiscal year 1998-
1999, AR$12,156,499 in fiscal year 1999-2000 and AR$16,950,704 up to May
17, 2001,"° for a total of AR$30,642,627. Of that amount, 93.8% would
correspond to payments made to Siemens and its subsidiaries: AR$1,297,813 in
fiscal year 1998-1999," AR$11,402,796 in fiscal year 1999-2000 and
AR$15,899,760 in fiscal year 2000-2001 up to May 17, 2001, for a total of
AR$28,600,639. The remainder AR$2,041,988 was paid by SITS to third parties.
The Tribunal will now apply to the amounts paid by SITS to Siemens and its

‘*' Calculation based on data published by Bloomberg.

‘2 ‘Annex C of the financial statements.

‘8 During the full fiscal year 2000-2001 SITS paid AR$27,017,497 on account of interest. This
amount needs to be adjusted to May 17, 1981 because SITS’ fiscal year ran until September 30.
For this purpose, the Tribunal has assumed that interest accrued at the same rate each day,
divided the amount of interest payments made by 365, multiplied the daily rate by the number of
days between May 17 and September 30 -136 days- and deducted the result -AR$10,066,793-
from the amount of interest paid that fiscal year. This brings the amount of interest payments
between October 1, 2000 and May 17, 2001 to AR$16,950,704.

‘4 No interest payments to Siemens and its subsidiaries are recorded in the financial statements
for fiscal year 1997-1998.

119

subsidiaries the yearly percentages arrived at in the preceding paragraph with
the following results: AR$234,255 represents 18.35% of the interest paid to
Siemens and its subsidiaries in fiscal year 1998-1999, AR$2,977,270 represents
26.11% of such payments made in fiscal year 1999-2000 and AR$2,667,979
represents 16.78% of those made in fiscal year 2000-2001 up to May 17, 2001.
These three items add up to AR$5,879,504. The Tribunal will allow that amount
of interest paid to Siemens and its subsidiaries plus AR$2,041,988 paid to third
parties for a total of AR$7,921,492 to be capitalized for purposes of the
calculation of the book value of Siemens’ investment. Therefore, the book value
calculated by Siemens’ expert Lemar should be reduced by the difference
between the aggregate amount of interest payments made to Siemens and its
subsidiaries - AR$28,600,369 - and AR$5,879,504, namely, AR$22,720,865.

373. The book value calculation by Mr. Lemar includes two other items
that the Tribunal finds inappropriate. First, in note 5 to SITS’ financial statements
for fiscal year 2000-2001 under the heading of “Resultados extraordinarios”,
there is an entry on “Constitucién prevision de otros créditos” with an amount of
AR$42,253,305. This item cross-refers to note 4.5, which explains that this
amount corresponds to tax credits that have been provisioned in full because of
the uncertainty regarding their recoverability and have been charged as
extraordinary losses. The Tribunal holds the opinion that it is incorrect to include
this amount in the book value of SITS for purposes of compensation. Indeed, the
tax credits had not been realized because of SITS’ lack of revenues. Hence, the
amount of AR$42,253,305 should also be subtracted from the calculation of the
book value.

374. | Second, the Tribunal refers again to note 5 to the financial
statements of SITS for fiscal year 2000-2001 and to the item on “Constitucion
prevision para riesgos relacionados con la rescisién del contrato” under the
heading of “Resultados extraordinarios.” An entry of AR$10,445,000 is listed on
that account. Since the Tribunal has allowed compensation for consequential
damages, as explained later, the provisioning for risks related to Contract
termination would lead to double counting and is disallowed for purposes of the
book value calculation.

120

375. To conclude the book value calculation, the Tribunal decides that
such value is the value claimed by Siemens minus the amounts disallowed
above on account of excessive interest rates, tax credits and risks associated
with Contract termination. The amounts corresponding to these items add up to
AR$75,419,170, which when subtracted from AR$283,859,710 claimed by
Siemens reduce the book value of the investment to AR$208,440,540.

376. As the Tribunal has noted, it has been a matter of controversy
whether to use funds invested as a measure of the value of the investment or
how these funds have been used. The Tribunal has looked into the use of funds
as recorded in the financial statements themselves and the result of such
examination confirms the adjusted book value set forth above. The Tribunal has
taken into account the items in the financial statements that correspond to the
Project as such, “bienes de uso”, intangible assets and “project cost”. It emerges
from note 5 to SITS’ 2001 audited financial statements (“Estado de resultados”
under the heading of “Resultados extraordinarios”) that, in 2001 and because of
the termination of the Contract, SITS wrote off AR$39,777,220 of intangible
assets, AR$49,678,876 of “bienes de uso” and AR$123,127,297 of “project
costs”. These three items add up to AR$212,583,393.

377. The audited financial statements reflect the financial situation of
SITS on September 30, 2001 and the Tribunal has the task to value the
investment of Siemens at May 17, 2001. Therefore, the Tribunal has considered
it appropriate to compare the aggregate amount of funds applied to “bienes de
uso”, intangible assets and “project cost” between September 2000 and
September 2001, to assume that these funds were applied at the same daily rate
through the period, and to subtract from the difference the amount corresponding
to the 136 days between May 17 and September 30, 2001. These assumptions
correspond, mutatis mutandis, to those applied by expert Lemar to the sources of
funds to calculate the value of the investment to May 17, 2001. The financial
statements for 2001 show that SITS spent AR$20,741,994 in “project cost”
during the year and AR$8,973,678 on “bienes de uso” (no funds were applied to
intangible assets). These two items add up to AR$29,715,672. This amount
prorated by 365 days results in a daily application of funds to such items of

121

AR$81,412.8, which multiplied by 136 is equal to AR$11,072,140. The
subtraction of this amount from AR$212,583,393 (the sum expended on account
of “bienes de uso”, intangible assets and “project cost”) results in
AR$201,511,253, which the Tribunal considers a reasonable approximation to
the amount applied to “bienes de uso”, intangible assets and “project cost” up to
May 17, 2001. When the allowed capitalized interest of AR$7,921,492 is added
to this amount we arrive at AR$209,432,745. A result slightly higher than the
book value, which can be explained by the adjustments that need to be made to
reflect the value of the investment on May 17, 2001.

378. Siemens further claims $124,541,000 on account of loss profits
before taxes.

379. The Tribunal considers that the amount claimed on account of lost
profits is very unlikely to have ever materialized for the following reasons:

380. First, in considering the estimated rate of profit on sales, the
Tribunal recalls that the calculation of the Claimant assumes the issuance of 33
million DNI. The Tribunal considers that this amount is excessive taking into
account that the Claimant accepted to make the investment with a guaranteed
minimum of 24 million DNI (Article 16(b) of the Contract). Therefore, the
estimated amount of revenues of AR$889,147,000 calculated by the Claimant
needs to be reduced by AR$270 million (30 pesos per each DNI multiplied by 9
million) to AR$619,147,000.

381. | Second, the amount of AR$619,147,000 includes a 21% value
added tax (Article 4.4 of the Contract) equal to AR$107,455,000, which needs to
be subtracted and results in AR$511,692,000. Applying to this amount the 16%
profit rate results in profits before applicable taxes of AR$81,870,000 over the life
of the Contract.

382. Third, the discount rate to be applied to the estimated profits
should reflect the cost of money and the country and business risks. According to
Siemens’ own expert, this should be a rate within a range of 11% and 15%. Mr.

‘5 The TTN points out in its report that the license of Printrak that SITS held to print DNIs was
valid for printing only 24 million documents. Exhibit 161 to the Counter-Memorial, folio 15.

122

Lemar himself has offered a calculation using a rate in the middle of such range -
13%. The Tribunal considers this rate appropriate taking into account the country
and business circumstances of the operation and the cost of funds.

383. Fourth, Siemens’ expert has discounted the profits over the
expected life of the Contract assuming that it would not be extended. It was
possible for the Contract to be extended for an additional six years. It would not
be unreasonable to assume that delays would have occurred in the normal
course of Project operation given the novelty and complexity of the Project; it is
undisputed by the parties that it was the first of its kind. Furthermore, the analysis
performed by Mr. Lemar to take into account the three-month delay in Project
start-up shows the sensitivity of profits to delays in the timing of revenues. A
delay of three months resulted in a drop of 2% in the profit rate notwithstanding
the addition of AR$29 million in revenues for printing of electoral roles which had
been underestimated in an earlier calculation. An extension of the Contract to 9
or 12 years would have had devastating effects on the profit rate.

384. Fifth, the profits would have been subject to a corporate profits

tax.

385. For these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that Siemens is not
entitled to any compensation on account of profit loss.

386. Additionally, Siemens has claimed $9,178,000 for post-
expropriation costs incurred by SITS in continuing a skeleton operation,
$219,899 for unpaid invoices by the Government in relation with the voters list of
1999, $44,678,462 for sub-contractors’ claims, and the return of the performance
bond.

387. The Tribunal considers that the claim on account of post-
expropriation costs is justified in order to wipe out the consequences of the
expropriation. As regards the sub-contractors’ claims, Argentina has affirmed to
have taken the necessary measures to ensure that these claims are transferred
to Argentina. The Tribunal acknowledges this affirmation and decides that
Argentina shall hold the Claimant, its subsidiaries and affiliates, wherever
located, harmless from, and indemnify same in respect of, any claims heretofore

123

or hereafter asserted against any of them by any of the following subcontractors
to SITS in relation to the Contract: Boldt S.A., Correo Argentino S.A., Printrak
International/Printrak de Argentina S.R.L., Imaging Automation Inc., Impsat S.A.,
SWIPCO Argentina S.A., Mojacar S.A., Indra Spain and Indra Argentina, and
Oracle.

388. Since the Contract was terminated on grounds other than
performance, it is congruent that the performance bond be returned promptly to
Siemens or SITS, as its agent for this purpose. Should the bond not have been
returned 30 days after the date of this Award, Argentina shall pay the Claimant
the amount of the bond.

389. As for the amount claimed on account of services rendered and
unpaid, the Tribunal considers that, since such amount is not disputed and would
normally be considered an asset forming part of the value of the investment, the
Respondent shall compensate Siemens for the full amount claimed.

g) Interest

390. | The Claimant has requested that the Tribunal award compound
interest at the rate of 6% per annum and that interest accrue as from May 18,
2001 for compensation on account of the expropriated investment and as from
the date costs were incurred in the case of compensation for additional damages.
The Lemar Report takes into account a number of options before arriving at the
conclusion that 6% would be an appropriate rate to apply based on the
consideration that this is the rate that Siemens used as its average corporate
borrowing rate in appraising investments and in considering funding costs in
2001-2003. The rate of 6% has also been advanced in Professor Schreuer’s
opinion on the basis of arbitral practice.

391. In its Counter-Memorial, the Respondent does not comment on
the issue of the applicable rate of interest. In its Rejoinder, Argentina simply
disputes the rate of interest claimed since the Treaty provides that interest be
paid at “the usual bank rate.” No alternative interest rate is proposed nor is any
reason adduced to question how the Claimant has arrived at that rate. Argentina

124

seems to presume that “the usual bank rate” would be different but without
specifying what this bank rate should be.

392. In its Rejoinder, the Respondent objects to the award of
compound interest, it considers that this is an inappropriate case for awarding
compound interest without offering reasons why this would be so, and responds
to the Claimant's assertion that compounding of interest is in line with the
principle of full damages as follows:

“That may theoretically be the case if in fact the investor has borrowed
elsewhere to make good the loss of the money which it is said it should
have received. But nowhere is it claimed that this Claimant was obliged to
make good any financial losses by itself borrowing money at compound
interest rates from banks. Thus, the claim for loss of the interest on
interest which it is said would have been earned is unfounded in fact as
well as being entirely speculative. This element of the Claim amounts to
an attempt by the Claimant to unjustly enrich itself in the circumstances of
this case.”"“

393. Argentina further objects to the date of May 18, 2001 as the date
from which interest would accrue. It argues that, since the Treaty is silent on this
point, it would be artificial to attribute most losses as from that date and
speculative and complex to establish dates when the additional damages
occurred.

394. The Tribunal will address first the applicable rate of interest, then
turn to the questions of the date as from which interest should accrue and
whether interest should be simple or compounded.

395. As an expression of customary international law, Article 38 of the
Draft Articles states:

“1, Interest on any principal sum payable under this Chapter shall be
payable when necessary in order to ensure full reparation. The interest
rate and mode of calculation shall be set so as to achieve that result.

“© Rejoinder, para. 727. Footnote deleted.

125

2. Interest runs from the date when the principal sum should have been
paid until the date the obligation to pay is fulfilled.”

396. Thus, in determining the applicable interest rate, the guiding
principle is to ensure “full reparation for the injury suffered as a result of the
internationally wrongful act.”'*” The Tribunal considers that the rate of interest to
be taken into account is not the rate associated with corporate borrowing but the
interest rate the amount of compensation would have earned had it been paid
after the expropriation. Since the awarded compensation is in dollars, the
Tribunal considers that the average rate of interest applicable to US six-month
certificates of deposit is an appropriate rate of interest. The average of such rate
from May 18, 2001 to September 30, 2006 is 2.66%. “8

397. For purposes of erasing the effects of the expropriation, interest
should accrue from the date the Tribunal has found that expropriation occurred,
namely, May 18, 2001, in respect of the book value of the investments made for
the Project up to that date. Compensation for post-expropriation costs incurred
after May 18, 2001 should accrue interest as from the date on which they were
incurred. Since this would not be practical for calculation purposes given the
multiple dates involved, the Tribunal considers that interest on post-expropriation
costs shall accrue as of January 1, 2002, date by which most of these costs had
been incurred ($9,339,863 out of a total claimed of $9,807,638). As for interest
on unpaid Government bills, interest should accrue from January 1, 2000 since
they relate to services rendered in 1999.

398. In the eventuality that Siemens or any of its affiliates or
subsidiaries would be held liable for any of the claims of the sub-contractors
related to the Contract, interest shall accrue from the date of payment of any
such claim. Furthermore, in the eventuality that the performance bond is not
returned by the Respondent within 30 days of the dispatch of this Award to the
parties, interest shall accrue on the amount of the bond as from 30 days after the

‘47 J. Crawford, The International Law Commission's Articles on State Responsibility.
Introduction, Text and Commentaries (2002) p. 239.
“8 Calculated on the basis of data published by Bloomberg.

126

date of dispatch of this Award to the parties and until such amount has been fully
paid.

399. As regards compounding of interest, the question is not, as
argued by Argentina, whether Siemens had paid compound interest on borrowed
funds during the relevant period but whether, had compensation been paid
following the expropriation, Siemens would have earned interest on interest paid
on the amount of compensation. It is in this sense that tribunals have ruled that
compound interest is a closer measure of the actual value lost by an investor. As
expressed by the tribunal in Santa Elena:

“[w]here an owner of property has at some earlier time lost the value of his
asset but has not received the monetary equivalent that then became due
to him, the amount of compensation should reflect, at least in part, the
additional sum that his money would have earned, had it, and the income
generated by it, been reinvested each year at generally prevailing rates of
interest.”'4°

400. Similarly have held the tribunals in Metalclad and Wena Hotels.
The Ad Hoc Committee in Wena Hotels decided that it was within the tribunal’s
power to take the option of compound interest as an alternative compatible with
the objectives of prompt, adequate and effective compensation and
compensation that reflects the market value of the investment immediately before
the expropriation. °°

401. For these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that interest shall be
compounded and be compounded annually.

Vill. Costs

402. In order to take into account that the Claimant has not fully
prevailed in these proceedings, the Tribunal determines that each party shall
bear its own legal costs, and that Argentina and Siemens shall be responsible for
75% and 25%, respectively, of the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the
costs of the ICSID Secretariat.

“8 Santa Elena, para. 104.
‘8° Wena Hotels, paras. 52-53.

127

IX. Decision

403. Having carefully considered the parties’ arguments in their written

pleadings and oral submissions and for the reasons above stated the Tribunal

unanimously decides:

1

. that the Respondent breached Article 4(2) of the Treaty by

expropriating Claimant's investment without complying with its
terms;

. that the Respondent breached Articles 2(1) and 4(1) of the

Treaty by failing to accord fair and equitable treatment and full
protection and legal security to the investment of the Claimant;

. that the Respondent has breached Article 2(3) of the Treaty by

the arbitrary measures taken in respect of the investment of
the Claimant;

. that the Respondent shall pay forthwith to the Claimant

compensation in the amount of $208,440,540 on account of
the value of its investment, $9,178,000 on account of
consequential damages and $219,899 on account of unpaid
bills for services rendered by SITS to the Government;

. that the Respondent shall forthwith, and in no event later than

thirty (30) days from the date of dispatch of this Award to the
parties, deliver to Claimant (or SITS as its agent for this
purpose) the Contract performance bond provided by SITS
(insurance policy No. 000589772) for an amount of $20
million);

. that the Respondent shall hold the Claimant, its subsidiaries

and affiliates, wherever located, harmless from, and indemnify
same in respect of, any claims heretofore or hereafter
asserted against any of them by any of the following
subcontractors to SITS in relation to the Contract: Boldt S.A.,
Correo Argentino S.A., Printrak International/Printrak de
Argentina S.R.L., Imaging Automation Inc., Impsat S.A.,

128

SWIPCO Argentina S.A., Mojacar S.A., Indra Spain and Indra
Argentina, and Oracle;

7. that the Respondent shall pay to the Claimant interest
compounded annually on the sums listed in point 4 of this
decision at the rate of 2.66%, which is the average rate
applicable to US six-month certificates of deposit from May 18,
2001 to September 30, 2006; such interest to accrue as from
May 18, 2001 in the case of compensation on account of the
value of the investment, January 1, 2000 in the case of
compensation on account of unpaid bills by the Government,
and January 1, 2002 in the case of compensation on account
of consequential damages, all until the date of dispatch of this
Award to the parties;

8. that, in the eventuality that the Respondent had not paid in full
the sums referred to in this decision thirty (30) days after the
date of dispatch of this Award to the parties, the Respondent
shall pay to the Claimant interest compounded annually on the
unpaid sum at the rate set forth in point 7 of this decision; such
interest to accrue as from thirty (30) days after the date of
dispatch of this Award to the parties until such amount has
been fully paid;

9. that the Respondent shall, in the eventuality that the
Respondent has not delivered the bond referred to in point 5
of this decision to the Claimant (or SITS as its agent) thirty
(30) days after the date of dispatch of this Award to the
parties, forthwith pay to the Claimant the full amount of the
bond. Such amount to bear interest compounded annually at
the rate set forth in point 7 of this decision until fully paid;

10.that the Respondent shall, in the eventuality that Siemens or
any of its affiliates or subsidiaries would be held liable for any
claims of the sub-contractors listed above, pay interest

129

compounded annually at the rate set forth in point 7 of this
decision on any amount paid to satisfy such liability; such
interest to accrue from the date of payment of any such

amount;

11.that any funds to be paid pursuant to this decision shall be
paid in dollars and into an account outside Argentina indicated
by the Claimant and net of any taxes and costs;

12. that each party shall bear its own costs and counsel fees;

13.that the Respondent and the Claimant shall be responsible for
75% and 25%, respectively, of the fees and expenses of the
arbitrators and the costs of the ICSID Secretariat; and

14. that all other claims are dismissed.

130

Made in Washington, D.C., in English and Spanish, both versions equally

authentic.
(signed) (signed)
Judge Charles N. Brower Professor Domingo Bello Janeiro
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: 4 Jan. 2007 Date: 11 enero 2007
(signed)
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda

President

Date: January 17, 2007

131

