A

UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION
ON
INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW

 

FINAL AWARD

 

SILVERTON FINANCE SERVICE, INC.

Claimant

vs.
REPUBLICA DOMINICANA

Respondent

Axrbitral Tribunal

Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades
President
Professor Franco Ferrari
Co-Arbitrator

Mr. Jose Eloy Anzola
Co-Arbitrator

Table of Contents

I. Introduction

 

II. Procedural History.

 

Il. The Claimant’s Withdrawal of its Claim.

 

IV. Costs

 

V. Decision

ee AN

1. Pursuant to the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law Arbitration
Rules (adopted on December 16, 2013) (hereinafter the “UNCITRAL Rules”), the
Tribunal hereby issues the following Final Award:

I. INTRODUCTION

2. SILVERTON FINANCE INC. (“Silverton” or the “Claimant”) is a company
established in accordance with the laws of the Republic of Panama. The Claimant has
instituted this arbitration against REPUBLICA DOMINICANA (“Dominican
Republic” or the “Respondent”), a sovereign nation, in accordance with the
UNCITRAL Rules. The Claimant claims breaches of a Bilateral Investment Treaty
between the Republic of Panama and the Dominican Republic, with date of signature
February 6, 2003 and entry into force September 17, 2006 (hereinafter the
“Dominican Republic-Panama BIT”) The Claimant and the Respondent may be
referred to, individually, as a “Party,” and, jointly, as the “Parties.”

3. The Claimant’s address for the purposes of this arbitration is:

Republic National Bank no. 15
Via Espafia

Calle Colombia

Panama

Republica de Panama

4. The Respondent’s address for the purposes of this arbitration is:

Bryan Cave LLP

200 S. Biscayne Boulevard, Suite 400
Miami, Florida 33131

United States of America

Tel: (786) 322-7500

Fax: (786) 322-7501

5. The Claimant is represented by:

Alberto Croze (acroze@crozelaw.com)
Guillermo Gémez Herrera (guillermogh@gglawrd.com)

Gomez & Gratereaux

Federico Geraldino No. 6, Edificio JZ, Primer Nivel, local 2
Santo Domingo

Dominican Republic

Tel: (809) 331-2600

6. The Respondent is represented by:

Pedro J. Martinez-Fraga (pedro.martinezfraga@bryancave.com)
C. Ryan Reetz (ryan.reetz@bryancave.com)

Bryan Cave LLP

200 S. Biscayne Boulevard, Suite 400

Miami, Florida 33131

United States of America

Tel: (786) 322-7500

Fax: (786) 322-7501

Enrique De Marchena K. (eedemarchena@dmklawyers.com)
Nelson MI. Jaéquez Suarez

DMK Lawyers

C/Max Henriquez Urefia No. 11

Santo Domingo

Dominican Republic

Tel: (809) 549-3446

Fax: (809) 566-5075

7. The members of the Arbitral Tribunal are:

Bernardo M. Cremades

B. Cremades & Asociados
Goya 18, 2°

28001, Madrid

Spain

Jose Eloy Anzola

3625 Bougainvillea Road
Miami, Florida 33133
United States of America

Prof. Franco Ferrari

NYU School of Law

40 Washington Square South
Room 409B

New York, NY 10012
United States of America

Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

8. The Claimant filed its “Demanda Arbitral” or Notice of Arbitration on September 2,
2016, and served it on the Respondent on September 5, 2016.

13.

14.

In its Notice of Arbitration, the Claimant proposed the use of the UNCITRAL Rules
and also the appointment of three arbitrators and appointed Mr. Eloy Anzola as its
party-appointed arbitrator, in accordance with Article 9 of the UNCITRAL Rules.
The Claimant also proposed the language of the arbitration to be Spanish, the seat of
the arbitration to be Miami, Florida, and the Appointing Authority to be the
International Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce Court
(“ICC”).

On October 6, 2016, the Respondent provided its response to the Claimant’s Notice
of Arbitration, in which it agreed with the Claimant’s proposal to appoint three
arbitrators and that the seat of the arbitration should be Miami, Florida. The
Respondent disagreed with the Claimant’s further proposals and stated that both
English and Spanish should be the languages of the arbitration, and that the Parties
adhere to Article IX of the UNCITRAL Rules concerning the Appointing Authority.
The Respondent requested a 75-day extension of time to file a memorial on
jurisdiction.

On October 11, 2016, the Claimant asked for clarification regarding the Respondent’s
stance on the use of the UNCITRAL Rules as opposed to the 1976 version of the
tules. The Claimant further agreed with the Respondent concerning the potential
mootness of an Appointing Authority should the two party-appointed arbitrators
agree on the appointment of a third arbitrator.

On October 17, 2016, the Respondent wrote to the Claimant reiterating its argument
that both English and Spanish should be the languages of the arbitration. The
respondent further appointed Prof. Franco Ferrari as its party-appointed arbitrator in
accordance with Article 9 of the UNCITRAL Rules. The Respondent clarified that it
agrees to the application of the UNCITRAL Rules.

By letter dated October 17, 2016, the Respondent wrote to Mr. Eloy Anzola and Prof.
Franco Ferrari notifying them that the Parties had elected them as arbitrators in this
matter in accordance with Article IX of the UNCITRAL Rules. The letter included
the Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration, dated September 2, 2016, the Respondent’s
Response dated October 6, 2016, the Claimant’s letter dated October 11, 2016 and the
Respondent's letter dated October 17, 2016.

On October 28, 2016, Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades wrote to the Parties informing
them that he had been nominated by the co-arbitrators to act as President of the
Arbitral Tribunal in accordance with the UNCITRAL Rules. In accordance with
Article 11 of the UNCITRAL Rules, Mr. Cremades made a disclosure statement to
the Parties. Mr. Cremades further instructed the Parties to attempt to propose a joint
procedural timetable no later than November 18, 2016.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25,

26.

27.

On October 28, 2016, Mr. Anzola made a disclosure statement to the Parties in
accordance with Article 11 of the UNCITRAL Rules.

On October 29, 2016, Prof. Ferrari made a disclosure statement to the Parties in
accordance with Article 11 of the UNCITRAL Rules.

On October 30, 2016, the Claimant wrote to the Arbitral Tribunal requesting a
decision as to the language of the arbitration before the drafting of any memorials.

On October 31, 2016, the Respondent provided a response to the Claimant’s
communication dated October 30, 2016 reiterating its arguments concerning the
language of the arbitration and stating that it was not yet the “proper procedural
juncture” to submit party arguments concerning procedural decisions.

On November 3, 2016, the Claimant stated that it was not possible to agree on a
procedural order with the Respondent given the Parties’ conflicting proposals
concerning the language of the arbitration.

On November 4, 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal instructed the Parties to submit their
comments on the language of the arbitration no later than November 9, 2016.

On November 9, 2016, both Parties submitted their comments on the language of the
arbitration to the Arbitral Tribunal.

On November 14, 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal decided that the languages of the
arbitration shall be both English and Spanish, and that the Parties should lay out
procedures for the translation of documents in their joint procedural proposal.

In its communication dated November 14, 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal further stated
that it shall apply a rate of US $600 per hour for its fees. Neither Party has ever
disagreed with this decision by the Arbitral Tribunal.

On December 12, 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal requested the Parties to provide an
update as to the Parties’ joint proposal for a procedural order and timetable.

On December 17, 2016, the Respondent wrote to the Arbitral Tribunal indicating that
it had not had communications with the Claimant regarding the procedural order and
timetable and attached a draft proposal previously prepared by the Respondent.

On December 19, 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal requested the Claimant to provide its
comments on the Respondent’s December 17 communication, no later than December
21, 2016.

On December 21, 2016, the Claimant stated that the Arbitral Tribunal’s decision.
concerning the languages of the arbitration would greatly increase the costs of the

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.
33.

34,

35.

36.

37.

arbitration and that “[i]n view of the small size of a possible positive outcome of
these proceedings for the Claimant (US$ 1000/1500 K) going through the whole
exercise appears to be disproportionate in relation to the costs of the same.” The
Claimant continued that “we hereby propose to abandon the claim, without prejudice,
each [P]arty bearing its own costs (or "spese compensate" since we have an Italian
co-arbitrator) splitting the arbitration costs incurred up to now between the [P]arties.”

On December 21, 2016, the Respondent expressed its disagreement with Claimant’s
proposal and requested that the Claimant’s claim be dismissed with prejudice and that
the Respondent should be awarded reasonable fees and costs.

On December 21, 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal requested the Claimant to provide
further comments no later than December 31, 2016. In response to a request for an
extension of time from the Claimant on December 28, 2016, the Arbitral tribunal
extended the Claimant’s deadline until January 5, 2017.

On January 5, 2017, the Claimant submitted its response to the Respondent’s
application for a dismissal with prejudice and an award of fees and costs, in which it
stated that it was withdrawing the claim “with prejudice.”

On January 7, 2017, the Arbitral Tribunal granted the Respondent until January 26,
2017 to submit a further formal reply.

On January 26, 2017, the Respondent submitted its Reply to Claimant’s Submission.

On January 28, 2017, the Claimant requested the right to file a further short response.
The Arbitral Tribunal granted this request giving the Claimant until February 13,
2017 to file its submission.

On February 1, 2017, the Respondent. files its Amended Reply to Claimant’s
Submission “in an effort to correct typographical errors.”

On February 2, 2017, the Respondent wrote to the Arbitral Tribunal stating that “the
case styled: Bolner View Corp., y Silverton Finance Service, Inc. v. Ministerio de
Obras Piiblicas y Comunicaciones, Falkland Trading LTD y el Arquitecto Arturo
Vasquez, case No. 030-14-01479, technically remains open and pending.”

On February 12, 2017, the Claimant submitted its further comments to the Arbitral
Tribunal stating that the Arbitral- Tribunal “should issue [an] award terminating these
proceedings with prejudice, dictating that each party should bear its legal costs and
sharing the arbitration costs.”

On February 13, 2017, the Arbitral Tribunal instructed the Parties to submit their
costs and expesnes no later than February 17, 2017.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43,

44.

Til.

45.

On February 17, 2017, the Parties submitted their costs and expenses to the Arbitral
Tribunal.

On March 2, 2017, the Arbitral Tribunal requested the Parties to provide comments
on the costs submissions no later than March 4, 2017.

On March 3 and March 4, 2017, respectively, the Respondent and the Claimant
provided further comments on the issue of costs.

On March 6, 2017, the Arbitral Tribunal requested the Parties to provide a detailed
breakdown of their costs no later than March 9, 2017.

On March 6, 2017, the Claimant wrote to the Arbitral Tribunal requesting the
Respondent to produce its invoice to or fee arrangement with the client.

On March 8 and March 9, 2017, respectively, both Parties submitted a detailed
breakdown of their costs.

On March 9, 2017, the Arbitral Tribunal declared the proceedings to be closed in
accordance with Article 31 of the UNCITRAL Rules.

THE CLAIMANT’S WITHDRAWAL OF ITS CLAIM

The Claimant’s claim related to the ownership of property in the municipality of La
Romana in the Dominican Republic. The Claimant states that it commenced a series
of proceedings when a neighboring property began construction works which were
allegedly contrary to local legislation. Moving through the court system of the
Dominican Republic, the Claimant eventually secured a judgment it its favor
suspending the construction license that had been granted to the neighboring
property. The Claimant argued that despite this, the final decision from the
Dominican Republic courts came too late, i.e. when the illegal construction was fully
terminated and there were no more works to suspend. The Claimant argues that this
was caused, by among other things, the conspiracy of a lower level judge to deny
jurisdiction to hear the Claimant’s claim. The Claimant therefore argued that there
were various breaches of the Dominican Republic-Panama BIT regarding these
matters that occurred in the Dominican Republic court system. The Claimant states
that it has been seeking justice, rather than money, from the Respondent, hence the
nature of its relatively small monetary claims. The Claimant maintains that the
Arbitral Tribunal does have jurisdiction to hear the merits of this dispute.

46.

47.

48.

The Respondent has denied each of the Claimant’s allegations of a breach of any of
the provisions of the Dominican Republic-Panama BIT. The Respondent argues that
there is no jurisdiction for the Claimant’s claim to be brought under the Dominican
Republic-Panama BIT. The Respondent argues that the Claimant’s claims set forth
non-compliance with contractual obligations rather than cognizable violations of
treaty protection standards contained in the Dominican Republic-Panama BIT. The
Respondent also disputes the merits of the Claimant’s claim and argues that there has
not been a breach of any provision of the Dominican Republic-Panama BIT.

Despite the Claimant’s above contentions which have been set out more fully in its
Notice of Arbitration, the Claimant has decided to withdraw its claim with prejudice
as a result of the Arbitral Tribunal’s decision to conduct these arbitration proceedings
in both English and Spanish. The Claimant states that “[t]here is no bad faith or abuse
of process and this action is in no way frivolous; Silverton suffered and is suffering a
great injustice in the Dominican Republic and hoped to find justice in arbitration. But
the decision of dual language with the translation of the memorials and the important
documents from Spanish to English rendered this effort much too expensive for a
single investor like Silverton.”! The Claimant continues that “[a]s we stated earlier
the Tribunal’s decision on the language makes it impossible to continue for the
Claimant since investing the necessary funds in a fully bilingual arbitration (see draft
of Procedural Order of Bryan Cave) entails a financial effort completely
disproportionate with the possible positive result or in the extreme a claim for
damages (if and when it would be made), which was of a maximum of $ 1000/1.,500
K. We are therefore obliged to offer to withdraw the claim, with prejudice, each party
bearing its legal and arbitration costs incurred up to now.”

Thus, the Claimant accepts that its claim should be withdrawn with prejudice, though
it argues that each Party should cover its own costs. The Respondent acknowledges
the Claimant’s statement that it intends to withdraw its claim with prejudice, though
questions whether this the Claimant only does so by qualifying a dismissal with
prejudice where each Party bears its own costs and fees.” The Tribunal accepts that
the Claimant wishes to withdraw its claim with prejudice, but decides that this is not
conditioned by a favorable costs order from this Arbitral Tribunal. Therefore, the
Tribunal will dismiss the Claimant’s claim with prejudice and shall decide on the
issue of costs and expenses separately.

' Claimant’s email to the Arbitral Tribunal dated January 5, 2017.
2

3 Amended Respondent’s Reply to Claimant’s Submission, dated February 1, 2017, p. 9.

IV. Costs

49. Article 40 of the UNCITRAL Rules contains provisions regarding costs. Article 40
provides:

1. The arbitral tribunal shall fix the costs of arbitration in the final award
and, if it deems appropriate, in another decision.

2. The term “costs” includes only:

(a) The fees of the arbitral tribunal to be stated separately as to each
arbitrator and to be fixed by the tribunal itself in accordance with article 41;
(b) The reasonable travel and other expenses incurred by the arbitrators;

(c) The reasonable costs of expert advice and of other assistance required by
the arbitral tribunal;

(d) The reasonable travel and other expenses of witnesses to the extent such
expenses are approved by the arbitral tribunal;

(e) The legal and other costs incurred by the parties in relation to the
arbitration to the extent that the arbitral tribunal determines that the amount
of such costs is reasonable;

(f) Any fees and expenses of the appointing authority as well as the fees and
expenses of the Secretary-General of the PCA.

3. In relation to interpretation, correction or completion of any award under
articles 37 to 39, the arbitral tribunal may charge the costs referred to in
paragraphs 2 (b) to (f), but no additional fees.

50. Article 42 of the UNCITRAL Rules, entitled “Allocation of Costs,” provides:

1. The costs of the arbitration shall in principle be borne by the unsuccessful
party or parties. However, the arbitral tribunal may apportion each of such
costs between the parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable,
taking into account the circumstances of the case.

2. The arbitral tribunal shall in the final award or, if it deems appropriate,
in any other award, determine any amount that a party may have to pay to
another party as a result of the decision on allocation of costs.

51. The Respondent argues that the Claimant should bear the costs of this arbitration
since it is not the “prevailing party.”* The Respondent refers to the case of Canfor
Corporation v. United States of America, Tembec et al. v. United States of America

4 Amended Respondent’s Reply to Claimant’s Submission, dated February 1, 2017, p. 9.

and Terminal Forest Products Ltd. v. United States of America, in which, referring to
now Article 42 of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal held that:

“The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules do not address expressly the issue of a
unilateral withdrawal by a claimant. However, the issue can be resolved on
the basis of an interpretation of the UNCITRAL Rules. Accordingly, the
Tribunal interprets the reference to ‘the unsuccessful party’ in Article 40(1)
of the UNCITRAL Rules to include a party that unilaterally withdraws its
claim. It triggers also the general principle of ‘costs follow the event,’
which, according to this Tribunal, is the guiding principle for the application
of [Article 42(1)] of the Rules.”

52. The Claimant makes reference to the second sentence in Article 42(1) of the
UNCITRAL Rules stating that “the arbitral tribunal may apportion each of such costs
between the parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into
account the circumstances of the case.” The Claimant denies the Respondent’s
contention that this case is frivolous and has been brought in bad faith. The Claimant
states that “in investment arbitration there is a general trend to split the legal and
arbitration costs between the parties even if one of them fully succeeded.”* The
Claimant refers to the case of Romak v. Uzbekistan, where the Tribunal held that:

“The Arbitral Tribunal has reviewed a number of arbitral awards in
investment treaty disputes. These awards indicate that, in this field, a
general trend has developed that arbitration costs should be equally
apportioned between the Parties, irrespective of the outcome of the dispute.
One of the reasons for this, as stated in several awards, is that investment
treaty tribunals are called upon to apply a novel mechanism and substantive
law to the resolution of these disputes (see, for example, Azinian v. Mexico,
194 Tradex y. Albania, 195 and Berschader v. Russial96). Thus, the
initiation of a claim that is ultimately unsuccessful is more understandable
than would be the case in commercial arbitration, where municipal law
applies. With respect to the present dispute, to the Tribunal’s knowledge,
there has never been an investment treaty claim decided outside the ICSID
system in relation to the enforcement of an arbitral award. Other cases, such
as Saipem, share similar factual elements with the present dispute, but
offered no direct analogy.

Clearly, the general practice in investment treaty arbitration disfavoring the
shifting of arbitration costs against the losing party does not always apply.
In particular, deficiencies in the presentation of a case or obstructive
behavior, which lead to an unjustified increase of the costs of the

$ Claimant’s email to the Arbitral Tribunal dated January 5, 2017.

53.

54.

55.

56.

proceedings, not infrequently justify apportioning the arbitration costs in
another way.

In the present case, neither of the Parties has presented its case in a way
Justifying the shifting of arbitral costs against it. To the contrary, counsel for
both Parties worked ably, diligently and efficiently in defense of their
clients’ respective interests. Nor are there any.other reasons that support
such apportionment. Each of the Parties shall therefore be liable to pay half
of the arbitration costs. Each Party shall also bear its own costs for legal
representation and other costs incurred in connéction with presenting its
case.”

The Claimant argues that it has not committed any of the actions identified in the
Romak case that would warrant the shifting of arbitration costs. The Claimant argues
that very little work has been done by the Parties to date, and that the case is not
frivolous and has not been instituted in bad faith. In this regard, the Claimant
reiterates that the Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear this dispute, and that the
Claimant has brought a strong claim on the merits as “there is no doubt that the
Claimant suffered a profound injustice in its attempts to stop the construction of the
illegitimate building affecting and damaging its property.”*

The Parties have made extensive arguments concerning the merits of the dispute,
despite the fact that the Claimant has accepted the withdrawal of its claim with
prejudice. The Arbitral Tribunal has had regard to these arguments only in so far as
they assist the Arbitral Tribunal in making a determination as to costs. It is not for
this Arbitral Tribunal, now or ever, to decide on the merits of this matter.

The Arbitral Tribunal is bound to act in accordance with Articles 40 and 42 of the
UNCITRAL Rules. Article 42 clearly states that in principle the costs should be
borne by the unsuccessful party. Thus, despite what any other UNCITRAL tribunal
has stated, this Arbitral Tribunal must have regard first and foremost to the actual text
of the UNCITRAL Rules. This Arbitral Tribunal agrees that a party withdrawing its
claim with prejudice comes within the definition of an “unsuccessful party” within
the meaning of Article 42 of the UNCITRAL Rules.

The Claimant has sought to argue that its sole purpose for withdrawing its claim is
related to translation costs while would follow from the Arbitral Tribunal’s decision
to conduct this arbitration in both English and Spanish. This argument is not
persuasive, and does not warrant the Respondent having to bear significant expenses
and fees in defending itself to date.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

Without making any finding on the merits, the Arbitral Tribunal recognizes that the
Claimant was faced with defending significant jurisdictional objections as well as
eventually proving the merits of its claims. This arbitration was never going to be a
simple straight forward arbitration based on the facts and the law that the Arbitral
tribunal has already seen. Thus, ‘the decision regarding the language of the
proceedings did not suddenly make this -arbitration prohibitively expensive and
unworkable. If the Claimant genuinely believed in the merits of its claim, the Arbitral
Tribunal finds. it difficult to believe that the Claimant would now wish to withdraw
such claim with prejudice to itself.

Regardless of the Claimant’s motivations for now withdrawing its claim with
prejudice, it is a fact the Claimant is the unsuccessful party in this arbitration, and the
general rules is therefore that the Claimant should bear the costs of the arbitration, as
detailed in Article 40(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules. The Arbitral Tribunal believes that
this approach is reasonable given the circumstances of the case, whereby the
Claimant has instituted an arbitration against the Respondent, causing the Respondent
to incur significant legal fees, and where this Claimant now seeks to walk away from
the arbitration that it commenced without any consequences.

In summary, the Arbitral Tribunal finds the Claimant to be the unsuccessful party, in
accordance with Article 42(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, and the Arbitral Tribunal
believes that it is reasonable in the circumstances of the case (where the Claimant
withdraws its claim with prejudice) that the Claimant should bear all of the costs of
this arbitration.

Furthermore, the Tribunal has examined the Parties’ fees and costs and considers
them to be reasonable in light of the amount of work that was done by both Parties in
this arbitration. This decision is adopted by a majority of the members of the Arbitral
Tribunal.

DECISION

The undersigned Arbitrators, having been designated in accordance with the
UNCITRAL Rules, and having been duly sworn and having duly heard the proofs
and allegations of the Parties, as indicated above, do hereby:

61.1. DISMISS all of the Claimant’s claims against the Respondent with prejudice;

61.2. ORDER the Claimant to pay the costs of this arbitration, as defined in Article
40 of the UNCITRAL Rules, in the following sums:

61.2.1. US $380,596.83 to the Respondent. This decision is adopted by a
majority of the members of the Arbitral Tribunal.

61.2.2. US $12,000.00 to Arbitrator Bernardo M. Cremades.

61.2.3. US $8,400.00 to Arbitrator Jose Eloy Anzola.

61.2.4. US $6,600.00 to Arbitrator Franco Ferrari.

Place of Arbitration: Miami, Florida, United States of America

ye ptae l el WY
Site, Le EF {een
OE TOE Eloy Anzola Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades Prof. Franco Ferrari

Co-Arbitrator President Co-Arbitrator

Date: 3/is 200 Date: 3/45] rit Date: alte|ZolF

