INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Société Resort Company Invest Abidjan, Stanislas Citerici and Gérard Bot
v.

Republic of Céte d'Ivoire

(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/11)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Preliminary Objection to Jurisdiction

 

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Zachary Douglas QC, President of the Tribunal
The Honorable L. Yves Fortier QC, Arbitrator
Professor Kaj Hobér, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Ella Rosenberg

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 1 August 2017

Representation of the Parties

For the Claimants:

Ms. Danyéle Palazo Gauthier
Ms. Marie P. Michon

62, boulevard de la Tour Maubourg

75007 Paris
France

Mr. Frangois Tosi
18, rue Porte Dijeaux
33000 Bordeaux
France

Mr. Jean-Chrysostome Blessy
01 BP 5659

Abidjan

Céte dIvoire

Mr. Alain Fénéon
Cabinet Fénéon, Paris
42, rue de Bourgogne
75007 Paris

France

For the Respondent:

Ms. Ly Sangare

Agent Judiciaire du Trésor
BP 98

Abidjan

Céte dIvoire

Mr. Lee M. Caplan

Mr. Gerard Leval

Mr. Timothy Feighery

Ms. Laure Hadas-Lebel
Arent Fox LLP

1717 K Street, NW
Washington, DC 20006-5344
United States of America

VI.

Table of Contents

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 4
A. The Claimant: 4
B. The Respondent 4
PROCEDURAL HISTORY.

THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTION TO JURISDICTION .....0... cece 13
A. The Respondent’s position ..........ccsececseesesseesessessesseesesseeseeseesessesssssssnesneeneeneeaess 13
B. The Claimants’ position 19
C. The Tribunal’s analysis 27
COSTS 46
A. The Respondent’s position .........cccsecsecsessessessssessesseesesseeseesessessssessessnesseeneeaeeneesy 46
B. The Claimants’ position 48
C. The Tribunal’s Decision 2,
DECISION 2

 

INTRODUCTION

This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) pursuant to Ordonnance N° 2012-87
of 7 June 2012, Code des Investissements (“2012 Code”), and the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the

“ICSID Convention”).

The Republic of Céte d’Ivoire has objected to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal on the
ground that the Claimants failed to satisfy the requirements of Article 20 of the 2012
Code which, according to the Céte d’Ivoire, requires foreign investors to expressly
declare their consent to ICSID arbitration in their request for investment authorization
(“demande d’agrément’) which the Céte d’Ivoire claims that the Claimants failed to

do.!

THE CLAIMANTS

The Claimants in this proceeding are Société Resort Company Investment Abidjan
(“RCI-Abidjan”), a company incorporated under the laws of the Céte d’ Ivoire (held
by Mr. Citerici, Mr. Bot, and Société Resort Company Invest Dakar), Mr. Stanislas
Citerici, a French national, and Mr. Gérard Bot, a French national (the “Claimants” or

“RCT’).

THE RESPONDENT

The Respondent is the Republic of Céte d'Ivoire (the “Respondent” or “Céte

d'Ivoire”).

' Respondent’s letter to ICSID dated 5 December 2016. See also the Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction
dated 14 February 2017, §§ 1-2.

Il.

~

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 2 March 2016, ICSID received a request for arbitration from Société Resort
Company Invest Abidjan, Stanislas Citerici and Gérard Bot against the Céte d’ Ivoire

accompanied by factual exhibits 1 through 54 (the “Request’).

On 29 March 2016, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request, as
supplemented by the Claimants’ letter of 17 March 2016, submitted with factual
exhibits 55 through 67, and the Claimants’ letter of 25 March 2016.

By letter of 16 June 2016, the Claimants informed the Centre that the Parties were
attempting to agree on a method of constitution of the Tribunal pursuant to Article
37(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention and decided to postpone the constitution of the
Tribunal until 1 September 2016.

By letter of 6 September 2016, the Claimants informed the Centre that the Parties had
agreed to constitute the Tribunal pursuant to Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention,
composed of three members nominated pursuant to Rule 3 of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules (the “Arbitration Rules”). The Claimants indicated that they wished to appoint
the Honorable L. Yves Fortier QC as arbitrator, and that the Respondent wished to

appoint Professor Kaj Hobér as arbitrator.

On 12 September 2016, the Centre invited the Respondent to confirm (i) its agreement
with the method proposed by the Claimants for the constitution of the Tribunal which,
if confirmed, would constitute an agreement on the method of constitution of the
Tribunal for the purposes of Article 37(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention; and (ii) to
confirm its appointment of Professor Kaj Hobér as arbitrator. The Centre also noted
the Parties’ disagreement as to the language of the proceedings and the place of
arbitration, and informed them that these questions would be discussed at the First

Session.

By letter of 13 September 2016, the Claimants confirmed their request that the Tribunal
in this case be constituted pursuant to the formula provided by Article 37(2)(b) of the

ICSID Convention. The Claimants appointed the Honourable L. Yves Fortier QC, a

national of Canada, as arbitrator.

On 14 September 2016, the Centre acknowledged receipt of the Claimants’ letter of 13
September 2016, and informed the Parties that the Tribunal would be constituted
pursuant to Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. The Centre noted that the
Claimants had nominated the Honourable L. Yves Fortier QC, a national of Canada,
as arbitrator and invited the Respondent to confirm its nomination of Professor Kaj

Hobeér, a national of Sweden, as arbitrator.

On 23 September 2016, the Respondent (i) confirmed its agreement that “the Tribunal
in this case be constituted pursuant to a mechanism identical to that provided for in
Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention”; (ii) confirmed its appointment of Professor
Kaj Hobér, a national of Sweden, as arbitrator; and (iii) invited ICSID to “appoint the

third arbitrator who will serve as President of the Tribunal”.

By letter of the same date, the Centre informed the Parties that the Honourable L. Yves

Fortier QC had accepted his appointment as arbitrator in this case.

By email of 26 September 2016, the Claimants requested that the President of the
Tribunal be designated by the Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID, in
accordance with Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 4.

On 7 October 2016, the Centre informed the Parties that Professor Kaj Hobér had

accepted his appointment as arbitrator in this case.

By letter of 14 October 2016, the Centre invited the Parties to consider a list of seven

candidates for the appointment of the President of the Tribunal.

By letter of 21 October 2016, the Centre informed the Parties that they had agreed to
appoint Professor Zachary Douglas QC, a national of Australia, as the presiding

arbitrator in this case.

By letter of 27 October 2016, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Article
37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1) notified the Parties

6

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was
therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms. Ella Rosenberg, ICSID

Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

By letter of 10 November 2016, further to several exchanges with the Parties, the
Tribunal proposed that the First Session be held by videoconference on 16 December

2016.

By letter of 21 November 2016, the Centre circulated a draft Procedural Order No. 1
to help the Parties prepare for the First Session and set out the Tribunal’s views on

certain matters raised in draft Procedural Order No. 1.

On 5 December 2016, The Respondent submitted (i) its Preliminary Objections to
Jurisdiction; (ii) a request to bifurcate the proceedings; and (iii) its comments on draft

PO 1.

By letter of 9 December 2016, the Tribunal informed the Parties that the issue of
whether the Respondent’s Objections would be decided in a preliminary phase of this
arbitration and whether the proceedings on the merits should be suspended in
accordance with Rule 41(3) of the Arbitration Rules would not be on the agenda for
the First Session scheduled to occur on 16 December 2016. The Tribunal further
invited Claimants to submit a response to Respondent’s request to bifurcate the

proceedings by 19 December 2016.

By letter of 12 December 2016, the Tribunal informed the Parties that given that there
was no agreement on the language to be used by the Tribunal for the First Session, a
coin would be flipped to determine whether it would be English (as requested by the
Respondent) or French (as requested by the Claimants). The coin flipping would occur
on 14 December 2016, via telephone conference, between the Parties and Ms. Ella

Rosenberg, Secretary of the Tribunal, who would flip the coin.

On 14 December 2016, the coin toss was held to determine the language to be used by

the Tribunal during the First Session. It resulted from the coin toss that it would be

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

French. The Centre transmitted the video and audio recordings of the coin toss to the

Parties and the Tribunal on the same day.

Also on 14 December 2016, the Tribunal circulated a proposed agenda for the First
Session scheduled for 16 December 2016.

On 16 December 2016, the Tribunal held a First Session with the Parties by
videoconference. The Tribunal members participated from London and used French,
the Claimants participated from Paris and also used French, and the Respondent and

Ms. Rosenberg participated from Washington D.C. and used English.

During the First Session, the Parties confirmed that the Tribunal was properly
constituted, that they had no objection to the appointment of any member of the
Tribunal and that they agreed on the application of the 2006 version of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules. They also agreed that the place of the proceedings would be
Washington D.C.

On 19 December 2016, the Claimants submitted a response to Respondent’s Objections

and a request to bifurcate the proceedings.

On 21 December 2016, the Tribunal transmitted to the Parties the executed versions of

Procedural Order No. | in French and English, as well as the procedural timetables.

On 26 December 2016, Respondent submitted a Reply to the Claimants’ Response of
19 December 2016.

Also on 26 December 2016, the Centre informed the Parties that it had received an
application from Mr. Oulepo Nemlin Hie for leave to file a non-disputing party
submission on behalf of the ex-employees of the “Café de Rome”, and invited their

comments by 17 January 2017.

On 10 January 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, whereby it decided
that “the preliminary objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction raised by the Respondent

in its letter of 5 December 2016 shall be determined in a preliminary phase of these

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

proceedings and that the proceedings on the merits shall be suspended pending the

Tribunal’s determination”.

By letters of 17 and 18 January 2017, the Respondent and the Claimants, respectively,
objected to Mr. Oulepo’s request to intervene in these proceedings as a non-disputing

party.

By letter of 18 January 2017, the Respondent stated that it intended to file an expert
opinion that would address issues of international investment law together with its

Memorial on Jurisdiction and that it “may rely on expertise in the area of Ivorian law.”

On 19 January 2017, the Tribunal took note of the Respondent’s intention to file an
expert opinion on “issues of international investment law”. The Tribunal also indicated
that while “it is ultimately for the parties to decide how to present their cases” it had
“a strong preference for points of international investment law to be made by

submission rather than by expert evidence”.

By letter of 1 February 2017, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it would reserve
its position on Mr. Oulepo’s request to intervene as a non-disputing party, as it

considered the question to be premature.

On 13 February 2017, Mr. Oulepo wrote to the Tribunal to request access to the Parties’

comments on his application to intervene in these proceedings as a non-disputing party.

On 14 February 2017, the Respondent filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction along with
factual exhibits R-1 through R-10, the expert opinion of Professor Sohuily Felix Acka

and the witness statement of Mr. Esmel Emmaniel Essis.

On the same date, the Claimants filed their Memorial on the Merits along with factual

exhibits C-69 through C-99.

On 28 February 2017, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they did not consent to
Mr. Oulepo’s request to access the Parties’ comments on his application to intervene

in these proceedings as a non-disputing party.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

By letter of 9 March 2017, the Tribunal informed Mr. Oulepo that his request to access

the Parties’ comments on his application was denied.

On 17 March 2017, the Claimants submitted a Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction along
with factual exhibits C-100 through C-108, and an expert opinion by Professor

Emmanuel Gaillard.

On 20 March 2017, The Respondent wrote that in submitting Professor Emmanuel
Gaillard’s expert opinion with their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, the Claimants
had failed to follow the instructions conveyed in the Tribunal’s letter of 19 January
2017. Subsequently, the Respondent requested leave to submit a draft opinion of

Professor Christoph Schreuer into the record.
By letter of 21 March 2017, the Claimants objected to the Respondent’s request.

On 21 March 2017, the Tribunal invited the Parties to confirm, by 23 March 2017, their
availability for a pre-hearing organizational meeting, to be held by teleconference. The
Tribunal also circulated a draft agenda and invited the Parties to submit a joint proposal
confirming their points of agreement, or their respective points of disagreement no later
than 27 March 2017. The Tribunal further informed the Parties that it would revert to
them in due course concerning the Respondent’s request of 20 March 2017 to submit

Professor Schreuer’s draft Opinion into the record.

On 22 March 2017, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to file a signed and dated
report by Professor Schreuer by no later than 27 March 2017. The Respondent did so
on 24 March 2017.

On 29 March 2017, the Tribunal held a pre-hearing organizational meeting with the
Parties by telephone conference. Minutes of the pre-hearing organizational meeting

were transmitted to the Parties on 4 April 2017.
On 4 April 2017, the Parties submitted their respective skeleton arguments.

The Hearing on jurisdiction (the “Hearing”) took place on 6 and 7 April 2017 at the
World Bank offices in Washington, D.C. In attendance at the Hearing were the

10

50.

Sl.

Members of the Tribunal, the Secretary of the Tribunal, and the following Party

representatives:

On behalf of Claimants

Ms. Danyéle Palazo-Gauthier, Cabinet Tour Maubourg
Ms. Marie P. Michon, Cabinet Tour Maubourg

Mr. Francois Tosi, Cabinet Tosi

Mr. Jean-Chrysostome Blessy, Cabinet Blessy

Mr. Alain Fénéon, Cabinet Fénéon

On behalf of Respondent

Mr. Lee Caplan, Arent Fox

Mr. Timothy Feighery, Arent Fox
Mr. Gerard Leval, Arent Fox

Ms. Laure Hadas-Lebel, Arent Fox
Mr. Hady Gouda, Arent Fox intern

The Hearing was sound recorded and the audio recordings were made available to the
Tribunal and the Parties on 19 April 2017, on the Box platform created for this case.
Verbatim transcripts of the Hearing were made available to the Tribunal and the Parties

in real-time.

On 28 April 2017, the Parties submitted their respective submissions on costs, and their
comments on the decision issued on 8 March 2017 in the case of Viadislav Kim and
others v. Republic of Uzbekistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/13/6), as requested by the
Tribunal during the Hearing. On the same date, the Parties informed the Tribunal that
they had agreed to submit the revised versions of the Hearing’s transcripts on 9 May

2017.

By letter of 9 May 2017, the Claimants submitted the Parties’ revisions to the

transcripts. The only disagreement between the Parties regarding the transcripts related

to the translation into French of the terms “state”, “asked”, “spell out”, “set forth

formally” and “perfected” which had been translated as “exprimé”.

53. By letter of 10 May 2017, the Respondent responded to the Claimants’ letter of 9 May
2017, and requested that the Tribunal let the French translation stand and reject the

Claimants’ proposed modifications.

54, On 12 May 2017, the Parties submitted their respective replies on costs.

III. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF
55. In its Memorial on Jurisdiction, the Respondent made the following requests:
“Respondent respectfully requests that this Tribunal render an award:

(a) in favor of the Respondent and against Claimants, dismissing Claimants’

claims in their entirety and with prejudice; and

(b) pursuant to paragraph I of ICSID Rule 28, ordering that Claimants bear the
costs of this arbitration, including Respondent’s costs for legal representation

and assistance.”

56. In their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, the Claimants requested the Tribunal to
declare that it had jurisdiction pursuant to Article 20 of the 2012 Code and to order the
Respondent to bear the entirety of the costs related to the arbitration including the costs

related to legal representation and experts.?

2 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 124.
3 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 227.

IV.

A.

57.

58.

59.

THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTION TO JURISDICTION

THE RESPONDENT’S POSITION

The Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal on the ground that the
Claimants allegedly failed to meet the consent requirements of Article 20 of the 2012
Code requiring an investor to expressly state its consent to ICSID arbitration in the
application for authorization (demande d’agrément).* According to the Respondent,
since the Claimants never properly accepted the Respondent’s offer to consent to
ICSID arbitration, no agreement to arbitrate between the Parties ever formed and the

Claimants’ claims should be dismissed in their entirety.°

The Respondent’s objection focuses on the language of the last sentence of Article 20

of the 2012 Code which states:

Le consentement des parties a la compétence du CIRDI ou du
mécanisme supplémentaire, selon le cas, requis par les
instruments les régissant est constitué, pour la République de
Céte d'Ivoire par le présent article, et exprimé expressément
dans la demande d’agrément pour la personne concernée.°

The Respondent’s position is that by its own clear terms, Article 20 imposes
unambiguous conditions on an investor’s ability to perfect its consent to ICSID
arbitration.’ According to the Respondent, an investor may only accept the
Respondent’s offer of consent to ICSID arbitration by expressly indicating so in the
demande d’agrément. The Respondent’s position is that the consent of the investor
does not arise impliedly through the submission of the demande d’agrément.’ The
Respondent submits that it is undisputed that no express consent to ICSID arbitration

was given on the part of the Claimants in their demandes d’agrément dated 22 April

+ Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 1-2.

5 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 6.

6 Exhibit C-77: Publication au Journal Officiel en date du 20 septembre 2012 de I’Ordonnance n°2012-487
portant nouveau Code des Investissements du 7 juin 2012.

7 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 18.

* Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 5.

60.

61.

62.

° Exhibit R-1:

2010 and 11 December 2013. Based on its interpretation of Article 20 of the 2012

Code, therefore, the Respondent concludes that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction.?

With respect to the standard of interpretation that should be adopted by the Tribunal,
the Respondent submits that provisions on consent to ICSID arbitration under a
national investment law, such as Article 20, are to be interpreted in accordance with
tules of international law relating to unilateral acts, and Ivoirian principles on statutory
interpretation. !° In support of its position, the Respondent submitted the expert Report
of Professor Félix Acka, who opined that under Ivorian law, in the absence of
ambiguity, the interpreter need not look beyond the plain meaning of the text.
According to the Respondent, Ivorian law is “consistent and complementary to the
interpretive approaches followed in the international law, and otherwise accepted by

both parties.”!!

The Respondent submits that “[t]he Parties’ basic views on the applicable standard of
interpretation are not far apart. Both accept the non-restrictive standard of
interpretation adopted in Tidewater v. Venezuela. Both have cited in their memorials
the same passage of this case which provides that unilateral declarations should be
interpreted ‘in good faith ‘as it stands, having regard to the words actually used’; ‘in
a natural and reasonable way, having due regard to the intention of the State

concerned.””?

The Parties’ positions differ with respect to their interpretations of Article 20 of the
2012 Code. For the Respondent, the text is clear and unambiguous.'* It argues that
“under both international and Ivorian law, the plain meaning of the law to be

interpreted is the critical point of departure in the interpretive analysis. The context

  

‘laimants’ Application for Authorization (April 22, 2010); Exhibit R-2: Claimants’ Application

for Authorization (December 11, 2013). See also Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, §{] 20-27.

‘ORespondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 34.

4! Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, p. 2. See also English Transcripts D1; P19:L8-22.
2 Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, p. 1. See also English Transcripts D1; P14:L3-P16:L12.
3 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4] 55, 123.

63.

64.

and purpose of the text may be considered, but such examination is less important

where the text is clear and unambiguous.” '*

The Respondent argues that the plain meaning of Article 20 restricts the investor’s
means of consenting to ICSID arbitration to the selection of ICSID expressly in its
application for authorization.'* According to the Respondent, the State’s offer of
consent to ICSID arbitration is subject to certain formalities for perfecting the
investor’s consent to ICSID arbitration.'° For the Respondent, Article 20 establishes
both the manner and the mode by which an investor can express consent to ICSID
arbitration.'7 An investor can only accept the Respondent’s offer of consent if the
investor’s consent is expressly stated (“exprimé expressément”) in the investor’s
application for authorization (“dans la demande d’agrément’).'® The Respondent
argues that since the plain meaning of the text of Article 20 clearly requires the
Claimants to expressly state their consent to ICSID arbitration in their demande
d’agrément,'° which they did not do,?° the Claimants have not complied with Article

20.

The Respondent further argues that “the context provided by the design and structure
of the 2012 Code confirms the plain meaning of Article 20.’*' In particular, the
Respondent submits that the 2012 Code distinguishes between “avantages” on the one
hand and “garanties” on the other. The Respondent submits that ““‘[a]vantages’ are
economic incentives, such as reductions in or exonerations from taxes and customs
duties, which an investor may benefit from for a limited period of time in order to

maximize its profitability as a business venture. ‘Garanties’ are fundamental

44 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 47.

'S Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, p. 2.

16

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 50.

"7 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 59.

'8 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 17. See also {fj 51-61.

'° Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {fj 49-64.

2 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, §{] 20-27.

2! Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, p.3. See also Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {ff 65-84.

65.

66.

for foreign direct investment in Céte d'Ivoire.

investment protections for investors designed to create an open and fair marketplace
922

According to the Respondent, under the 2012 Code, ICSID arbitration is a “garantie”
not an “avantage”. It points out that recourse to ICSID arbitration falls under Title II
of the 2012 Code entitled “Garanties Accordées Aux Investisseurs,” not Title IV
entitled “Régimes d’Incitation”.? According to the Respondent, “the 2012 Code is

designed and structured in a way such that when an investor submits an application

for authorization to seek to obtain ‘avantages,’ it does not automatically obtain the

‘guarantie’ of ICSID arbitration when the investor's application is approved. Rather,
as the context of the Code demonstrates, to be entitled to ICSID arbitration, an investor
must take the additional step of expressly stating its consent to ICSID arbitration in its
application for authorization.”**

The Respondent explains that the 2012 Code has two separate regimes which serve
separate purposes: one which regulates the availability of certain economic benefits
(“avantages”) and the other which regulates consent to ICSID arbitration (a
“garantie”). If an investor wishes to benefit from the Code’s avantages, it must submit
its application for authorization to the CEPICI (Centre de Promotion des
Investissements en Céte d'Ivoire), pursuant to Article 40.75 If, however, an investor
wishes to choose ICSID arbitration, the 2012 Code regulates consent to ICSID

arbitration as a garantie in Article 20.°° The Respondent further explains that:

While the same document (the application for authorization)
is used to effectuate each choice, the result of those choices is
determined in accordance with entirely different terms and
conditions. To obtain ‘avantages’ under Part IV of the Code,
an investor must provide detailed information in its
application for authorization that demonstrates its corporate
bone fides and the nature and scope of its investment. To

» Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 66.

23 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 78.

4 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 67.

25 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 68-76.

26

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{] 76-84.

67.

68.

69.

obtain the ‘garantie’ of ICSID arbitration under Part II of the
Code, the investor simply must expressly state its consent to
ICSID arbitration in its application for authorization.”"

The Respondent concludes that the existence of separate regimes under the 2012 Code

confirms the plain meaning of the consent requirements established in Article 20.78

The Respondent also argues that the purpose and intent behind Article 20 confirms its
plain meaning. First, according to the Respondent, in establishing a process by which
the investor must inform the Respondent of its consent to ICSID arbitration, Article 20
furthers the Respondent’s policy goals of “ensuring that the parties enjoy a reciprocal
right of arbitration; providing both parties clear notice as to when consent to ICSID
arbitration is perfected; and allowing Respondent the opportunity to assess and
manage its exposure to ICSID.”*? The Respondent submits that it also serves the policy
goals of “clarity with respect to the timing and efficacy of the parties’ consent to ICSID

2930

arbitration”*° and allowing the Respondent to manage its litigation risk.*!

The Respondent rejects the Claimants’ interpretation of the 2012 Code. According to
the Respondent, the Claimants’ argument that the filing of the demande d’agrément
constitutes consent on the part of the Claimants cannot stand because, if adopted, the
Claimants’ interpretation of Article 20 would (i) render the consent requirements in
Article 20 meaningless; and (ii) deprive all investors of their right to choose between
domestic courts and international arbitration.*? The Respondent argues that the
Claimants’ interpretation of Article 20 would reverse its alleged presumption from one

where investors must opt in to ICSID arbitration to one where investors must opt out

27 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 82.

?8 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 84.

2° Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 86.

3° Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 91.

3! Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 95.

» Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {fj 108-109.

70.

71.

72.

of ICSID arbitration if they do not want it, which is not how the 2012 Code should be

read.*3

The Respondent further rejects the Claimants’ argument that their 2013 demande
d’agrément constitues consent to ICSID arbitration since they requested “tous les
avantages qui découlent du régime de l’agrément a l'investissement en vertu de
l’ensemble du Code des investissement’.*+ According to the Respondent, the
Claimants’ 2013 demande d’agrément cannot be construed as the Claimants’ consent
to ICSID arbitration because “not only did Claimants not request all of the benefits
under the 2012 Code, but, as explained, ICSID Arbitration is not an economic benefit
under the Code in any event.”*> The Respondent further points out that the Claimants’

2013 demande d’agrément did not contain a reference to ICSID arbitration.*°

The Respondent also rejects the Claimants’ argument that the filing of the Request for
Arbitration constitutes the Claimants’ consent to ICSID arbitration and that the
Claimants have a public interest right to ICSID arbitration, as “baseless.”*" For the
Respondent, the Claimants’ arguments in this regard “completely ignore [...] the clear
requirement that their consent to ICSID arbitration must be expressly stated ‘dans la
demande d’agrément.””*® It also argues that the Claimants’ arguments disregard the

Respondent’s reciprocal rights under Article 20.°”

In addition, the Respondent submits that Article 20 contains a “fork-in-the-road”
provision requiring the investor to choose between Ivorian courts or ICSID

arbitration.*° Accordingly, the Respondent argues, the investor must expressly make

3 English Transcripts D1: P53:L5-17.

4 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, #4] 131-132. See English Transcripts D1: P:58L16-P:60: L14.
35 English Transcripts D1: P:59:L11-P:60:L16.

36 English Transcripts D1: P:59:L17-P:60:L21.

37 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 110.

38 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 111. See also fj 110-117.

3 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 112.
40 English Transcripts D1: P41:L11-20.

that choice; it is not made automatically for the investor when its demande d’agrément

is approved.*!

73. Finally, the Respondent rejects the Claimants’ argument of contra proferentem as
irrelevant. According to the Respondent, contra proferentem derives solely from
domestic contract principles and “[t]here is simply no place for this doctrine in
interpreting a unilateral offer of consent to ICSID arbitration in national

legislation.”

74. Similarly, the Respondent rejects any relevance of the proportionality-based approach
taken by the Tribunal in Kim et al. v. Republic of Uzbekistan.” According to the
Respondent (i) the nature of the norm involved in the current proceeding is
fundamentally different from that addressed in Kim; (ii) the application in this case of
the allegedly clear consent requirements does not produce “harsh consequences” for
the investor; (iii) the approach adopted by the Kim Tribunal “has no place in the well-
established jurisprudence governing consent to investor-State arbitration under
unilateral offers in national investment laws”; and (iv) adopting the position in Kim
would establish a “devastating precedent” since it would impose ICSID arbitration on

every investor who filed an application for authorization.**

B. THE CLAIMANTS’ POSITION

75. The Claimants submit that this Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear its claims since the
Claimants and the Respondent consented to ICSID arbitration, in compliance with the

terms of Article 25 (1) of the ICSID Convention and Article 20 of the 2012 Code.**

41 Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, p.3. See also English Transcripts D1:P17:L5-L14.

* Respondent’s Skeleton Argument, p.1.

43 Vladislav Kim et al. v. Republic of Uzbekistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/6, Decision on Jurisdiction (8 March
2017) (“Kim”).

4 Respondent’s Comments on Kim et al. v. Republic of Uzbekistan dated 28 April 2017 pp 2-4.

45 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {ff 3-4.

76. The Parties agree that the last sentence of Article 20 of the 2012 Code constitutes an
offer to ICSID arbitration on the part of the Respondent.*° They disagree, however,
on whether the Claimants have consented to ICSID arbitration within the meaning of

the last sentence of Article 20 of the 2012 Code*’ which states, in relevant part:

Le consentement des parties a la compétence du CIRDI ou du
mécanisme supplémentaire, selon le cas, requis par les
instruments les régissant est constitué, pour la République de
Céte d'Ivoire par le présent article, et exprimé expressément
dans la demande d’agrément pour la personne concernée.*®

77. The Claimants argue that they consented to ICSID arbitration in the following ways:

i) Le dépét de la demande d’agrément d l'investissement
vaut consentement a larbitrage CIRDI;

ii) Méme si le dépét de la demande d’agrément vaut
consentement, les Demandeurs ont en plus, méme si
non-nécessaire aux termes de l'article 20 du Code,
déclaré leur consentement a l’intérieur de leur
demande d’agrément du 11 décembre 2013 (Piéce C-
68) en indiquant qu’ils consentaient a tous les
avantages et obligations qui découlent du Code,
incluant nécessairement l’arbitrage CIRDI ; et,

iii) Considérant limpossibilité, selon la jurisprudence
CIRDI, de renoncer de maniére implicite au droit a
Varbitrage CIRDI, ce qui serait le cas en l’espéce,
qu'il doit étre considéré que la Requéte d’arbitrage
vaut, dans les  circonstances, consentement a
arbitrage CRDI.”

78. The Claimants reject the Respondent’s restrictive interpretation of the language of

Article 20 of the 2012 Code and its conclusion that since the Claimants did not

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 6. Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 17.
47 See Article 20 2012 Code and Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §¥] 7-8.

*8 Exhibit C-77: Publication au Journal Officiel en date du 20 septembre 2012 de I’Ordonnance n°2012-487
portant nouveau Code des Investissements du 7 juin 2012.

46

* Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Costs, 31.

20

expressly state their consent to ICSID arbitration in their demande d’agrément, they

have not complied with the terms of Article 20 of the 2012 Code.*”

79. Like the Respondent, the Claimants consider that Article 20 of the 2012 Code is a
unilateral declaration.*! The Claimants further submit that it is a unilateral act that was
adopted freely in the framework of a treaty (the ICSID Convention) which recognizes
this freedom of action.*? As such, the Claimants reject the restrictive approach adopted
by the Respondent*® and argue that Article 20 of the 2012 Code should be interpreted
according to the principles of interpretation adopted in the case Tidewater v.
Venezuela,” i.e., (i) in good faith and in a reasonable way; (ii) taking into consideration

the ordinary and grammatical meaning of the words used (textual analysis); and (ii

 

conformity with the intention of the State, which can be deduced from the text and also

from the circumstances of its preparation and the purposes intended to be served.*°

80. Contrary to the interpretation of the Respondent, the Claimants contend that Article 20
of the 2012 Code is ambiguous. According to the Claimants, such ambiguity stems
from the placement (positionnement) of the last sentence of Article 20 and from its

drafting.*°

81. With respect to the placement of the text in question, the Claimants submit that one
cannot ignore the fact that the last four paragraphs of Article 20 are alternative in
nature, and that the last paragraph, from which the phrase in question directly follows,

relates specifically to situations where “/a personne concernée ne remplit pas les

50 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, §¥j 20-27.

5! Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, §] 43. Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 37.

52 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, ff 43-47.

53 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, ff 48-57.

54 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 68. Exhibit RL-7: Tidewater Inc., Tidewater Investment
SRL, Tidewater Caribe, C.A., et al. v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB/10/5,
Decision on Jurisdiction, February 8, 2013, {| 102 point 5.

55 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 68 and Exhibit RL-7: Tidewater Inc., Tidewater Investment
SRL, Tidewater Caribe, C.A., et al. v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB/10/5,
Decision on Jurisdiction, February 8, 2013, {| 102 point 5.

56 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 5.

21

82.

83.

84.

85.

conditions de nationalité stipulée a Uarticle 25 de la convention” .*’ The Claimants
argue that placement of the provision related to consent at this location and not as an
entirely separate paragraph creates ambiguity. This is even more curious given that the
third bullet of the second paragraph of Article 20** relates to the ICSID Convention

which it states, “est applicable”.*

With respect to the drafting of Article 20, the Claimants submit that the terms
“exprimer”, “expressément” and “dans” contained in the last sentence of Article 20 of
the 2012 Code each have two meanings in French. They dispute the Respondent’s

systematic reliance on the more restrictive meaning of these terms.°

According to the Claimants, the verb “exprimer” has a meaning which is “beaucoup
plus abstrait que celui de ‘déclarer’ (‘state’) utilisé de maniére récurrente par la
Défenderesse, ou encore, que des verbes comme ‘mentionner’ ou ‘préciser’ utilisés

dans d'autres lois d’investissement.”®!

The Claimants argue that the word “expressément” should be interpreted in the context
of the sentence in which it is contained.®? They contend that in this context it is used
to make clear that filing the demande d’agrément constitutes written consent within

the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.®

Finally, the Claimants contend that “dans” can either mean “a / intérieur de” or be

used to indicate the manner in which, or the instrument through which, something is

t.4

done, depending on the context. According to the Claimants, the Ivorian legislator

57 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{] 81- 90.

58 It states “la Convention du 18 mars 1965 pour le réglement des différends relatifs aux investissements entre
Etats et ressortissants d'autres Etats, établie sous l’égide de la Banque Internationale pour la Reconstruction
et le Développement et ratifiée par la République de Céte d'Ivoire en vertu du décret n° 65-238 du 26 juin

1965est applicable. ”

°° Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 81- 90.
Claimants’ Skeleton Argument pp. 2-3. See also English Transcripts, D1:P10:L10-P96:L9.
6! Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 122.

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 106.

© Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {fj 106-110.

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 9] 113-114.

22

86.

87.

88.

used the prepositions “dans” and “par” interchangeably.© Therefore, contrary to the
position of the Respondent, the Claimants submit that the investor need not include a
written statement of consent to ICSID arbitration within the confines of the demande
d’agrément.©

In light of these ambiguities, the Claimants add that the principle of contra
proferentem, according to which any ambiguity in the drafting of a text should be
interpreted against the person who drafted it (the Respondent in the present case), is
applicable and would favor their interpretation of Article 20 over that of the

Respondent.”

For the Claimants, the “sens véritable et raisonnable” of Article 20 of the 2012 Code
is that it does not impose a condition or obligation upon the investor in order to consent
to ICSID arbitration other than filing the demande d’agrément.® They argue that had
the Respondent wished to require a specific reference to consent to ICSID arbitration,
it would have included it the model demande d’agrément. Failure on the part of the
State to do so shows that the State always considered that the demande d’agrément

itself expresses the consent of the investor to ICSID arbitration.

The Claimants reject the Respondent’s argument that “Article 20 of the 2012 Code
exclusively governs the issue of consent to ICSID arbitration independent of and
unaffected by any other provisions of the Code or the regulations implementing the
Code’s ‘avantages’ scheme.”” For the Claimants, ICSID case law recognizes the
relevance of examining all of the dispositions of a law in order to interpret one of its

Articles.”!

6 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {fj 116-121.

66

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 121.

7 Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, p. 3.

6 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {fj 95-99.

© Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 104.

7 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 80.

7 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 128.

23

89.

90.

91.

92.

The Claimants also reject the Respondent’s argument that ICSID arbitration is a
“garantie” not an “avantage” since it falls under Title II of the 2012 Code entitled
“Garanties Accordées Aux Investisseurs,” not Title IV entitled “Régimes

dIncitation”.””

Even though it is their position that the filing of their demande d’agrément suffices to
establish consent to ICSID arbitration, the Claimants second main argument is that they
also consented to ICSID arbitration, in writing, when they indicated, in their demande
d’agrément dated 11 December 2013, that they wished to benefit from “tous les
avantages qui découlent du régime de l’agrément a l'investissement en vertu de
ensemble du Code des investissements.”” This includes ICSID arbitration which the

Claimants submit, constitutes an “avantage.””*

The Claimants argue that “[e]n adhérant au régime de l’agrément a |’investissement,
en déposant une demande d’agrément, les investisseurs ont droit a tous les avantages
qui en découlent, incluant le droit a l’arbitrage CIRDI the 2012 Code.” In this respect,
Article 40 of the 2012 Code states:

[tlout investisseur, désirant bénéficier des avantages
particuliers prévus par le présent Code, est tenu de déposer un
dossier de demande d’agrément auprés de la Commission
Technique Interministérielle des Investissements visée a
Varticle 39.

According to the Claimants, the expression “avantages particuliers prévus par le
présent Code” means “tous les avantages qui peuvent découler du régime de
l’agrément a l’investissement dans l'ensemble du Code et non pas uniquement aux

avantages particuliers prévus ‘dans la présente section’, ‘le présent sous-titre’ ou

” Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4] 78.

73 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, $f 131-132.

74 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 135, 151. See also Claimants’ Skeleton Argument p. 4,
(“Article 2, 20 et 40 du NCI : Le droit a l'arbitrage CIRDI est aussi considéré comme un avantage”).

24

93.

94.

95.

16

‘prévus au chapitre III du présent Sous-titre’. Il est écrit ‘par le présent Code”’."> One

such advantage, the Claimants argue, is ICSID arbitration.”
Therefore, the Claimants conclude :

en l’espéce, considérant l'ensemble des dispositions du NCI,
la déclaration écrite des Demandeurs revient a dire que: ‘nous

hai bénéficier de tous les a qui découlent du
régime de l’agrément a l'investissement en vertu de
V’ensemble du Code des investissements et nous nous
engageons a respecter toutes les obligations qui en découlent’
comprend nécessairement le consentement des Demandeurs a
larbitrage CIRDI au méme titre que s'il était écrit
‘L investisseur consent a la compétence du CIRDI.’™

 

The Claimants submit that the intention of the Ivorian legislator supports its position
that filing a demande d’agrément constitutes consent.”* According to the Claimants,
it is telling that there is no mention of ICSID arbitration in the model investment
applications. If the Ivoirian legislator wanted to require investors to specifically
mention consent to ICSID arbitration in the demande d’agrément it would have

included it in the model forms.”

The Claimants also argue that the placement of Article 20 in “TITRE II: GARANTIES
ACCORDEES AUX INVESTISSEURS” of the 2012 Code shows that the Ivoirian
legislator wanted to treat it as a true “garantie.”*° The Claimants contend that it would
not make sense for the State to accord a guarantee and then to impose a condition as
detrimental as that which the Respondent suggests, in order to benefit from it. In that

case it would no longer be a guarantee. *!

75 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 144.

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 145.

7 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 161.

78 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4] 150.

” Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, p. 4.

8 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 179.

8! Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, $f 176-182.

25

96.

97.

For the Claimants, the purpose of the 2012 Code is the promotion of investment and
reassurance of investors, not, as suggested by the Respondent, a means through which
it can assess exposure to ICSID and manage its litigation risk.*? The Claimants support
their position by pointing to “[l]es Travaux parlementaires qui ont conduit a la
rédaction de l'article 24 du Code des Investissements de 1995 présentent les seuls
objectifs de 1’Etat: rassurer les investisseurs et ainsi promouvoir les
investissements.”*> The Claimants point out that these goals were maintained with the
2012 Code when the State also added as goals, (i) “de favoriser et de promouvoir les
investissements productifs”; and (ii) “d ’encourager la création et le développement des
acticités orientés vers certains secteurs dont, le développement touristique et
d’hétellerie.”** The State also modified the dispute resolution clause adding the right
to a fair trial, “[I] Etat garantit aux investisseurs, le droit a un proces équitable pour

tout litige né dans le cadre de l’application des dispositions du présent Code.”*°

The Claimants’ third main argument is that they accepted the State’s offer to ICSID
arbitration by filing their Request for Arbitration on 2 March 2016.** According to the

Claimants:

Méme s’il était considéré — a tort — que les Demandeurs n'ont
pas en l’espéce consenti a la juridiction du CIRDI, il serait
inéquitable, dans les circonstances, de considérer qu’ils ont
dans les faits renoncé a ce droit. Une renonciation non-
éclairée a l’offre d’arbitrage CIRDI contenue a l'article 20 du
Code des investissements de 2012 (le « NCI ») ne pourrait pas
étre qualifiée de valide, et, de ce fait, la requéte d’arbitrage
CIRDI des Demandeurs doit valoir consentement.*”

® Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 185.

% Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 189.

* Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, pp. 4-5.

85 Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, p. 5.
86 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 9. See also English Transcripts, D1:P111:L8-P112:L13.
87 Claimant’s Skeleton Argument, p. 1.

26

98. The Claimants argue that the offer of the Respondent was still standing when the
Claimants filed their Request for Arbitration.** Therefore, their consent to ICSID

arbitration was given, at the latest, when the Request was filed.*?

99. Finally, the Claimants argue that the principle of proportionality, which was discussed
in the case Kim et al. v. Republic of Uzbekistan, ® supports their position.°' According

to the Claimants:

Considérant la combinaison du faible degré d’Importance de
l’Obligation/formalité et l’analyse du Comportement de
l'Investisseur, en tenant notamment compte du caractére
ambigu de larticle 20 du Code et en l’absence de
‘compromission’ d’intérét significatif équivalent de la
Défenderesse, l’application de la sanction sévére qu’est le
déni a _ Tl arbitrage CIRDI serait complétement
disproportionnée.*

Cc. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

100. The 2012 Code is divided into seven parts:

TITRE I : DISPOSITIONS GENERALES

TITRE II : GARANTIES ACCORDEES AUX INVESTISSEURS

TITRE III : OBLIGATIONS DES INVESTISSEURS

TITRE IV : REGIMES D'INCITATION

TITRE V : DISPOSITIONS SPECIFIQUES AUX PETITES ET MOYENNES
ENTREPRISES

TITRE VI : DISPOSITIONS DIVERSES

TITRE VII : DISPOSITIONS TRANSITOIRES ET FINALES

101. “Investisseur” is defined as “toute personne physique ou morale, de nationalité

ivoirienne ou non, réalisant dans les conditions définies dans le cadre du présent code,

88 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, 225.

® Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 226.

% Vladislav Kim et al. v. Republic of Uzbekistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/6, Decision on Jurisdiction (8 March
2017).

°! Claimants’ Reply Submission on Costs, 60. See also the Claimants’ Comments on Viadislav Kim et al. v.
Republic of Uzbekistan dated 28 April 2017.

° Claimants’ Comments on Viadislav Kim et al. v. Republic of Uzbekistan dated 28 April 2017, p.4.

27

102.

103.

des opérations d’investissement sur le territoire de la Céte d'Ivoire”. Hence the 2012

Code applies to both national and foreign investors unless stipulated otherwise.
This is made explicit in Article 2 of the 2012 Code:

La présente ordonnance portant code des investissements fixe
les conditions, avantages et régles générales applicables aux
investissements directs, nationaux et étrangers, réalisés en
Cote d'Ivoire.

The principal focus of the present inquiry in this preliminary phase on jurisdiction is

Article 20 of the 2012 Code, which is reproduced below in its entirety (paragraph

numbers have been added to assist with the Tribunal’s subsequent analysis):

L Etat garantit aux investisseurs le droit a un proces équitable
pour tout litige né dans le cadre de l’application des
dispositions du présent code. [Paragraph 1]

Tout différend ou litige entre les personnes physiques ou
morales étrangeres et la République de Céte d'Ivoire relatif a
Vapplication du présent code, a défaut d’un réglement
amiable, est réglé par les juridictions ivoiriennes ou par un
tribunal arbitral. Les compétences du tribunal arbitral sont
déterminées dans les conditions ci-aprés : [Paragraph 2]

- des Accords et Traités relatifs a la protection des
investissements sont conclus entre la République de Céte
d'Ivoire et l’Etat dont la personne physique ou morale
étrangére concernée est ressortissante ; [Paragraph 2(a)]

- une procédure de conciliation et d’arbitrage dont les parties
sont convenues est définie ; [Paragraph 2(b)]

- la Convention du 18 mars 1965 pour le réglement des
différends relatifs aux investissements entre Etats et
ressortissants d'autres Etats, établie sous |’égide de la Banque
Internationale pour la R struction et le Développ et
ratifiée par la République de Cote d'Ivoire en vertu du décret
n° 65-238 du 26 juin 1965, est applicable ; [Paragraph 2(c)]

 

- la personne concernée ne remplit pas les conditions de
nationalité stipulée a l'article 25 de la convention susvisée,

28

104.

105.

106.

107.

conformément aux dispositions des réglements du mécanisme

supplémentaire, approuvé par le conseil d’administration du

Centre international pour le Réglement des différends relatifs

aux investissements, en abrégé CIRDI. Le consentement des

parties a la compétence du CIRDI ou du mécanisme

supplémentaire, selon le cas, requis par les instruments les

régissant est constitué, pour la République de Céte d'Ivoire

par le présent article, et exprimé expressément dans la

demande d’agrément pour la personne concernée.

[Paragraph 2(d)]
The guarantee of the right to an “equitable procedure” (“procés equitable”) in
Paragraph | is applicable to both national and foreign investors, given that “investor”
is defined to cover both. The remaining text of Article 20, however, relates only to
foreign individuals or legal entities (“/es personnes physiques ou morales étrangéres”)
which will be referred to collectively as “foreign nationals”. The term “investor”

(“investisseur’”) is not retained.

Paragraph 2 appears to set out two possible fora for the resolution of disputes with
foreign nationals: the courts of the Republic of Céte d’Ivoire or an arbitral tribunal. It
does not expressly confer a right of election on either party to the dispute in respect of
either forum. The subparagraphs of Paragraph 2 then purport to regulate the
“compétences” (plural) of the arbitral tribunal (singular). Once again, however, no
right of election is expressly conferred on either party in relation to each possible type
of arbitral tribunal defined in subparagraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) of Paragraph 2. Each
subparagraph is instead formulated as a different basis for vesting an arbitral tribunal
with jurisdiction or “compétence” and each sets out a particular condition for the

vesting of that jurisdiction.

Paragraph 2(a) refers to bilateral investment treaties. The condition is that the foreign
individual or legal entity is a national of a State which has concluded a treaty with the

Republic of Céte d’Ivoire.

Paragraph 2(b) refers to a procedure of conciliation and arbitration which the Parties
have agreed to as “defined” (“une procédure de conciliation et d’arbitrage dont les

parties sont convenues est définie’”’). The present tense of the verb “étre” (“est”) is used

29

108.

109.

110.

111.

here and thus can mean “‘is defined” —as a statement of fact, or “shall be defined” —as
a modal phrase. The latter use of the verb “étre” is common in statutory texts but both

meanings are formally correct and only the context can reveal the statutory intention.

Paragraph 2(c) refers to the ICSID Convention by its full title and also references the
Republic of Céte d’Ivoire’s ratification instrument for the ICSID Convention.
Following those references, there is a comma followed by the words “is applicable” or
“shall be applicable” (“est applicable”) depending, once again, on which meaning of

the verb “étre” is to be preferred.

The first sentence of Paragraph 2(d) provides that where the person in question does
not satisfy the nationality requirements in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, then
the ICSID Additional Facility Rules apply. This sentence implicitly supplies the
condition for Paragraph 2(c): the foreign national must satisfy the nationality
requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention for the ICSID Convention to be

applicable.

Once again, the structure of the first sentence of Paragraph 2(d) is perhaps unusual: the
first clause is in the form of a statement “the person concerned does not satisfy the
nationality requirements” (“/a personne concernée ne remplit pas les conditions de
nationalité”). It is clear that the use of the present tense in this clause must be as a
statement rather than as an obligation as the latter would not make sense. The second
clause of the first sentence of paragraph 2(d) is another statement—referring to the
application of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules (“‘/a personne concernée ne remplit
pas les conditions de nationalité stipulée a l'article 25 de la convention susvisée,

li. des régl du bcani: b ire,

conformément aux

1, hk

approuvé par le conseil a‘ ‘ation du Centre inte ional pour le Ré

des différends relatifs aux investissements, en abrégé CIRDI.”)

The final sentence of Paragraph 2(d), to which the Parties in these proceedings have
devoted most attention, clearly applies both to arbitration under the ICSID Convention
as well as under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules. It provides that the consent of

the Parties “requis par les instruments les régissant est constitué, pour la République

30

112.

113.

de Céte d'Ivoire par le présent article, et exprimé expressément dans la demande

d’agrément pour la personne concernée.”

The Parties’ differing interpretations of this final sentence of Paragraph 2(d) of Article
20 can be stated succinctly: the Claimants maintain that a foreign national’s filing of a
“demande d’agrément” is sufficient to manifest its consent to ICSID arbitration;
whereas the Respondent argues that the foreign national must expressly record its
consent to ICSID arbitration in the “demande d’agrément” itself. It is common ground
that no express mention of ICSID arbitration is to be found in the actual “demande
d’agrément” filed by the Claimants and that there is no express reference to the
possibility of ICSID arbitration in the model “demande d’agrément” published by the

responsible national authority of the Respondent.

Before the Tribunal embarks on its analysis of the critical final sentence of Article 20,
it is important to expose the internal contradictions in the text of Article 20 as a whole.
These contradictions are best illustrated by an example. Whichever interpretation of
the manner in which consent on the part of the foreign national to ICSID arbitration is
to be manifested, both interpretations offered by the Parties require consent to be
perfected at the time that the “demande d’agrément” is filed. Assuming that the foreign
national has manifested its consent to ICSID arbitration either by filing that document
(the Claimant’s interpretation) or by including an express reference to ICSID
arbitration in that document (the Respondent’s interpretation), a question then arises as
to the impact of that binding ICSID arbitration clause and the possibility that the
foreign national may wish to resort to international arbitration under an applicable
bilateral investment treaty (Paragraph 2(a) of Article 20). That bilateral investment
treaty may provide for ICSID arbitration or arbitration under the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, for example. If the foreign national institutes arbitration proceedings
under the bilateral investment treaty, could the Republic of Céte d’Ivoire contest the
jurisdiction of that tribunal on the basis that the foreign national has already consented

to ICSID arbitration?

31

114. The Parties were confronted with this problem concerning the internal consistency of
Article 20 at the hearing. The Respondent’s counsel’s answer was that Article 26 of
the ICSID Convention would prevent the foreign national from resorting to
international arbitration under a bilateral investment treaty if consent to ICSID
arbitration had already been given under Paragraph 2(c) of Article 20 of the 2012
Code.® The Respondent’s counsel was fortified in this response by virtue of the fact
that, according to the Respondent’s research, all the States that are parties to bilateral
investment treaties with the Republic of Céte d’Ivoire are also parties to the ICSID

Convention.™*

115. The Respondent’s attempt to make sense of Article 20 in this way is problematic for

the following reasons.

116. First, Paragraph 2 of Article 20 defines the ratione materiae of disputes that can be
submitted to an arbitral tribunal as those “relative a l’application du présent code’. If
the Respondent were correct, then by consenting to ICSID arbitration in the “demande
d’agrément,” the foreign national would be simultaneously waiving any right to bring
an investment treaty arbitration in respect of a future dispute unrelated to the
application of the 2012 Code. The Respondent confronted this difficulty by submitting
that the protections afforded in Title II of the 2012 Code are “broader than a BIT”®>.
Whether or not this argument holds water on the basis of a textual comparison of the
protections in Title II versus those offered in the BITs ratified by the Céte d’ Ivoire, it
is plain that protections in an investment treaty cannot be unilaterally withdrawn by
the State as their legislative counterparts could be and are thus different in juridical
nature for that reason alone. The Respondent’s conclusion that a foreign national
forsakes reliance on an applicable BIT by consenting to ICSID arbitration in the
“demande d’agrément” is thus rather drastic: it would be a surprising result in the

absence of any express wording in Article 20 that would put a foreign national on

°3 English Transcripts D2:P 146-150 (Caplan/Douglas).
° English Transcripts D2:P152 (Caplan/Douglas).
°S English Transcripts D2:P155 (Caplan).

32

117.

118.

119.

120.

notice of these consequences of consent to ICSID arbitration in the “demande

d’agrément’.

The Respondent’s conclusion is also inconsistent with the terms of the bilateral
investment treaties ratified by the Céte d’Ivoire. The most recent such treaty, with
Canada, was signed on 30 November 2014 and hence after the 2012 Code was
promulgated.*° The Canada/Céte d’Ivoire BIT confers ratione materiae jurisdiction
only in relation to claims for a breach of an investment protection obligation in the BIT
itself.°” A tribunal constituted on the basis of the Canada/Céte d’Ivoire BIT would not,

therefore, have jurisdiction over the application of the 2012 Code.

Second, it is by no means clear that Article 26 of the ICSID Convention extends to
remedies conferred by other international instruments. Would a foreign national be
precluded by Article 26 from bringing a claim under a regional human rights treaty,

for example?

Third, Article 20 of the 2012 Code was obviously drafted to cater to a situation where
the ICSID Convention (and thus Article 26) would not be applicable: this explains the
reference to the ICSID Additional Facility Rules. In that scenario, a conflict between
consent to arbitration under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules (ultimately subject to
a national law at the seat of the arbitration) and consent to arbitration under a BIT could
not be resolved by reference to Article 26 of the ICSID Convention (which would not
be applicable) and it would be impermissible for a provision of domestic legislation to
have the effect of abrogating or modifying rights granted under an international

investment treaty.

The unfortunate truth is that Article 20 lacks coherency. Without determining how an
election is to be made among different types of arbitration and by whom, Paragraph 2

of Article 20 is formulated as if a single tribunal might be vested with jurisdiction on

°© At the hearing, counsel for the Respondent confirmed that in addition to offering ICSID arbitration, that BIT
also offered arbitration under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: English Transcripts D2:P158:L1-3 (Caplan).
°7 See Article 20 of the Canada/ Céte d’Ivoire BIT. This BIT was referred to at the Hearing see English
Transcripts D2: P 157 L3-P158 L3.

33

121.

122.

the basis of each type of arbitral consent, which would actually be consistent with the
chapeau of Paragraph 2—“Les compétences du tribunal arbitral sont déterminées dans
les conditions ci-aprés:” —with its use of the plural for “compétences” and the singular
for “tribunal arbitral”. In other words, Paragraph 2 is drafted as if a single tribunal
could be vested with as many “compétences” as the circumstances permit: one
“compétence” under a bilateral investment treaty (where applicable) and another under
the ICSID Convention (where applicable). But “compétences” cannot, of course, be
aggregated in this way: if the foreign national selects UNCITRAL arbitration under the
BIT and at an earlier point in time consents to ICSID arbitration by filing a “demande
d’agrément’ then the result is not an aggregation of “compétences” in a single tribunal

but the creation of several tribunals with overlapping “compétences.”

The Tribunal is thus faced with a text that it cannot make sense of as a whole by
resorting to the usual canons of interpretation. It is important to record this impediment
at the outset because it would be highly artificial, in the Tribunal’s estimation, to
proceed to the interpretation of the critical final sentence of Article 20 as if the anterior

text were flawless in conveying the true and coherent intention of its drafters.

As was previously stated, the ratione materiae scope of arbitral jurisdiction
contemplated by Paragraph 2 of Article 20 is “[t]out différend ou litige entre les
personnes physiques ou morales étrangéres et la République de Céte d'Ivoire relatif a
application du présent code.” The inclusion of the reference to bilateral investment
treaties under this chapeau in Paragraph 2(a) makes little sense because at least some
of those treaties ratified by the Republic of Céte d’ Ivoire (including at least one treaty
ratified after the Code was promulgated) do not contemplate that an arbitral tribunal
could have jurisdiction over disputes concerning the application of the 2012 Code. The
same can be said for the reference to an agreement to a procedure for conciliation and
arbitration in Paragraph 2(b). Whether or not such a procedure would extend to
disputes relating to the 2012 Code would depend of course on what the foreign national
and the Republic of Céte d’ Ivoire negotiated in their specific agreement. It cannot be
taken for granted that any such agreement would include the scope of disputes

contemplated by the chapeau provision in Paragraph 2. (Another surprising aspect of

34

123.

124.

125.

Paragraph 2(b) is that only an agreement to both conciliate and arbitrate is permissible

as a potential forum for disputes relating to the 2012 Code.)

The Tribunal thus considers that the different arbitral mechanisms set out in Paragraph
2 are not listed as alternative fora to resolve the same type of disputes; viz. “tout
différend ou litige entre les personnes physiques ou morales étrangéres et la
République de Céte D'Ivoire relative a l’application du présent code.” An arbitral
tribunal established pursuant to at least some of the bilateral investments treaties
ratified by the Céte dIvoire cannot have jurisdiction over such disputes and it is by no
means certain that an arbitral tribunal established pursuant to a contractual agreement
between a foreign national and the Republic of Céte d’Ivoire would have such
jurisdiction either. Moreover, as has already been stated, there is no text in Article 20
that would serve to vest a choice among the different arbitral mechanisms in Paragraph

2 in either the foreign national or the Republic of Céte d’ Ivoire.

The references to ICSID arbitration in Paragraph 2(c) and (d) are different. Unlike the
preceding references to arbitral mechanisms in Paragraphs 2(a) and 2(b), the references
to ICSID arbitration in Paragraphs 2(c) and (d) appear to be specifically tailored to the
disputes specified by the chapeau provision in Paragraph 2 (i.e., “[t]out différend ou
litige entre les personnes physiques ou morales étrangéres et la République de Cote
dIvoire relatif a l’application du présent code.”) This is because the consent of the
Republic of Céte dIvoire to ICSID arbitration (either under the ICSID Convention or
the ICSID Additional Facility Rules) is actually fixed by Article 20 of the 2012 Code
itself. It follows that such an ICSID tribunal will undoubtedly have jurisdiction over a

dispute “relative a l’application du présent code.”

It thus appears that ICSID arbitration has a privileged place in Paragraph 2 as the only
arbitral forum that is certain to have jurisdiction over a dispute “relative a l’application
du présent code”. Indeed, it is possible to infer that ICSID arbitration would be the
primary, perhaps even exclusive, forum for the resolution of disputes between foreign
nationals and the Republic of Céte d’ Ivoire relating to the 2012 Code for the following

reasons.

35

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

First, in contradistinction with the arbitral mechanisms in Paragraphs 2(a) and (b), the
ICSID Convention is stated in Paragraph 2(c) to be “applicable”. The use of the present
tense of the verb “étre” (“est applicable’) is consistent with the modal expression
“shall be applicable” or with an expression of a statement to mean simply “is
applicable”. In either case the same inference should be made: unlike the arbitral
mechanisms in Paragraphs 2(a) and (b), ICSID arbitration either “is” or “shall be”

(“est”) applicable.

Second, the reference to the ICSID Additional Facility Rules in Paragraph 2(d) conveys
the intention that ICSID arbitration (whether under the ICSID Convention or not)
should be available in all circumstances for disputes arising out of the 2012 Code; i.e.
both when the foreign national is a national of a Contracting State to the ICSID
Convention and otherwise. The Republic of Céte d’Ivoire’s consent to ICSID
arbitration in Paragraph 2(d) is, therefore, provided in relation to both possibilities. As
an arbitration under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules has no special status vis-a-vis
any other form of contractual arbitration that is already covered in any case by
Paragraph 2(b), the intention appears to be to create a comprehensive regime for the

arbitration of disputes under the 2012 Code in Paragraphs 2(c) and (d).

The Tribunal turns to the final critical sentence of Article 20 of the Code, which is

reproduced again for convenience:

Le consentement des parties a la compétence du CIRDI ou du
mécanisme supplémentaire, selon le cas, requis par les
instruments les régissant est constitué, pour la République de
Céte d'Ivoire par le présent article, et exprimé expressément
dans la demande d’agrément pour la personne concernée.

It was common ground between the Parties that the Céte d’ Ivoire, by virtue of this final
sentence of Article 20 of the 2012 Code, has perfected its consent to ICSID arbitration.

The preliminary issue under consideration is, therefore, whether the Claimants have

perfected their consent to ICSID arbitration.

The Tribunal records at the outset that the final sentence of Article 20, consistent with

the remaining text of the Article, is fraught with ambiguities.

36

131.

132.

133.

134.

The consent to ICSID arbitration, by the “personne concernée”, is stated to be
manifested in some way by the “demande d’agrément’. Both Parties have assumed,
based on their different interpretations of the requirement in the final sentence of
Article 20, that the mere filing of the “demande d’agrément” (with or without an
express election of ICSID arbitration) would be sufficient to constitute a binding
arbitration agreement. But that cannot be right because the national organ of the
Republic of Céte dIvoire designated in Article 39 of the 2012 Code ultimately has the

discretion not to accept the “demande d’agrément”.

Indeed, the foreign national only becomes an “investisseur” under the 2012 Code, and
entitled to rely on the guarantees in Part II of the 2012 Code, in the event that approval
is given to the “demande d’agrément’”. Consistent with this interpretation is the fact
that the foreign national is not referred to as an “investisseur” in Paragraph 2(d) but as
a “personne concernée”: the “personne concernée” only becomes an “investisseur”
under the 2012 Code if the national organ—here the “Centre de Promotion des

Investissements de Céte d'Ivoire” —approves the “demande d’agrément”.

Part IV Section II of the 2012 Code, entitled “Régime d’agrément a l'investissement’,
is not the only regime for making an investment under the 2012 Code. Part IV Section
I of the 2012 Code contains a separate “Régime de déclaration”, which, as the title
suggests, does not envisage an approval process by the national organ but rather the
mere acknowledgement of receipt of the declaration. ICSID arbitration in Paragraph
2(d) does not appear to be contemplated for investments made under this regime
because the last sentence refers exclusively to a “demande d’agrément” and not to a

“déclaration”.

To conclude this point, ICSID arbitration only applies to investments made under the
regime set out in Part IV Section II of the 2012 Code and an ICSID arbitration
agreement (whether in respect of arbitration under the ICSID Convention or under the
ICSID Additional Facility Rules) will only come into force if the designated national
organ of the Republic of Céte d’Ivoire approves the “demande d’agrément’. This

conclusion militates in favour of interpreting the use of the present tense of the verb

37

“étre” in Paragraph 2(c) to mean “is applicable” rather than “shall be applicable”.
There can be no categorical obligation to resort to ICSID imposed by Article 20
because it will ultimately depend upon whether the foreign national’s “demande
d’agrément” is accepted by the designated national organ of the Republic of Céte
d'Ivoire under Article 39 of the 2012 Code. If the use of the present tense is to be
interpreted consistently throughout, it follows that the present tense of the verb “étre”

in the final sentence of Article 20 is to convey a statement rather than an obligation.

135. When the final sentence of Article 20 is interpreted against this background, it is clear
that its object and purpose is to set out the manner in which the requirements for
consent to ICSID arbitration are to be ascertained consistently with the applicable
ICSID Convention or Additional Facility Rules. The final sentence does not impose
obligations on either party to take certain steps to conclude an ICSID arbitration
agreement. That is consistent with the fact that ultimately the designated national organ
of the Republic of Céte d’Ivoire has the power to accept or reject the foreign national’s
“demande d’agrément” and thus determine whether a binding ICSID arbitration

agreement will actually come into effect.

136. This conclusion also disposes of one of the Respondent’s arguments for its
interpretation of the final sentence of Article 20 as imposing an obligation upon the
foreign national to include an express stipulation in favour of ICSID arbitration in the
“demande d’agrément”. The Respondent reasoned that this is necessary to allow the
Céte d’Ivoire “the opportunity to assess its exposure to ICSID claims”.°® But, as we
have seen, the Republic of Céte d’ Ivoire has that opportunity at the time its designated
national organ is considering whether or not to approve the “demande d’agrément”
pursuant to Article 39 of the Code. If, consistent with the Claimants’ submissions, the
final sentence of Article 20 simply records the fact that the foreign national’s consent
to ICSID arbitration is deemed to have been given by the filing of a “demande
d’agrément’, then the Republic of Céte d’Ivoire would be on notice that if it approves

the “demande d’agrément” then it will be “exposed to ICSID claims” in the future.

°8 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4] 95.

38

137.

138.

139.

The majority of the Tribunal is thus persuaded, subject to the remaining linguistic
points to be considered below, that the legislator intended by the final sentence of
Article 20 to set out the manner in which an arbitration agreement may be constituted
to satisfy the requirements of the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Additional Facility
Rules. The Republic of Céte d’Ivoire’s consent is constituted by Article 20 itself,
whereas the foreign national’s consent is constituted by the “demande d’agrément” to
be filed in accordance with the regime set out in Part IV Section II of the 2012 Code.
The final sentence of Article 20 thus stipulates that the substantive requirement of
consent to arbitration is satisfied for ICSID arbitration (each Party is deemed to have
expressed its consent to arbitration) as well as the formal requirement (that such
consent to have been expressed in writing). If the national organ of the Republic of
Céte d’Ivoire then approves the “demande d’agrément”, there will be a perfected

ICSID arbitration agreement.

But this finding does not finally resolve the issue of contention: are the formal
requirements for consent by the foreign national satisfied by the act of filing the
“demande d’agrément” (as the Claimants maintain) or is it incumbent upon the foreign
national, in addition, to insert specific language into the “demande d’agrément” to the

effect that it consents to ICSID arbitration (as the Respondent maintains)?

The majority of the Tribunal considers that, in this context, it is highly material that
the Respondent’s model “demande d’agrément’ makes no reference to ICSID
arbitration or Article 20 of the 2012 Code. Moreover, the provision of the 2012 Code
that regulates the contents of the dossier to be submitted with the “demande
d’agrément” makes no mention of ICSID arbitration or Article 20 either. Article 40 of
the 2012 Code provides:

Tout investisseur désirant bénéficier des avantages
particuliers, prévus par le présent code, est tenu de déposer
un dossier de demande d’agrément auprés de l’organisme
national chargé de la promotion des Investissements visé a
Varticle 39.

Le dossier visé a l’alinéa précédent comporte, outre la
de de, des is précis sur les in i ‘s, des

 

39

140.

141.

142.

143.

informations sur le programme, notamment sa nature, son
montant ainsi que toute information nécessaire a la délivrance
de l’agrément et a son suivi.

These omissions strongly support the thesis that the act of filing the “demande
d’agrément” is the manifestation of consent to ICSID arbitration on the part of the
foreign national. On this view, there would be no reason for the model “demande
d’agrément’ or the provision regulating the contents of the “dossier” accompanying
the “demande” to refer to ICSID arbitration because the national organ would be on
notice that if it approves the “demande d’agrément” then there will be an ICSID

arbitration agreement.

There is, however, one matter that the Respondent maintains points in the other
direction. If the filing of the “demande d’agrément” were to be sufficient to manifest
the foreign national’s consent to ICSID arbitration, it would follow that the foreign
national would be deprived of a choice of the local courts in the Republic of the Céte
d'Ivoire, which appears to be contemplated in Paragraph 2 of Article 20. This is an
important counterargument but one that the majority of the Tribunal ultimately rejects
for the following reasons, which have already been alluded to in the preceding

discussion.

First, there is no express language in Article 20 that would serve to vest a choice in the
foreign national (or indeed to vest a choice in the Republic of Céte d’ Ivoire). In the
absence of such language the majority of the Tribunal cannot infer that Article 20 is a
“fork-in-the-road” provision requiring an election between different fora for the

resolution of disputes.

Second, the ICSID Convention is expressly stated to be “applicable” unless the foreign
national’s State is not a Contracting State to the ICSID Convention in which case the
ICSID Additional Facility Rules are to apply. There appears to be a clear intention to
create a comprehensive arbitral regime for disputes relating to the Code in Paragraphs

2(c) and (d).

40

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

Third, the ratione personae scope of Paragraph 2 is different to Paragraphs 2(c) and
(d). Paragraph 2 refers to foreign nationals generally whereas Paragraphs 2(c) and (d)
refer to a subset of foreign nationals who are submitting a “demande d’agrément’,
which can only mean a reference to the investment regime in Part IV Section II of the
2012 Code. It is thus plausible that the statutory intention was to carve out disputes
with foreign nationals investing under Part IV Section II of the 2012 Code from the
general chapeau provision in Paragraph 2 of Article 20 and refer that subset of disputes

to ICSID arbitration pursuant to Paragraphs 2(c) and (d) in all cases.

Fourth, it would be artificial in the circumstances to interpret the foreign national’s
silence in the “demande d’agrément’ as an election of the local courts as the forum for
the resolution of any disputes relating to the 2012 Code given that there is no reference
to dispute resolution in the model “demande d’agrément” or the provisions of the 2012
Code regulating the application process and there is no express language in Article 20
conferring a right of election upon the foreign national in the first place. There is, in
other words, no reason to treat the local courts as the default forum for dispute
resolution given the structure of Article 20. To the contrary, the ICSID Convention is

stated to be “applicable” in Paragraph 2(c) of Article 20.

For these reasons, the Respondent’s point concerning the access to the local courts has
not dislodged the majority of the Tribunal from its interpretation of the final sentence

of Article 20.

There are, finally, certain linguistic ambiguities in the final phrase of the final sentence

of Article 20 that must be confronted.

The first relates to the word “dans”, which the Claimants have submitted, in French
can mean either “d /’intérieur de” or “marque la maniére” depending on the context.”

This is indeed confirmed by the extracts from leading French dictionaries that the

% Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, {fj 111-114.

41

Parties’ have relied upon.!°° The Respondent prefers the former meaning, which it
says is consistent with the use of the word “par” in the previous phrase. In the
Respondent’s view, if the legislator had intended “dans” to mean the same as the
proposition “par” in the previous phrase, then it would have been straightforward to
use “par” in the final phrase. According to the Respondent, the use of “dans” with its
preferred meaning is more consistent with a requirement that the foreign national’s
consent be recorded by specific text in the “demande d’agrément” itself. The Tribunal
accepts that the use of the word “par” would have made the Claimants’ interpretation
of the final phrase of Article 20 stronger. But the majority of the Tribunal cannot accept
that the use of the word “dans” in and of itself, and in an article that is fraught with
both textual and substantive ambiguities and inconsistencies, favours the Respondent’s

interpretation.

149. The second linguistic point relates to the word “expressément”. The Respondent must
be right that the inclusion of this word is consistent with a requirement that the foreign
national inserts specific language into the “demande d’agrément”’. But there is an
alternative explanation, which is that the legislator is trying to make it abundantly clear
that the formal writing requirement in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention is satisfied
by the filing of a written document—the “demande d’agrément”. Like the word

“dans’’, there are alternative dictionary meanings of “expressément”, each of which is

101

capable of introducing a nuance in support of either Party’s interpretation.'°' Once

again, the majority of the Tribunal cannot accept that the inclusion of this word can be
dispositive in favour of the Respondent’s interpretation against the other factors that

point towards the correctness of the Claimants’ approach.

100 Exhibit R-7, Le Petit Robert de la Langue Frangaise (2017): “dans” is defined as either “/. Marque le lieu”
or “2. Marque la maniére.” Exhibit R-8, Le Dictionnaire de I’ Académie Frangaise (2017) defines “dans” as “I.
Marque un rapport de lieu [...| A. Indique le rapport d'une personne ou d'une chose a ce qui la contient. A
lintérieur de [...]” and also as “ B. Par ext. S'applique a des termes qui désignent une situation, un état, une
disposition, etc. *[...]”.

101 Exhibit R-7, Le Petit Robert de la Langue Francaise (2017): “expressément” is defined as “/. En termes
expres, formels. Explicitement, nettement, précisément [...)” and also as “2. Avec une intention, une volonté
spéciale bien déterminée. Expres, spécialement {...]’. Exhibit R-8, Le Dictionnaire de I’Académie Francaise
(2017) defines expressément as “I. En termes expres {...]” and also as “2. Tout exprés ; dans une intention
particuliére bien déterminée. [...]”.

 

  

42

150. There is no doubt that the final sentence of Article 20 could have been drafted less
ambiguously to convey the meaning advocated by the Claimants. An example of a
more precise formulation can be found in the investment law of the Democratic

Republic of Congo:

Le consentement des parties a la compétence du CIRDI ou du
Mécanisme Supplémentaire, selon le cas, requis par les
instruments les régissant, est constitué en ce qui concerne la
République Démocratique du Congo par le présent article et
en ce qui concerne I investisseur par sa demande d’admission
au régime de la présente loi ou ultérieurement par acte
séparé,'

151.

In the majority of the Tribunal’s view, the linguistic differences between this text and
the final sentence of Article 20 of the 2012 Code cannot be interpreted as manifesting

a different statutory intention against the background of the Article as a whole.

152. The other side of the coin is that there are also very clear examples of statutory texts
that would be consistent with the meaning ascribed by the Respondent to the final

sentence of Article 20. The investment law of Cameroon, for example, provides:
ARTICLE 45

[.]

(3) Le choix d'une des procédures ci-dessus doit étre
expressément mentionné, soit dans la demande d’agrément de
lentreprise concernée. Dans ce dernier cas, la procédure
d’arbitrage ou de conciliation est indiquée dans lacte
d’agrément.'

153. The express conferral of a choice (“choix”) together with the use of the modal
expression “doit étre” and the final sentence prescribing how the choice is to be

manifested in “/’acte d’agrément” make it plain that “/ entreprise concernée” would

have to record its choice in “/’acte d’agrément” expressly to consent to ICSID

02 Expert Report of Professor Emmanuel Gaillard, 4] 33 (quoting Article 38 of Law No. 4 dated 21 February
2002 of the Democratic Republic of Congo).
13 Exhibit C-102 : Ordonnance n°90/007 du 8 novembre 1990 portant code des investissements du Cameroun.

43

154.

155.

156.

arbitration. On balance, the majority of the Tribunal considers that the linguistic
differences between this text and the final sentence of Article 20 are significant and do

evidence a different statutory intention.

The majority of the Tribunal, on the basis of a thorough and detailed analysis of the
2012 Code and Article 20 in particular, concludes that a valid and binding arbitration
agreement for the purpose of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention came into force when
the “Centre de Promotion des Investissements de Céte d'Ivoire” approved the
“demande d’agrément” filed by the Claimants. Article 20 of the Code records the
Respondent’s prospective consent to ICSID arbitration but a valid and binding ICSID
arbitration agreement comes into force only if two conditions are satisfied: first, the
putative investor must file a “demande d’agrément” and, second, that “demande

d’agrément” must be approved by the Centre de Promotion des Investissements.

Two further considerations support the fairness of this conclusion for the majority of

the Tribunal.

First, if the Centre de Promotion des Investissements de Céte d'Ivoire shared the
Respondent’s interpretation of Article 20 of the Code in these arbitration proceedings,
then it would follow that the Claimants’ “demande d’agrément” was defective in the
sense that it did not express a choice between local court procedures or ICSID
arbitration. (There is nothing to suggest in the text of Article 20 that local court
procedures would apply in default of a choice; to the contrary, Paragraph 2(c) of Article
20 states that the ICSID Convention “est applicable”.) The Respondent’s national
authority had an opportunity to correct what would have been a defect in accordance
with this interpretation by requesting the Claimants to make an explicit choice or
otherwise raising the issue with the Claimants but they did not do so. To the contrary,
they approved the Claimants’ “demande d’agrément.” The fact that there is no mention
of dispute resolution procedures in the Respondent’s model “demande d’agrément” or
in the provision of the 2012 Code regulating its contents suggests to the majority of the
Tribunal that the conduct of the Respondent’s national authority in approving the

Claimants’ “demande d’agrément” was not an error.

44

157. Second, as both Parties have emphasized in their pleadings and submissions, the 2012
Code is a unilateral act on the part of the Céte d’Ivoire. It is not an international treaty
between two or more States in which textual ambiguities can sometimes be attributed
to a failure to reach a consensus on all issues (hence the epigram that a treaty is a
disagreement reduced into writing). The Céte d’Ivoire has complete control over its
own text and complete freedom to amend its text as and when it sees fit. It cannot be
reasonably claimed that the final sentence of Article 20 is a model of clarity and indeed
the Tribunal has identified several other serious difficulties with the remaining parts of
Article 20 that are liable to generate unnecessary controversies in the future. As this
is reported to be the first ICSID arbitration arising on the basis of the 2012 Code, it
may be that the Céte d’Ivoire has not yet had the occasion to revisit the text of Article
20 since its promulgation. If the Céte d’Ivoire, upon receipt of the Tribunal’s decision,
maintains its disagreement with the majority of the Tribunal’s analysis, then its remedy
can be swift and straightforward: it can introduce amendments to Article 20 of the 2012
Code and to its model “demande d’agrément” with the effect that prospective investors
will be in no doubt as to manner in which they are to convey their consent to ICSID
arbitration. This will not, of course, shut out the Claimants from pursuing their claims
against the Respondent in the present proceedings. But that, in the estimation of the
majority of the Tribunal, is a small price to pay when compared with the injustice of
informing the Claimants at this point in time that, despite the Respondent’s approval
of their “demande d’agrément” in accordance with the provisions of the 2012 Code
and despite their filing of a Request for ICSID Arbitration, they cannot be deemed to
have consented to ICSID arbitration after all. And all the while the Respondent’s

consent to ICSID arbitration is not contested.

45

Vv. COSTS

A. THE RESPONDENT’S POSITION

158. The Respondent submits that under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention the Tribunal

has broad discretion to apportion costs. It identifies two relevant factors, (i) the extent

to which a party has prevailed on its claims or defenses in and proceeding; and (ii) the

extent to which a party’s conduct in the proceeding has unnecessarily added to the

other’s expense.'!°* The Respondent further stated that “[t]he types of conduct resulting

in apportionment of costs against a party include: (1) filing baseless claims; (2)

deficient argumentation; and (c) procedural misconduct.

105

159. The Respondent submits that in the event that it prevails on its jurisdictional objection,

the Tribunal should consider the following circumstances in rendering its decision on

costs:

104 Respondent’s Submi

 

The Claimants presented a series of allegedly
unfounded legal theories, devised ex post facto, in
order to avoid the consequences of their own failure to
expressly state their consent to ICSID arbitration in
any of their applications for authorization;

The Claimants’ legal theories are “inconsistent,
convoluted and legally incoherent”;

The Claimants’ argument that its Request for
arbitration constituted its consent was based on ICSID
awards that in the Respondent’s opinion have no
relation to the Claimants’ asserted legal theory;

Claimants mischaracterized key evidence on which
their case relied;

The Claimants mischaracterized the standard in PNG
v. Papua New Guinea at the Hearing on Jurisdiction.
The Claimants quoted only one sentence from the

ion on Costs dated 28 April 2017, fj 1-7.

5 Respondent’s Submission on Costs dated 28 April 2017, 49.

46

decision in that case: “States should be presumed to
desire the effective and just resolution of international
investment disputes, in a manner that enhances the
prospects for foreign investment and confidence in the
rule of law.” Based on that sentence, the Claimants
concluded: “cette présomption est un peu |’équivalent
du principe contra proferentem” ;

e With respect to venue and language, the Respondent
was exercising its rights under the ICSID Convention
and the ICSID Arbitration Rules. The Respondent
argues, however, that the Claimants ignored the
Tribunal’s strong preference for points of international
investment law to be made by submission rather than
by legal experts in filing an expert opinion by
Mr. Emmanuel Gaillard; and

e The Claimants repeatedly and baselessly accused the
Respondent of acting in bad faith. !°°

160. In Response to the Claimants’ Submission on Costs, the Respondent argues that the
Tribunal should reject the Claimants’ submission that the Respondent’s conduct with
respect to (i) the First Session; (ii) the place of the proceedings; and (iii) the language
of the proceedings, created costs that were “inutiles et supplémentaires.”'°’ According
to the Respondent, holding the First Session via video conference actually resulted in
lower costs than if there had been an in-person first session in London. In addition, it
argues, the Respondent should not be penalized for exercising its procedural right to
have Washington D.C. be the place of the proceedings and to have English be one of

the official languages of the proceedings. '°*
161. The Respondent also claims that:

Claimants’ Submission on Costs seeks reimbursement of many
cost items that do not relate to the jurisdictional phase of the
proceedings. These include Claimants’ ICSID registration fee

06 Respondent’s Submission on Costs dated 28 April 2017, 421.
‘7 Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs dated 12 May 2017, pp. 1-3.
108 Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs dated 12 May 2017, pp. 2-3.

47

in the amount of $25,000. These also include 130,172.00 € in
costs relating to:

Ensemble de la procédure, notamment analyse de dossier,
Requéte d’arbitrage, constitution du Tribunal, suivi de la
procédure, échanges de courriers relatifs a la premiére
session, premiére session, excluant la rédaction du Mémoire
sur le fond du 14 février 2017.1"

162. The Respondent submits that in the event the Tribunal decides that it has jurisdiction,
it should either defer its decision on these costs until the end of the proceedings or, at
most, make an award as to costs incurred exclusively relating to the jurisdictional phase

of the case.!!°

163. Finally, the Respondent submits that the Claimants failed to demonstrate that they were
actually billed by the Claimants’ counsel for the total amount that was claimed in their

Submission on Costs. !!!

164. In light of the above, the Respondent rejects the Claimants’ Submission on Costs and

requests the Tribunal to:

(a) order [...] Claimants to pay all of the costs of the ICSID
proceedings, including the Tribunal’s fees and expenses and
all administrative costs; and

(b) order [...] Claimants to bear Respondent’s legal costs and
expenses in the amount of $747,529.'!

B. THE CLAIMANTS’ POSITION

165. The Claimants agree with the Respondent that the Tribunal has the discretion to
allocate costs under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention.!'?

© Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs dated 12 May 2017, pp. 4.
110 Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs dated 12 May 2017, pp. 4.
111 Respondent’s Reply Submission on Costs dated 12 May 2017, pp. 4-5.
112 Respondent’s Submission on Costs dated 28 April 2017, 425.

13 Claimants’ Reply on Costs dated 12 May 2017, 4 2.

48

166. The Claimants do not dispute the Respondent’s submission that in allocating costs the
Tribunal should consider the following factors, (i) the extent to which a party has
prevailed on its claims or defenses in and proceeding; and (ii) the extent to which a

party’s conduct in the proceeding has unnecessarily added to the other’s expense. !'+

167. The Claimants, however, submit that the cases relied on by the Respondent to argue
that the Claimants should be ordered to pay the Respondent’s costs are irrelevant
because they relate to decisions made at the merits phase.!!> They argue that given the
ambiguity of Article 20, even if the Tribunal were to decide that it did not have
jurisdiction, it would be unjust and inequitable to order the Claimants to pay the
Respondent’s costs. If, however the Claimants are successful, they argue that it would
be just and equitable to order the Respondent to pay their costs because the law in

question was drafted by the Respondent. '!°

168. The Claimants further take issue with the Respondent’s Submission on Costs for the

following reasons.

169. First, they argue that the Respondent wrongly used its Cost Submission as a post-

hearing brief, which the Parties and the Tribunal had agreed would not be filed. |!”

170. Second, the Claimants dismiss the Respondent’s claim that the Claimants’ arguments
were unfounded, inconsistent, convoluted and legally incoherent. According to the

Claimants:

L’argumentation juridique des Demandeurs est fondée,
consistante, claire et cohérente. Ce que la Défenderesse
souléve, c’est seulement son prétendu désaccord avec les
arguments des Demandeurs: ce qui ne peut absolument pas
étre un facteur pertinent concernant la répartition des frais.

114 Claimants’ Reply on Costs dated 12 May 2017, 3. Respondent’s Submission on Costs dated 28 April
2017, 491-7.

45 Claimants’ Reply on Costs dated 12 May 2017, #46 and 10.
446 Claimants’ Reply on Costs dated 12 May 2017, 49 6-7.
417 Claimants’ Reply on Costs dated 12 May 2017, § 24 and 4 24-27.

49

171.

172.

173.

La Défenderesse ne souléve d’ailleurs aucun argument auquel
les Demandeurs n’auraient pas répondu.""*

Third, with respect to the alleged mischaracterization of the standard in PNG, the
Claimants submit that in their view, “surtout dans le contexte ou on analyse le
consentement de I'investisseur et non celui de 1’Etat” the statement “States should be
presumed to desire the effective and just resolution of international investment disputes
in a manner that enhances the prospects for foreign investments and confidence in the
rule of law” constitutes an objective approach not “une approche extensive au bénéfice

de l’investisseur.”''? The Claimants argue:

En effet, dans le contexte ou a article 20 du Code, l'Etat
consent a l’arbitrage CIRDI et crée, par sa propre rédaction
une ambiguité quant a la maniére pour I’investisseur
d’exprimer son consentement, il demeure tout a fait objectif de
dire que cette loi, en application des trois principes
susmentionnés ou méme si on n’applique pas ces principes,
doit étre interprétée ‘en faveur’ de l’investisseur. |”

Fourth, the Claimants dismiss the Respondent’s allegation that they mischaracterized

evidence in order to attempt to fill in the gaps of their arguments. '?!

Fifth, the Claimants maintain their argument that the Tribunal should take into
consideration the inappropriate behavior of the Respondent. The Claimants argue that
the Respondent’s insistence that the hearing take place in Washington D.C. and that
English be one of the official languages of the proceedings resulted in additional
expenses, in particular with respect to interpretation, court reporting and translation of

122

documents. '** The Claimants thus request that in the event that the Tribunal dismisses

jurisdiction, the Respondent provide “plus de détails concernant ses frais et

118 Claimants’ Reply on Costs dated 12 May 2017, ff 33-34.

419 Claimants’ Reply on Costs dated 12 May 2017, 461.

'20 Claimants’ Reply on Costs dated 12 May 2017, {| 62.

"2! Claimants’ Reply on Costs dated 12 May 2017, {ff 42-62.

'22 Claimants’ Submission on Costs dated 28 April 2017, 44 6-12.

50

174.

175.

176.

honoraires, et notamment, mais non-exclusivement, d’indiquer la portion qui porte sur

la traduction francaise de tous documents, courriers, pieces, mémoires, etc.

Sixth, with respect to the behavior of the Parties, the Claimants maintain that the

Respondent’s behavior was in bad faith. !+

Finally, the Claimants submit that “[I]es honoraires des Conseils de la Défenderesse

de 708.993,00 USD sont exorbitants et déraisonnables.”'?5

For its part, and as set out in the Claimants’ Submission on Costs, the Claimants request

the Tribunal to:

Condamne la Défenderesse a verser 225.000,00 USD aux
Demandeurs, correspondant a la part les Demandeurs de
la provision pour honoraires et frais des membres du
Tribunal arbitral et frais administratifs du CIRDI;

Condamne la Défenderesse a verser 357.437,00 Euros
hors taxe aux Demandeurs, correspondant a_ ses
honoraires et frais de Conseil ;

Condamne la Défenderesse a verser 30.000,00 Euros hors
taxe aux Demandeurs, correspondant aux honoraires et
frais de son expert juridique ; et'?°

Ordonner le paiement d‘intéréts simples aux Demandeurs
par la Défenderesse sur les sommes a étre versées a titre
de remboursement des frais et honoraires et ce, a compter
de la date de la décision ordonnant le paiement desdits
frais et honoraires jusqu’au jour de leur paiement au taux
dintérét LIBOR + 2.'?'

23 Claimants’ Reply on Costs dated 12 May 2017, | 73.
'24 Claimants’ Reply on Costs dated 12 May 2017, {| 67.
'25 Claimants’ Reply on Costs dated 12 May 2017, 72.
'26 Claimants’ Submission on Costs dated 28 April 2017, 17.
'27 Claimants’ Reply on Costs dated 12 May 2017, 75.

SL

Cc. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

177. The Tribunal has resolved to reserve the issue of costs in respect of this jurisdictional
phase of the proceedings until such time as it renders a final award.

VI. DECISION

178. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal:

a) By a majority of its Members, dismisses the Respondent’s preliminary objection to

jurisdiction on the basis of Article 20 of the 2012 Code;

b) Reserves the issue of costs in respect of this jurisdictional phase of the proceedings until

such time as it renders a final award.

( -

 

rofessOr Kaj Hobér
rbitrator

¢ Brare.bing]

“Ste ro a

Professor Zachary Douglas QC
President of the Tribunal

 

N

Société Resort Company Invest Abidjan,
M. Stanislas Citerici et M. Gérard Bot
(ARB/16/11)

DISSENTING OPINION OF PROF. KAJ HOBER

For the reasons set out below, | am unable to agree with my esteemed co-arbitrators on the
question of the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal. My analysis and interpretation of the relevant
statutory provisions lead me to the conclusion that the Arbitral Tribunal does not have jurisdiction
to try the claims put forward by the Claimants.

The disagreement between the Parties centers on the interpretation, understanding and effect of
Article 20 of the Code. The critical part of this provision is its final sentence which reads:

“Le consentement des parties a la compétence du CIRDI ou du mécanisme supplémentaire, selon le
cas, requis par les instruments les régissant, est constitué pour la République de Céte d'Ivoire par
le présent article, et est exprimé expressément dans la demande d’agrément pour la personne
concernée.”

it is common ground between the Parties that the quoted language means that the Respondent,
the Republic of Céte d'Ivoire, has consented to ICSID arbitration. The question now before the
Arbitral Tribunal is whether the Claimants have consented to ICSID arbitration.

Whilst Article 20 — including its final sentence — is not a wonder of clarity, it is in my view clear that
the quoted text also requires an investor to consent to ICSID arbitration at some point, in
connection with the application for approval of the investment in question (“demande
d’agrément’). It follows from this, that it is not sufficient for purposes of Article 20 of the Code to
submit a request for ICSID arbitration once a dispute has arisen. Such a request does not constitute
consent to ICSID arbitration under Article 20 of the Code.

The jurisdictional requirements to be analyzed by the Arbitral Tribunal are set forth in Ivorian
municipal legislation, i.e. the Code, and must therefore be interpreted based on Ivorian principles
of statutory interpretation. At the same time, since we are dealing with a jurisdictional issue under
an international treaty — the ICSID Convention — rules and principles of interpretation under
international law must be applied, to wit, rules and principles relating to the interpretation of
unilateral acts of States. This is so because the Respondent's consent to ICSID arbitration in Article
20 of the Code constitutes a unilateral act, a unilateral declaration by the Republic of Céte d'Ivoire.
The combination of these two approaches to interpretation results in my view in the following four
key interpretative elements: good faith; the plain (ordinary) meaning of the words used; the
context in which the words are used; and the intention of the State in issuing the unilateral
declaration.

Let me start with the context in which the words used in the last sentence of Article 20 of the Code
are found.

Article 20 of the Code as a whole deals with various forms of dispute settlement mechanisms. The
second paragraph of the provision states that disputes between individuals, or legal entities, and
the Republic of Céte d'Ivoire concerning the application of the Code are to be resolved by Ivorian
courts, or by an Arbitral Tribunal (“est rég/é par les juridictions ivoiriennes ou par un Tribunal
Arbitral”). It then goes on to describe how the jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals is to be determined.

It is thus in the context of making a choice of a dispute settlement mechanism that we find the last
sentence of Article 20 of the Code. An investor has the choice between, on the one hand, Ivorian
courts, and on the other hand different forms of arbitration, including an arbitration mechanism
specifically agreed between the parties in question.

As far as the choice of ICSID arbitration is concerned, it is regulated by the last sentence of Article
20. The unilateral consent thereto by the Republic of Céte d'Ivoire is provided by the provision
itself. The consent of the other party “est exprimé expressément dans la demande d’agrément...”

In my view the plain and ordinary meaning of the quoted words is that such consent is to be
expressly stated in the application for approval of the investment (“demande d’agrément’) by the
investor. | hasten to add that in my view this is also the natural meaning of the words in question
resulting from a good faith interpretation of them.

1am reinforced in my view when | analyze the plain and ordinary meaning of the three critical
elements of the text viz., 1. "est exprimé”; 2. “expressément’”; and 3. “dans /a.” | will address each
of them.

1. Est exprimé:

In the context in which these two words appear, their plain and ordinary meaning
is: “to be expressed”. In other words, even though the present tense is used (“est”),
the words-indicate the imperative, i.e. something that is to be done. “Exprimé” is of
course derived from the verb “exprimer” the dictionary meaning of which is “faire
connaitre par la langue”. in other words, make something known using language,
as opposed to other means of communication. The two words thus mean that
something is to be expressed by using language.

2. Expressément:

The plain and ordinary meaning of the adverb “expressément’ is: “en termes exprés,
formels”, or in English: “expressly”, “in an express manner’, or “explicitly”. To put it
differently: whatever is to be done “expressément” must be done in such a way so
as to leave no doubt with respect to the act, choice or declaration in question. In
my view, the requirement for an express choice is particularly important in the
context of Article 20 of the Code, dealing, as it does, with the choice of a dispute
settlement mechanism.

»

Dans Ia:

The words “exprimé expressément” are followed by the words “dans la demande
d’ogrément’. The word “dans” serves as the preposition in the sentence leading on
to, and indicating where the consent (“le consentement’) is to be found, i.e. in the
“demande d’agrément”. Whilst it could perhaps be argued — as Claimants have done
~ that “dans” and “par”, from a grammatical point of view could have similar
functions, they do not normally have the same meaning. The natural — and in my
view the only reasonable — meaning of “dans” in Article 20 of the Code is “in”, i.e.
indicating that the consent must be set forth in — dans la - “demande d’agrément”

11. This analysis leads me to conclude that the plain and ordinary meaning of the words used in the
last sentence of Article 20 of the Code is that in order to properly to consent to ICSID arbitration,
the investor, ie., the Claimants, must expressly select ICSID arbitration in the “demande
d’agrément”. It is undisputed that the Claimants have not done so.

ml

N

. The Claimants have argued that the submission itself of the “demande d’agrément” satisfies the
requirements of Article 20 of the Code. | do not agree with that argument. First, it is not
reconcilable with the interpretation of Article 20 of the Code that | have explained above.
Second, accepting the Claimants’ argument would mean that every investor who submits a
“demande d’agrément” — and which is eventually accepted by the relevant Ivorian authorities —
would be deemed to have consented to ICSID arbitration. That cannot be right. In my view this is
not a reasonable — nor the natural — interpretation of Article 20 of the Code.

13. Having thus taken into account three of the four interpretive elements mentioned above — good
faith; the plain and ordinary meaning of the words used; and the context — it is strictly speaking
not necessary to dwell on the fourth element — the intention of the State issuing the unilateral
declaration. In its briefs and at the hearing, the Respondent explained the purpose and intention
behind Article 20 of the Code. | do not intend to — nor do | need to — review the policy goals
which prompted the regulation in Article 20 of the Code. Suffice it to say that | find no reason to
doubt them, nor do | find them unreasonable. The intentions as explained by the Respondent
seem to be reflected in Article 20 of the Code, including the last sentence of it, particularly in
light of the context in which the last sentence appears.

1.

B

. Based on the foregoing, | am of the view that the Arbitral Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to try the
claims put forward by the Claimants.

 

rof. Kaj Hobér
Arbitrator

