INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Sodexo Pass International SAS
Claimant

v.
Hungary

Respondent (Applicant on Annulment)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20)
Annulment Proceeding

DECISION ON THE REQUEST FOR THE CONTINUED STAY OF ENFORCEMENT
OF THE AWARD

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Andrés Jana Linetzky, President of the ad hoc Committee
Dr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu, Member of the ad hoc Committee
Dr. Jacomijn van Haersolte-van Hof, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Leah Waithira Njoroge

February 10, 2020

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

Il.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROCEDURAL HISTORY.

THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS
A. The Applicant’s Position

 

 

 

  
 
 
 

(1) The Committee has Power to Stay the Enforcement ..
(2) The Claimant Has No Automatic Right to Enforcement
(3) Hungary has Satisfied the Burden of Proof
(4) The Circumstances of this Case Justify a Stay of Enforcement of the Award

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(5) Provision of Security as a Condition of the Stay is unwarranted .........00. cee
B. The Claimant’s Position
(1) Hungary Failed to Establish the Circumstances Requiring a Stay of
Enforcement
(2) The Risk of Future Non-Compliance of the Award Warrants the Termination
of the Provisional Stay 20
(3) Continued Stay Should be Conditioned on the Provision of a Bank Guarantee or
the Placement of Amounts Due under the Award in an Escrow Account
THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS 23
A. The Applicable Legal Standard 23
B. Are There Circumstances that Require the Continuation of the Stay of
Enforcement? 27
(1) The Good Faith and Non-dilatory Nature of the Application... cece 27
(2) The Financial Standing of SodeX0 1.0.0.0... cece eee eeeeeeeeeeeeteeeeeteteeeneeeneneeaeeeee 29

(3) The Claimant’s Attempt to Enforce the Award Before the Hungarian Courts..... 30

DECISION 33

21

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On May 27, 2019, Hungary (the “Applicant” or the “Respondent”) filed with the
Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID” or the “Centre”) an Application for Annulment (the “Application for
Annulment’) of the award rendered on January 28, 2019 (the “Award”). In its Application
for Annulment, Hungary requested a stay of enforcement of the Award pursuant to Article
52 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and

Nationals of other States dated March 18, 1965 (the “ICSID Convention’).

On May 31, 2019, the ICSID Secretary-General registered the Application for Annulment
and transmitted a Notice of Registration to the Parties on the same date. In that Notice, the
Secretary-General noted that the Application for Annulment contained a request for a stay
of enforcement of the Award in accordance with Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”). The Secretary-General
notified the Parties that, pursuant to Rule 54(2), the enforcement of the Award was

provisionally stayed.

The ad hoc Committee (the “Committee”) was constituted on July 30, 2019 in accordance
with Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention. Its members are Mr. Andrés Jana Linetzky
(Chilean), serving as President, Dr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu (British/Nigerian); and Dr.

Jacomijn van Haersolte-van Hof (Dutch).

Procedural Order No. 1 was issued on September 6, 2019, and provided, inter alia, that the

applicable Arbitration Rules would be those in effect from April 10, 2006.

In accordance with the agreed schedule, on September 27, 2019, Hungary filed a
Submission in Support of Hungary’s Application for the Continued Stay of Enforcement
of the Award, together with Exhibits R-81 through R-84 and Legal Authorities RLA-162
through RLA-178 (the “Application for Continued Stay”).

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

IL.

qd)

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

On October 18, 2019, Sodexo Pass International SAS (‘‘Sodexo” or the “Claimant”) filed
its Response to the Applicant’s Request for the Continued Stay, together with Exhibits C-
96 through C-103 and Legal Authorities CL-158 through CL-171 (the “Response”).

On November 8, 2019, Hungary filed a Reply on its Request for the Continued Stay,
together with Legal Authorities RLA-179 through RLA-193 (the “Reply”).

On November 29, 2019, the Claimant filed a Rejoinder on Hungary’s Request for the
Continued Stay of Enforcement, together with Exhibits C-104 through C-106 and Legal
Authorities CL-172 and CL-173 (the “Rejoinder”).

THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

THE APPLICANT’S POSITION
The Committee has Power to Stay the Enforcement

Hungary submits that the Committee has the power to stay the enforcement of the Award
pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 54(4) pending its

decision on Hungary’s Application for Annulment.!

Hungary states that Arbitration Rule 54(4) requires an applicant to “specify the
circumstances that require the stay of enforcement of the award” but neither Article 52(5)
of the ICSID Convention nor Arbitration Rule 54(4) provide any guidance as to the type of
circumstances that would allow the Committee to grant a stay of enforcement. ? Relying on
the decision in Kardassopoulos, Hungary submits that ad hoc committees enjoy

considerable discretion in determining whether the circumstances are met.?

' Application for Continued Stay, paras. 12-13.

? Application for Continued Stay, para. 14.

3 Application for Continued Stay, para.15, citing Joannis Kardassopoulos & Ron Fuchs v Georgia, ICSID Case Nos.
ARB/05/18 and ARB/07/15, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Stay of E of the Award,
12, 2010 (“Kardassopoulos”) (RLA-162), para. 29.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment
Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

 

11. Hungary submits that the following factors are generally taken into account by ad hoc
committees in considering whether to grant a stay of enforcement of an award: (i) whether
there is a dilatory motive underlying the application for annulment; (ii) the prospect of
prompt enforcement of the award if it is upheld; and (iii) hardship to either party in the

event that a stay is ordered (or lifted, as the case may be).*

12. Further, Hungary submits that, based on publicly available information, ad hoc committees
have overwhelmingly granted applications made pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID
Convention, granting stays of enforcement in 40 proceedings, out of a total of 49

decisions.°

13. Relying on Elsamex, Pey Casado and Enron, Hungary argues that there is a general practice
of granting a stay of enforcement, in some instances “quasi-automatically”, and the
Committee should not depart from the standard practice unless there are unusual or
exceptional circumstances.° Hungary argues that there are no circumstances that would

justify an immediate enforcement of the Award in the present case; on the contrary, the

circumstances “militate for a stay of enforcement.”

4 Application for Continued Stay, para. 16, citing Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary
(Cambridge University Press 2013) (RLA-163), p. 1071; Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/02/16, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the
Award, March 5, 2009 (“Sempra”) (RLA-164), para. 24.

5 Application for Continued Stay, para. 17, citing ICSID’s website and ICSID, Updated Background Paper on
Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, May 5, 2016 (RLA-165), para. 58.

© Application for Continued Stay, paras. 18-20 citing Elsamex, S.A. v. Republic of Honduras, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/09/4, Decision on the Termination of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, March 11, 2014 (“Elsamex”)
(RLA-166), para. 86; Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/98/2, Decision on the Republic of Chile’s Application for a Stay of Enforcement of the Award, May 5, 2010
(“Pey Casado”) (RLA-167), para. 25; Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case No.
ARB/99/7, Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, November 30, 2004 (“Patrick Mitchell”) (RLA-168),
para. 25; Enron Corporation Poderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/O1/3, Decision on
Stay of Enforcement of the Award, October 7, 2008 (“Enron”) (RLA-169), para. 43; Azurix Corp v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, December 28, 2007 (“Azurix”) (RLA-170), para. 22; See also Reply, paras. 18 and 30.

7 Application for Continued Stay, para. 21.

  

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

(2)

(3)

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award
The Claimant Has No Automatic Right to Enforcement

In its Reply, Hungary argues that contrary to Sodexo’s assertion, Sodexo has no automatic
right to enforcement. In its view, in as much as Sodexo has a right to seek enforcement of

the Award, Hungary also has a right to seek that any enforcement of the same be stayed.®

Hungary has Satisfied the Burden of Proof

With respect to Sodexo’s contention that Hungary attempted to “shift the burden of proof,”
Hungary contends that it has never argued that the stay of enforcement should be granted
automatically in each case.° Rather, Hungary argues that ICSID practice is that ad hoc
committees overwhelmingly grant applications for stay of enforcement absent unusual
circumstances. Hungary further contends that, while an applicant is required to specify the
circumstances justifying the stay of enforcement, at the same time, the other party is

required to substantiate the “positive allegations” for rebutting the applicant’s request.'°

Contrary to the Claimant’s argument, Hungary submits that there is no requirement to
identify the circumstances requiring the continuation of the stay with the application for
annulment; therefore, its request is not belated.'' Hungary contends that pursuant to the
first sentence of Arbitration Rule 54(2), it did not have to specify the circumstances
requiring the continuation of the stay, if the request for the stay of enforcement of the
Award was filed with its Application for Annulment.!? Consequently, Hungary dismisses
Sodexo’s contention that it failed to discharge its burden of proof with respect the

continuation of the stay of enforcement. '*

* Reply, paras.10-15.

° Reply, para.17.

© Reply, para. 19, citing Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v, Tanzania Electric Supply Company
Limited, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20, Decision on Applicant’s Request for a Continued Stay on Enforcement of the
Award, April 12, 2017 (“Standard Chartered Bank”) (CLA-168), paras. 53-54.

4 Reply, para. 21.
2 Reply, paras. 22-23.
3 Reply, para. 25.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment
Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

 

17. Hungary further rejects Sodexo’s allegation that Hungary failed to meet the standard to
establish that its request for the stay of enforcement is warranted.'* Hungary argues that a
majority of past decisions have ordered a stay of enforcement pending a decision on
annulment and that these decisions do not suggest that there is a particularly high threshold
to be satisfied by applicants.!> Relying on Occidental, Hungary states that there is no
reason to deviate from the prevailing practice of granting a stay of enforcement in the

present case. '®

18. Hungary further states that ad hoc committees “enjoy broad discretion to assess which
criteria may [...] justify a stay of enforcement” on a case-by-case basis and “there is no
objective ranking of the criteria in order of relevance.”'”

(4) The Circumstances of this Case Justify a Stay of Enforcement of the Award

19. Hungary argues that the Committee should continue the stay of enforcement for three
reasons: (a) it applied for annulment in good faith; (b) the stay of enforcement would not
cause Sodexo to suffer irreparable harm; and (c) Sodexo’s bad faith attempt to enforce the

Award weighs in favour of the stay of enforcement.

a. Hungary’s Application for Annulment was in Good Faith

20. Hungary argues that a number of ad hoc committees have considered that “absent any
evidence that the application for annulment of the Award is purely dilatory or vexatious,

the application for a stay must be considered as justified.” !*

4 Reply, para. 26, referring to Response, Section II(B).

15 Reply, paras. 26-28.

16 Reply, para. 30, citing Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v.
Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, September 30,
2013 (RLA-182), footnote 50.

17 Reply, para. 34.

'8 Application for Continued Stay, para. 23, citing Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v.
Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Interim Order No. 1 on Guinea’s Application for Stay of Enforcement
of the Award, August 12, 1988 (“MINE”) (RLA-171), para. 17; Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Turkey, ICSID
Case No. ARB/06/8, Decision on Applicant’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, May 7,
2012 (“Libananco”) (RLA-172), paras. 48-49; Pey Casado, para. 72. See also Patrick Mitchell, para. 26.

21.

22.

23.

!° Application for Continued Stay, paras. 24-26,

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment
Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award
Hungary relies on Libananco and Enron to argue that the standard for establishing the
existence of a dilatory or vexatious claim is a stringent one, and that to date, no request for

stay of enforcement has been rejected on this basis.!°

Hungary states that it has instituted these annulment proceedings in good faith. In
particular, Hungary asserts that the basis of its annulment application is the Achmea
Decision”, which “give[s] rise to a key question of jurisdiction.”*! Hungary states that it
is not asking the Committee to conduct an assessment of the strengths of Hungary’s
Application for Annulment as this would be inappropriate at this stage of the proceeding.”
As a result, not staying enforcement is inappropriate since the Award may be annulled in
its entirety” and this “potential for annulment of the Award in its entirety is in itself a
circumstance that justifies a stay.””* Further, Hungary states that in the Dan Cake revision
proceedings, the tribunal granted Hungary’s request for the continued stay of enforcement
on the basis of, among others, that the jurisdiction issue raised by Hungary with respect to
the Achmea Decision was genuine.*> Hungary submits that in the present case, the same

“genuine” issue of jurisdiction with respect to the Achmea Decision exists.”°

Hungary dismisses Sodexo’s suggestion that it invokes the “good faith” of its Application
for Annulment as an exclusive circumstance, that would be sufficient, in and of itself, to

warrant the order of a stay. According to Hungary, its submission is that its request under

iting Libananco, para. 48; Enron, para. 47.

 

2 Application for Continued Stay, para. 28, citing Slovak Republic v. Achmea BV, Case C-284/16, Judgment of the
Court (Grand Chamber), March 6, 2018, EU:C:2018:158 (“Achmea”) (RLA-174).

2! Application for Continued Stay, para. 29.

2 Application for Continued Stay, para. 29; Reply, paras. 42-43.

% Application for Continued Stay, para. 29; Reply, para. 5.

> Reply, para. 48.
°5 Reply para. 45, citing Dan Cake (Portugal) S.A. v. Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/9, Decision on Applicant's
Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, September 30, 2013 (“Dan Cake”) (RLA-184), paras.

56-57.

2 Reply, para. 46.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

24.

25.

26.

27.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

Article 52(2) is made in good faith absent any dilatory conduct, and as a justified exercise

of its procedural rights of defence.”’

Furthermore, Hungary states that the rapid briefing schedule agreed to by the Parties

suggests absence of dilatory conduct on its part.?*

b. Stay of Enforcement Would Not Cause Sodexo to Suffer Irreparable Harm

Hungary argues that because Sodexo is “large and financially sound” and “not at risk of
imminent insolvency,” a brief delay in enforcement would not cause Sodexo to suffer
irreparable harm.” Hungary dismisses Sodexo’s assertion that Sodexo’s legal right to

enforcement is not contingent upon its financial standing.*”

Hungary further contends that, in any case, the post-Award interest would compensate for

t.3!

the damages caused by the delay in enforcement.”’ To support this assertion, Hungary

relies on Azurix which found that “[t]he provision for interest compensates for the delay.”**
Hungary states that, as was the case in Azurix, Sodexo would also not be severely

prejudiced by the continued stay of enforcement.**

In reply to Sodexo’s assertion that there is no risk of non-recoupment by Hungary, since
Sodexo is financially sound, Hungary argues that Sodexo’s assertion is unpersuasive.™ In
Hungary’s view, recoupment of sums paid in enforcement would result in unnecessary
time, cost and resources being expended.*> Hungary argues that the tribunal in Dan Cake

emphasized that this circumstance weighs in favour of the continuation of the stay.*° Thus,

27 Reply, para. 39.

28 Application for Continued Stay, para. 30; Reply, para. 47.

2? Application for Continued Stay, paras. 31-33, referring to the 2018 Consolidated Financial Statements of Sodexo
(R-81); Reply, para. 53.
30 Reply, para. 50.

3! Application for Continued Stay, paras. 34-36; Reply, paras. 54-58.

* Application for Continued Stay, para. 34, citing Azurix, para. 40 (emphasis added by the Applicant).

* Application for Continued Stay, para. 35.

Reply, para. 59.

35 Reply, para. 60.

% Reply, para. 60 citing Dan Cake, para. 62.

28.

29.

30.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment
Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award
the Committee should weigh the potential consequences and decide in favour of continuing

the stay.”

c. Sodexo’s Bad Faith Attempt to Enforce the Award Weighs in Favour of the
Stay of Enforcement
Hungary states that Sodexo initiated recognition and enforcement proceedings of the

Award before the Budapest Capital Regional Court of Hungary (the “Court”) in bad faith.

First, Hungary alleges that it is public knowledge that it has filed applications for annulment
with respect to each of the ICSID awards that have been rendered against it in intra-EU
arbitrations in recent months on the basis of the Achmea Decision. Further, Hungary
declared on January 16, 2019 that it would seek to set aside inter-EU investment arbitration
awards.** For that reason, Hungary contends that Sodexo could have foreseen that Hungary

would challenge the Award and secure a provisional stay of enforcement.*?

Second, Hungary asserts that Sodexo wrongly listed Hungary’s representative for purposes
of the enforcement proceedings and failed to duly notify it of the existence of a dispute.”
Hungary states that Sodexo was in contact with the correct representative throughout the
arbitration proceedings, including the request for voluntary enforcement of the Award, but
“inexplicably sought to serve [enforcement] proceedings on a different arm of the State.”*+!
Hungary dismisses Sodexo’s assertion that it was not in its interest to name the wrong
representative in the enforcement proceedings. In Hungary’s view, Sodexo could have re-

filed the application identifying the correct representative. Hungary notes that Sodexo

37 Reply, para. 61.

38 Application for Continued Stay, para. 38, referring to Declaration of the Representative of the Government of
Hungary on the Legal Consequences of the Judgment of the Court of Justice in Achmea and on Investment Protection
in the European Union, January 16, 2019 (“Hungary’s Declaration”) (RLA-176), p. 2, undertaking no. 2.

*? Application for Continued Stay, para. 39.

*0 Application for Continued Stay, paras. 41-43; Reply, 66.

+ Application for Continued Stay, paras. 41-43; Reply, paras. 66-67.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

31.

32.

6)
33.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

chose not to notify Hungary’s legal counsel in these proceedings, DLA Piper, of the

filing.”

Hungary states that under its domestic law, the Court was bound to rule on Sodexo’s
application for enforcement dated May 10, 2019 within 15 days, i.e., on May 27, 2019, a
day before the expiration of the time-period for filing an application for annulment under
the ICSID Convention.*? Hungary therefore argues that Sodexo’s attempt to enforce the
Award “in anticipation of and in parallel with the annulment proceedings” indicates bad
faith on the part of Sodexo, weighing in favour of granting a continued stay of

enforcement.+

Third, Hungary argues that Sodexo’s continued enforcement efforts by filing an appeal
against the first instance decision of the Court dated July 11, 2019, which rejected Sodexo’s
enforcement application, are a clear breach of the provisional stay.*° Hungary rejects
Sodexo’s contention that it had no other choice than to appeal the Court’s decision to
preserve its rights, arguing that the Court’s decision has no res judicata effect.*° Hungary
argues that Sodexo should have known that its subsequent attempt to suspend the appeal
would be unsuccessful because “there is no possibility, under Hungarian law, for the court
competent to decide on ordering enforcement to suspend the proceedings before it.”47
Hungary also dismisses Sodexo’s assertion that the enforcement proceedings would require

that the stay is lifted.

Provision of Security as a Condition of the Stay is unwarranted

In response to Sodexo’s request for security in the form of a bank guarantee or the posting

of an amount due under the Award in an escrow account if the continued stay is granted,

* Reply, para. 68.

43 Application for Continued Stay, para. 45, referring to Claimant's letter to the ad hoc Committee, August 21, 2019
(R-82), p. 1.
+ Application for Continued Stay, para. 46; Reply, paras. 62, 65.

+5 Reply, para. 70.

46 Reply, para. 71.
+” Reply, paras. 72-73.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

34.

35.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

Hungary argues that: (i) the provision of security is not supported by the ICSID
Convention; and (ii) there are no compelling reasons to justify the posting of any form of

security.

First, Hungary states that neither Articles 51(4) nor 52(5) of the ICSID Convention provide
for the posting of any form of security or guarantee of payment of an award as a condition
for the continued stay of enforcement of an award.** Relying on the Enron and Azurix ad
hoc committee decisions, Hungary contends that there is no entitlement to security for a

party objecting to a stay of enforcement.”

Moreover, Hungary observes that ad hoc
committees refrain from requiring any conditions for continuation of a stay absent any
compelling reasons such as, history of non-payment of final ICSID awards by the State or
a failure to put in place domestic enforcement mechanisms.*° Hungary asserts that in order
to balance the rights of the investor and the State, the provision of security should not be

ordered.*!

Second, Hungary contends that, contrary to Sodexo’s assertions, security is not
increasingly granted as a condition of the continued stay.*? Further, Hungary asserts that
Sodexo’s arguments that the granting of a security to compensate for delayed enforcement
is unsubstantiated.** Hungary rejects Sodexo’s allegation that Hungary “most probably
will not comply with the Award nor with its enforcement obligations under the ICSID
Convention” as being unsubstantiated.*4 Hungary explains that it did not comply with the
Award because it intended to file an application for annulment. Further, Hungary dismisses

Sodexo’s characterization of Hungary’s Declaration® which stated that Hungary “will

+8 Reply, para. 82.

* Reply, paras. 83-84, citing Enron, para. 44 and Azurix, para. 35.

50 Reply, para. 85, citing Carnegie Minerals (Gambia) Limited v. Republic of The Gambia, ICSID Case No.
ARB/09/19, Decision on the Gambia’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, October 18, 2018
(“Carnegie”) (RLA-191), para. 51.

5! Reply, paras. 86-90.
52 Reply, para. 92.

53 Reply, para. 93.

54 Reply, para. 94.

55 Hungary’s Declaration of January 16, 2019.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

36.

37.

38.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

request the courts” to set aside the awards in proceedings relating to intra-EU BITs, but
Hungary notes that the Declaration does not “contain a declaration by Hungary that it will

not comply with this Award if the Award is upheld.”°°

According to Hungary, the Court rightly rejected Sodexo’s application for the enforcement
of the Award because the application was premature in light of the provisional stay of
enforcement granted in the annulment proceedings.*’ Therefore, Hungary submits that
Sodexo’s conclusion that the Hungarian judicial system was incapable of enforcing ICSID
awards is baseless.** Hungary contends that Sodexo failed to disprove the existence of an
effective domestic enforcement procedure in compliance with Article 54 of the ICSID
Convention, specifically that: (i) Hungary failed to enact any specific laws that implement
Article 54 of the ICSID Convention; and (ii) Hungary’s internal laws fail to give effect to
Article 54 of the ICSID Convention.

As to Sodexo’s reliance on the Sempra case, Hungary states that the circumstances in the
present case are distinct.® In Sempra, Argentina was ordered to place a portion of the
amount granted under the award in escrow because of the State’s history of non-compliance
with ICSID awards. Hungary asserts that its attitude towards ICSID awards cannot be
compared to the conduct of the State in Sempra since Hungary has a track record of paying
ICSID awards.°! In Hungary’s view, Sodexo’s assertion that Hungary “has not and most
probably will not comply with its enforcement obligations under the ICSID Convention is

unacceptable.”

In conclusion, Hungary submits that Sodexo has not met the high threshold under the

ICSID Convention for posting of security as a condition for a stay. In particular, Hungary

56 Reply, paras. 92-94, 96-100.
57 Reply, para. 103.

58 Reply, paras. 103-105.

5 Reply, para. 106.

© Reply, para. 107, referring to Response, paras. 102-105, citing Sempra, paras. 102-105.

©! Reply, para. 108.

© Reply, para. 108, referring to Response, para. 88.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

39.

40.

Al.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

asserts that Sodexo has not demonstrated: (i) a history of non-payment by Hungary of final
ICSID Awards, or the absence of a proper mechanism in Hungary to ensure the
implementation of ICSID awards; or (ii) any other exceptional circumstance justifying an
order of security. In reliance on Azuwrix, Hungary submits that under the circumstances, a
request for the posting of security as a condition of the stay should be rejected and the stay

of enforcement should be ordered unconditionally.“

Finally, in its Reply, Hungary reserved its right to seek leave from the Committee to
respond to the Rejoinder within the limited subject-matter of the posting of security.
Hungary states that it should be afforded the opportunity to have the “last word” on this

issue which was first raised in the Response.

For the foregoing reasons, Hungary requests the continuation of the stay of enforcement of
the Award until a decision on annulment is rendered and for Sodexo to bear all costs borne
by Hungary “in relation to the Application for Annulment, including the costs of presenting

and defending this application.”

THE CLAIMANT’S POSITION

Sodexo’s arguments in response to Hungary’s application for the continuation of the stay
of enforcement are three-fold: (i) Hungary failed to establish the circumstances requiring a
stay of enforcement; (ii) the provisional stay should be terminated as there is a high risk of
future non-compliance of the Award by Hungary; and (iii) should the Committee grant a
continued stay, such stay “should necessarily be conditioned upon the delivery of an
international first demand bank guarantee by Hungary or, alternatively, by the placement

of the amounts due by Hungary under the Award on escrow.”°”

© Reply, para. 109.

& Reply, paras. 110-111, citing Azurix, para, 39.

© Reply, para. 112.

Application for Continued Stay, para. 47; Reply, para. 114.

© Response, paras. 9-10.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

qa)
42.

43.

44.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award
Hungary Failed to Establish the Circumstances Requiring a Stay of Enforcement

Sodexo argues that: (a) Hungary’s attempts to shift its burden of proof as regards the
continued stay to Sodexo fails; (b) Hungary’s attempts to lower the applicable standard of
proof also fails; and (c) none of the circumstances put forward by Hungary are relevant

with respect to the continuation of the stay.

a. Hungary’s attempt to shift the burden of proof onto Sodexo is to no avail

At the outset, Sodexo agrees with Hungary’s submission that the Committee has power to
order the continuation of the stay of enforcement pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID
Convention.** Sodexo also does not contest Hungary’s assertion that Rule 54(4) of the
Arbitration Rules requires that a party applying for annulment of an award also requests a
stay of its enforcement and that such a party “shall specify the circumstances that require
the stay.”© According to Sodexo, a stay of enforcement will only be granted if an applicant
has established that the “circumstances so require” the stay and that absent such

circumstances, enforcement of an award should not be stayed.”

First, Sodexo asserts that granting of a stay of enforcement is in no way automatic. Sodexo
dismisses Hungary’s assertion that the granting of the stay of enforcement is “quasi-
automatic,” and rejects Hungary’s reliance on Elsamex, Pey Casado and Enron.”
According to Sodexo, none of these committees stated that the stay of enforcement of an
award was automatic.’* Sodexo submits that the correct approach was stated by the ad hoc
committee in Total which held in relevant part, that “[...]the stay of enforcement in the
ICSID system is far from automatic. The fact that statistically ad hoc committees may have

 

granted the stay in the vast majority of cases does not mean that the stay is automatic.”

© Response, para. 12.

© Response, para. 13.

7 Response, para. 14.

7! Response, para. 16, referring to Application for Continued Stay, paras. 18-19.

% Response, para. 17.

3 Response, para. 18, citing Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Cas

 

No. ARB/04/01, Decision on Stay of

Enforcement of the Award, December 4, 2014 (“Total”) (CL-159) (emphasis added by the Claimant), para. 76.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

4S.

46.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

Therefore, Sodexo relies on the finding of the Committee in Churchill which found that,
“[...]whatever the practice of granting stays might be in the Applicants’ eyes, a stay must

remain exceptional.””*

Although Sodexo does not contest that there was a trend for granting stays in 2016, it argues
that this is no longer the case based on the recent decisions that recalled the “exceptional”

nature of a stay.”>

Second, Sodexo contends that by attempting to establish that a stay of enforcement is
“quasi-automatic,” Hungary shifts the burden of proof to Sodexo. Sodexo contends that it
is under no obligation to demonstrate that the continued stay should not be granted by
establishing circumstances which would justify the immediate enforcement of the Award.”
To support that contention, Sodexo argues that numerous ad hoc committees (specifically
citing Pezold, OI European Group and Burlington) have held that it is for the requesting
party to establish that there are circumstances that require continuation of the stay.””
According to Sodexo, Hungary failed to put forward any of the exceptional circumstances
to compel the continuation of the provisional stay of enforcement even though the burden

lies clearly with it to establish such exceptional circumstances. ”*

4 Response, para. 19, citing Churchill Mining PLC and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v. Republic of Indonesia, CSID Case
Nos. ARB/12/14 and 12/40, Decision on the Request for Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, June 27, 2017
(“Churchill”) (CL-160), para. 34; Rejoinder, para. 21.

5 Rejoinder, para. 19.

7 Response, para. 20, referring to Application for Continued Stay, para. 21.

7 Response, paras. 22-24, citing Bernhard von Pezold and Others v. Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSID Case No.
ARB/10/15, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, April 24, 2017 (“Pezold”) (CL-162), para. 80; OF
European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25, Decision on Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, April 4, 2016 (“OI European Group”) (CL-163), para. 94; Burlington Resources Inc. v.
Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, August 31, 2017
(“Burlington”) (CL-161), para. 85.

78 Response, paras. 20-24; Rejoinder, paras. 23, 33.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

47.

48.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

b. Hungary’s Attempt to Lower the Applicable Standard of Proof is to No
Avail
Sodexo contends that Hungary attempted to lower the applicable standard of proof by
arguing merely that the stay is “justified.”’? According to Sodexo, the wording of Article
52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54(4) of the Arbitration Rules is clear that the
standard to be used in determining whether to continue a stay is: whether the continuation
itself is “required.” Sodexo notes that Hungary has not argued in its submissions that the
continuation is required.*° The Claimant further argues that the ad hoc committees in SGS
and Border established that the stay shall only be continued if the circumstances so
“require” and that less categorical words such as “justified” are not used in the ICSID

Convention.*!

c. None of the Circumstances Presented by Hungary Justify a Continued Stay
of Enforcement
Sodexo contends that none of the three circumstances identified by Hungary in its
submissions justify, let alone require, a continued stay of enforcement.*? In response to
Hungary’s arguments, Sodexo submits that: (i) the fact that Hungary’s Application for
Annulment is made in good faith does not warrant the granting of a continued stay of
enforcement; (ii) the grounds and merits of Hungary’s Application for Annulment are
irrelevant with respect to the stay; (iii) Sodexo’s financial standing is irrelevant; (iv)
whether or not Sodexo was granted post-Award interest is irrelevant; and (v) Sodexo’s
attempt to enforce the Award cannot weigh in favour of the stay of enforcement, but rather

necessarily requires that it be lifted.

7 Response, para. 25, referring to Application for Continued Stay, para. 22; Rejoinder, para. 28.

89 Response, para. 28, referring to Application for Continued Stay, para. 22.

8! Response, paras. 26-27, citing SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. The Republic of Paraguay, ICSID Case

No. ARB/07/29, Decis

 

n on Paraguay’s Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, March 22,

 

2013 (“SGS”) (CL-158), para. 87; Border Timbers Limited, Border Timbers International (Private) Limited, and
Hangani Development Co. (Private) Limited v. Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25, Decision on Stay
of Enforcement of the Award, April 24, 2017 (“Border”) (CL-165), para. 78.

® See paragraphs 19-32 above.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

49.

50.

51.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

First, Sodexo argues that Hungary’s contention that the application was made in good faith
does not warrant a grant of stay. Sodexo rejects Hungary’s submission that absent any
evidence that the application for annulment of the Award is purely dilatory or vexatious,
the application for a stay must be considered as justified. In Sodexo’s view, Hungary’s
argument is wrong because it would mean that stays of enforcement would be automatically
granted in all annulment proceedings which are not purely dilatory or vexatious, which is
not the case. Further, it would require the responding party to establish that the application
for annulment was purely dilatory or vexatious for the stay not to be granted, which shifts
the burden of proof.*?

Sodexo rejects Hungary’s reliance on Patrick Mitchell, Libananco and Enron and argues
that none of these cases support Hungary’s position.** According to Sodexo, none of these
cases indicate that “the application for a stay of enforcement is justified, whenever the
application for annulment was neither dilatory nor vexatious.”*° Sodexo states that several
ad hoc committees such as SGS have explicitly held the contrary position. *° Sodexo
therefore argues that Hungary cannot benefit from a stay merely because it acted in good
faith; this is the expected minimum standard of behaviour.®” Further, Sodexo underscores
that it has a greater interest in an expeditious annulment procedure and states that Hungary

waited for 119 days before applying for annulment.**

Second, Sodexo asserts that the grounds and merits of Hungary’s Application for
Annulment are irrelevant with respect to the stay of enforcement. Sodexo contends that the
continued stay of enforcement should not be considered as justified merely because the
Application for Annulment concerns a “key question of jurisdiction.” Sodexo argues that

a question of jurisdiction that allegedly leads to the annulment of the Award “in its entirety”

3 Response, para. 33.

* Response, para. 34.

85 Response, para. 34.

* Response, para. 35, citing SGS, para. 94.

87 Response, paras. 34-36; Rejoinder, paras. 35, 38.

88 Response, para. 37.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

should not be “a relevant circumstance to take into account when deciding on the continued
stay.”*° Sodexo states that the ad hoc committees in other cases including Tenaris and
Kardassopoulos, unanimously adopted a position of not looking into the grounds of

annulment or the strength of the arguments in support of the applications for annulment.”

52. Third, Sodexo states that its financial standing is irrelevant with respect to the stay of
enforcement. Sodexo argues that its right to enforcement is guaranteed by the ICSID
Convention and is “not contingent upon its financial standing.”®! Sodexo argues that, as
held by the ad hoc committee in Patrick Mitchell, Sodexo’s financial standing should not
influence the Committee’s reasoning as regards the stay of enforcement, as it is a contingent
issue which falls “outside the context of the present proceedings.” °? On the other hand,
Sodexo submits that any delay in the enforcement would cause harm to it.°° In response to
Hungary’s argument that Sodexo relied on the minority position adopted by three ad hoc
committees to argue that post-Award interest should not be deemed to compensate Sodexo
for the delay, Sodexo argues that a recent decision in Infrastructure Services supports its
position. In that case, the Committee stated that “the payment of interest should not be
considered a sufficient remedy for any prejudice caused by a delay in the Award’s

enforcement.”**

53. Sodexo contends that Hungary will not face a risk of non-recoupment if the Award is
annulled after enforcement since Sodexo is a “large and financially sound group of
companies.” Further, according to Sodexo, time, costs and resources which Hungary would

spend for recoupment of the amounts paid to Sodexo should not be taken into account when

8° Response, paras. 40-45; Rejoinder, para. 42.

° Response, para. 42, citing Tenaris S.A. and Talta - Trading e Marketing Sociedade Unipessoal Lda. v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela I, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/26, Decision on the Request to Maintain the Stay of Enforcement
of the Award, March 24, 2017 (“Tenaris”) (CL-166), para. 78; Kardassopoulos, para. 9.

°! Response, para. 47.

 

°2 Response, paras. 48-49, citing Patrick Mitchell, para. 25.

%3 Rejoinder, paras. 48-49.

° Rejoinder, para. 53, citing Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.d.r.l. and Energia Termosolar B.V. (formerly Antin
Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.d.r.l. and Antin Energia Termosolar B.V.) v. Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/13/31, Decision on the Continuation of the Provisional Stay of Enforcement of the Award, October 21, 2019
(“Infrastructure Services”) (CL-0172), para. 82 (emphasis added by the Claimant).

  

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

54.

55.

56.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

deciding on the continuation of the provisional stay; especially in light of the fact that
Sodexo presented alternatives — the delivery of an unconditional and irrevocable first
demand bank guarantee by Hungary, or the placement of the sums due to Sodexo on escrow

account.”

Fourth, Sodexo states that the availability of post-Award interest is irrelevant with respect
to the stay of enforcement. According to Sodexo, Hungary’s argument ignores the
fundamental principle that “despite an application for annulment, awards must be
enforced.”°° Sodexo submits that the post-Award interest will not compensate the harm it
has suffered due to the continued stay and the difficulties in enforcement Sodexo will face

before the Hungarian courts.*”

Fifth, Sodexo argues that its legitimate exercise of its right to enforcement does not weigh
in favour of the stay but rather requires that the stay be lifted. Sodexo argues that its attempt
to enforce the Award was not done in bad faith nor in parallel with the annulment

proceedings as alleged by Hungary.”®

Sodexo states that it initiated enforcement proceedings due to the lack of response by
Hungary to Sodexo’s request to comply with the Award.®? Sodexo further asserts that
Hungary’s allegation that it listed the wrong state representative is baseless and whether or
not Sodexo served the wrong representative is still being debated in the Hungarian court.!°
Sodexo argues that listing a wrong representative would lengthen the proceedings or lead
to the dismissal of its enforcement application altogether, thus would be of no benefit to it.
In addition, Hungary’s assertion that, as a result of listing the wrong representative,
Hungary was not put on notice of the enforcement proceedings is irrelevant, since the

proceedings are conducted ex parte. Sodexo asserts that Hungary was notified of the

°5 Response, para. 50; Rejoinder, paras. 55-67.

° Response, para. 52, citing SGS, para. 85.

°7 Response, paras. 51-54; Rejoinder, paras. 49-54.

°8 Response, para. 57.

% Response, para. 60; Rejoinder, paras. 69-72.

0 Response, para. 65.

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

57.

58.

(2)

59.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

decision of the Court and these events do not in any way indicate bad faith on the part of

Sodexo. !0!

Sodexo also states that the enforcement proceedings began prior to Hungary’s Application
for Annulment; thus, the two proceedings did not occur in parallel to each other.!° Sodexo
states that it applied for the suspension of the enforcement proceedings pursuant to the
provisional stay of enforcement granted by the Secretary-General. However, Sodexo states
that it “had no other choice than to file an appeal” of the Court Decision that dismissed
both Sodexo’s requests for enforcement and for suspension of the enforcement

proceedings. Sodexo informed the Committee of these proceedings. !°*

Based on the above, Sodexo requests the Committee to reject all the arguments asserted by
Hungary in support of the continued stay of enforcement and “to declare that Hungary has

simply failed to establish that the present circumstances requires a stay of enforcement.” !%*

The Risk of Future Non-Compliance of the Award Warrants the Termination of the
Provisional Stay

Sodexo argues that the provisional stay should be terminated because there is a higher risk
of non-compliance by Hungary.!° Sodexo states that compliance should play a decisive
role in the Committee’s conclusion. '°° Hungary publicly declared that it will request the
courts “to set awards aside or not to enforce them” following the Achmea Decision and this
establishes a high-risk of non-compliance with the Award.!°’ Sodexo points out that
Hungary refused to comply with the Award pursuant to Sodexo’s letter demanding

payment after the Award was rendered. !°*

'l Response, paras. 64-65; Rejoinder, paras. 73-78.

102

103

Response, para. 67; Rejoinder, para. 81.
Response, paras. 66-67.

'4 Response, para. 68.

105

Response, para. 70; Rejoinder, para. 91.

106 Response, para. 71.

'°T Response, para. 75; Rejoinder, paras. 95-98.

"8 Response, para. 77; Rejoinder, para. 97.

20

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

60.

(3)

61.

62.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

Sodexo also states that the decision of the Court of September 24, 2019 finding that the
Award “impose[d] no obligation” on Hungary,'”? among other findings of the Court,
demonstrate that there is a high risk of non-compliance by Hungary. Specifically, Sodexo
points out that the order of the Court which drew a distinction between “Hungary” and
“Hungarian State”, found that enforcement proceedings can be carried out only against the
Hungarian State.'!° According to Sodexo, this interpretation effectively means that “no
ICSID Award can ever be enforced against Hungary in its own country.”!!! According to

Sodexo, it further proves that there is a high risk of non-compliance by Hungary.!!?

Continued Stay Should be Conditioned on the Provision of a Bank Guarantee or the
Placement of Amounts Due under the Award in an Escrow Account

Sodexo submits that in any event, should the Committee grant the stay — given the Court’s
attitude of complicating and delaying enforcement and the high risk of non-compliance on
the part of Hungary — the continued stay be conditioned upon the delivery of an
international first demand bank guarantee by Hungary.!!? Sodexo argues that ad hoc
committees consider ordering the provision of a bank guarantee when there are legitimate
fears of non-enforcement.''+ Sodexo contends that Hungary has demonstrated that it “will
not comply with the Award nor with its enforcement obligations under the ICSID
Convention.”!'> Sodexo states that ad hoc committees have power to condition continued

stays upon the posting of a security and have done so in “12 out of a total of 40 cases”.!!°

Sodexo argues that requiring security also balances the Parties’ interests.!'’ Sodexo states

that ordering a security would “(i) compensate Sodexo for the additional delay of

109 Response, para. 80; Rejoinder, para. 101.

410 Response, para. 80; Rejoinder, para. 104.

‘11 Response, para. 80; Rejoinder, para. 108.

'2 Response, paras. 79-81; Rejoinder, paras. 100-108.

113

Response, para. 88; Rejoinder, paras. 116-119.

414 Response, para. 87.

15

Response, para. 88.

‘16 Response, paras. 83-88; Rejoinder, paras. 113-115.

417 Rejoinder, para. 120.

21

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

63.

64.

65.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

enforcement of the Award; (ii) dissipate Hungary’s concerns related to the potential
recoupment of sums paid to Sodexo and, therefore, benefit Hungary in the event that the
Award were annulled; and (iii) prevent both Parties from incurring unnecessary time, costs

and resources in enforcement proceedings during the present annulment phase.”!!*

Sodexo also proposes that the continued stay be automatically terminated if the Parties
cannot reach an agreement on the particular terms and conditions of the first demand bank

guarantee within 30 days.!!?

Alternatively, Sodexo submits that in the event that the stay of enforcement is continued
without being conditional upon the delivery of a first demand international bank guarantee,
for the same reasons, Hungary should be ordered “to place the full amounts due under the
Award (including post-Award interest) in an escrow account with a first-tier reputable
international bank (acting as escrow agent) with no principal establishment in Hungary. !”°
Again, Sodexo proposes that the continued stay should be automatically terminated if the

Parties cannot reach an escrow agreement within 30 days. '?!

In summary, Sodexo requests that the Committee reject Hungary’s application for the
continued stay of enforcement of the Award; terminate the provisional stay of enforcement
of the Award; and order Hungary to reimburse all costs incurred in relation to the stay of
enforcement. !” In the event that the Committee were to grant the continuation of the stay
of enforcement of the Award, Sodexo requests the Committee to order Hungary to provide
“an unconditional and irrevocable first demand bank guarantee” or to order that “the full
amount due under the Award (including post-Award interest) be placed by Hungary in an
escrow account with a first-tier reputable international bank” and also to order Hungary to

reimburse all costs incurred in relation to the stay of enforcement. !?7

48 Rejoinder, para. 130.

419 Response, para. 91.

20 Response, para. 92; Rejoinder, paras, 110, 130.

"2! Response, para. 95; Rejoinder, para. 138,

22 Response, para. 96.

123

Response, paras. 96-97.

22

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

66.

Il.

67.

68.

69.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

Sodexo opposes Hungary’s request that it should be allowed to file a further response to
Sodexo’s rejoinder with regard to the issue of security. Sodexo asserts that this issue was
not novel to Hungary and that Hungary had an opportunity to address it in its Reply
submission but failed to do so. Sodexo therefore requests that the Committee deny Hungary
the possibility of seeking leave to file a reply to the Rejoinder with respect to the issue of

the posting of security. !*4

THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

The Committee will first address the legal standard applicable to an application for a
continued stay of enforcement; and thereafter consider whether there are circumstances in

this particular case that require the continuation of the stay of enforcement.

THE APPLICABLE LEGAL STANDARD

Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention establishes the power of the Committee to grant or

reject Hungary’s request for the continued stay of enforcement of the Award:

The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so
require, stay enforcement of the award pending its decision. If the
applicant requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his
application, enforcement shall be stayed provisionally until the
Committee rules on such request.

Rule 54 of the Arbitration Rules specifies the procedure as follows:

(1) The party applying for the interpretation, revision or annulment
of an award may in its application, and either party may at any time
before the final disposition of the application, request a stay in the
enforcement of part or all of the award to which the application
relates. The Tribunal or Committee shall give priority to the
consideration of such a request.

(2) If an application for the revision or annulment of an award
contains a request for a stay of its enforcement, the Secretary-
General shall, together with the notice of registration, inform both

'24 Rejoinder, paras. 139-143.

23

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

70.

125

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

parties of the provisional stay of the award. As soon as the Tribunal
or Committee is constituted it shall, if either party requests, rule
within 30 days on whether such stay should be continued; unless it
decides to continue the stay, it shall automatically be terminated.

(3) Ifa stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to paragraph
(1) or continued pursuant to paragraph (2), the Tribunal or
Committee may at any time modify or terminate the stay at the
request of either party. All stays shall automatically terminate on
the date on which a final decision is rendered on the application,
except that a Committee granting the partial annulment of an award
may order the temporary stay of enforcement of the unannulled
portion in order to give either party an opportunity to request any
new Tribunal constituted pursuant to Article 52(6) of the
Convention to grant a stay pursuant to Rule 55(3).

(4) A request pursuant to paragraph (1), (2) (second sentence) or
(3) [for a stay or its modification or termination] shall specify the
circumstances that require the stay or its modification or
termination. A request shall only be granted after the Tribunal or
Committee has given each party an opportunity of presenting its
observations.

(5) The Secretary-General shall promptly notify both parties of the
stay of enforcement of any award and of the modification or
termination of such a stay, which shall become effective on the date
on which he dispatches such notification.

It follows from Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention that the Committee’s decision on
the continuation of a stay is discretionary (“the Committee may [...]”). In addition,
according to the same provision the Committee’s discretionary decision must be based on
its appreciation of the specific circumstances of each case (“[...] if it considers that the
circumstances so require [...]”). Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention does not specify
the relevant circumstances that the Committee shall consider, a further indication of the

Committee’s discretion in this respect.'?°

See Burlington, para. 70; Kardassopoulos, para 29.

24

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

71.

72.

723.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

Hungary concurs that this is the proper legal standard under the Convention!”° — a position
that the Claimant does not contest.!?7 Also, the Parties are in agreement that Arbitration
Rule 54(4) requires that a party requesting a stay of enforcement “shall specify the

circumstances that require the stay.” !7*

Nonetheless, the Parties disagree with respect to what should be the starting point for the
Committee in considering whether or not to grant the continuation of the stay, an issue that
is closely linked to the question of burden of proof in satisfying the conditions for the
continuation or lifting of the stay. In particular, the Parties have presented opposing
positions regarding the right to enforcement of the Award in relation to the procedural
tights of the other party to seek annulment of the Award and to request a continuation of

the stay of enforcement. !”?

Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention establishes that an award is binding and
immediately enforceable, “except to the extent that enforcement shall have been stayed
pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention.” Thus, the ICSID Convention
appears to attempt to strike a balance between, on the one hand, the binding nature and
enforceability of ICSID awards and, on the other hand, the procedural right of the parties
to request an annulment in accordance with Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, including
the right to request a stay of enforcement of the award. As stated by the committee in
Standard Chartered Bank, “the obligation that each State assumed on ratification of the
Convention, under Article 53, to comply with awards against it is particularly important.
This obligation is as important as the right to pursue annulment under Article 52 of the

ICSID Convention. These two articles are linked together.” '*°

26 Application for Continued Stay, paras. 12-15; Reply, para. 34.

"27 Response, para. 12.

28 See Application for Continued Stay, para. 14 and Response, para. 14.

129 See Reply, para 15: “[...]as much Claimant has a right to seek enforcement of the Award, Hungary has a right to

seek that any enforcement be stayed [...].

30 Standard Chartered Bank, para. 84.

25

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

74. In addition, the Parties have argued extensively whether granting a request for the
continuation of a stay of enforcement is “automatic” or “quasi-automatic” or if it should

be considered rather an exceptional remedy within the ICSID Convention structure.

75. Hungary has used the expression “quasi-automatic” in reference to what in its view is a
majority practice by ad hoc committees in granting the stay. Hungary clarified in its Reply
that the use of that expression was in reference to the practice of ad hoc committees in
actually granting the stay.'*! Sodexo has contested this position as a past trend, citing
decisions that in its opinion support a different current practice. '** In the Committee’s
view, in as much as previous decisions by ad hoc committees are useful to illustrate its
analysis, this use is limited since, as previously mentioned, granting the continuation of the

stay lies within the Committee’s discretion and is circumstance-based.

76. In the Committee’s view, it is now well-accepted that the continuation of a stay is not
automatic and that there exists no presumption in favour of a_ stay of
enforcement. '* Moreover, the Committee agrees with those committees that have
confirmed that the continuation of the stay remains the exception to the immediate

enforceability of ICSID awards. !*4

77. The Parties have dedicated several paragraphs of their written submissions to the question
of who bears the burden of proof with respect to a request for a continuation of the stay of
enforcement. In this respect the Committee notes that a number of ad hoc committees have
interpreted Article 52(5) to mean that the burden of establishing circumstances that require

the stay of enforcement lies with the party seeking the continuation of the stay.'*° Some

31 Reply, para. 28.
132 Rejoinder, paras. 29-32.

133 See Karkey Karadeniz Elektrik Uretim A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/13/11, Decision
on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, February 22, 2018 (“Karkey”) (CL-0173) and the Standard Chartered Bank
decision. See also Sempra, para. 27. In paragraph 17 of its Reply, Hungary clarified its position stating that ““Claimant’s
attempt to distort Hungary’s submission is misplaced. For the sake of clarity, Hungary has never argued that a stay of
enforcement should be granted ‘automatically’ in each case an applicant requests it.”

   

'84 Kardassopoulos, para. 26; Burlington, para. 73; Churchill, para. 34.
85 Burlington, para. 75; OI European Group, para. 94.

26

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

78.

79.

qa)
80.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

committees have found that it is part of the committee’s discretion to establish the existence

of such circumstances. °°

In this respect, the Committee recalls that Rule 54(4) of the Arbitration Rules instructs the
party that makes a request “pursuant to paragraphs [54](1), (2) (second sentence) or (3)” to
“specify the circumstances that require the stay[...].” According to the committee in
Carnegie, “[...] a request to stay enforcement is like any other request before it. A party
making the request must bear the burden of establishing the basis for the request.”!*”
Consequently, the Committee is of the view that as the moving party, Hungary has the
burden of proof, albeit that Sodexo should substantiate the positive allegations it relies on

for rebutting Hungary’s position.

ARE THERE CIRCUMSTANCES THAT REQUIRE THE CONTINUATION OF THE STAY OF
ENFORCEMENT?

As previously mentioned, Hungary is in agreement that the party seeking the continuation
of the stay of enforcement shall specify the circumstances that satisfy such a request, and
that the Committee shall use its discretionary power to consider these circumstances in
order to determine whether a continuation of the stay of enforcement should be granted. !**
Hungary’s arguments in support of its request for the continuation of the stay of
enforcement are three-fold: (i) Hungary applied for annulment in good faith; (ii) the stay
of enforcement would not cause Sodexo to suffer irreparable harm; and (iii) Sodexo’s bad

faith attempt to enforce the Award weighs in favour of the stay of enforcement.!*°

The Good Faith and Non-dilatory Nature of the Application

The Committee agrees with Hungary that the basis for a finding of the existence of a
dilatory or vexatious request for annulment is a stringent one. For such finding, a high

threshold must be met, such as that the application for annulment has a manifestly abusive

86 Standard Chartered Bank, para. 53.
57 Carnegie, para. 42; See also Karkey, para. 103.

158 See Application for Continued Stay, para. 14; Response, para. 13.

139 Application for Continued Stay, para. 22.

27

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

81.

82.

83.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

character or was brought without any basis under the ICSID Convention. The Committee
is not aware of any decision that has rejected a request for a stay based on this circumstance,
which reflects its high threshold. The Committee also notes that rather than forming a
requirement that must be demonstrated positively, the bad faith or dilatory purpose of an
application for annulment may, if demonstrated to a committee’s satisfaction, serve to rebut

a request for a stay.

In this respect, Sodexo has not argued that Hungary’s Application for Annulment is either
in bad faith or has a dilatory purpose. Further, the Committee sees no indication that
Hungary’s Application for Annulment does not correspond to the legitimate exercise of its
procedural rights under the Convention, which may be presumed to be exercised in good

faith.

Nevertheless, the Committee is not of the view that, absent any evidence that an application
for annulment is purely dilatory or vexatious, the application for a stay of enforcement
must be granted. The Committee shares the position of the committee in OJ European
Group which stated that, “the mere fact that the application is not dilatory is not sufficient
to grant the extension of the stay.”!40 Furthermore, as Sodexo contends, to sustain such a
position would mean that the stay of enforcement should be granted in all annulment
proceedings that are not purely dilatory or not instituted in bad faith, which as previously

explained, would not be consistent with the Convention. iat

Further, the Committee does not agree with Hungary’s position that the fact that its
Application for Annulment is based on the Achmea Decision (thus entailing the potential
of annulment of the entire Award), is in itself a circumstance that justifies the continuation
of the stay.'4? As Hungary recognizes, it would be inappropriate for the Committee at this
stage of the proceeding to consider the merits of the Application for Annulment. As other

committees have stated, the merits of the annulment application are not relevant for the

440 Q7 European Group, para. 115.

41 Response, para. 33.

142

Reply, para. 48.

28

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

(2)
84.

85.

86.

143

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

purpose of deciding whether or not to grant the continuation of a stay.'“? For that reason,
the Committee agrees with Sodexo that the fact that an annulment is based on a “key
question of jurisdiction” that could lead to annulment of the Award in its entirety, is not a
relevant circumstance for deciding a request for the continuation of a stay of

enforcement. !4

The Financial Standing of Sodexo

The second circumstance relied on by Hungary as a basis for its request for continuation
of the stay of enforcement is the fact that Sodexo is “a large financially sound” entity.
Hungary’s position is that the Committee should consider such a factor as weighing in
favour of granting the stay because in its view, a brief delay in the enforcement of the

Award would not cause Sodexo to suffer irreparable harm.

In turn, Sodexo alleges that a delay in enforcing the Award will cause harm to it due to the
difficulties in enforcement it will face before the Hungarian courts. Hungary contends that
post-Award interest would provide Sodexo with sufficient compensation for any damages
it would suffer as a consequence of the delay, in the event that the Committee finds against
the Application for Annulment. Sodexo argues that post-Award interest would not be an
adequate remedy because the prejudice it would face relates to the difficulties in

enforcement before the Hungarian courts.

With respect to Hungary’s allegation that the Committee should consider Sodexo’s good
financial position as weighing in favour of granting the stay, the Committee disagrees with
this assertion. The Committee does not see why the fact that a party opposing the
continuation of a stay has good financial standing should be a relevant factor for granting
the stay, even more so in this case where Hungary has not alleged that the lifting of the stay
would cause it irreparable harm. Indeed, the Committee has not been called upon in this

case to address a possible balance of hardship to the Parties if the stay is granted or not.

Patrick Mitchell, para. 60; Of European Group, para. 115.

4 See Response, para. 40.

29

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

87.

88.

(3)
89.

145

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

As for the Parties’ discussion with respect to post-Award interest, it remains unclear to the
Committee exactly how a decision to continue the stay would cause specific harm to
Sodexo in relation to its enforcement efforts which could not be adequately remedied by
interest. Further, the Committee notes that it has not been argued in the present case that
any delay caused by the stay would affect the likelihood of enforcement. That

'45 the Committee does not consider

notwithstanding, for similar reasons expressed above,
that the availability of post-Award interest is relevant for the specific circumstances of this

case, as a factor that would justify or require the stay of enforcement of the Award.

In addition, the Parties presented opposing arguments in relation to the financial position
of Sodexo and the possible risk of non-recoupment by Hungary. Hungary argues that such
tisk exists, notwithstanding Sodexo’s good financial standing, because in any case
recoupment of sums paid in enforcement would result in unnecessary time, cost and
resources being expended. The Committee considers that, to the contrary, Sodexo’s
financially sound position, recognized by Hungary, is a circumstance that militates against
such risk.'#° Further, the Committee agrees with Sodexo that the risk of non-recoupment
as alleged by Hungary is present in every single annulment proceeding — being a risk

inherent in any enforcement of an ICSID award. '4”

The Claimant’s Attempt to Enforce the Award Before the Hungarian Courts

The third factor invoked by Hungary as a basis for its request for the continuation of the
stay is that Sodexo commenced recognition and enforcement proceedings of the Award
before the Budapest Capital Regional Court in bad faith and in parallel with the annulment
proceedings. According to Hungary, Sodexo improperly “[...] hastily initiated proceedings

9148

for the recognition and enforcement of the Award [...] when it “[...] was undoubtedly

In addition, considering the Committee’s decision expressed in paragraph 93 infra, it is not necessary to analyze

the merit of Sodexo’s allegation that the continuation of the stay would cause it to suffer an irreparable prejudice that
could not be remedied by the post-Award interest.

446 Karkey, para. 115; Standard Chartered Bank, para. 73.
47 Response, para. 50.

148 Application for Continued Stay, para. 40.

30

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

90.

91.

92.

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

foreseeable for [Sodexo] that Hungary would challenge the Award and secure its
provisional stay of enforcement [...].”'4? In addition, Hungary alleges that in its application
to the Court, Sodexo wrongly listed Hungary’s representative for purposes of the

enforcement and failed to duly notify it of the existence of its application for enforcement.

The Committee rejects Hungary’s allegation of bad faith by Sodexo. First, when Sodexo
filed for the enforcement of the Award with the Court, no application for annulment and
request for stay of enforcement had been filed by Hungary, therefore, the Award was
enforceable under Articles 53 and 54 of the ICSID Convention, a fact which Hungary does
not dispute. In the absence of a pending annulment application and a declaration of
provisional stay by the Secretary-General, the Committee sees no reason why Sodexo
should have refrained from exercising its rights under the ICSID Convention and, as a

consequence, how that could be considered to have been done in bad faith.

In addition, the Committee also does not consider that listing the wrong Hungarian
representative for enforcement proceedings before its Courts — even if that were the
case!°°— could be considered an act of procedural bad faith. From the information available
to the Committee, it is difficult to understand how allegedly listing a wrong representative
would benefit Sodexo. The likely result would be that this would work against Sodexo’s
own interests by delaying the enforcement proceedings. As to the allegation by Hungary
that the wrong identification of its representative affected its procedural rights, the
Committee is not aware, from the evidence submitted by the Parties, of any such prejudice,
more so where the first stage of the enforcement proceedings under Hungarian law is an

ex-parte proceeding, as acknowledged by Hungary.!>!

With respect to Hungary’s allegation that Sodexo pursued enforcement of the Award in
parallel with the annulment proceedings, and that its filing of an appeal against the first

instance decision of the Court which rejected the Claimant’s enforcement application are

149 Application for Continued Stay, para. 39.

150 The Claimant contests that it wrongly listed the representative under Hungarian law.

'5! See Application for Continued Stay, footnote 24.

31

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

93.

94.

152

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

a breach of the provisional stay and a further demonstration of bad faith in the Claimant’s
behaviour, the Committee finds that as was expressed previously, it is not disputed that
Sodexo’s application for enforcement to the Hungarian Court occurred before the
declaration of the provisional stay. Moreover, as regards the continuation of the
enforcement proceedings after the provisional stay came into effect, the Committee is
satisfied with the explanation provided by the Claimant that it applied for suspension of

the enforcement proceedings before the Court.

In light of the foregoing analysis, the Committee finds that Hungary has failed to satisfy
the burden of proof to show that there are circumstances in this case that would require the
continuation of the stay of enforcement of the Award. In the absence of such justification,

the Committee concludes that the provisional stay of enforcement should be lifted.

Having reached this conclusion, it is not necessary for the Committee to deal with the
Claimant’s allegation that in the present case there is a risk of future non-compliance with
the Award by Hungary. It is also unnecessary to analyse Sodexo’s request to order Hungary
to provide “an unconditional and irrevocable first demand bank guarantee” or to order that
“the full amount due under the Award (including post-Award interest) be placed by
Hungary in an escrow account with a first-tier reputable international bank.” !*?
Accordingly, Hungary’s request for leave to respond to the issue of security as a condition

for the stay is also therefore dismissed.

Response, paras. 83 and 92; Rejoinder, paras. 110 and 133.

32

Sodexo Pass International SAS v. Hungary
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/20) — Annulment

 

Decision on the Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award

IV. DECISION
95. For the above reasons, the Committee:
(i) decides that the stay of enforcement of the Award should not be continued; and

(ii) reserves its decision on costs incurred in this Application for Continued Stay until the

conclusion of the annulment proceeding.
On behalf of the Committee,
[signed]
Andrés Jana Linetzky

President of the Committee
Date: February 10, 2020

33

