INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

SolEs Badajoz GmbH
Respondent on Annulment

v.
Kingdom of Spain

Applicant on Annulment

(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/38)
Annulment Proceeding

 

DECISION ON THE CONTINUATION OF THE STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE
AWARD

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Cavinder Bull, SC, President of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Colm O hOisin, SC, Member of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Noé Fernando Piérola Castro, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Paul Jean Le Cannu

 

August 26, 2020

TI.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND 2
THE APPLICANT’S POSITION 4
A. Spain’s Application for Annulment was made in good faith

B. Spain will suffer harm if the stay is not maintained

c. SolEs will suffer no harm if the stay is maintained...

D. The stay should be inued itionally 9
E. Spain’s request for relief. 9

THE RESPONDENT ON ANNULMENT’S POSITION...

A.

E.

THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS.

 

 

Whether Spain’s Application was based on serious grounds, made
in good faith and is not dilatory is irrelevant

 

 

Spain cannot prove that there are circumstances requiring a stay

Spain’s submission that SolEs would not be prejudiced does not
justify a stay of enfor 13

 

If the Committee finds that there are circumstances requiring a
stay, the Committee should order a conditional stay.

 

SolEs’s request for relief.....

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. The applicable legal standard...
B. Whether the circumstances require the stay to be continued.

The good faith of Spain’s annulment application.

Prejudice suffered by Spain if a stay is not granted.

Whether SolEs would be prejudiced if a stay is grante 2:
Cc. Whether security should be ordered as a condition for the stay
D. Whether the European Commission should be granted leave to

intervene in the present icati 27
DECISION AND ORDERS 29

 

L PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1. This Decision addresses the application by the Kingdom of Spain (the “Applicant” or
“Spain”) for the continuation of a provisional stay of enforcement of the ICSID award
rendered on July 31, 2019 in SolEs Badajoz GmbH v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case
No. ARB/15/38 (the “Arbitration”), as rectified by the Tribunal’s Decision on
Rectification of the Award on December 5, 2019 (the “Award”).

2. On April 1, 2020, the Applicant filed its Application for Annulment of the Award,
together with Annexes! 001 to 016 (the “Application”).

3. On April 3, 2020, the Secretary General of ICSID registered the Application and
informed the Parties of the provisional stay of the award pursuant to ICSID Arbitration

Rule 54(2).

4, On May 8, 2020, the ad hoc Committee was constitituted.in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rules 6 and 53. Its members are Mr. Cavinder Bull, SC, (Singapore)
President, Mr. Colm © hOisin, SC, (Ireland), Mr. Noé Fernando Piérola Castro (Peru

and Switzerland).

5. On June 9, 2020, the Applicant filed its Submission in Support of the Continuation of
the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, together with Annexes 017 to 033 (the

“Submission”).

6. On June 23, 2020, SolEs Badajoz GmbH (“SolEs” or the “Respondent on
Annulment”), filed its Response to Applicant's Request to Continue Stay, together with
Legal Authorities CL-001 to CL-024 (the “Response”).

7. On June 24, 2020, the Committee’s First Session was held by teleconference.

8. On June 25, 2020, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 1, to which was
appended the Procedural Calendar agreed by the Parties, and which provided, inter alia,

for the hearing on stay of enforcement of the Award, on July 30, 2020.

' With its Observations on the European Commission’s Application for Leave to Intervene as a Non-Disputing
Party of July 27, 2020, Spain provided two tables of concordance showing both the Annex number and the R or
RL number of exhibits and legal authorities. See List of Exhibits (R) and List of Legal Authorities (RL), both
dated July 27, 2020.

On July 7, 2020, the Applicant filed its Reply in Support of the Continuation of the Stay
of Enforcement of the Award, together with Annexes 034 to 058 (the “Reply”).

On July 17, 2020, the European Commission filed an Application for Leave to Intervene

as a Non-Disputing Party (the “EC Application”).

On July 21, 2020, the Respondent on Annulment filed its Rejoinder to Applicant’s
Request to Continue Stay, together with Exhibits C-001 to C-004 and Legal Authorities
CL-025 to CL-027 (the “Rejoinder”).

On July 27, 2020, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 2 (“PO2”) On the

Organization of the Hearing on Stay of Enforcement of the Award (the “Hearing”).
On the same date, the Parties each submitted observations on the EC Application.

On July 30, 2020, the Committee invited each Party to make comments on the other

Party’s observations on the EC Application by August 12, 2020.

As contemplated in PO2, the Committee held the Hearing by video on July 30, 2020.
In addition to the Members of the Committee and its Secretary, the following Party

representatives attended the Hearing:
On behalf of the Kingdom of Spain:

Mr. Alberto Torré Molés, Abogacia General del Estado
Mr. Pablo Elena Abad, Abogacia General del Estado
Ms. Gabriela Cerdeiras, Abogacia General del Estado

On behalf of SolEs Badajoz GmbH:

Mr. Charles Kaplan, Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe (Europe) LLP
Mr. Tunde Oyewole, Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe (Europe) LLP
Ms. Sarah Lajugie, Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe (Europe) LLP
Mr. Thomas Hopp, Voigt & Collegen GmbH

The audio recording of the Hearing was uploaded to the virtual platform Box on
July 31,2020 and the verbatim transcript was circulated to the Parties on

August 3, 2020.

IL.

20.

On August 12, 2020, each Party submitted comments on the other Party’s observations

on the EC Application.

Sections II and III of this Decision summarize the Parties’ positions and arguments
regarding the continuation of the stay of enforcement of the Award. Section IV sets
out the reasons for the Committee’s decision. The Committee’s decision and orders are

recorded in Section V.
THE APPLICANT’S POSITION

Spain argues that the stay of enforcement of the Award should be continued in this case
as (i) its Application for Annulment was made in good faith and raises “clear and
serious” grounds for annulment;? (ii) enforcement of the Award would be prejudicial
to Spain;? and (iii) SolEs will suffer no harm if the stay is continued.* In addition, Spain
argues that the stay should be continued unconditionally as an order for security is
unnecessary, burdensome, and would place SolEs in a better position than it would be

should there be no stay of enforcement.*
A. Spain’s Application for Annulment was made in good faith

Spain submits that there is a prevailing practice amongst ICSID ad hoc committees to
grant stays of enforcement absent unusual circumstances.° Given that Spain’s
Application is “based on serious grounds, was made in good faith, and is not dilatory”,
there is no reason to depart from that standard practice.’ Spain explains that its
Application raises “serious grounds” for annulment, as the Tribunal manifestly

exceeded its powers, failed to state the reasons on which it was based, and committed

 

Submission, § 7.

Ibid.

Submission, 49.

Submission, §¥j 8-9, citing RL-0117, Occidental Petroleum C ion and Occidental Exploration and
Production Company y. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/I1), Decision on the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, September 30, 2013, | 50; RL-0118, Victor Pey Casado and Foundation
“Presidente Allende” vy, Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2), Decision on the Republic of Chile’s
Application for a Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 5 May 2010, 425; Reply, §f 85-86; RL-0128, Tenaris
S.A, and Talta - Trading e Marketing Sociedade Unipessoal Lda. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID
Case No. ARB/12/23), Decision on Venezuela’s Request for the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the
Award, February 23, 2018 (“Tenaris v. Venezuela”), § 104.

Submission, § 12.

 

 

4

21.

22.

23.

a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.* Premature enforcement,

Spain submits, would be imprudent in these circumstances.”

. Spain will suffer harm if the stay is discontinued

Spain contends that the Committee has to consider “the harm that the continuation or
not of the stay could imply for each party.”!° In this case, not continuing the stay of
enforcement would be prejudicial to Spain because it would face “the risk of non-
recoupment of the amounts unduly paid”!! if the Award is enforced and subsequently
annulled by this Committee. Even if the amounts were recouped, Spain would have to
spend resources in the process, which is an additional burden that Spanish taxpayers

should not bear.!

In addition, the financial situation of SolEs suggests that “there is a serious risk of non-
recoupment if the stay is lifted”, a risk to which a State should not be exposed to were
the other party to turn out to be insolvent.'* If SolEs were allowed to enforce the Award
now, “it would probably pay the dividends it owes to two private equity funds [SolEs21
GmbH and SolEs 22 GmbH] — a dividend it promised and which it has been unable to
pay since its inception.”'> The promised dividend would have amounted to 5.94% per
annum'®, and was designed to be paid on a regular basis, as suggested by SolEs’s own
evidence.'’ While SolEs points to a payment made in 2012, Spain emphasizes that in
the last seven years, those who invested in SolEs 21 GmbH and SolEs 22 GmbH and

were promised regular payments, have not received any dividends. '*

Spain further argues that if the Award is enforced and its proceeds distributed as
dividends, SolEs and its subsidiary Fotones de Castuera SL will have no assets against

which Spain could recover its funds in the event that the Award is later annulled.!?

Submission, §ff 13-17.
Reply, | 90.
Submission, § 18.
Submission, § 19.

 

 

Reply, 34. Spain refers to RL-0123, MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (ICSID
Case No. ARB/01/7), Decision on the Respondent’s Request for a Continued Stay of Execution, June 1, 2005.

ion, § 24. See also Submission, {ff 26-27; Reply, | 30.

Submission, § 26; Reply, 37.
Reply, 4] 37-41, 55.

Reply, 4 42.

Submission, § 25.

24.

25.

SolEs’s most recent publicly available financial statements, as Spain submits, confirm
that SolEs lacks assets of a value similar to the damages awarded in the arbitration
(EUR 40.49 million).?° SolEs is unable to point to any such asset”!, and merely claims
that it and Fotones de Castuera are solvent.?? Further, the financial statements
submitted by SolEs in the underlying arbitration show that SolEs “has no other assets

of material realisable value than those related to its investment in Fotones de Castuera

SL (shares and subordinated loans).”?>

In response to SolEs’s argument that German accounting rules required it to use the
lowest value for its assets (thus suggesting that the value of SolEs’s assets may be more
than what is reflected in its financial statement), Spain argues that financial statements

must provide “a true and fair view of the net worth, financial position and results of

24

the company.”** (Emphasis in original.) Having valued its wholly-owned subsidiary at

EUR 100,001, it is clear to Spain that SolEs does not have the assets that would allow
Spain to recoup its funds if the Award were annulled after enforcement.*> Moreover,
said subsidiary, Fotones de Castuera, is in a “dire financial situation” and at “[h]igh

risk of default”?’ given its negative equity value of EUR -41,266,497.78

Spain also argues that its own experience in other cases, in which it has been unable to
recover any payment for costs awards in its favour, demonstrates the risk of lifting the
stay.2? While SolEs has laid great emphasis on the Eiser, Masdar, Antin, and NextEra

cases as supporting its argument that the stay should be lifted,*° Spain argues that these

Submission, { 30.

Reply, 4.47.

Reply, 4 48.

Submission, 32; Reply, {ff 49-50.

Reply, 452.

Submission, { 33.

Submission, Section II.B.(4); Reply, 4 59.

Reply, 57.

Submission, § 36; Reply, 58.

Reply, 4 62.

Reply, § 95; CL-0019-ENG, Eiser Infrastructure Limited and Energia Solar Luxembourg S.A.R.L. v.
Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/13/36), Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, March 23,
2018 (“Eiser v. Spain”); CL-00023-ENG, Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1), Procedural Order No. 3 — Decision on the Kingdom of Spain’s Request for a
Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, May 20, 2020 (““Masdar v. Spain”); CL-0021-ENG,
Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.d.r.l. and Energia Termosolar B.V. (formerly Antin Infrastructure
Services Luxembourg S.a.r.l. and Antin Energia Termosolar B.V.) v. Kingdom of Spain (1CSID Case No.
ARB/13/31), Decision on the Continuation of the Provisional Stay of Enforcement of the Award, October 21,
2019 (“Antin v. Spain”); CL-0022-ENG, NextEra Energy Global Holdings B.V. and NextEra Energy Spain
Holdings B.V. vy. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/11), Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the
Award, April 6, 2020 (““NextEra v. Spain”).

26.

27.

cases ought to be distinguished from the present case*!, where the award creditor’s only
relevant asset is on the verge of insolvency.” In addition, SolEs failed to provide the
full picture to the Committee by omitting to refer to the Decision on the Kingdom of
Spain’s Application for Annulment in Eiser, which in Spain’s view “is probably the
best example of the risks of lifting the stay once an application for annulment has been

filed.”>

Finally, Spain contends that it has potentially conflicting obligations under European
Union (“EU”) law and under the ICSID Convention. In particular, Spain argues that it
can only make payment under the Award if the European Commission has determined
that the Award does not constitute incompatible State Aid under EU law.*4 Flowing
from this, Spain submits that the enforcement of the Award should be stayed pending
the conclusion of annulment proceedings in order to avoid potentially pointless
litigation. In Spain’s view, if SolEs is allowed to enforce the Award, but the European
Commission decides that the Award is incompatible with EU law, there would be
further litigation by either Spain (so as to recover the proceeds of the Award from SolEs)
or SolEs (so as to overturn the European Commission’s decision).*° Such further
litigation could potentially be avoided by staying enforcement of the Award pending
the conclusion of the annulment proceedings — if the Award is annulled, then the issue

of whether it constitutes incompatible State Aid would become moot.*°

Besides the spectre of potentially wasted litigation, Spain also raises concerns that the
enforcement of the Award would place it “in the impossible situation of having to
choose which international obligation it will have to breach, and to face the
consequences of doing so.”*” In addition to possible financial liability**, such situation
will also give rise to reputational damage due to non-compliance with international
obligations.*° In this respect, Spain emphasizes that it is “committed to seek the

European Commission’s approval, not to try to block compliance.”*° While SolEs has

Reply, § 101.
Ibid .

Reply, 4 98.
Reply, § 153.
Reply, $f 154, 155.
Reply, § 156.
Reply, § 162.
Reply, § 161.
Reply, § 164.
Reply, 177.

28.

29.

30.

 

been ignoring EU law and its principle of primacy*!, and misapplying the law of
treaties”, Spain is simply trying to reconcile its potentially conflicting treaty

obligations to the extent possible.**

. SolEs will suffer no harm if the stay is maintained

Spain submits that another relevant consideration in deciding to continue the stay is
whether such a stay would have adverse consequences on the award creditor, which in
this case is SolEs. In this respect, Spain argues that SolEs has failed to prove any
prejudice that would arise out of the stay, and that SolEs would suffer no harm as a

result of the continuation of the stay of enforcement for two main reasons.*>

First, if a stay of enforcement is granted and Spain’s Application dismissed, any delay
in enforcing the Award would be compensated for through the payment of post-award
interest as provided in the Award.*° Spain emphasizes that the quantum of interest
provided for is not insignificant, pointing out that “SolEs Badajoz will be receiving two

times more than it would if they invested in 10-year Spanish government bonds.”*”

Secondly, Spain argues that there is no risk of SolEs being unable to enforce the Award
if it is not annulled.** To begin with, there is no concern that Spain, as the fifth-largest
economy in the EU, would be unable to meet its financial obligations under the
Award.*? Moreover, Spain emphasizes that it has no history of non-compliance and
would abide by its obligations under the ICSID Convention and as a Member State of
the EU.*° Indeed, Spain has confirmed “its commitment to pay the Award if it is not
annulled in this proceeding, specifically, by seeking authorization from the European

Commission consistent with its obligations under EU law and regulations, and then to

Reply, 4 186.
Reply, {fj 188-192.
Reply, § 180.
Reply, #f] 65-68.
Submis
Submission, §41; Reply, 71.
Reply, 4/77.

ion, § 39; Reply, {f] 69-70.

 

ion, 4/45; Reply, 81.
ion, 4/45.
ion, | 46; Reply, 81.

31.

32.

Til.

33.

sl

pay promptly upon receiving such authorization.”*! Spain argues that this commitment

should be sufficient and “weigh in favor of continuing the stay of enforcement.”

D. The stay should be continued unconditionally

Spain finally contends that the Committee should not ask for any guarantee as a
condition for the continuation of the stay of enforcement. In Spain’s view, “[a]d hoc
committees have recognized that this would place the award creditor in a better position
than it would have been if an annulment proceeding had not been even commenced,
and that it requires a high burden of proving that the award creditor would suffer
prejudice if the stay were continued.”*? In addition, SolEs has failed to prove that the

continuation of the stay should be conditioned upon the provision of security.**
E. Spain’s request for relief

Spain requests that “the stay of enforcement of the Award [...] be continued and
maintained in effect until the decision on the Annulment Application is rendered by the

Committee in this proceeding.”*°

THE RESPONDENT ON ANNULM.

 

S POSITION

SolEs argues, contrary to Spain’s position, that a stay of enforcement is “an exceptional
measure that may only be granted where circumstances so require”, and not “merely a
discretionary measure to be ‘automatically’ granted if requested, unless circumstances
justify that it be refused.”*° SolEs points out that Spain’s requests for a stay of
enforcement of awards rendered in renewable energy cases were rejected by the four

committees that have ruled on these requests.>”

Reply, 83.

Reply, § 84, 151-152.

Submission, { 49.

Reply, § 203.

Submission, § 50. See also Reply, { 212 (“Spain respectfully submits that the stay of enforcement of the
Award should be continued and maintained in effect, without security or other conditions, until the decision
on the Annulment Application is rendered by the Committee in this proceeding.”)

Response, fj 3, 15-19; Rejoinder, 18.

Response, 4 4, 20-21. SolEs refers to CL-00023-ENG, Masdar v. Spain, {9 63, 93, 98, 124; CL-0021-ENG,
Antin v. Spain, §§ 67, 72; CL-0022-ENG, NextEra v. Spain, {§ 80, 90; CL-0019-ENG, Eiser v. Spain, 49 48,
59, 61, 64, 69: Rejoinder, 4] 13-16.

34.

35.

36.

According to SolEs, Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention “establishes the immediate
binding nature of the award, therefore requiring compliance, except in cases where such

58

tule does not apply. SolEs argues that Article 53(1) imposes an immediate
obligation on an award debtor to comply with the award, and does not even require the
award creditor to seek enforcement of the award.*? In line with this, a stay of
enforcement must be seen as an exception to the “default rule” requiring “full and
immediate compliance” with the Award. It must therefore only be granted in
“exceptional cases, if and only if the circumstances objectively require it.”°! (Emphasis

in original.)

SolEs argues that ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(1) also demonstrates the “default rule”
providing that the stay shall be automatically terminated if the Committee does not

decide to continue the stay within 30 days of the Committee’s constitution.”

Finally, SolEs notes Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention, which “establishes two
thresholds for determining whether to take the exceptional step of continuing a stay.”
First, the Committee must determine if the circumstances of the case “require” (and not
merely justify) the continuation of the stay. If this first threshold test is satisfied, the
Committee may then exercise its discretion to determine whether to stay enforcement
of the award pending its decision.® In this respect, the burden rests on the award debtor,
Spain, to demonstrate “(i) the existence of the circumstances it relies on and (ii) that
these circumstances require the stay to be extended.”®° Spain has not discharged this
burden.®” SolEs, on its part, is not obliged to show any circumstances requiring the

lifting of the stay.

. Whether Spain’s Application was based on serious grounds, made in good faith

and is not dilatory is irrelevant

Response, 7.
Response, {ff 7, 9.
Response, 48.
Response, § 10.
Response, 11.
Response, | 13.
Ibid.

Ibid.

Rejoinder, § 7.
Rejoinder, § 10.
Rejoinder, § 8.

37.

38.

39.

SolEs contends that “[t]he merits of an annulment application are not relevant for the
purposes of the decision on the stay of enforcement of the underlying award” for two
reasons. First, in SolEs’s view, it would be inappropriate for an ad hoc committee to
review and express any views on the merits of an application for annulment at this stage
of the proceeding.”” Second, a good faith, serious application for annulment “is the
least that can be expected from an applicant”, and cannot be a basis to grant a stay.”! If
Spain’s fumus boni iuris criterion were accepted, “it would create an inappropriately
low bar for a stay, at odds with the fundamental purpose of the ICSID enforcement

regime.”

. Spain cannot prove that there are circumstances requiring a stay

SolEs argues that Spain cannot complain of the risk of non-recoupment of the amounts
paid under the Award since “[t]he risk of non-recovery is borne by any debtor to an

award that has been challenged in annulment proceedings.” *

Far from being an
exceptional circumstance, it is a logical consequence of immediate enforceability of
awards under the ICSID system.” In addition, Spain’s own arguments suggest that it

would not suffer any hardship as a result of enforcement.”>

SolEs disagrees that SolEs’s financial situation reveals a risk of non-recoupment and
that there is evidence that SolEs will use the proceeds to pay dividends and aggravate
this risk.” First, Spain’s argument as to the use of the Award proceeds is speculative
because SolEs did not promise, and is not obliged, to pay a dividend of 5.94% p.a. to
its investors.’’ While initially regular payment of dividends were contemplated, these
expectations changed when the disputed measures were put in place.’* In any case,
SolEs denies that periodic payments were promised to its investors, asserting that

“{bJoth now and then, it has been contemplated that investors would receive most of

Response, 25.

Response, | 26; Rejoinder, § 43.
Response, 27; Rejoinder, § 43.
Rejoinder, 4 48.

Response, 32.

Ibid.

Response, 33.

Response, 37.

Response, | 40.

Rejoinder, 457.

40.

Al.

42.

their return in the form ofa final future payment that would exceed any and all previous

distributions.”

SolEs also contends that Spain’s arguments on its financial difficulties and insolvency
were “already-refuted” in the underlying Arbitration, and notes that SolEs and its
subsidiary, Fotones de Castuera, are solvent due to their debt restructuring efforts.*°
Further, Spain misunderstands the one-Euro valuation of Fotones de Castuera’s shares*!
and the calculation of Fotones de Castuera’s equity for the purposes of determining
insolvency.*? Moreover, Spain’s arguments on SolEs’s financial status conveniently
fails to take into account the effect of the disputed measures on its financial situation

and that of Fotones de Castuera.*?

SolEs points out that, as a general rule, the ICSID Convention does not require an award
creditor to show that it would have assets to reimburse funds paid pursuant to the award
if that award was annulled.** It argues that, on Spain’s analysis, “stays would always
be granted: either the award creditor would be sufficiently financially secure and
therefore ‘unworthy’ of immediate compliance by the award debtor [i.e., it suffers no

harm], or the award creditor would be in need of the funds, thereby giving rise to the

85

tisk of non-recoupment of which Spain now complains. Contrary to Spain’s

suggestion, all the Ziser case shows is that the scenario that materialized in that case —
lifting of the stay and then annulment - is envisaged in the ICSID Convention.** Both
companies are in any event solvent thanks to the financial restructuring of the project

that SolEs was able to achieve.*” SolEs concludes that there is “no evidence SolEs

Badajoz would be unable to return the sums paid out to it in the event of annulment.”**

As for Spain’s argument on its conflicting international obligations, SolEs disagrees
that there is any conflict between the ICSID Convention and the ECT on the one hand

and EU law on the other,*? or that such conflict if it exists can justify a failure by Spain

Ibid.

Response, 445.
Rejoinder, 4 60.
Rejoinder, 61.
Response, § 46.
Rejoinder, § 62.
Rejoinder, 4 63.
Rejoinder, | 66.
Response, | 46.
Ibid.

Rejoinder, 71.

43.

44.

to comply with its obligations under the ECT and the ICSID Convention.” SolEs
rejects the applicability of EU law to the substance of the dispute and the primacy of
EU law in disputes under the ECT involving EU Member States.”! It argues that Article
16 of the ECT provides that “ECT provisions take precedence over the provisions of
other treaties, whether earlier or later, which concern the same subject-matter as the
substantive investment protections of the ECT [...] or its dispute-resolution
procedure.”*? In any event, SolEs argues that the issue of conflicting international
obligations will not be resolved even if a stay of enforcement is granted, such that it

cannot be said to be a circumstance “requiring” a stay.”?

. Spain’s submission that SolEs would not be prejudiced does not justify a stay of

enforcement

SolEs disagrees with Spain’s argument that the interest on the Award would

compensate SolEs for any delay in payment, and contends that “‘post-award interest on

the Award is irrelevant for the purpose of evaluating the validity of a stay request.”°*

Such interest is designed to provide compensation for the deprivation of the principal

and leaves the award creditor “no better off than it would be if the respondent State had

95

simply complied with its obligation to pay under the award. It cannot be a

circumstance that requires a stay of enforcement, elsewise this would result in the award
creditor having to bear the burden of showing why a stay should not be granted.”
Accordingly, the fact that the Tribunal fixed a rate that “is higher than the current yield
of a ten-year Spanish government bond (i.e., that interest rates in Spain (and elsewhere)
have gone down since 2014) is irrelevant.”°”

SolEs also disagrees with Spain’s suggestion that continuing the stay would not harm
SolEs because of Spain’s “assurance” that it will abide by its international obligations.°*
SolEs notes that Spain has consistently alleged a conflict between its obligations under

EU law and its obligations under the ICSID Convention and the Energy Charter Treaty

Rejoinder, 472.

Rejoinder, 4 75.

Rejoinder, 4 78.

Rejoinder, 4 73.

Response, 51. See also Rejoinder, | 50.
Response, | 53; Rejoinder, { 53.
Response, 54.

Rejoinder, 4 53.

Response, {f] 55-56.

4S.

46.

(“ECT”),” and that Spain has not indicated whether, in the event that the European
Commission does not authorize enforcement, it would prioritize its obligations under
EU law over its obligations under the ICSID Convention and the ECT.!°° Indeed, SolEs
argues that Spain’s Reply “leaves no doubt that Spain is prepared to evade compliance
with the Award on the basis of its asserted EU obligations.”!°! This ambiguity about
Spain’s willingness to comply with the award is “yet another reason to reject its stay

application.”!°?

. If the Committee finds that there are circumstances requiring a stay, the

Committee should order a conditional stay

SolEs argues that if Spain is concerned about the risk of being unable to recoup the
sums paid out under the Award, then it should “of its own accord offer concrete
measures such as a guarantee in order to properly balance the debtor’s apprehension
regarding the risk of non-recoupment with its ostensible willingness to pay ifthe Award
is not annulled.”'® Spain should not be allowed to complain about its concerns
regarding allegedly “premature” payment of the Award whilst being “unprepared to
agree to any measures that would balance those concerns with the Claimant’s right to
payment of the Award.”!°+ Moreover, SolEs disagrees that a conditional stay would
place it in a better position than it would be without a guarantee, arguing that “a
guarantee leaves an award creditor no better off than it would be if the respondent State

had simply complied with its obligation to pay immediately under the award.” !°°

. SolEs’s request for relief

In its Response, SolEs requests that the Committee:

“REJECT the Kingdom of Spain’s request to continue the stay of the Award.

Response, § 56.
Response, | 57; Rejoinder, { 68.
Rejoinder, 4 69.
Response, | 59.
3 Rejoinder, 4 88.
Rejoinder, 4 90.
S Rejoinder, 4 91.

- ORDER the Kingdom of Spain to pay all costs in connection with these

proceedings.” !°°

47. In its Rejoinder, SolEs requests that the Committee:
- “REJECT the Kingdom of Spain’s request to continue the stay of the Award.

- IN THE ALTERNATIVE, GRANT a stay conditioned on the provision of

either:

o abank guarantee for the full amount of the award, including interest,

issued by a bank situated outside the European Union; or

© anunconditional undertaking to comply if the Award is not annulled,
without any reservation, express or implied, on the basis of its

alleged EU obligations.

- IN ANY EVENT, ORDER the Kingdom of Spain to pay all costs in

connection with these proceedings.” !°”

106 Response, 61.
07 Rejoinder, 4 93.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

10%

110

THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

The Committee decides that the stay of enforcement should be continued. While the
Committee is mindful that a stay of enforcement should not be granted as a matter of
course in annulment proceedings, it considers that the present circumstances warrant
the granting of a stay. In particular, the Committee accepts that there is a real risk that
Spain may be unable to recoup the sums paid out under the Award should the Award
be enforced and subsequently annulled. Thus, the prejudice that Spain might suffer if
a stay is not granted outweighs the potential harm that SolEs might face if a stay is

granted. The balance therefore tilts towards the continuation of the stay.

. The applicable legal standard

At the outset, the Committee notes the Parties’ disagreement on the applicable legal
standard regarding the stay of enforcement of an award. Spain contends that the

“prevailing practice in prior annulment cases has been to grant the stay of

>> 108

enforcement and disagrees with SolEs’s submission that a stay of enforcement is

an “exceptional measure” that should only be granted in “exceptional cases.”!

The Committee begins its analysis with the text of the ICSID Convention under which

the present application is made. Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention provides that:

“The Cc i may, if it iders that the cir so require, stay
enforcement of the award pending its decision. If the applicant requests a stay
of enforcement of the award in his application, enforcement shall be stayed
provisionally until the Committee rules on such request.” (Emphasis added.)

 

In the Committee’s view, the language of Article 52(5) suggests that a stay of
enforcement should only be granted where “required”, and not automatically or as a
matter of course. Numerous ad hoc committees have also held that that there is no
presumption that a stay of enforcement should be granted in annulment proceedings.!!°

In line with this, the Committee agrees with SolEs that a stay of enforcement should

Submission, {| 8; citing RL-0117, Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and
Production Company y. Republic of Ecuador (\CSID Case No. ARB/06/I1), Decision on the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, September 30, 2013, 4 50.

Reply, ff 9-11. See Response, {| 3, 10.

See e.g. CL-0021-ENG, Antin v. Spain, 4 60; CL-0022-ENG, NextEra v. Spain, 4 79; CL-0019-ENG, Eiser
v. Spain, | 48.

16

52.

53.

54.

55.

11
112
13
114
1s

not be “the default option in annulment proceedings” and that Spain bears the burden

of proving that there are circumstances requiring a stay.'"!

As for the question of what circumstances would “require” a stay, the ICSID
Convention does not prescribe any particular factors that must be taken into account in
deciding whether a stay should be continued, nor does it establish a presumption in
favour of or against the continuation ofa stay of enforcement. The Committee therefore
agrees with the observations of the ad hoc committee is NextEra v. Spain that the
Committee’s decision must be “one based on the set of particular factual circumstances
of the case at hand” and that the Committee “will exercise its wide discretion [to stay
enforcement] depending upon the circumstances of the case and its determination will

be a case-specific, fact-specific inquiry.” !!”

The list of circumstances that may be considered is not closed, although it has been
observed that circumstances “usual to most annulment applications cannot, even if
relevant, be sufficient to justify the continuation of a stay.”''? In the absence of any
presumption in favour of granting a stay, there must be “special or particular

circumstances that bring the case outside the run of usual annulment applications.” !!4

. Whether the circumstances require the stay to be continued

In reaching its decision, the Committee has considered the following issues raised in

the Parties’ submissions:

a. the relevance of the merits and good faith of the Application;
b. the prejudice that Spain might suffer if the stay is not continued; and

c. the prejudice that SolEs might suffer if the stay is continued.

The good faith of the Application

Spain contends that its Application “is based on serious grounds, was made in good
faith, and is not dilatory.”'!> It further argues that “unless faced with an obviously

frivolous annulment application or other improper purposes [...] a stay of enforcement

Response, § 16.

CL-0022-ENG, NextEra v. Spain, §§ 76-77.
CL-0021-ENG, Antin v. Spain, § 67.

Ibid.

Submission, § 12.

56.

57.

116
"7
118
119
20

121

should be granted.”!'® SolEs’s reply is that “[t]he merits of an annulment application
are not relevant for the purposes of the decision on the stay of enforcement of the
underlying award.”!!” SolEs argues that, first, the Committee should not be assessing
the merits of Spain’s annulment application at this early stage, and second, the making
of an annulment application in good faith is the least that can be expected from a party

and cannot be a basis for staying enforcement of an award.!!8

In the Committee’s view, the merits of an annulment application can be relevant to a
stay application insofar as a stay should not be granted where the application for
annulment is manifestly frivolous or obviously unmeritorious. That said, the
Committee disagrees with Spain’s submission that a stay of enforcement should be
continued “unless it is obvious that the application is ‘without any basis under the
Convention’ and is ‘dilatory’ in nature.”!!” As pointed out by SolEs, such an argument

has been rejected by numerous ad hoc committees. '2°

More importantly, the
Committee recognises that the vast majority of annulment applications under the ICSID
Convention would have been made in good faith, such that allowing a stay of
enforcement in all such cases would in effect create a presumption in favour of granting

a stay. Such a presumption, as stated at paragraph 43 above, has no basis.

Prejudice suffered by Spai a stay is not granted
Spain submits that it would suffer harm if the stay is not continued as it would (i) bear
the risks and burdens of recovering sums paid out under the Award if the Award is

enforced and subsequently annulled; !*! and (ii) potentially face conflicting treaty

Submission, § 4.

Response, § 25.

Response, ff] 25-27.

Submission, § 10.

See CL-0018-ENG, Karkey Karadeniz Elektrik Uretim A.S. v, Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No.
ARB/13/1), Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, February 22, 2018 (“Karkey v. Pakistan”),
4 118. See also CL-00023-ENG, Masdar v. Spain, § 92; CL-0021-ENG, Antin v. Spain, § 83; CL-0022-
ENG, NextEra v. Spain, | 82; CL-0019-ENG, Eiser v. Spain, 4] 59 (citing CL-0010-ENG, Total S.A. v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/01), Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, December
4, 2014 (“Total v. Argentina”), § 83; CL-0013-ENG, OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25), Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, April 4, 2016 (“OL
European v. Venezuela”), § 115; CL-0015-ENG, Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v.
Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20), Decision on Applicant’s Request
for a Continued Stay on Enforcement of the Award, April 12, 2017 (“Standard Chartered Bank v.
Tanzania”), § 60).

Submission, § 19.

58.

59.

60.

obligations if the Award is enforced.!?? The Committee will address the Parties’

arguments on these issues below.

First, Spain argues that “there is a serious risk of non-recoupment if the stay is lifted.”
This is premised on (i) the likelihood that the award sums received by SolEs would be
distributed to the investors and shareholders of SolEs’s parent companies, '?* and (ii)
the lack of any valuable assets in SolEs against which Spain could recover its funds in
the event that the Award is annulled.'7* SolEs in turn argues that these factors are

“unexceptional or speculative, or both”, and do not justify a continuation of a stay.!?°

The Committee considers the risk of non-recoupment to be a relevant factor in deciding
the continuation of a stay of enforcement. In Patrick Mitchell, for example, the ad hoc
committee granted a stay of enforcement as there was, inter alia, a justifiable concern
by the respondent State that it would not be able to recoup the award monies which it
pays to the claimant investor.'7° Similarly, the ad hoc committee in NextEra v. Spain
ordered a conditional stay of enforcement on the basis that although “the ultimate owner
of Claimants, at the top of a complex corporate chain, may be a large public-listed entity
on the New York Stock Exchange [...] [that] does not sufficiently offset the risk of

recoupment that Spain may face.”!?7

To justify a stay of enforcement, the risk of non-recoupment must be a real one, and
not simply an abstract possibility that is “common to virtually all annulment
applications.”!?* In weighing whether such a risk exists, previous ad hoc annulment

committees have considered factors such as:

a. the creditor’s natural or juridical character; !”°

b. the localization of its assets or activities;'*° and

Reply, § 162.

Submission, § 24.

Submission, § 25.

Response, fj 30, 37.

RL-0139, Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7), Decision on
the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, November 30, 2004 (“Mitchell v. Congo”), 4 24.

CL-0022-ENG, NextEra v. Spain, 88. See also CL-0023-ENG, Masdar v. Spain, § 121.

CL-0021-ENG, Antin v. Spain, 4 72.

RL-0139, Mitchell v. Congo, § 24; RL-0116, Antoine Abou Lahoud and Leila Bounafeh-Abou Lahoud v.
Democratic Republic of the Congo (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/4), Décision sur la Suspension de l’Execution
de la Sentence Arbitrale, September 30, 2014 (“Lahoud and Lahoud v. Congo”), §4 20, 65.

RL-0139, Mitchell v. Congo, 424; RL-0116, Lahoud and Lahoud v. Congo, 4 20, 32, 65.

19

 

 

61.

62.

136

1
1
13
1

131 133

c. the creditors financial stability in terms of assets!'*!, revenue!*”, liquidity

134 136

profits!*4, solvency! or risk of bankruptcy.

In the present case, Spain argues that any sums paid to SolEs under the Award would
likely be distributed to their parent equity funds, SolEs 21 GmbH and SolEs 22 GmbH,
which would in turn use these funds to pay promised dividends to their shareholders. !°7
In this regard, Spain notes that SolEs (and its parent funds) have not paid dividends to
their investors for the last seven years although their prospectuses indicated “high,

regular dividends” for said investors. '**

In response, SolEs states that it is under no obligation to make payment of these
dividends, and that Spain’s suggestions as to how SolEs would use the award sums
remain speculative.'*? SolEs, however, does not give any further evidence on its
planned used of the award sums should the Award be enforced, arguing that “the
applicable ICSID provisions impose no obligation on SolEs Badajoz to demonstrate
that circumstances require the lifting of the stay.”'#° SolEs also cites the ad hoc
committee’s observation in Masdar that the distribution of award proceeds to
shareholders are “possible scenarios that may occur in all cases in which the proceeds
of an award are obtained by an original creditor.”'*! It thus appears that SolEs is not

ruling out that Award proceeds may be distributed to shareholders.

CL-0010-ENG, Total v. Argentina, | 103; CL-0015-ENG, Standard Chartered Bank v. Tanzania, § 73;

CL-0018-ENG, Karkey v. Pakistan, | 115; RL-0127, Perenco Ecuador Limited v. Republic of Ecuador
(Petroecuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6), Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, February 21,
2020, 4 75.

CL-0010-ENG, Total v. Argentina, § 103.

CL-0013-ENG, OI European y. Venezuela, § 113.

CL-0015-ENG, Standard Chartered Bank v. Tanzania, § 73.

CL-0012-ENG, Flughafen Ziirich A.G. and Gestién e Ingenieria IDC S.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/19), Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, March 11,
2016, | 64; CL-0013-ENG, O/ European v. Venezuela, 4 113; CL-0014-ENG, Tenaris S.A. and Talta -
Trading e Marketing Sociedade Unipessoal Lda. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/11/26), Decision on the Request to Maintain the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, March 24, 2017,
| 87.

CL-0018-ENG, Karkey v. Pakistan, 4 115; CL-0020-SPA, Valores Mundiales, S.L. and Consorcio Andino
S.L. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/13/11), Decision on the Request for a
Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, September 6, 2018, § 98; CL-0021-ENG, Antin v.
Spain, § 73; CL-0023-ENG, Masdar v. Spain, § 119-126.

Submission, {ff 26-27.

Reply, if] 39-42.

Response, §] 43.

Rejoinder, § 8.

Response, §] 42; CL-00023-ENG, Masdar v. Spain, § 123.

20

63.

64.

1

42
43

Submiss

Having heard the Parties’ evidence and submissions, the Committee concludes that
there is a real likelihood that the sums paid to SolEs under the Award would be
distributed to the investors of SolEs’s parent funds. On its part, Spain has shown
evidence that SolEs has promised its investors a dividend of 5.94% per annum but has
not made any dividend payments since 2012.'*? While the prospectus relied on by
Spain does not show a binding legal obligation to provide such returns, it does indicate
that this is the business model and how capital and funding are obtained. Given SolEs’s
admission that “SolEs Badajoz is not currently generating income for its investors as a
result of the Spanish measures,” the Committee finds it not unreasonable to assume, as
Spain argues, that such dividends, if paid, would have to come out from the monies

paid under the Award. '47

SolEs, on its part, has not adequately rebutted Spain’s contentions. SolEs has not, for
example, identified any intended use of the Award monies that would alleviate any non-
recoupment concerns (e.g. maintenance of adequate cash levels, purchase of marketable
securities or acquisition of capital). Further, unlike the award creditors in other
annulment proceedings, '*4 SolEs has not offered any risk-mitigating responses, such as
the deposit of the proceeds in an escrow account or an undertaking to repay any amounts
eventually due or to refrain from disbursing or transferring them while the annulment
proceeding is still underway. In short, there is no countervailing evidence showing that
the risk of non-recoupment is unlikely or remote, e.g. showing that the Award proceeds
would not be distributed by SolEs to its shareholders. The Committee is therefore left
with no suggestion as to how the proceeds of the Award (which are substantial and
amount to more than 14 times SolEs’s assets or equity as of 31 December 2018) would
be utilised other than to address the unfulfilled expectation of dividend payments to
SolEs’s parent investors. In these circumstances, it is not unreasonable for this
Committee to assume that SolEs would use the proceeds from the Award (e.g. by
distributing dividends to its investors) in a manner that may put those proceeds out of
reach from Spain in the event that the Award is annulled. Were the situation otherwise,
the Committee would have expected SolEs to come forward and provide more

information than it did.

 

ion, | 26; Reply, | 42.

Response, | 46.

See,

e.g., CL-0023-ENG, Masdar v. Spain, § 118; CL-0022-ENG, NextEra v. Spain, § 88.
21

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

 

Secondly, Spain submits that, in the event that the Award proceeds are distributed to
SolEs’s investors, SolEs and its subsidiary Fotones de Castuera will have no assets
against which Spain would be able to recover its funds if the Award is later annulled. '45

The Committee finds Spain’s argument and evidence to be persuasive.

On their face, the financial statements of SolEs and its subsidiary, Fotones de Castuera,
show that these entities do not have assets sufficient to repay the Award sum whether
now or in February 2022 when the present annulment proceeding is scheduled to be
completed. As of 31 December 2018, SolEs’s total assets were EUR 2.85 million, the
most part of which were current assets (EUR 2.75 million).'*° Its gross revenue was
EUR 95,000, while its net income was EUR 2.34 million.'*” These figures alone lend
no confidence to SolEs’s ability to repay the Award sum of EUR 40.49 million if the

Award sums are spent and the Award is subsequently annulled.

Further, even if the Committee accepts SolEs’s argument that both itself and its
subsidiary are solvent, this would not eliminate the risk of non-recoupment highlighted
by Spain. Solvency alone does not guarantee that SolEs will have sufficient assets to

repay the award sums if required.

As for SolEs’s argument that Spain “does not say a word about the impact of the
disputed measures on the current financial situation of SolEs Badajoz and its Spanish
subsidiary”, '“* the Committee does not see the relevance of such an argument. Insofar
as the disputed measures imposed by Spain had caused a financial loss to SolEs and its
subsidiary, this loss would be compensated for by the Award. If SolEs chooses to spend
the Award proceeds, then it cannot blame Spain for its resulting inability to repay these

proceeds if the Award is subsequently annulled.

In the premises, the Committee accepts that if SolEs distributes the proceeds of the
Award to its investors, it would be unlikely for Spain to recover those proceeds from
SolEs’s assets in the event that the Award is annulled. This finding, in conjunction with

the Committee’s finding that there is a real likelihood that SolEs distributes the Award

ion, 425.
ion, | 29; Annex-027, Sols Badajoz GmbH, Jahresabschluss zum Geschéfisjahr vom 01.01.2018

bis zum 31.12.2018. The English translation of Annex-027 is provided in paragraph 29 of the Submission.
C-003-GER, Bericht iiber die Erstellung des Jahresabschlusses zum 31. Dezember 2018 der SolEs Badajoz
GmbH, Diisseldorf, Anlage Il.

Response, | 46.

22

70.

71.

72.

sums to its investors, poses in the Committee’s view a significant risk that Spain would
not be able to recoup the monies paid under the Award should the Award be annulled.
This is a significant, if not decisive, circumstance within the meaning of Article 52(5)
of the ICSID Convention, which militates towards the continuation of the stay of

enforcement of the Award.

Thirdly, Spain submits that even if the proceeds of the Award can be recovered in the
event of an annulment, the process of such recovery would impose a significant burden
and expense on Spain that can be avoided with a stay of enforcement. '*? The
Committee does not consider this to be a significant consideration supporting a stay of
enforcement. As noted by previous ad hoc committees, the burden and expense of
recovering award proceeds in an event of a successful annulment is common to
annulment proceedings, and hence does not require a stay of enforcement to be

granted. !°°

Fourthly, Spain argues that the enforcement of the Award might accrue to it conflicting
obligations under EU law and the ICSID Convention. In particular, EU law requires
Spain to “submit the Award to the European Commission for a determination as to
whether it constitutes incompatible State Aid.”'>! If the stay is discontinued, the Award
is enforced, and the European Commission subsequently finds that the Award
constitutes incompatible State Aid, Spain would have to either commence proceedings
against SolEs to recover the Award sum or, alternatively, face possible litigation
brought by SolEs to overturn the European Commission’s determination.!°? Spain
submits that, since the entire issue would be moot if the Award is annulled, the Parties
may avoid such “unnecessary burden and expense [...] by staying enforcement of the

Award at this time.”!53

In the Committee’s view, any procedural hardships resulting from alleged conflicts

between EU law and other treaty obligations do not require a stay of enforcement.

Submission, §ff 21-22.
CL-0021-ENG, Antin v. Spain, § 72.
Reply, 4 153.

Reply, {ff 154-155.

Reply, {fj 156-157.

23

73.

74.

75.

76.

154

55
156

To begin with, the Committee agrees with the ad hoc committee in Masdar that, while
a stay might allow Spain to temporarily avoid its conflicting obligations under the
ICSID Convention and EU law, it would not change “the circumstances underlying the
alleged conflict of laws.”'** The ad hoc committee in Eiser also expressed a similar

view in the face of such an argument:

“Tf the argument is that seeking clearance would create a contradiction between
the ICSID Convention Rules and EU law, this issue, together with the need to
request clearance from the EU, has been heavily debated by the Parties. The
Committee considers that Spain has not shown that the manner through
which or the process that will be followed to comply with its obligation
contained in Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention would be affected by the
fact that the request for stay is granted or denied now or when the final ruling
of the Committee is issued. Thus, the Committee denies this ground for [the]
request to stay the enforcement of the Award.” (Emphasis added.)!*°
A stay of enforcement would not necessarily resolve the procedural burdens
complained of by Spain. For instance, a decision by the Commission on Spain’s
notification of the Award for a State Aid assessment may trigger further litigation.
Therefore, the Committee does not consider such difficulties to be a circumstance

requiring the stay of enforcement to be continued.

In any event, the Committee also does not consider a stay of enforcement to be an
appropriate means for resolving Spain’s conflicting international obligations. In this
respect, the Committee shares the same doubt as the Masdar committee as to whether
“the mere existence of constraints imposed by legal regimes other than that of the
ICSID Convention — whether national or international — may be a valid ‘circumstance’
that ‘requires’ the stay of enforcement of the Award.”'*° As stated by the ad hoc
committee in Antin, insofar as Spain “willingly chose to undertake international
obligations that may conflict with each other, it cannot thereafter complain of prejudice

once these conflicts arise.” !57

Having considered the four issues above, the Committee is of the view that the
enforcement of the Award at this juncture would prejudice Spain because there is a real

risk that Spain would be unable to recoup the Award sums if the Award is subsequently

CL-0023-ENG, Masdar v. Spain, § 132.
CL-0019-ENG, Eiser v. Spain, § 69.
CL-0023-ENG, Masdar v. Spain, § 132.
CL-0021-ENG, Antin v. Spain, 4 76.

24

77.

78.

79.

80.

158 Subr

annulled. This is premised on the Committee’s findings that (i) there is a real likelihood
that SolEs would use the proceeds of the Award and distribute them to its investors,
and (ii) once those amounts are no longer available, SolEs would not have significant
assets against which Spain would be able to recoup the Award sums in the event that

its Application succeeds.

For the sake of clarity, the Committee emphasises that it is well within the rights of an
award creditor to use the funds obtained from an award in any manner that it deems fit.
However, the question before the Committee is not whether SolEs is entitled to
distribute the proceeds of the Award to its investors, but whether there is a real
possibility that such distribution occurs under circumstances that would prevent Spain
from recouping the Award proceeds in the event that the Award is annulled. For the

reasons set out above, the Committee answers this question in the affirmative.

Whether SolEs would be prejudiced if a stay is granted

Spain argues that SolEs would not suffer significant prejudice as (i) the interest of 1.74%
compounded quarterly sufficiently compensates for any delay in the enforcement of the
Award; and (ii) there is no risk that SolEs would not be able to enforce its Award against

Spain, the fifth-largest economy in the EU.!°*

SolEs does not point to any particular circumstance showing prejudice, but argues that
(i) a post-award interest is irrelevant for the purpose of evaluating the validity of a stay
request; and (ii) there is little confidence that Spain would willingly comply with its
obligations under the ICSID Convention to honour the Award.'*? Further, SolEs
submits that even if it is not prejudiced by a stay of enforcement, such lack of prejudice

is not a circumstance requiring a stay to be granted.'°°

The Committee agrees with SolEs’s submission that a lack of prejudice is not a
circumstance justifying a stay of enforcement. However, it is a relevant consideration
in assessing whether the continuation of the stay would cause SolEs any prejudice so

as to warrant the stay not being granted even though there are circumstances otherwise

 

ion, $f] 40-49.

 

1599 Response, if] 51-59.
160 Response. if] 50-59.

25

81.

82.

83.

84.

161

163
16

z

requiring such a stay. Having considered this issue, the Committee finds that no such

prejudice has been established.

With respect to the question of post-award interest, the Committee agrees with SolEs
and the Masdar committee that the payment of that interest does not in itself “speak to

whether the circumstances require a stay.”!®!

At best, the payment of post-award
interest “may show that the stay is less (or not at all) burdensome.”!®? This might be a
relevant consideration in establishing prejudice (or the lack thereof) for SolEs, but in

this case, it is not significant.

With respect to SolEs’s ability to enforce the Award against Spain, there is no dispute
as to Spain’s economic ability to honour the Award. While SolEs suggests that Spain
is relying on EU law to potentially “escape its obligations under the ICSID Convention
and the ECT,”!® the Committee considers that there is insufficient evidence to impute
that intent on Spain. In any case, even if Spain’s reluctance to pay the Award sums
pending clearance from the European Commission poses difficulties in enforcing the
Award, this is an issue to be resolved by the competent courts at the place of
enforcement and not by this Committee in addressing the present application. For this
reason, the Committee does not consider this issue to be a significant one in deciding

whether a stay should be granted.

For the above reasons, the Committee does not consider that a stay of enforcement of
the Award would cause any particular harm or prejudice to SolEs. In the absence of
such prejudice, the Committee finds that it has no reason not to exercise its discretion

to grant a stay in circumstances where such a stay is, in the Committee’s view, required.

. Whether security should be ordered as a condition for the stay

SolEs argues that, if this Committee finds that there are circumstances requiring a stay,

it should order the stay to be continued only on the condition that Spain provides:'*

a. a bank guarantee payable outside the EU; or

Response, | 53; CL-00023-ENG, Masdar v. Spain, 4 98.
id.

12 Ibid.

Response, | 57.
Rejoinder, 92.

26

85.

86.

87.

88.

165
166
167

168

b. an unconditional undertaking by Spain to comply with the Award if it is not
annulled, without any reservation, express or implied, based on its alleged EU

obligations.

Spain contends that the above conditions should be rejected. First, such conditions
would circumvent the provisions of EU law that might stand in the way of enforcing
the Award, and thus place SolEs ina “better position than it would have been in without

9 165

a guarantee. Moreover the maintenance of a bank guarantee would involve

significant bank charges, thus imposing a further burden on Spain. !°°

In deciding whether to order a condition for the stay, the Committee is guided by the
observation made by the ad hoc committee in Azurix v. Argentina, that the provision of
a security is not “an automatic or counterbalancing right” to a stay, but should instead
be ordered only in “limited exceptions [...] in order to eliminate any ‘reasonable doubt
as to the State’s intent to comply’.”'®” In light of its finding that there is insufficient
evidence to show that Spain might be unable or unwilling to honour the Award (see
paragraph 82 above), the Committee does not find that the circumstances warrant the

imposition of any condition for the continuation of the stay.

. Whether the European Commission should be granted leave to intervene in the

present application

On July 17, 2020, the European Commission filed an Application for Leave to Intervene
as a Non-Disputing Party in the present annulment proceeding. One of the issues on
which the European Commission requested to be heard, “where necessary”, was on the
question of whether international law and EU law require the Award to be stayed

unconditionally pending the conclusion of the annulment proceedings. !°

Given the Committee’s decision to continue the stay, it is unnecessary to consider the
EC Application in respect of this issue. The Committee will separately consider the

rest of the EC Application together with the Parties’ observations and their comments

Reply, 207, citing RL-0128, Tenaris v. Venezuela, | 155.

Reply, § 205.

RL-0119, Azurix Corp. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Decision on the Argentine
Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, December 28, 2007, | 25.

EC Application, July 17, 2020, $f] 47-53, 58(b).

27

on each other’s observations. The EC will be informed accordingly by separate

communication.

28

Vv. DECISION AND ORDERS
89. For the reasons stated above, the Committee:

a. decides that the stay of enforcement of the Award should be continued

unconditionally until the conclusion of the present annulment proceeding; and

b. reserves the issue of costs on this Application to a further order, decision or

award.

ff (Bue Ben -

Mr Fernando Pierola Mr. Colm O hOisin, SC
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee

 

 

Mr. Cavinder Bull, SC
President of the ad hoc Committee

29

