CASES

International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes

SOUTHERN PACIFIC PROPERTIES
(MIDDLE EAST) LIMITED

ve

ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT i
CASE No. ARB/84/3 '

AWARD ON THE MERITS

President : Dr. Eduardo JIMENEZ DE
ARECHAGA
Members of the Tribunal : Dr. Mohamed Amin EL MAHDI
Robert FE PIETROWSKI, Jr., Esq.
Secretary of the Tribunal : Mr. Nassib G. ZIADE
In Case No. ARB/84/3,
between Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited and
Southern Pacific Properties Limited,
represented by

Mr. Peter Munk, as Agent; assisted by: Mr. William Lau-
rence Craig, Mr. Jan Paulsson, Mr. Paul D. Friedland, Mr.
Jean-Claude Najar, Mr. Harvey McGregor, Q.C., Mr.
Mohammed Kamel, Mr. Charles Kaplan and Mr. Michael
Polkinghorne, as Counsel; and Dr. Aron Broches, as
Consultant,

 

CASES 329

and

The Arab Republic of Egypt,

represented by

Dr. Iskandar Ghattas; assisted by: Mr. Hassan Baghdadi,
Professor Fawzy Mansour, Professor Jean-Denis Bredin,
Mr. Robert Saint-Esteben, Mr. Ahmed Medhat and Pro-
fessor Emmanuel Gaillard, as Counsel; and Dr. Rudolf
Dolzer, as Consultant,

THE TRIBUNAL,
Composed as above,
Makes the following Award:

I, THE PROCEEDINGS

1, On August 24, 1984, the International Centre for Settlement of In-
vestment Disputes (“the Centre” or “ICSID”) received a Request for Arbitra-
tion from Southem Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited (“SPP(ME)” or
“the Claimant”), a Hong Kong corporation. The Request stated that SPP(ME)
wished to institute arbitration proceedings under the Convention on the Set-
tlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States
(“the Washington Convention”) against the Arab Republic of Egypt (“the
ARE” or “the Respondent”), and asked for the following relief:

“SPP(ME) respectfully requests ICSID to establish an arbitral tribunal to:

1. determine that the ARE has undertaken obligations and incurred du-

ties in respect to SPP(ME) both according to the terms of Law No. 43 and

according to the Heads of Agreement of September 1974 specifically en-

tered into by a Member of its Government, as well as by a Supplemental

Agreement “approved, agreed and ratified” by the same Member of its

Government.

2. determine that the ARE violated its obligations thereunder,

3. adopt and incorporate as its own the pertinent findings of fact made
by the ICC Arbitral Tribunal concerning SPP(ME)’s performance of its
obligations under its agreements, the dismissal of EGOTH's counterclaim
therein, and the acts bringing about termination of the investment project,
4. determine the liability of the ARE to compensate SPP(ME) for the
termination of its investment agreements and to award the full measure of
indemnification to SPP(ME) on account of the destruction of its invest~
ment, increased by the additional costs, including all direct and indirect
costs of the present proceedings, occasioned by ARE’s wrongful refusal to
honor the ICC award of February 16, 1983, or otherwise compensate
SPP(ME), as well as interest at commercial rates.”

330 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

2. On August 28, 1984, the Secretary-General of ICSID sent an ac-
knowledgement of the Request to SPP(ME) and transmitted a copy of the
Request to the Respondent. On the same day, the Secretary-General registered
the Request in the Arbitration Register and notified the Parties accordingly.

3. On August 29, 1984, the Secretary-General notified the Parties by
telex that:

. the Arabic text of Article 8 of Law No. 43 of 1974 refers to the set~
tlement of disputes within the framework of the ICSID Convention in the
cases where it (i.¢., the Convention) applies, and not, as erroneously men~
tioned in the English translation, where Law No. 90 of 1971 ratifying the
Convention applies. I have, thus, registered the request of SPP without
prejudice to the question whether said Article eight constitutes consent
for the purposes of the ICSID Convention or merely includes a reference
to this Convention in the cases where consent for ICSID jurisdiction is is-
sued separately, This matter, if raised, will be for the Arbitral Tribunal to
decide.”

4. On August 29, 1984, the Centre received from SPP(ME) a proposal
that a sole arbitrator be appointed pursuant to Rule 2(1)(a) of the Centre’s
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”), or, al-
ternatively, that the Parties jointly nominate an individual as President of the
Tribunal.

5. Inacommunication received by the Centre on November 12, 1984,
the Respondent stated that it contested the Centre’s competence with respect
to the present dispute, and that no action undertaken in proceedings concern-
ing SPP(ME)’s request could be deemed a renunciation of the Respondent's ju-
risdictional objections. The Respondent rejected SPP(ME)'s proposals for the
constitution of the Tribunal and proposed as an alternative a Tribunal consisting
of three members, with Dr. Eduardo JIMENEZ DE ARECHAGA serving as
President of the Tribunal.

6. In accordance with Rule 4 of the Centre’s Arbitration Rules, the
Parties agreed on November 26, 1984 to extend to December 3, 1984 the
period for nominating their respective arbitrators and for agreement on the
President of the Tribunal.

7. On November 26, 1984, the Respondent designated Dr. Mohamed
Amin EL MAHDI, an Egyptian national, as an arbitrator pursuant to Rule 3
of the Centre’s Arbitration Rules. SPP(ME) informed the Centre on Novem-
ber 30, 1984 that it did not object to the nationality of the arbitrator named by
the Respondent, as it might have done under Rule 3(1)(a)(i) of the Arbitration
Rules, and that it was designating Mr. Robert F PIETROWSKI, Jr., a US. na~
tional, as an arbitrator. Further, SPP (ME) informed the Centre that it con-
sented to the Respondent's proposal that Dr. JIMENEZ DE ARECHAGA be

 

CASES, 331

appointed President of the Tribunal. Dr. JIMENEZ DE ARECHAGA ac-
cepted his appointment on December 5, 1984 and Mr. PIETROWSKI ac-
cepted his appointment on December 7, 1984. On December 18, 1984, the
Centre received notice that Dr. EL MAHDI accepted his appointment as an ar-
bitrator, and the Secretary-General informed the Parties that the Tribunal was
constituted and that the proceedings were deemed to have begun in accor-
dance with Rule 6(1) of the Arbitration Rules.

*

8. On February 8, 1985, the Tribunal conducted a preliminary
meeting with the Parties at the Permanent Court of Arbitration in the Hague.
The Parties placed on record their agreement to the effect that:

“the Tribunal has been properly constituted in accordance with Section 2

of the ICSID Convention and Chapter 1 of the Arbitration Rules.”

In accordance with Rule 20 of the Centre’s Arbitration Rules, it was decided
that the Arbitration Rules in effect up to September 26, 1984 would apply;
that the procedural languages would be English and French; and that the seat
of the arbitration would be Washington.

9. The Tribunal decided at the preliminary meeting to suspend the
proceedings on the merits pending a decision on the Respondent's jurisdic-
tional objections, and that the proceedings on jurisdiction would consist of
written pleadings and oral argument. The Tribunal then fixed a schedule for
the filing of the written pleadings on jurisdiction, with the Respondent's ob-
servations to be filed by May 8, 1985 and the Claimant's observations to be filed
by June 19, 1985.

10. The observations of both Parties were filed within the prescribed
time limits. The Respondent in its observations submitted that the Tribunal
should

“pour ensemble des motif ci-dessus exposés, se dire incompétent pour
connaitre des demandes présentées par SPP(ME)
The observations of the Claimant submitted that the Tribunal should

“reject Respondent's objections to the Centre's jurisdiction over this dis-

pute between SPP(ME) and the Government of Egypt regarding the

State's failure to compensate this foreign investor for the losses it suffered

as a result of the State’s cancellation of the Pyramids Oasis project.”

11. On July 8, 1985, the Centre received from the Respondent a further
pleading addressing certain arguments made by the Claimant in its observations.

332 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

12. Oral argument on the question of jurisdiction was held at the Per-
manent Court of Arbitration in the Hague on July 10 and 11, 1985, The heas-
ings were recorded in the form of a verbatim transcript in the English and
French languages. At the end of the oral proceedings, the Tribunal requested
that the Parties submit certain additional materials concerning Egypt's Law No.
43 of 1974 concerning the Investment of Arab and Foreign Funds and the Free
Zones.

13. On July 23, 1985, the Parties advised the Centre that Southern
Pacific Properties Limited (“SPP”), the parent company of SPP(ME) and also
a Hong Kong corporation, had been joined as a claimant in the proceedings
subject to the Respondent's reservation of jurisdictional defenses.

14. In response to the request made by the Tribunal at the end of the
oral proceedings, SPP and SPP(ME) (“‘the Claimants”) and the Respondent
filed supplemental materials concerning Law No. 43 on August 21 and August
27, 1985, respectively,

15. On November 27, 1985, the Tribunal rendered a Decision on Pre-
liminary Objections to Jurisdiction. In this decision, the Tribunal unanimously
rejected certain of the Respondent's objections concerning jurisdiction and
stayed the proceedings on the Respondent's remaining jurisdictional objections
pending final disposition by the French courts of certain concurrent proceed-
ings involving the same dispute. The operative part of the Tribunal’s decision
provided:

“THE TRIBUNAL UNANIMOUSLY DECIDES:

A. To reject the objections to its jurisdiction raised by the Respondent

alleging that Article 26 of the ICSID Convention, as well as the pursuit

by the Claimants of alternative remedies, bar the claim in the present case;

B. To reject the objection to its jurisdiction raised by the Respondent al-

leging the withdrawal from the Claimant of the benefits of Law No. 43;

C.. To reject the objection to its jurisdiction raised by the Respondent

contending that the provisions of Article 8 of Law No. 43 do not apply to

this investment dispute; and

D. To stay the present proceedings on the Respondent's remaining ob-

jections to the Centre's jurisdiction until the proceedings in the French

courts have finally resolved the question of whether the Parties agreed to
submit their dispute to the jurisdiction of the International Chamber of

Commerce.”

 

 

CASES, 333

16. On January 6, 1987, the French Cour de Cassation issued a decision
the effect of which was to finally determine that the Respondent had not
agreed to submit the present dispute to arbitration under the auspices of the In-
ternational Chamber of Commerce (“ICC”).

17. On January 29, 1987, the Claimants filed a request with the Tribu-
nal asking that the present proceedings be resumed in view of the Cour de Cas-
sation’s decision of January 6, 1987.

18. On March 24, 1987, at the request of the Respondent, the Tribunal
invited the Parties to file further written pleadings and supporting materials.

19. The Respondent filed its Mémoire, dated April 30, 1987, and re-
quested further hearings on the remaining jurisdictional issues. The Claimants
then filed their “Observations on Respondent's Jurisdictional Memorandum,”
dated May 20, 1987.

20. The Tribunal met in London on May 25-27, 1987. After reviewing.
the new materials filed by the Parties, and in consideration of its Decision on
Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction of November 27, 1985 and the decision
of the French Cour de Cassation of January 6, 1987, the Tribunal unanimously
decided to accede to the Respondent's request for further hearings on the ques-
tion of the Centre’s jurisdiction.

21. ‘The final hearings on the question of jurisdiction were held in Paris
on September 8, 1987. At the conclusion of the hearings, the Tribunal: in-
structed the Parties to present their final written submissions on the jurisdic~
tional issues, together with an enumeration of the specific arguments relied on
to support those submissions, by September 25, 1987.

22. The Claimants’ “Final Submission on Jurisdiction” dated September
25, 1987 submitted that the Tribunal should

“determine in favor of Claimants the remaining jurisdictional issue, to rule

that the Arab Republic of Egypt (“A.R.E.”) has consented to ICSID ar-

bitration in conformity with the requirement of Article 25(1) of the IC-

SED Convention, and to take jurisdiction over the investment dispute

between the parties.”

23. The Respondent's Mémoire en Réplique dated September 25, 1987
did not contain formal submissions as such, but reiterated certain points made
by the Respondent's counsel at the hearing held in Paris on September 8, 1987,
and responded to arguments made by counsel for the Claimants at that hearing.

24. The Tribunal conducted its final deliberations on the question of ju-
tisdiction in Washington on December 7-12, 1987. On April 14, 1988, a ma-
jority Decision on Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction was signed. The
‘operative part of the Tribunal’s decision provided:

334 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

“THE TRIBUNAL DECIDES:
(A) To reject the objection to its jurisdiction raised by the Respondent
alleging that Article 8 of Law No. 43 does not suffice to establish Egypt's
consent to the Centre's jurisdiction;

(B) To reject the submission of the Claimants that the Tribunal adopt
and incorporate as its own the pertinent findings of fact made by the ICC
tribunal; and

(C)_ Consequently, and in accordance with Rules 25 and 41, to instruct
the President to fix the time limits for further proceedings on the merits
in consultation with the Parties.”

*

25. On October 5, 1988, the Tribunal fixed December 5, 1988 as the
date for the filing of the Claimants’ Memorial on the merits. On November 17,
1988, this time limit was extended to January 5, 1989 and on January 4, 1989
it was further extended to February 15, 1989. At the same time, the Tribunal
fixed June 25, 1989 as the time limit for the filing of the Respondent's
Counter-Memorial. The Centre received the Claimants’ Memorial on Febru-
ary 16, 1989.

26. Meanwhile, on November 14, 1988, the Centre received from the
Respondent an application for annulment of the Tribunal’s Decision on Pre-
liminary Objections to Jurisdiction of April 14, 1988. In a letter dated Decem-
ber 9, 1988, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID notified the Respondent
of his decision not to register the application for annulment on the ground that
the Tribunal’s decision of April 14, 1988 was not an “award” as that term is
used in Article 52 of the Washington Convention and Rule 50 of the Centre’s
Arbitration Rules.

27. The time limit for filing the Respondent's Counter-Memorial was
extended on May 16, 1989 to September 7, 1989, and again on August 31,
1989 to September 15, 1989. The Centre received the Respondent's Counter-
Memorial on September 18, 1989.

28. On October 12, 1989, the Tribunal fixed a schedule for the filing of
the remainder of the written pleadings, with the Claimants’ Reply to be filed
by December 5, 1989 and the Respondent's Rejoinder to be filed by February
20, 1990. The Centre received the Claimants’ Reply on December 28, 1989
and the Respondent's Counter-Reply on February 22, 1990.

29. On March 14, 1990, the President of the Tribunal held a consulta-
tion with representatives of the Parties in order to agree on the date and place

 

CASES 335

for the final hearings on the merits. It was agreed to hold the final hearings in
Paris.

30. On April 16, 1990, the President of the Tribunal issued a procedural
order fixing September 3-11, 1990 as the dates for the hearings on the merits
in Paris and providing further directions to the Parties including, inter alia, di~
rections that they file written summaries of the relief claimed after the hearings.
Following agreement by the Parties on certain procedures for the oral proceed-
ings, the Tribunal, on August 23, 1990, issued a procedural order in respect of
the conduct of the hearings.

31. The final hearings on the merits were held in Paris during the period
September 3-11, 1990. The Tribunal heard testimony by witnesses and
experts, as well as oral argument. The witnesses and experts appearing on
behalf of the Claimants were: Mr. Ralph M. Grierson, Mr. Gerald Walker, Mr.
Norbert Stibrany, Mr, William D. Birchall, Mr. A. Anthony McLellan, Mr.
Ronald Blainey and Mr. David H. Gilmour, The witnesses and experts appear-
ing on behalf of the Respondent were Professor Rainer Stadelmann, Mr.
Michael Renshall, Ms. Soheir Azab and Professor Abdel Moneim Awadallah.
In addition, the Respondent submitted an affidavit by Mr. Atif M. El-Azab.

32, At the close of the hearings, the Tribunal—in response to a request
by the Respondent—ruled that the Respondent could submit written com-
ments on the exhibits that had been produced for the first time during the
hearings by the Claimants’ witnesses and experts. The Tribunal asked that these
comments be submitted by October 31, 1990.

*

33. On September 21, 1990, the Claimants, pursuant to the Tribunal’s
procedural order of April 16, 1990, submitted a document entitled “Final
Conclusions and Prayer for Relief” which summarized the relief sought by the
Claimants as follows:

“The Claim

A. The Claimants claim primarily:

(1) the value of the investment in ETDC computed at
$41,000,000, or such other sum as the Tribunal may award, on the
basis of (i) the DCF methodology and/or (i) the share sales to the
Saudi Princes; and

(2) the amount of the loan to ETDC, amounting to $1,650,000;
an

336 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

3) post-cancellation costs for 1978 and 1979, amounting to
$623,000; and
(4) _post-cancellation, legal, audit and arbitration costs from 1980 to
1990, amounting to $5,108,000;
together with interest:
a. on the value of the investment ((1) herein) at 12.6%
compounded annually, amounting (on a value of
$41,000,000) to $125,000,000; and
b. on (3) herein at 12.6% compounded annually, amount-
ing to $1,874,000; and
¢. on the loan to ETDC ((2) herein) at the contractual rate,
amounting to $6,931,000.
B. The Claimants claim secondarily, as an alternative to A above, the
value of its investment in ETDC on the basis of its out-of-pocket expens-
es (items 1-6), on the view that the project would necessarily have real-
ized, at the very least, the amount invested in it, and an additional amount
(item 7) to compensate for loss of the chance or opportunity of making a
commercial success of the project:
(1) the amount of the loan to ETDC, amounting to $1,650,000;
and

(2) further monies lent at no interest to ETDC, amounting to
$408,000; and

(3) the capital invested, amounting to $1,310,000; and

(4) development costs pre-cancellation, amounting to $2,254,000;
and

(5) post-cancellation costs for 1978 and 1979, amounting to
$623,000; an

(6) post-cancellation, legal, audit and arbitration costs from 1980 to
1990, amounting to $5,108,000; a

(7) such additional amount as shall be fixed by the Tribunal to
compensate for the loss of the chance or opportunity of making a
commercial success of the project;

  

together with interest:
a. on the Joan to ETDC ((1) herein) at the contractual rate,
amounting to $6,931,000; and
b. on (3) herein at 12.6%, compounded annually, amount-
ing to $4,303,000; and
c. on (4) herein at 12.6%, compounded annually, amount-
ing to $7,404,000; and
4. on (6) herein at 12.6%, compounded annually, amount-
ing to $1,874,000.

 

CASES, 337

C. The Claimants claim as a further, subsidiary altemative to A and B
above the out-of-pocket expenses represented by items B (1)-(6) above,
together with interest as set forth in items B ad above.
Interest on all items has been calculated to 31 August 1990. The Claim-
ants ask that farther interest be added to take the computation to the date
of award,
Post-Award Interest
The Claimants claim post-award interest at a commercial rate on the final
sums awarded, commencing 30 days after the date of the award and run-
ning until the date of payment.
The Object of the Award
Claimants claim that any and all amounts recognized by the Tribunal un-
der claims A, B and C above should be awarded:

(i) to SPP (Middle East) Limited and Southern Pacific Properties

Limited, jointly; and

(i) to the extent that the prayer in part (i) herein is not recognized,

then to SPP (Middle East) Limited alone; ani

(iii) to the extent that the prayers in parts () and (ii) herein are not

recognized, then to Southern Pacific Properties Limited alone.
Respondent's Counterclaim
Respondent 's counterclaim and the relief sought by it should be denied in
all res
34. The Respondent filed a summary of the relief claimed on September

25, 1990, requesting that the Tribunal decide the case as follows:

“SOUS la réserve expresse de la question de la compétence juridic-
tionnelle (1D2) (1)(1), la R.A.E. demande au Tribunal arbitral qu'il lui
plaise dire et juger:

(1) On désigne ci-aprés:

~ le Mémoire en Réponse de la R.A.E.du 15/9/1989,
Facts: I F ; Droit: ID
~ le Mémoire en Réplique du 20/2/1990,
Facts: IF ; Droit: I! D

I/ SUR LE DROIT APPLICABLE AU LITIGE
1) Qu’en désignant expressément, notamment dans le Heads of Agree-
ment, avec différentes lois égyptiennes, la loi 43/74, les parties ont choisi
le droit égyptien comme loi applicable 4 leurs litiges, y compris le droit
administratif, et ce conformément 4 l'article 42.1, 1ére phrase de la Con-
vention de Washington (ID, 12 et s. ; IID 32 ets. ;

338

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

2) Que le droit égyptien incorpore différents principes et normes de
droit international, et spécialement la Convention de I'UNESCO du 16
novembre 1972 pour la protection du Patrimoine Mondial, culturel et na-
tutel applicable 4 T'espace; qu’en revanche sont inapplicables les deux
‘Traités bilatéraux entre I'Egypte et le Royaume Uni invoqués par SPP et
SPP (ME) (ID 21 ets. ; Il, D, 40 ets.

3) Que, de toute maniére, la Convention précitée de I' UNESCO s'im-
pose 4 !'Egypte en tant qu’ obligation internationale.

Il/ SUR LES DEMANDES DE SPP (ME) ET SPP

A/ SUR L'IRRECEVABILITE DES DEMANDES

1) Que SPP (ME) ne justifie pas que son Projet ait été réguligrement
approuvé par le “Board of directors” de l’Autorité Générale des Inves-
tissements (G.ILA.) conformément 3 'article 1 de la loi 43/74 et aux arti
cles 33 et suivants du Réglement 91/1975 portant application de cette loi
(ID 3 ets. ; ITD, 16 ets).

2) Qu’en conséquence, le décret du 4 décembre 1975 du Ministre de
l'Economie ne peut pas valoir approbation réguliére ni du Projet de SPP
(ME), ni de incorporation d’E.T.D.C. dans Me cadre de la loi 43/75, I
D, 28 ets.

3) Que SPP n'a présenté dans ses mémoires écrits aucune demande pour
son compte ; que les demandes de paiement 4 son profit présentées ver-
balement et subsidiairement au cours des audiences des 3/11 septembre
1990, sont irrecevables comme étant tardives et non conformes aux dis-
positions du Réglement de Procédure d’arbitrage du CIRDI; qu’au sur-
plus, elles n’ont été assorties d’aucune justification.

4) Qu’en tout état de cause, les demandes de SPP et SPP (ME) sont ir-
recevables et en tout cas mal fondées en raison des faits de corruption que
révélent les comportements de SPP et SPP (ME) notamment quant aux
“dévelopments costs” non imputés a E.T.D.C.; que, subsidiairement, il
conviendrait d’ordonner une expertise pour vérifier la réalité de ces coats,
et les destinataires réels des paiements intervenus (II, F 117 et s. ; 11D, 110
ets.).

B/ SUR LE MAL FONDE DES DEMANDES de SPP (ME) et SPP
B.1_Principalement

Que la R.A.E. n'a ni nationalisé ni confisqué les droits de SPP (ME) sur
tun “Projet” au sens de la loi 43/74, art. 7.

a) Qu'll n'y a pas eu de nationalisation 4 défaut de transfert desdits droits
et du Projet au profit de "Etat ou d'une collectivité publique (I D 36 ; I
D62).

b) Que la mesure de classement et d’expropriation pour cause d’utilité
publique du terrain du Plateau était non seulement licite (ce qui n'est pas
contest) mais méme obligatoire en raison de la Convention de I'U-
NESCO de 1972 précitée (ID 92 et s. ; IID 68 et s.)

 

 

CASES

©) Quill n'y a pas eu de “confiscation” des droits des demandeurs sur le
Projet; qu’en effet, il n’y a pas eu privation de tels droits, le Projet étant
seulement modifié dans l'une des ses modalités d’exécution conformé-
ment au droit administratif égyptien ; que, plus précisément,
1) les droits sur RAS EL HEKMA étaient intacts, ce qui n'est pas
discuté (ID 111 ets. ; I D 83 ets.) ;
2) le blocage des comptes de E.T-D.C., puis la nomination d'un ad-
ministrateur judiciaire constituaient des mesures provisoires et con-
servatoires ([ D 114; II D) ;
3) Il fat offert notamment lors des négociations de 1979 un terrain
de remplacement proche des sites initiaux permettant la réalisation
d'un projet analogue 4 celui qui avait été prévu en particulier dans le
Heads of Agreement et le contrat du 12 décembre 1974, offre qui fut
refusée sans examen sérieux (piéces F 37, F 43, F 51) (Il F 111 et
s.; 1D 150 ets. ; UD 87 ets.)
Que si, par extraordinaire, un doute subsistait, le Tribunal ordon-
nerait soit un transport sur le site, soit une expertise aux fins de véri-
fier la possibilité de réalisation d'un projet touristique sur ledit site de
remplacement (I D 150).
4) La R.AE. a également offert, au méme moment, un dédom-
magement monétaire pour compenser les conséquences du change-
ment de site (II D 91 et s.).
5) SPP (ME) n’a pas négocié de bonne foi, tant au regard du site
de remplacement qu’elle a refusé d’étudier séricusement, qu’au re-
gard de ta compensation monétaite, alors qu'elle présentait des de-
mandes totalement dépourvues de justification, notamment quant
aux “development costs” susmentionnés (I D 116 et s. ; II F 117 et
s.; 11D 0 ets.).
6) _Enfin, les droits de SPP (ME) sur le Projet étaient annulables ou
résiliables en raison des causes de nullité du Projet et des fautes com-
mises, précisées dans les Mémoires, (I F 169 ets. ; 1D 124 ets. ; I
F 101 ets. ; If D 100 et s.) et en particulier :
~ de illégalité du Décret n 475/75 qui ne comprenait pas
de carte en annexe et concernait un terrain déja classé en
partie domaine public, par le décret n 136 de 1955 (I F 129
ets. ;1D 125ets.).
= de la dérive immobiliere (“Housing”) du Projet, contrai-
re aux articles 3 et 4 de la loi 43/74 aux contrats et aux
études de faisabilité présentées par SPP (I F 139 ets. ;1D
126 ets. ; ITF 101 ets. ; 1 D 104 ets.).

B.2 Tres subsidiairement, sur le préjudice

a) que la compensation doit étre la “compensation appropriée”, tenant
compte des circonstances particuliéres de I’espéce (I D 76 et s. et 140 et
s.; HED 119 ets.)

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

b) Que parmi ces circonstances particuliéres figure au premier plan le
fait non contesté- que la R.A.E. ne s'est pas enrichie, et méme s'est ap-
pauvrie sans autre raison que de protéger le patrimoine culturel mondial et
de respecter une obligation internationale.

©) Qu’en tout état de cause, le lucrum cessans est exclu, en raison du
caractére licite, et méme obligatoire, des mesures (1 D 73 et s. et 146 et
s.; ID 126 ets).

d) Que les transactions exploitées comme références ne sauraient étre
retenues comme critére valable (II D 140 et s.), notamment 3 raison de
leur caractére spéculatif.

¢) Que la méthode D.C.F. est inappropriée en raison de Mabsence d’a-
vancement suffisant du Projet, de méme qu'est impossible toute prise en
compte d'une quelconque “profitabilicé” surtout pour un Projet aussi peu
avancé (I D 156 ; I! D 143 et s.).

f) Que Pévaluation des éléments de calcul de la méthode D.C.F. sont
contestables comme les experts de la R.A.E. l'ont établi (pices F 50, D
26, D 27, D 28 ; II D 143).

g) Que les autres chefs de préjudice ne sont pas établis (II D 115 et 143).
Que la R.A.E. n’a pas pu vérifier les nombreux volumes de pices pro-
duits par SPP aux audiences des 3/11 septembre 1990  l'appui de ses de-
mandes ; que si ces piéces tardives devaient étre déclarées recevables, une
expertise s'avérerait indispensable pour les vérifier.

2) Que les intéréts moratoires sont soumis au droit égyptien et sont lim-
ités, en matiere civile y inclus les contrats administratifs, 4 4%, & partir du
jugement, le montant total ne pouvant dépasser le capital (I D 159; 1 D
145 ets).

Quen rout cas, le retard antérieur a janvier 1986, da 4 Ia procédure
C.CLL engagée 4 tort par SPP ne saurait étre imputé 4 la R.AE.

Il. SUR LA DEMANDE RECONVENTIONNELLE DE LA
RAE,

1D 165 ; I D 155)
Dire et juger que SPP, et subsidiairement SPP (ME) sont responsables 3
Tégard de la R.A-E. de la non réalisation des Projets, et qu’elles devront
payer une somume forfaitaire de 30 millions de USD A titre de réparation
du préjudice, incluant les frais de procedure.

Qu’en tout état de cause, SPP et SPP (ME) seront condamnées aux entiers
dépens et'frais de procédure.”

 

CASES 341

*

35. On November 27, 1990, the Tribunal extended the time limit for
the of the Respond on the d abmiteed by
the Claimants’ witnesses during the hearings on the merits to December 5,
1990. These comments, together with certain additional documents, were re-
ceived by the Centre on December 3, 1990.

36. On December 21, 1990, the Claimants responded to certain points
made by the Respondent in its submission of December 3, 1990.

37. On February 11 to 13, 1991, the Tribunal met in London and on
February 13 it issued a procedural order requesting further information from
the Parties as follows:

“1. Whereas, the Claimants have explained that they have incurred cer-

tain expenses in connection with what they describe as the planning, de-

veloping, financing and management of the project, adding that said

expenses have been capitalized as development costs in the accounts of

SPP(ME) before and after the measures taken in May 1978 by the Re-

spondent.

2. Whereas, the Claimants have submitted as Exhibit 170 a letter dated

19 January 1981 from Coopers & Lybrand, with a summary of SPP(ME)'s

development costs for the years 1975-1979, broken down by categories of

expense.

3, Whereas, the above-referenced letter dated 19 January 1981 from

‘Coopers & Lybrand states that the summary of development costs for each

year from 1975 to 1979 “agrees in total by year to the audited accounts

of SPP (Middle East) Limited, and is in accordance with the information

contained in our audit files, which do not, however, provide a detailed

analysis for each period shown in the summary.” The letter further de-
scribes the audit procedures followed, indicating that a detailed analysis of
these costs, prepared by employees of the company with reference to the
various categories of expense, was provided to Coopers & Lybrand each

year and “agreed by us to the expense accounts in the company’s nominal

ledger, in which all expenditure was recorded in the first instance.” The

letter adds that “{tJhose items which were material in relation to the total

of these costs in each year were verified by us in order to ensure that the

expenditure as recorded in the nominal ledger had been recorded correct-

ly and had been authorised properly.” This verification was carried out

“by agreeing the selected items to the documentation supporting the ex-

penditure, such as invoices and loan agreements and by performing tests

on procedures operated by the company to ensure all payments were

properly authorised” and by reviewing “minutes of the meetings of the

Board of Directors.”

4, Whereas, for its part the Respondent has stated in its Annex F-49 that

the investigation of these expenses “sheds doubt over the components of

342, ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the unjustifiable developing costs which were not charged to ETDC. This

investigation requires the appropriate and clear details with their support-

ing legal documents in relation to the nature and components of these

costs.” In this connection, the Respondent formally requested that the

‘Tribunal order “une expertise pour verifier la réalité de ces coats et les

destinataires récls des paiements intervenus.””

5. Whereas, the Respondent has submitted as Annex F-72 a report by

Peat, Marwick, Mitchell and Co. dated 14 August 1981, which states that

“file is not possible . .. to be satisfied that the costs incurred either up to

18 June 1978, or subsequently, relate to the Pyramids Project” and that

“we do not understand why [these costs] were not directly recovered

from ETDC.”

6. Whereas, the Tribunal did not receive sufficiently clear and precise

information and figures concerning the development costs, nor the nec~

essary indications as to the nature and supporting documents of the ex-
penditures involved, to be in a position to determine all of the related
egal consequences.

For these reasons, the Tribunal decides the following:

a. The Claimants shall submit to the Tribunal and to the Respon-
dent, within one month, a document indicating the nature, date and
amount of the above-referenced development costs, including the
names of the recipients of payments in excess of U.S. $20,000 and a
confirmation that these sums were legitimately and actually expended
for the project and were directly connected with it. The document
shall also contain an explanation of why these costs were not charged
to or were not directly recovered from ETDC.

b. The Parties, within one month, shall submit to the Tribunal and
to each other an itemized list of the legal and accounting fees relating
to the present proceedings, indicating their amount, the respective
dates and the phase of the proceedings to which those fees and ex-
penses relate.

c. After receipt of the documents referred to in paragraphs a and b
above, the Parties shall have one month within which to submit their
comments thereon to the Tribunal.”

38. On March 15, 1991, the time limit for the Claimants’ submission of
the information requested by the Tribunal in its procedural order of February
13, 1991 was extended to April 21, 1991. On March 25, 1991, the time limit
for the Respondent's submission of the information requested in Paragraph 6(b)
of the procedural order was extended to April 21, 1991, and the time limit for
its submission of the information requested in Paragraph 6(c) was extended to
June 21, 1991.

39. On April 22, 1991, the Centre received the Respondent's response
to Paragraph 6(b) of the procedural order and on April 23, 1991 the Centre re-

 

CASES 343

ceived the Claimants’ response to Paragraphs 6(a) and (b). The Centre received
the Respondent’s comments on the Claimants’ response to the procedural
order on June 26, 1991.

40. On July 9, 1991, the Claimants filed a response to the Respondent's
comments of June 26, 1991, and on September 18, 1991, the Respondent filed
a response to the Claimants’ response. Although this final exchange of com-
munications had not been requested by the Tribunal, the materials submitted
by the Parties were nevertheless considered by the Tribunal.

41. The Tribunal convened its final deliberation on the merits in Paris
on February 17, 1992. On February 18, 1992, the Tribunal issued a procedural
order declaring the proceedings closed.

Il. THE FACTS

42. On September 23, 1974, a contract entitled “Heads of Agreement”
was entered into by the Respondent (represented by the Minister of Tourism),
the Egyptian General Organization for Tourism and Hotels (“EGOTH”) and.
SPP, a company engaged in the development of tourist and resort facilities.
EGOTH was at the time a public sector enterprise under the control of the
Minister of Tourism, organized under Egyptian Law No. 60 of 1971.

43. The Heads of Agreement by its terms was entered into in accor-
dance with certain Egyptian laws, including Law No. 43 of 1974 Concerning
the Investment of Arab and Foreign Funds and the Free Zones. In the Heads
of Agreement, EGOTH and SPP undertook to incorporate an Egyptian joint
‘venture company to develop tourist complexes at the Pyramids area near Cairo
and at Ras El Hekma on the Mediterranean coast. These projects were to be
developed according to detailed “master plans” which were to be prepared by
SPP and approved by EGOTH. The Ministry of Tourism agreed to secure the
title to property and the possession of land necessary for the development of the
proposed projects. The Ministry and EGOTH undertook to transfer the right
of usufruct for such property to the joint venture company as part of the capital
investment. They also undertook to assist in obtaining all necessary local ap-
proval for the execution of the projects in accordance with the master plans.
SPP, for its part, agreed to obtain the necessary financing for the projects and
to provide or arrange for all technical expertise required for the design, con-
struction, management and marketing of the projects.

44, The Preamble of the Heads of Agreement, which was expressly
made part of the Agreement by Article 1, provided:

344 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

“Whereas the Ministry of Tourism approved granting both 2nd and 3rd
party {i.e., EGOTH and SPP] the right to develop the areas as shown in
the attached maps in the Pyramid’s area and Ras El Hekma Zone.

This agreement is issued in accordance with laws No. 1 for the year 1973
relating to Hotels, Instalations and Tourism, and law No. 2 for the year
1973 relating to the supervision by the Ministry of Tourism on touristic
sites and the development of such areas, and law 43 for the year 1974 re-
lating to Arab and foreign funds invested in the A.R.E. with particular
reference to government guarantees long term tax holidays, exemptions
from import custom duties, etc.”

45. Article 2 of the Heads of Agreement provided:

“Both 2nd and 3rd parties undertake to incorporate promptly an Egyptian
joint venture company of which 40 percent would be subscribed by
E.G.O.T.H. and 60 percent by S.P.P. (For the Pyramid area) and 30 per-
cent by E.G.O.T-H. and 70 percent by S.P.P. (For Ras El Hekma).”

and Article 4 provided:

“FIRST party will secure the title of property and possession of land and

both First and second party undertake to transfer the right of usuftuct to

the joint company as its part of the capital investment. Both M.T. [i.e.,

Ministry of Tourism] and E.G.O.T.H. undertake to transfer such right to

the joint company immediately upon incorporation, any balance being

transferred not later than 90 days thereafter.”

46. On December 12, 1974, a contract entitled “Agreement for the De-
velopment of Two Intemational Tourist Projects in Egypt” (“the December
Agreement") was concluded between EGOTH and SPP. The Preamble of the
December Agreement referred to the Heads of Agreement, saying that:

seellowing execution of the Heads of Agreement dated 23rd September,

1974,...and subsequent negotiations between the above parties, the fol-
lowing are agreed
Article 1 of the December Agreement provided for the formation of a joint
venture company—the Egyptian Tourist Development Company ("ETDC”)
—to develop tourist complexes at the Pyramids and Ras El Hekma sites:

“A joint venture (stock) company with registered shares will be incorpo-

rated in Eygpt for a duration of fifty years renewable, named the “Egyp-

tian Tourist Development Company” (hereinafter referred to as

“ETDC”) which shall be responsible for the development and operation

of the projects. The nominal capital shall be US$2,000,000 (two million

United States dollars) increasing to US$10,000,000 (ten million United

States dollars) at the end of the fifth year. The capital shall be subscribed

60 (sixty) per cent by SPP and 40 (forty) per cent by EGOTH. On the

fiftieth anniversary of the incorporation of ETDC, EGOTH shall be en-

titled to an additional share at no cost in the capital of ETDC as will in-
crease the EGOTH shareholding to 50 (fifty) per cent of the total capital

 

CASES

of the company. The participation of EGOTH in the capital of ETDC
shall be represented by the rights of usufruct referred to in Articles 5 and
6 hereinafter. These rights are hereby agreed to be equal to the share of
EGOTH in the capital of ETDC namely 40 (forty) per cent at the incor-
poration of ETDC and through its duration and 50 (fifty) per cent begin-
ning at the fiftieth anniversary of its incorporation.”

47. SPP agreed in Article 3 of the December Agreement to arrange for

the financing of the projects:

“SPP will be responsible for the arranging of US$20,000,000 (twenty mil-
lion United States dollars) finance on terms and conditions prevailing on
the international market to be invested in the projects in the first four
years from the date of approval of the Master Plans as referred to in Article
4 hereinafter, and will ensure over and above that all necessary additional
finance required for both projects shall be provided by means of short and
long term capital, both in free and local currency.”

48, Article 4 provided that the development and management of the

projects would be undertaken by ETDC

“within the general limits described in the maps attached to the Heads of
Agreement, and in general accord with the Confidential Report, and as
detailed in the Master Plans to be prepared. Each Master Plan shall rec-
ognise the appropriate regional plan and shall specify the various zones for
the different types of development and shall include the location and de-
scription as well as the stages and priorities of all tourist facilities .. .. For
the Pyramids area there will be defined within the Master Plan area, the
project site area of not less than 10,000 (ten thousand) feddans (approxi-
mately 10,000 acres) to which EGOTH will receive title and ETDC the
right of usufruct as provided in Articles 5 and 6 hereinafter and within
which 5,000 (five thousand) feddans (approximately 5,000 acres) will be
developed. The remainder will be parkland and other recreational facili-
ties available for public use within the Master Plan.”

49. With respect to the rights of usufruct that were to represent

“use its best efforts to secure all the necessary Government approvals to
enable ETDC the immediate possession of the land in both sites, and to
ensure the transfer of the rights of usufruct to ETDC for its duration . ...”

and Article 6 provided:

“EGOTH will pass irrevocably the right of usufruct to ETDC for its du
ration immediately EGOTH receives title. ETDC shall be free to assign
its right of usufruct and to rent, lease, manage, promote or assign any site,
construction, recreational, residential or commercial facilities in both lo~
cal and foreign markets, provided that they are developed and utilized in
accordance with approved plans, but excluding the monument areas and
those which are designated for public use within the project sites.”

EGOTH’ capital contribution to the joint venture, Article 5 of the December
Agreement stipulated that EGOTH would

346 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

50. The December Agreement also provided in Article 17 that SPP
would incorporate a holding company to own its shareholding in the joint
venture: ¢

“It is understood that SPP will be incorporating a holding company to

own its shareholding in ETDC and it is agreed that SPP shall have the

right to assign its rights, privileges, duties and obligations under this

‘Agreement to this company in which SPP will have a controlling, but not

necessarily majority, interest and in which it controls and directs manage-

ment, provided the company satisfies EGOTH.”
Such an assignment was subsequently made to SPP(ME), a wholly-owned
subsidiary of SPP formed in 1974 to undertake the execution of the projects
at the Pyramids and Ras El Hekma sites.

51. Article 20 of the December Agreement provided that any dispute
relating to that agreement would be submitted to ICC arbitration, and Article
21 stated that the December Agreement had been made in accordance with
various laws of the ARE, including Law No. 43 of 1974.

52. On the final page of the December Agreement, following the signa
tures of the representatives of EGOTH and SPP, there appeared the typewrit-
ten statement, “Approved, agreed and ratified by the Minister of Tourism, His
Excellency, Mr. Ibrahim Naguib, on the Twelfth day of December 1974.”
Next to this statement the signature of the Minister and an official stamp were
affixed.

53. On the same date that the December Agreement was signed, the
representatives of EGOTH and SPP also signed a “statement” which provided:
“It is understood between contracting parties (EGOTH) and (S.P.P,) in
concer of the agreement signed on the 12th of December 1974, that ob-
ligations which lie on EGOTH are subject to the approval of the compe-
tent governmental authorities and that the feasibility study prooves the

profitability of the projects.”

*

54. By a letter dated April 12, 1975, the General Organization for In-
vestment of Arab Capital and Tax-Free Areas (‘‘the GIA") notified SPP that
the GIA’s Board of Directors, by Decree No. 30/16-75, had approved the ap-
plication for the establishment of a joint venture between EGOTH and SPP for
the development of the tourist areas at the Pyramids and Ras El Hckma sites.
‘The approval provided that the beneficial rights would accrue to the joint
venture for a period of 50 years and then would revert to the State. This period
was subsequently extended by the GIA to 99 years.

 

CASES 347

55. On May 22, 1975, the President of Egypt issued Decree No. 475 of
1975 which provided:

“The lands lying on each of the plateau of the pyramids and Ras-El-Hek-

ma and whose features and dimensions are determined on the map and in

the attached memorandum are assigned for the touristic utilization and the

General Egyptian establishement for Tourism and Hotels itself or through

one of its contributing companies will reconstruct and utilize these ewo

areas.”

56. On October 19, 1975, EGOTH as sole owner of the sites specified
in Presidential Decree No. 475 transferred its right of usufruct for the sites “ir
revocably” and “without restriction of any kind” to ETDC for the life of the
joint venture.

57. On November 23, 1975, EGOTH and SPP(ME) signed a contract
entitled “Preliminary Agreement of Incorporation” which provided for the in-
corporation of ETDC in conformity with Law No. 1 of 1973 Conceming
Tourist Establishments and Law No. 43 of 1974. The incorporation of ETDC
was subsequently authorized by Ministerial Decree No. 212 of 1975, issued by
the Ministry of Economy and Economic Cooperation on December 4, 1975.
This decree stated in its preamble that it was issued in conformity with inter
alia“the [GIA] Board of Directors’ Resolution No. 50/15/1975 at the session
of 20th July, 1975; and the memorandum of the Deputy Chairman of the
General Authority for Arab Investment dated 1st December, 1975.”

58. By a letter dated April 1, 1976, the Chairman of EGOTH notified
the Chairman of ETDC of the “formal approval of the MT Minisey of
Tourism] and EGOTH of the Pyramids Oasis Project as a whole .

59. On October 19, 1976, the Minister of Tourism wrote to the Chair
man of ETDC, stating:

“I am writing to confirm my formal approval of the development and

construction of your project pursuant to all terms of Law No. 2 of 1973.

This approval entitles you to proceed with your programme without the

necessity of further reference to this Ministry."*

60. On June 1, 197, the Ministry of Tourism issued Decree No. 96 of
1977. Article 1 of this decree provided:

“The Ministry of Tourism approves the master planning for the tourist

Pyramids Plateau Area, as well as the detailed planning of the first phase

regarding the implementation of villages nos 1, 3 and 21 of the project of

exploiting the tourist Giza Pyramids Plateau .

61. Construction began at the Pyramids st site in July of 1977. Roads were
laid, water and sewage trunk mains were installed, excavation for artificial lakes
and a golf course was undertaken, and work on the main water reservoir was

 

348 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

nearly completed. Planning was completed for the Pyramids Oasis George V
Hotel, as were the designs for a second hotel. In addition, ETDC sold 386 lots
on which villas and multi-family accommodations were to be built, for a total
of US $10,211,000.

* *

62. Inlate 1977, the Pyramids Oasis Project began to encounter political
opposition in Egypt and it became the subject of a parliamentary inquiry. Op-
ponents of the project claimed that it posed a threat to undiscovered antiquities.

63. Ina decree issued on May 27, 1978, the Ministry of Information and
Culture declared the land surrounding the Pyramids to be “public property
(Antiquity).” This decree was issued upon the recommendation of the Egyp-
tian Antiquities Authority, which confirmed the presence of antiquities in the
‘western part of the Al Giza Pyramids region.

64. On May 28, 1978, the GIA withdrew its approval of the Pyramids
Oasis Project by Resolution No. 1/51-78:

“As a result of the Decree of the Minister of Culture and Information dat-

ed 28/5/78, considering the Pyramids Plateau one of the monumental ar-

eas, and accordingly the nature of the land had changed to be a public

domain owned by the State as public property, it is impossible legally to

implement this project on this land.

‘The Board of Directors of the General Investment Authority decided to

drop its former issued agreement No 50/19-75, dated 20th July 1975,

concerning the Pyramids Plateau, for the impossibility of executing this

project on the Plateau, thus, according to the decree of the Minister of

Culture and Information.”

65. OnJune 19, 1978, Presidential Decree No. 267 was issued, cancel-
ling Presidential Decree No. 475, which had declared that the lands on the
Pyramids Plateau would be used for “tourist utilization.” On July 11, 1978, the
Prime Minister issued a decree declaring these same lands dutlité publique.

66. At the request of EGOTH, ETDC was put under judicial trustee-
ship by a judgment of the Giza Court for Urgent Matters rendered on June 19,

1978. The court appointed trustees who were put in charge of the manage-
ment of the company’s assets until a general meeting of the shareholders could
take place.

67. On December 7, 1978, SPP and SPP(ME) filed a request for arbi-
tration with the ICC in Paris against the Respondent and EGOTH under the
arbitration clause in the December Agreement. The Respondent objected to

 

CASES 49

the jurisdiction of the ICC tribunal. In the acte de mission, the Respondent and

EGOTH stated:

“The FIRST and SECOND DEFENDANTS wish to make it clear that

their submission of an ANSWER and COUNTER-CLAIM does not

constitute in any way an acceptance of the initiation of this arbitration
proceedings. Their refusal of the arbitration proceedings is to remain firm
until the Arbitrators render their final decision on the matter of jurisdic
tion. In case the Arbitrators affirm their jurisdiction over the subject mat-

ter at issue, the COUNTER-CLAIM shall be comprised within the said

jurisdiction.”

68. The ICC tribunal, in an award rendered on February 16, 1983, held
inter alia:

“1, ‘That the first Defendant, the Arab Republic of Egypt, pay to the

First Claimant, Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East), Limited the

sum of US$12,500,000 (twelve million five hundred thousand) together

with interest thereof at the rate of 5% per annum from the date in which

the request for arbitration was received by the Secretary of the ICC Court

of Arbitration (i.e. 1st December 1978) until payment.

2. That the claim by both Claimants against the second Defendant, the

Egyptian General Company for Tourism and Hotels, be dismissed.

3. That the counterclaim by the said second Defendant against the

Claimants be dismissed.

In dismissing the claim against EGOTH, the ICC tribunal added:
“Different considerations might well apply if the Government had not
been a party to the December, 1974 Agreement.”

69. On March 28, 1983, the Respondent appealed the ICC award to the
French Cour d’Appel.

70. By aletter dated August 15, 1983, SPP(ME) notified the Minister of
Tourism that in its view the ICC award “is binding between the parties and
finally dispositive of our dispute.” At the same time, SPP(ME) added that:

“recognizing that your Government has taken the position that the ICC
award was rendered without a jurisdictional basis, we hereby notify you

that we accept and reserve the opportunity of availing ourselves of the un-

contestable jurisdiction of the International Center for the Settlement of

Investment Disputes, under the auspices of the World Bank, which is

open to us as a result of Law no 43 of 1974, Article 8 of which provides

that investment disputes may be settled by ICSID arbitration.”

71. On July 12, 1984, prior to the institution of the present proceedings,
the Cour d’Appel annulled the ICC award on the ground that the Respondent
was not a party to the December Agreement and therefore was not bound by
the arbitration clause contained therein.

 

350 ICSID REVIEW--FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

72. On November 28, 1984, the Claimants referred the decision of the
Cour d’Appel to the Cour de Cassation (Pourvoi N° 84/17/274), requesting that
the decision be set aside. This request was rejected by the Cour de Cassation on
January 6, 1987.

Ill. THE ISSUES REMAINING TO BE DECIDED

73. As recalled in Section I of this Award, the Tribunal disposed of the
{jurisdictional issues in two decisions, one issued on November 27, 1985 and the
other on April 14, 1988. There remain to be decided a number of issues con-
cerning the substantive merits of the case.

The Applicable Law

74. In addressing the remaining issues, it is appropriate to begin with the
question of the law that is to be applied to the Parties’ dispute. Article 42(1) of
the Washington Convention provides that:

“The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law

as may be agreed by the parties, In the absence of such agreement, the Tri-

bunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute (in-

cluding its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international law

as may be applicable.”

75. ‘The Respondent contends that the Parties have implicitly agreed, in
accordance with the first sentence of Article 42(1), to apply Egyptian law. It
points out that the Parties’ agreement with respect to the choice of law need
not be express, and argues that in this case the choice of Egyptian law results
from the preamble of the Heads of Agreement, which refers to Egyptian Laws
No. 1 and No. 2 of 1973 and Law No. 43 of 1974. Pointing out that Law No.
43 provides that “[mlatters not covered by this Law are subject to the applicable
laws and regulations,” the Respondent argues that, according to this provision,
“aucun autre droit que le droit égyptien n'a été choisi par Jes parties” and
“toute lacune doit étre comblée par l'application du droit commun égyptien
applicable.”

76. According to the Respondent, the second sentence of Article 42(1)
is not applicable because it operates only “[iJn the absence of such agreement .
..-" Thus, the Respondent argues, the role of international law is a limited one:
it cannot be applied directly, but only indirectly through those rules and prin-
ciples incorporated in Egyptian law such as the provisions of treaties ratified by
the ARE and, in particular, the 1972 UNESCO Convention for the Protection
of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage.

 

CASES 351

77. The Claimants, for their part, reject the notion that the Parties
should be deemed to have agreed implicitly to the exclusive application of
Egyptian law. In the Claimants’ view, it is not the first sentence but the second
sentence of Article 42(1) which becomes operative, so that the Tribunal should
apply the “aw of the Contracting State party . . . and such rules of international
law as may be applicable.” The Claimants acknowledge that their investment
in Egypt was governed primarily by Law No. 43 of 1974, but they contend that
the provisions of Law No. 43 do not cover every aspect of the dispute and that
there is no agreement between the Parties on the rules of law to be applied by
the Tribunal. In the absence of agreement, the Claimants argue, the second
sentence of Article 42 (1) must apply.

78. In the Tribunals view, the Parties’ disagreement as to the manner in
which Article 42 is to be applied has very little, if any, practical significance.
Both Parties agree that Law No. 43 is applicable to their dispute. Nor is there
any question that the UNESCO Convention is relevant: the Claimants them-
selves acknowledged during the proceedings before the French Cour d’Appel
that the Convention obligated the Respondent to abstain ftom acts or contracts
contrary to the Convention, stating:

“que les Etats étaient susceptibles d'engager leur responsabilité internatio-

nale envers les autres Etats signataires en persistant dans des actes ou con-

trats devenus contraires aux régles de la Convention.”

79. Moreover, a consultation filed by the Respondent states:

“que si on applique I’ Article 42, al. ler., 2¢me phrase, le résultat est le

méme, les mémes sources du droit régissant les mémes rapports.”

80. Finally, even accepting the Respondent's view that the Parties have
implicitly agreed to apply Egyptian law, such an agreement cannot entirely
exclude the direct applicability of international law in certain situations. The
law of the ARE, like all municipal legal systems, is not complete or exhaustive,
and where a lacunae occurs it cannot be said that there is agreement as to the
application of a rule of law which, ex hypothesi, does not exist. In such case, it
must be said that there is “absence of agreement” and, consequently, the second
sentence of Article 42(1) would come into play.

*

81. The Respondent has contended that certain acts of Egyptian officials
upon which the Claimants rely are, under Egyptian law, legally non-existent or
absolutely null and void. Specifically, the Respondent has assailed the validity
of Presidential Decree No. 475 of 1975 because, inter alia, certain areas covered
by the decree overlapped land which had been designated “public utilities

352 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

(antiquities)” by an anété of the Minister of Education issued in 1955. The Re~
spondent argues that the quality of public domain is dominant and gives its
character and nature to the whole area. The Respondent contends that because
the public domain is inalienable and because the establishment of a usuffuct
constitutes an act of alienation, it follows that such an act would be absolutely
null and void, The Respondent argues further that certain decisions of high-
ranking government officials are invalid because they were not taken pursuant
to the procedures prescribed by Egyptian law.

82. It is possible that under Egyptian law certain acts of Egyptian offi-
cials, including even Presidential Decree No. 475, may be considered legally
nonexistent or null and void or susceptible to invalidation. However, these acts
were cloaked with the mantle of Governmental authority and communicated
as such to foreign investors who relied on them in making their investments.

83. Whether legal under Egyptian law or not, the acts in question were
the acts of Egyptian authorities, including the highest executive authority of the
Government. These acts, which are now alleged to have been in violation of
the Egyptian municipal legal system, created expectations protected by estab-
lished principles of international Jaw. A determination that these acts are nul]
and void under municipal law would not resolve the ultimate question of lia~
bility for damages suffered by the victim who relied on the acts. If the munic-
ipal law does not provide a remedy, the denial of any remedy whatsoever
cannot be the final answer.

84. When municipal law contains a lacunae, or international law is vio~
lated by the exclusive application of municipal law, the Tribunal is bound in ac-
cordance with Article 42 of the Washington Convention to apply directly the
relevant principles and rules of international law. As explained by one of the
authors of the Washington Convention, such a process

“will not involve the confirmation or denial of the validity of the host

State’s law, but may result in not applying it where that law, or action tak-

en under that law, violates international Jaw.” (A. Broches, “The Conven-

tion on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and

Nationals of Other States,” Recueil des Cours, vol. 136, at p. 342 (1972).)

85. The principle of international law which the Tribunal is bound to
apply is that which establishes the international responsibility of States when
unauthorized or ultra vires acts of officials have been performed by State agents
under cover of their official character. If such unauthorized or ultra vires acts
could not be ascribed to the State, all State responsibility would be rendered il-
tusory. For this reason,

. the practice of states has conclusively established the international re-
sonata for unlawful acts of state organs, even if accomplished outside

 

CASES, 353

the limits of their competence and contrary to domestic law.” (Sorensen

(ed.), Manual of Public Intemational Law, New York, 1968, at p. 548.)
‘The Change of Site

86. The Respondent, in its Counter-Memorial and in the oral proceed-
ings, has dealt extensively with what it describes as a “new fact” to which it at-
taches great importance, namely, that the project sites shown on the maps
attached to the Heads of Agreement and the “Confidential Report” referred
to in the December Agreement were for the most part outside and below the
Pyramids Plateau and thus were different than the site where the project was
finally implemented. The Respondent points out that four sites were delineated
on the map that was signed by the Minister of Tourism and SPP and attached
to the Heads of Agreement. Two of these sites were completely outside the
Pyramids Plateau area; a third site—the second largest—was on the southwest-
em side of the Plateau and was nearer to the Sixth of October City than to the
Plateau center; and the fourth site, which was quite small, was on the edge of
the Plateau proper. The Respondent further points out that the Heads of
Agreement recited that:

“the Ministry of Tourism approved granting both 2nd and 3rd party the
tight to develop the areas as shown in the attached maj
and then provided:

“Each complex will be developed according to a detailed Master Plan

prepared and submitted by S.P.P. and approved by E.G.O.T-H. in accor-

dance with and shown in the attached maps.”
Consequently, the Respondent contends, the project with respect to which
the Claimants seek compensation is not the project that the Respondent
agreed to in the Heads of Agreement. According to the Respondent,

“A quick glance at the real map attached as “Annex A” to the “Heads of

Agreement”, and by reference to which the obligations of the Ministry of

‘Tourism regarding the securing of title to the land and the establishment

of a right of usufruct, shows that it contains not one compact site on top

of the Pyramids Plateau, the limits of which are clearly delineated on the map

itself, but in fact four sites . . . . It is clear that the sites indicated in the

“Heads of Agreement” concluded with the M.T. [Ministry of Tourism)

are quite different, in fact have very little in common, with the single site

to which the Claimants climbed with their project on top of the Pyramids

Plateau.”

87. The Respondent adds that the same pattern of several separate sites,
situated for the most part outside of the Plateau area, more or less repeats itself
in the map attached to the “Confidential Report” referred to in the December
Agreement. In contrast, the Respondent points out, the site shown on the map
attached to the “Preliminary Agreement of Incorporation” of ETDC, signed

354 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

by EGOTH and SPP on November 23, 1975, sits all in one piece on top of
the Plateau. The Respondent alleges that from the start the Claimants had been
pressing for, and contriving to get, a single site on top of the Plateau, while the
Egyptian authorities were adamant that the project should be implemented on
several sites surrounding the Plateau.

88. The Respondent argues that this alteration of the agreed location of
the project violated the Heads of Agreement and encroached upon an area pro-
tected by both Egyptian law and international law. According to the Respon-
dent, the violation of the Heads of Agreement in respect of the sites was part
of a larger design to transform the project into a “housing and urban develop-
ment project” and entailed the violation of other imperative laws of the ARE
conceming the protection of antiquities, urban development and the right of
foreigners to own land in Egypt.

89. The Claimants, for their part, recognize that the map attached to the
Heads of Agreement indicated four sites identified as “General Development
‘Areas,” none of which corresponds to the eventual project site (although the
eventual site overlapped in small part two of the sites shown on the map). The
Claimants assert, however, that the project site ultimately settled upon was
agreed to and repeatedly endorsed by the Respondent. They contend that the
evidence shows that Egyptian authorities suggested the Plateau site in the first
place; that the Parties then proceeded to discuss and define the site together;
and that by January of 1975 (at the latest) the Respondent had established—
and all Parties had agreed to—the final site and that details of the site were ap-
proved in numerous decrees and other official documents. As evidence of these
contentions, the Claimants call attention to a report of April 1975 on infrastruc-
ture availability at the Pyramids site which was commissioned by SPP and
which refers to extensive and recorded consultations concerning the final site
with numerous Egyptian Government organizations and contains several maps
outlining the Plateau site.

90. The Claimants maintain that the map mentioned in the Heads of
‘Agreement only indicated a number of posible development areas and that the
precise location of the project was under discussion both prior to and after the
signing of the Heads of Agreement. In this connection, the Claimants point to
Article 4 of the December Agreement, which provided:

“ETDC will undertake the development and management of both

projects within the general limits described in the maps attached to the

Heads of Agreement, and in general accord with the Confidential Report,

and as detailed in the Master Plans to be prepared. Each Master Plan shall

recognize the appropriate regional plan and shall specify the various zones

for different types of development and shall include the location and de-

scription as well as the stages and priorities of all tourist facilities.

 

CASES 385

For the Pyramids area there will be defined within the Master Plan area,

the project site area of not less than 10,000 (ten thousand) feddans (ap-

proximately 10,000 acres) to which EGOTH will receive tide and ETDC

the right of usufruct as provided in Articles 5 and 6 hereinafter and within

which 5,000 (five thousand) feddans (approximately 5,000 acres) will be

developed. The remainder will be parkland and other recreational facili-

ties available for public use within the Master Plan.”

91. The Claimants point out that the December Agreement was “[a]p-
proved, agreed and ratified” by the Minister of Tourism, and that knowledge
of its contents—and particularly Article 4—must therefore be imputed to the
Ministry. Article 4, according to the Claimants, makes clear that none of the
parties to the Heads of Agreement—the Ministry of Tourism, EGOTH or SPP
—considered the project site to have been finally determined by the Heads of
Agreement or the maps annexed thereto.

92. In response, the Respondent argues that the words “as detailed in the
Master Plan to be prepared” in Article 4 of the December Agreement meant
no more than that the master plan was to give the details of the project within
the general limits described in the maps attached to the Heads of Agreement
and the Confidential Report, and was not intended to derogate from those
limits. The Respondent also contends that the change of site occurred without
the knowledge of the President of Egypt, who had authorized the project on
the basis of the original maps.

93. From the evidence, it is not clear precisely when the decision was
made to locate the project on the Pyramids Plateau or whether the decision was
taken at the initiative of the Claimants or of the Respondent. Resolution of
these questions is not necessary to a decision in this case, however. Several doc-
uments in the record demonstrate conclusively that, even if the change of site
was initiated by the Claimants, Egyptian authorities at the highest levels knew
of and agreed to the final selection of the site on the Pyramids Plateau.

94. The most conclusive of these documents is Presidential Decree No.
475 of May 22, 1975. This decree was preceded by a draft decree submitted
by the Minister of Tourism on March 30, 1975, together with a memorandum
which referred to “two touristic zones on the Plateau of the Pyramids and at Ras
El Hekma.” On this basis, Presidential Decree No. 475 provided in Article 1
that:

“The lands lying on each of the plateau of the pyramids and Ras-El-Hekma
and whose features and dimensions are determined on the map and in the

 

General Egyptian establishment for Tourism and Hotels itself or through

356 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

one of its contributing companies will reconstruct and utilize these two

areas.” (Emphasis added.)

Unfortunately, the map referred to in Presidential Decree No. 475 was not
placed in evidence by either Party. Nevertheless, the record establishes un-
ambiguously that, in implementing Decree No. 475, the Egyyptian Govern-
ment—acting through and represented by a number of different agencies—
authorized the location of the project site on the Plateau.

95. In its Counter-Reply, the Respondent alleges that certain adminis-
trative requirements were not observed with respect to the map referred to in
Presidential Decree No. 475:

“the map of the Pyramids site which was said to accompany the Presiden-

tial Decree no. 475 for the year 1975 allocating the Pyramids land to

EGOTH was never published in the official Gazette as the law requires .

_. . Nor did these maps accompany the demand submitted for the regis

tration of the Republic Decree with the Real Estate Registration Depart-

ment—as law requires—on which ETDC ultimately bases its legal right

of usufruct of the land... .”

But even if such publication and registration was required by Egyptian law,
it was the responsibility of the Respondent and not of the Claimants. More-
cover, these alleged defects in the administrative registration of the site do not
alter the fact that Presidential Decree No. 475 referred expressly to “{t]he
lands lying on . . . the plateau of the pyramids.”

96. Nor can the Tribunal overlook the fact that, subsequent to the pro-
mulgation of Presidential Decree No. 475, the Egyptian authorities repeatedly
approved the location of the project on the Plateau. This approval took various
forms. For example, the Minister of Tourism signed the contract of November
23, 1975, between EGOTH and SPP(ME), incorporating ETDC. This con-
tract referred to maps annexed to it which located the project on the Plateau.
The incorporation of ETDC as provided for in this contract was subsequently
authorized by the Ministry of Economy and Economic Cooperation in Decree
No. 212 of 1975.

97. In February of 1976, four separate Governmental committees—the
EGOTH Committee, the Pyramids Plateau Committee, the Egyptian Tourist
Development Committee and the Committee for Giza Survey Department—
participated in the physical demarcation of the initial 4,000 feddan portion of
the 10,000 feddan site on the Plateau.

98. Finally, and most importantly, the final master plan required by the
Heads of Agreement—after being submitted to and commented upon by
various Governmental agencies—placed the project on the Plateau. This defin-

 

CASES 357

itive master plan was formally approved by both EGOTH and the Ministry of
Tourism, the two Governmental parties to the Heads of Agreement.

99. In this connection, it should be noted that, even if the parties to the
Heads of Agreement had intended when they signed the Heads of Agreement
on September 23, 1974 that the project be located on the sites shown on the
annexed map, those parties were certainly free to agree to a different site at
some subsequent time; and it is clear that on April 1, 1976, when the Ministry
of Tourism approved the master plan, all of the parties to the Heads of Agree-
ment were in agreement that the project would be located on the Pyramids
Plateau and not in the areas shown on the map annexed to the Heads of

ent.
The Nature of the Project

100. The Respondent, in its Counter-Memorial and in the oral proceed-
ings, has argued that in reality the project was not a tourist destination project
but rather an urban land and housing development project, and thus was in vi-
olation of Article 4 of Law No. 43, which provides:

“Housing projects, constructed for the purpose of investment, may be un-
dertaken only by Arab capital; foreign capital may not undertake housing
projects even in participation with Egyptian capital

The Respondent points out that Article 3(ii) of the same law defines
“projects for housing and for urban development” as:

“investment in the division of land into parcels and the construction of
new buildings together with the public utilities connected therewith.”

The Respondent contends that this is precisely what the Claimants did in im-
plementing the Pyramids Oasis Project: their purpose, as revealed in internal
memoranda, was to remedy “the acute shortage of quality accommodation”
in Cairo and profit from “the demand for recreational and second home ac-
commodation,” providing Cairo with “its first, recreational oriented sub-
urb.” The Respondent alleges that the Claimants’ prime objective was to sell
vacant building lots to Egyptians for Egyptian currency in order to obtain
cash for their investment. It was asserted in this respect that the Claimants did
not have the right to rent or sell vacant lots.

101. The Respondent further argues that the project was “a real estate
operation involving the division of land” and was therefore subject to Law No.
52 of 1940 Concerning the Division of Land for the Purpose of Building. The
Respondent points out that Article 1 of Law No. 52 defines “division” as:

“every parcelling of a piece of land to a number of pieces with the purpose

of offering them for sale, barter, lease or “hekr” in order to construct

358 ICSID REVIEW—-FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

building on them if one of these pieces is not connected with an existing
road.”
and that Article 9 requires that:

“Approval of the division shall be established by a Decree published in the

Official Gazette. The publication of the Decree entails the annexation of

public roads, squares, gardens and parks to the State’s public property.”
Finally, the Respondent points to Article 10 of Law No. 52, which provides:

“Shall be forbidden the sale of the divided land, its lease or its “tahkir” be-

fore the issued of Decree referred to in the previous article and before the

deposit in the mortgage office of a certified copy of that decree as well as

of the list of conditions referred to in Article 7.

Shall also be forbidden the construction of buildings or the execution of

work on the divided land before the issuance of the said Decree.”

102. The Respondent contends that the violation of an imperative law
such as Law No. 43 of 1974 or Law No. 52 of 1940 renders the violating act
null and void and the whole project annullable.

103. The Claimants, on the other hand, maintain that the sale of villa lots
by ETDC was an integral part of the tourist destination concept and was fizn-
damental to the proposals that SPP made to the Egyptian Government, since
the lot sales were what made the project largely self-financing. The Claimants
allege that representatives of the Government were fully advised of the concept
and approved it. They also point out that lot sales had been used to finance
SPP’s project in Fiji, which the Respondent's representatives visited and studied
prior to approving the Pyramids Oasis Project. In this connection, the Claim-
ants recal] that the Heads of Agreement referred to the plan to develop “inter
linked residential and tourist destination complexes” and provided that the
joint company “will be free to rent, lease, manage or assign any site. . . in both
local and foreign markets . . .” , and that the December Agreement provided
that “ETDC shall be free to asin its right of usufruct and to rent, lease,
manage, promote or assign any site . . . in both local and foreign markets.”

104. The Claimants also draw attention to the November 23, 1975 j joint
venture the “Preliminary
SPP(ME) and EGOTH, which provided that ripe

“may buy, sell right of usufruct, lease, rent the desert lands in the Pyramids

and Ras El-Hekma sites (on the Mediterranean Coast) for touristic pur-

poses.”
and Article 7 of the resolution of the Board of EGOTH transferring the right
of usufruct to ETDC, which stated:

 

 

CASES 359

“ETDC will have full authority and power . . . to transfer sell or lease the
right of usufruct of any pare of the sites to bbe developed to a third party
without any restriction .

105. With respect to Law No. 52 of 1940, the Claimants allege that the
Egyptian Government assured ETDC that this law was not applicable. In
support of this allegation, the Claimants have submitted a letter dated February
9, 1977, from the GIA to ETDC’s attorney, which stated:

“We would like to inform you that said company is not subject to Law

52/1940, concerning the subdivision of lands to be developed, whereas

said subdivisions are out of the boundaries of cities and villages included

among the resolution of Minister of Housing, but said subdivisions are

governed by Law 2/1973, regarding tourist establishments.”

106. In the opinion of the Tribunal, the sale to Cairo residents of villa sites
where dwellings for permanent use might subsequently be erected did not
detract from or conflict with the “interlinked residential and tourist destina-
tion” concept. An integrated tourist complex, which included hotels, apart-
ments and villas as well as recreational facilities, would not lose its tourist nature
or become a forbidden housing development simply because Cairo residents
might purchase lots for weekend or second home accommodation or even for
permanent residence. Indeed, the potential market of buyers described in the
master plan approved by the Egyptian authorities included:

“3, The retirement market for foreign and domestic investors.

4, The foreign and domestic residential market including first and second

homes (week-end villas, etc.).”

107. The Tribunal also heard uncontroverted testimony that in other
resort areas local purchasers are attracted by the potential returns that can be
eamed from letting their furnished villas to tourists.

108. Moreover, a number of features which further the objective of
tourist development differentiated this project from most housing development
projects. For example, all purchasers of lots in the Pyramids Oasis Project were
obliged to build villas within a limited period in order to contribute to the es-
tablishment of tourist facilities. The contract of sale for each lot contained a
declaration to the effect

“that the Development covered by the sub-division plan is being devel~

oped as an integrated tourist and residential complex and that the cove-

nants, conditions and restrictions herein contained are part of a common

plan to benefit each and every lot in the Development.”
Among the “covenants, conditions and restrictions” referred to were obliga-
tions to build within a prescribed period of time, to refrain from subdivision
of the Jot or the erection of temporary buildings, to obtain approval of the

360 ICSID REVIEW-—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

seller for any building works, to erect only one private house, to observe the
building height prescribed for the particular lot and to refrain from conduct-
ing any business or trade on the lot. Some of these restrictions were enacted
by decree of the Ministry of Tourism.

109. The evidence also shows that the Ministry of Tourism and other
Egyptian authorities such as the GIA not only knew, but agreed, that the fi-
nancing of the project's infra-structure was to be obtained in large part through
the sale of vacant lots. The application to the GIA for the incorporation of
ETDC specified that the financing of the project would come from “the sale
and rent of the utilisations’ right in respect of sites” and that “the profits accru~
ing from the project comes through the utilisation of villa sites.” Details of the
plan to sell building sites were set forth in three separate reports submitted to
the GIA prior to its approval of the project and in the master plan approved by
the Minister of Tourism.

110. Various agencies and instrumentalities of the Egyptian Government,
including the Giza Committee, the Ministry of Housing and Reconstruction,
the Ministry of Tourism, EGOTH and the GIA, approved or participated in
the project with fall knowledge that it would be largely financed by the sale of
building sites. There is nothing in the record which indicates that any of these
agencies or instrumentalities ever questioned the legality of the lot sales. Unless
one assumes that these agencies and instrumentalities knowingly acted in dis-
regard of Egyptian law, it is apparent that none of them considered the lot sales
to be illegal or to render the project a “housing” project for purposes of Egyp-
tian law.

111. Finally, the Tribunal notes that two reports prepared by the Respon-
dent's financial experts and placed in evidence by the Respondent appear to ac-
knowledge that the project was in fact a tourist project. The first of these
reports, prepared by Peat Marwick McLintock, stated:

“Te seems clear that the first stated object of ETDC was to develop inter-

national tourism within Egypt. We are not lawyers, but our interpretation

as accountants of Article 3 as a whole is that other activities specified were

either to facilitate this main aim or were ancillary to it. The stated objec-

tives do not appear to rule out the division and sale of land (see Article 3-

6. . the sale buying and leasing of property of all kinds within the Arab

Republic of Egypt.’) provided that any such activity serves the overall ob-

jective of tourist development.”

The second report, prepared by Hazem Hassan & Co., stated:

“The prime objective of ETDC (as stated in its statutes which was pub-

lished in the official Gazette in December 4, 1975) was to develop Inter-

national tourism in both the Pyramids Plateau and Ras El Hekma areas
through the establishment of hotels, theatres, restaurants, amusement

 

CASES 361

parks, touristic residential areas, touristic villages, clubs, cafes and other

touristic establishments, using the most modern methods in tourism de-

velopment.”

112. In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal cannot accept the contention
that the Pyramids Oasis Project was in reality a housing project, the implemen-
tation of which would have violated the various imperative laws of the ARE
that have been invoked by the Respondent.

The Financial and Technical Capacity of the Claimants

113. The Respondent contends that SPP misrepresented its financial ca-
pacity and its tourism expertise when it proposed the Pyramids Oasis Project
to the Egyptian Government and that the Claimants in fact lacked the ability
to complete the project. In support of these contentions the Respondent has
produced reports by financial experts which conclude, inter alia, that during the
period 1972-1977 SPP’s net assets per share and cover for its interest declined;
that SPP had experienced certain financial difficulties with its operations in Fiji
and Australia; and that ETDC apparently would have required other forms of
finance to facilitate development of the Pyramids Oasis Project, including loan
finance and revenues from lot sales.

114. The Claimants, for their part, maintain that SPP’s experience and
history, and that of its principals, were a matter of public record and were thor-
oughly investigated by Egyptian authorities prior to approval of the project.
‘They point out that the Respondent even sent representatives to Fiji to study
SPP’s operation there. They further note that the allegations concerning SPP’s
financial and technical capacity were raised in February of 1978 in the People’s
Assembly where they were firmly rebutted by the Government.

115. With respect to the alleged financial difficulties in Fiji and Australia,
the Claimants maintain that these were of a transitory character, that the eco-
nomic crisis precipitated by the oil embargo in November of 1973 had a dam-
aging effect on international tourism worldwide, and that SPP’s situation
improved subsequently to the point where its South Pacific hotel operation was
sold in 1981 to a third party for US $120,500,000.

116. The Tribunal will first note that the reports of financial experts relied
upon by the Respondent do not conclude that the Claimants would have been
unable to complete the Pyramids Oasis Project; rather, the reports state that
SPP had encountered certain financial difficulties and conclude—consistent
with what the Claimants have argued—that financing of the project was de-
pendent on lot sales.

117. More importantly, the evidence shows that SPP had obtained at the
required times the funds necessary to finance the Pyramids Oasis Project

362 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

according to the agreements that had been concluded and the method of fi-
nancing that had been envisaged. Under the December Agreement, SPP was
to “arrange for” US $20,000,000 in financing over the first four years and
“ensure” that all additional financing for both the Pyramids Oasis and Ras El
Hekma Projects (total costs for both projects were estimated to be US
$400,000,000) would be provided by short and long term loans. SPP arranged
the US $20,000,000 of financing through a US $12,000,000 share issue to
Triad Holding Corporation S.A. and sales of SPP(ME) shares to two members
of the Saudi Arabian royal family totalling US $8,750,000.

118. Pursuant to the joint venture agreement of November 23, 1975
between EGOTH and SPP(ME), the latter was to make capital contributions
to ETDC as follows:

Year Amount

1 $510,000
2 $400,000
3 $400,000
4 $400,000
5 $330,000

The first three payments were made on or before the due date. The project
was cancelled before the fourth payment was duc.

119. Under the loan agreement of April 15, 1976, SPP(ME) granted
ETDC a loan facility of up to US $15,000,000. At the time the project was
cancelled, SPP(ME) had advanced ETDC US $1,650,000, plus interest, under
the loan agreement.

120, ‘The Claimants engaged various consultants to undertake the design
and planning of the project. In June of 1977, a contract was awarded for the
initial civil works and construction began on the site the following month. This
construction involved roads, sewage systems, water reservoir facilities, artificial
lakes and a golf course. In addition, the design work for two hotels had been
completed. At the time of cancellation, ETDC had spent over US $9,500,000
on development costs.

121. The evidence shows that the subsequent difficulties encountered by
ETDC in obtaining financing for the hotels were due in large part to the failure
of the Egyptian authorities to provide certain infrastructure services and to
obtain customs clearance for materials and equipment imported for the project.
The Heads of Agreement provided that the Ministry of Tourism would

“take appropriate measures to ensure the provision of basic infrastructure

by Government to the boundaries of the sites.”

 

‘The December Agreement provided that EGOTH would
“use its best efforts to ensure that basic suitable infrastructure is provided
to the boundaries of the respective areas at no cost to SPP or ETDC, such
infrastructure to comprise roads, water supply, power supply, telephone
facilities and ancillary public utilities, all of which shall be sufficient for the
adequate development of each area.”
and that EGOTH would
“assist in acquiring permits for obtaining materials and supplies necessary
for the projects.”
During the months preceding the cancellation of the project, SPP(ME)
wrote to EGOTH and the Ministry of Tourism repeatedly, stating that the
failure of the Government to provide infrastructure to the project’s boundary
and to clear equipment and materials through customs was jeopardizing the
farther financing of the project.

 

122. It is also apparent from the evidence that opposition to the project
in Egypt and the resulting uncertainties about its future further contributed to
the reluctance of foreign investors to participate in joint ventures for the con-
struction and operation of the hotels.

123. As to the Claimants’ financial means, the record shows that the
Parties understood and accepted that most of the costs to be incurred for the
project would be “self-financed,” that is, financed with revenues generated by
the project itself. Thus, the infrastructure was to be financed by lot sales, as had
been done in the Fiji operation. The self-financing aspect of the project was ex-
phined by the Minister of Tourism and the Minister of Economy and Eco-
nomic Cooperation in statements to the People’s Assembly, as follows:

“The finance of the project is based originally on the concept of self-fi-

nancing to every step, considering that the project is enormous and needs

a large amount of financing, and can not be based on the principle of

‘owned capital of the project, otherwise it will need an enormous capital

which is not possible for any company to provide. For this reason the fi-

nance will follow gradually the implemented portions of the project
which its revenue will be re-invested to implement the following stages.”

*

124. It is also evident that the Claimants had substantial experience and
expertise in the tourism business prior to becoming involved in the Pyramids
Oasis Project. At the hearings held in The Hague on July 10-11, 1985, Mr.
Peter Munk, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of SPP, stated that SPP
was founded in 1960 for the purpose of developing tourist resorts; that SPP de-
veloped only tourist resorts and facilities; that it was the largest hotel owner in

364 ICSID REVIEW--FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Australia, Fiji and New Guinea, that it operated in seven countries and em-
ployed over 5,000 people; and that its major sharcholders included the P&O
Steamship Company and Jardine Matheson.

125. Moreover, the Egyptian Govemment itself confirmed SPP’s experi-
ence in the tourist resort business before entering into the December Agree-
ment. In a letter published in Al-Akhbar on September 4, 1977, the Minister
of Tourism stated:

“we like to make clear that the General Egyptian Company entered into

the contract with S.PP. only after enquiring about the said company

through our Embassy in London and our consulate in Hong Kong and

through the relevant security authorities and banks. The company sub-
mitted documentary evidence of its capabilities and competence before

the Egyptian Company decided to enter into contract. It is important to

say that this company is a holding company and has other subsidiaries.

Some of the shareholders are companies with international reputations

such as the P. V.[sic] O. and the Hotels Company.”

And in a written answer to the People’s Assembly, the Minister of Tourism
stated that the delegation of Egyptian officials which travelled to Fiji “for the
purpose of visiting the project which SPP had erected there and to examine
its standards of planning, construction, management, marketing and profits,”
had “certified that the Company has a high degree of expertise, excellent ca~
pabilities and the full ability to perform the project.”

126. In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal must reject the contention that
the Claimants lacked the requisite expertise and experience to properly imple
ment the Pyramids Oasis Project.

‘The Allegation of Irregular Contacts and Connections

127. The Respondent's pleadings contain repeated allusions to irregular
contacts and business connections on the part of the Claimants. The Respon-
dent also alleges that certain individuals upon leaving Government service were
employed by the Claimants. Finally, it is alleged that the Claimants bypassed
normal Government channels of communication and went “right to the top.”

* On these grounds, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to declare that:

“Jes demandes de SPP et SPP(ME) sont irrecevables et en tout cas mal

fondées en raison des faits de corruption que révélent les comportements,

de SPP et SPP(ME).”

128. Nowhere, however, is there any specific allegation of unlawful
conduct on the part of the Claimants which could conceivably vitiate the rel-
evant or excuse of the R
under those agreements. The Respondent, at the end of its Come Rely i in
effect admits the lack of concrete evidence in this respect when it states:

 

CASES 365

“Indeed nothing we have said in our Counter-Memorial or Counter-Re-

ply should be construed as an accusation, or allegation of misconduct re-

garding any particular Egyptian Official referred [to] .

The particular persons whom the Respondent has exempted from any alle-
gation of misconduct are the very same persons who established the initial
contacts with the Claimants, who invited the Claimants to visit Egypt for the
first time, and who—as high ranking authorities in the Government—were
called upon to make important decisions with respect to the project.

129. When the Pyramids Oasis Project was under consideration in the
People’s Assembly, the Vice Speaker, Dr. Gamal El Oteify, put a number of
questions to the Minister of Tourism conceming “the agreement concluded
with the foreign company conceming the tourist exploitation of the Pyramids
Plateau and the Ras el Hekma site.” Among these was the following:

“Was there any intermediary involved in the conclusion of this agree-

ment?”

The Minister answered in writing as follows:

“The Note presented to the Supreme Committee for Economic and Po-

litical Planning in its session dated April 27, 1975, is attached herewith.

This certifies that there were no intermediaries in this agreement.”

130. The Respondent has questioned the English translation of the Min~
ister’s answer, asserting that instead of “This certifies that there were no interme-
diaries in this agreement,” the Arabic original should be translated as “It appears
from this that there was no intermediation in (for) this agreemert.” It is not
necessary, however, for the Tribunal to resolve this question of translation. Even
if the Respondent's translation is accepted, the answer, emanating from the
Minister of Tourism and addressed to the People’s Assembly, is sufficient to
show that the Egyptian authorities at the time were satisfied that no interme~
diaries had been involved in the making of the agreement.

131. The record also shows that, before entering into any commitments
with the Claimants, the Egyptian authorities made a number of inquiries
through their embassies in Australia and Hong Kong and “received many
letters from international offices which contain many details about this
company.” It must be concluded that those references satisfied the authorities,
since they continued negotiating with the C

132, Thus, the allegations concerning irregular contacts and connections
are not supported by the evidence in the record and are based on suppositions,
guilt by association and what the Respondent describes as “commencement de

nave.” On such grounds, it is simply not possible to reach the findings of fact
and conclusions requested by the Respondent.

366 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

The Status of SPP and SPP(ME) Under Law No. 43

133. The Respondent has raised an objection of admissibility against the
claims in this case on the ground

“1) Que SPP (ME) ne justifie pas que son Projet ait été réguliérement

approuvé par le “Board of Directors” de l’Autorité Générale des Inves-

tissements (GIA) conformément aI’ article 1 de la loi 43/74 et aux articles

33 et suivants du Réglement 91/1975 portant application de cette loi.

2) Qu’ en conséquence, le décret du 4 décembre 1975 du Ministére de

I Economie ne peut pas valoir approbation réguliére ni du Projet de SPP

(ME), ni de 1’ incorporation d’ ETDC dans le cadre de la loi 43/74.

134, By these submissions the Respondent has raised an objection which
in its view goes to the very essence of the case: that SPP(ME) does not have
the status of an investor under Law No. 43 because the GIA was never asked
to consider SPP(ME) as the entity that would make the investment in the Pyr-
amids Oasis Project, and never agreed to extend or transfer to SPP(ME) the au-
thorization which was granted to the parent company, SPP. The Respondent
points out that Decree No. 91 of 1975, which contains the regulations for the
establishment of new projects under Law No. 43, requires that information
conceming the inivestor be furnished to the GIA. According to the Respon-
dent, the information provided to the GIA in connection with the Pyramids
Oasis Project concemed only SPP, not SPP(ME), and the GIA never autho-
rized or approved the substitution of SPP(ME) for SPP as the investor that was
to implement the Pyramids Oasis Project under Law No. 43. For these reasons
the Respondent contends that SPP(ME) was not an “approved investor” under
Egyptian law and consequently cannot invoke any rights or privileges derived
from Law No. 43.

135. The Claimants acknowledge that the transfer of rights from SPP to
SPP(ME) was never expressly “authorized” as such in a GIA document. They
maintain, however, that the GIA did in fact approve the substitution of
SPP(ME) for SPP as the investor who was to implement the Pyramids Oasis
Project under Law No. 43. The Claimants point out that Decree No. 212 of
1975, issued by the Ministry of Economy and Economic Cooperation, autho-
rized the incorporation of a joint venture between SPP(ME) and EGOTH
“[iJn conformity with . . . [t]he [GIA] Board of Directors’ Resolution No. 50/
19/1975 at the session of 20th July, 1975; and the memorandum of the Deputy
Chairman of the General Authority for Arab Investment dated 1st December

1975.”

136. The Claimants also point out that it was SPP(ME) who in fact made
the investment and implemented the authorized joint venture under Law No.
43, and that it was SPP(ME) who supplied the capital contributions and loans

 

CASES 367

in accordance with the foreign investment regulations. The Claimants’ empha-
size that the Respondent accepted SPP(ME)’s performance and that it was
SPP(ME)’s rights under the contract and as a shareholder in ETDC that were
directly affected by the cancellation of the project. Finally, the Claimants recall
that Article 17 of the December Agreement provided that:

“It is understood that SPP will be incorporating a holding company to

own its shareholding in ETDC and it is agreed that SPP shall have the

right to assign its rights, privileges, duties and obligations under this

Agreement to this company in which SPP will have a controlling, but not

necessarily majority, interest and in which it controls and directs manage-

ment, provided the company satisfies EGOTH.”

137. The gist of the Respondent's argument is that, for an investment to
be protected by Law No. 43, there must be an express and specific decision of
the GIA authorizing the company concerned to make the investment, and
SPP(ME) cannot produce such an authorization. The Respondent contends
that the silence of the GIA with respect to the transfer of rights from SPP to
SPP(ME) cannot be deemed a sufficient authorization since the GIA must
make an express decision in each case after examining the financial capacity of
the party who is to actually make the investment.

138. To decide this issue, it is necessary to examine Decree No. 212 and
the ing its ion. This decree auth the
incorporation of ETDC as a joint venture between EGOTH and SPP(ME),
and consequently recognized SPP(ME) as the foreign investor in the project.

139. As the Respondent points out, Decree No. 212 was issued by the
Ministry of Economy and Economic Cooperation, not by the GIA. However,
the GIA played a decisive part in the promulgation of Decree No. 212. As
noted above, the recitals in the preamble of this decree include a statement that
it was issued “In conformity with . . . the memorandum of the Deputy Chair-
man of the General Authority for Arab Investment dated 1st December, 1975.”
The full text of this memorandum was requested by the Tribunal during the
final hearings in Paris and was produced by the Respondent on November 27,
1990. It is true, as the Respondent has observed, that the first page of this mem-
orandum refers to the creation of joint venture with SPP, without mentioning
SPP(ME). It is also true that the memorandum refers to a GIA approval dated
July 20, 1975, which did not include SPP(ME). However, on the second page
of the memorandum, the Deputy Chairman of the GIA stated:

“Conformément i Ja loi n° 43 de 1974, l’acte préliminaire et le statut ont

&té révisés et approuvés par I'Organisme public de I’investissement.

En date du 29/11/1975 n° 11, les deux associés ont homologué les signa-

tures au bureau d’enregistrement des activités d’investissement créé au

sitge de l'Organisme , et ont présenté la preuve du dépét a la Banque

368, ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

nationale Egyptienne, du quart du capital en numéraires souscrit pour la

premiére phase.”

There can be no doubt that the corporate documents which, according to the
memorandum, were revised and approved by the GIA were those incorpo-
rating ETDC, ice., the Preliminary Agreement of Incorporation (“Uacte
préliminaire”) between EGOTH and SPP(ME), and ETDC’s articles of incor~
poration and by-laws. Thus, the substitution of SPP(ME) for SPP was not
only known to, but also approved by, the GIA.

140. This conclusion is confirmed by the express reference to the two
joint venture partners (‘‘les deux associés”) who—according to the memoran-
‘dum—on November 20, 1975 deposited their authorized signatures at the GIA
offices and submitted proof that SPP(ME) had deposited its capital contribution
with the National Bank of Egypt.

141. The memorandum also shows that Decree No. 212 was actually
drafted at the GIA and then submitted to the Minister of Economy and Eco~
nomic Cooperation for his signature. It is legitimate to infer from this docu-
ment that the GIA not only knew of the transfer of rights from SPP to
SPP(ME), but also reviewed and approved such transfer, which included the
rights resulting from Law No. 43 of 1974.

142. Finally, if anything more were needed to establish the status of
SPP(ME) as an “approved investor” under Law No. 43, the statement of the
Deputy Chairman of the GIA that the Preliminary Agreement of Incorpora-
tion between SPP(ME) and EGOTH of November 23, 1975, as well as
ETDC’s articles of incorporation and by-laws, had been revised and approved
by the GIA is, in the Tribunal’s view, conclusive.

143. The Respondent argues that the regulations implementing Law No.
43 do not envisage the GIA granting formal approval of an investor by means
ofa memorandum, and that Decree No. 212, if so interpreted, might be con
sidered null and void. There are, however, no apparent irregularities in this in-
strument. The memorandum was signed by the Deputy Chairman of the GIA.
Board because the Minister, who presided over the Board, could not sign a de-
cision addressed to himself. For this reason, the GIA‘s decision was communi-
cated by the Deputy Chairman of the GIA in the form of a memorandum
addressed to the Minister.

144. Thus, the evidence shows that the GLA knew that it was SPP(ME)
‘who was in fact making the investment and performing the investor's other ob-
ligations under the relevant agreements, and that the GIA, acting pursuant to
Law No. 43, approved the joint venture between SPP(ME) and EGOTH that

 

CASES 369

was formed to implement the project. In these circumstances, SPP(ME) must
be deemed an investor entitled to the protections of Law No. 43.

*

145. Ac the hearings, the Claimants took the position that if SPP(ME)’s
status as a foreign investor could not be recognized under Egyptian law, then
SPP would advance the claim in its own name. This position was based on the
fact that the parent company, SPP, joined the present proceedings as a second
claimant at the request of the Respondent. [t announced its voluntary interven-
tion in the hearings held in The Hague on July 10-11, 1985. This intervention
was formally agreed to by the Respondent, whose Counsel subscribed a dec-
laration reading:

“Cette intervention est notée et acceptée par la RAE sous les mémes

réserves quant 4 'incompétence du CIRDI que celles invoquées a l’égard

de SPP (Middle East) Ltd.”

146. In its decision of November 27, 1985, the Tribunal took notice that:

“On July 23, 1985, the Parties advised the Centre that Southern Pacific

Properties Limited (hereinafter called “SPP” or “the Claimant”), the par-

ent Company of SPP(ME) and also a Hong Kong Corporation, had been

joined as a claimant in the proceedings, subject to Egypt's reservation of

jurisdictional defenses.”

147. The Respondent’ reservation referred only to the preliminary ob-
jections then raised by the Respondent concerning the competence of the
Centre. These preliminary objections were dismissed by the Tribunal in its de-
cisions of Novernber 27, 1985 and April 24, 1988.

148. The objection now raised is a different one, and thus is not covered
by the reservation. It does not concern jurisdiction but refers instead to the ad-
missibility of the request on a ground pertaining to the merits. The Respondent
has contested the argument concerning the validity of SPP’s claims, observing
that:

“Que SPP n’a présenté dans ses mémoires écrits aucune demande pour

son compte; que les demandes de paiement a son profit présentées ver-

balement et subsidiairement au cours des audiences des 3/11 septembre

1990, sont irrecevables comme étant tardives et non conformes aux dis~

positions du Réglement de Procédure d’Arbitrage du CIRDI; qu’au sur~

plus, elles n’ont été assorties d’aucune justification.”
This objection concerns the applicability of Rule 40 of the Centre's Arbitra-
tion Rules, which provides in paragraph 2 that:

370 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

“An incidental or additional claim shall be presented not later than in the

reply . . . unless the Tribunal, upon justification by the party presenting

the ancillary claim and upon considering any objection of the other party,

authorizes the presentation of the claim at a later stage in the proceeding.”

149, The Tribunal cannot accept the Respondent’s contention that 2
claim by SPP at this point in the proceedings would contravene Rule 40. What
is involved here is neither an “incidental” nor an “additional” claim: SPP was
voluntarily joined as a claimant in the case at the Respondent's request. As a
claimant, SPP must be presumed to be claiming something, and there is
nothing in the record which suggests that SPP has ever claimed anything dif-
ferent than what SPP(ME) claims. Rather, SPP(ME) and SPP have claimed
jointly against the Respondent ever since SPP was joined in the proceedings.

The UNESCO Convention

150. The Respondent maintains that the. entry into force on December
17, 1975 of the UNESCO Convention for the Protection of the World Cul~
tural and Natural Heritage made it obligatory, on the international plane, to
cancel the Pyramids Oasis Project. In this context, the Respondent relies pri-
marily on Articles 4 and 5 of the Convention. Article 4 provides:

“Each State Party to this Convention recognizes that the duty of ensuring

the identification, protection, conservation, presentation and transmission

to future generations of the cultural and natural heritage referred to in Ar-

ticles 1 and 2 and situated on its territory, belongs primarily to that State,

It will do all it can to this end, to the utmost of its own resources and,

where appropriate, with any international assistance and co-operation, in

particular, financial, artistic, scientific and technical, which it may be able

to obtain.”
and Article 5(d) provides:

“To ensure that effective and active measures are taken for the protection,

conservation and presentation of the cultural and natural heritage situated

n its territory, each State Party to this Convention shall endeavour, in so

far as possible, and as appropriate for each country: .. . to take the appro-

priate legal, scientific, technical, administrative and financial measures

necessary for the identification, rosetion, conservation, presentation and

rehabilitation of this heritage

151. The Convention established a body called the “World Heritage
Committee” to register the property to be protected under the Convention.
Article 11 of the Convention provides for such registration as follows:

“Every State Party to this Convention shall, in so far as possible, submit

to the World Heritage Committee an inventory of property forming part

of the cultural and natural heritage, situated in its territory and suitable for

inclusion in the list provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article... .”

 

 

CASES a1

152. Professor Kahn, in a consultation submitted by the Respondent, ex-
plained the system of the Convention in the following terms:

“La procédure est divisée en deux phases: tout d’abord une phase qui est

a Vinitiative de I’Etat de situation qui consiste en une demande d’inscrip-

tion sur la liste du Patrimoine Mondial des Monuments ou des sites qui

répondent aux conditions posées par la Convention; puis une phase d’ex-

amen et éventuellement d’inscription par le Comité du Patrimoine Mon-

dial. Cette procédure préserve la souveraineté des Etats (initiative) et évite

les inscriptions des biens intéressants mais non irremplagables et non

uniques grace au contréle international.”

153. For their part, the Claimants maintain that the Respondent’s expro-
priatory acts were not based on the UNESCO Convention and that none of
the Convention’s provisions required termination of the project. They point
out that the Respondent ratified the Convention on February 7, 1974 and thus
‘was aware of its terms when it authorized the Pyramids Oasis Project more
than a year later. The Claimants add that the Convention entered into force on
December 17, 1975 and final approval of the master plan occurred in 1976.
The Claimants contend that even if antiquities existed on the Plateau, nothing
in the Convention required the cancellation of the project, and that measures
short of cancellation could have been taken in conformity with the Convention
to protect such antiquities. They argue further that the Respondent did not rely
on the Convention when it cancelled the project, and that the Respondent has
only invoked the Convention as a post hoc rationalization for an act of expro-
priation which in fact had nothing to do with the Convention. In this connec-
tion, the Claimants observe that it was only on February 26, 1979—some nine
months after the project was cancelled—that the Respondent nominated “the
pyramid fields from Giza to Dahshur” for inclusion in the World Heritage list
under Article 11 of the UNESCO Convention.

154. In the Tribunal’s view, the UNESCO Convention by itself does not
justify the measures taken by the Respondent to cancel the project, nor does it
exclude the Claimants’ right to compensation. According to the system of the
Convention, as acknowledged by the Respondent, “le classement est finalement le
Sait des autorités intemationales de I’Unesco (Comité).” Thus, the choice of sites to
be protected is not imposed externally, but results instead from the State’s own
voluntary nomination. Consequently, the date on which the Convention
entered into force with respect to the Respondent is not the date on which the
Respondent became obligated by the Convention to protect and conserve an-
tiquities on the Pyramids Plateau. It was only in 1979, after the Respondent
nominated “the pyramid fields" and the World Heritage Committee accepted
that that the relevant i i ing from the
Convention became binding on the Respondent. Consequently, it was only

372, ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

from the date on which the Respondent's nomination of the “pyramid fields”
was accepted for inclusion in the inventory of property to be protected in the
UNESCO Convention in 1979 that a hypothetical continuation of the Claim-
ants’ activities interfering with antiquities in the area could be considered as un-
lawful from the intemational point of view.

The Existence of Antiquities in the Area

155. The Respondent has established to the Tribunal’s satisfaction that an-
tiquities exist in the project area. This was confirmed by a number of docu-
ments that were placed in evidence by the Respondent. The most conclusive
of these is a memorandum prepared by the President of the Egyptian Antiqui-
ties Authority in May of 1978 which stated:

“The follow-up by the Egyptian Antiquities Authority to the works

which were carried out has resulted in the following:

Firstly The presence of Antiquities was confirmed in the Western

side of Al Giza Pyramids region which represents the Eastern part of

the constniction operations carried out. As a result the Egyptian An-

tiquity Authority has demanded from both the Ministry of Tourism

and the Survey Authority to consider this part Public Property (An-

tiquity) in accordance of the Antiquities Protection Law N° 215 of

the year 1951.

Secondly The scientific evidence mentions the probability of An-

tiquities present in this important Antiquities region in measuring of

what were found in other regions.
This memorandum was submitted to the Ministry of Information and Cul-
ture, together with the recommendation that a decree be issued declaring
certain lands in the vicinity of the project site to be “public property (Antiq-
uity).” The Ministry issued such a decree—Decree No. 90 of 1978—on May
27, 1978, the day before the Pyramids Oasis Project was cancelled.

156. In any event, it is not disputed that in 1979 the World Heritage
Committee accepted the Respondent's nomination of “the pyramid fields” for
inclusion in the inventory of property to be protected by the UNESCO Con-
vention. The Respondent determined—as it was entitled to do under the Con-
vention—that the Pyramids Oasis Project was not compatible with its
obligations under the Convention to protect and conserve antiquities in the
areas registered with the World Heritage Committee. Admittedly, the registra
tion of these areas occurred somewhat belatedly in the context of the present
dispute. However, other of the Respondent’s acts which were contemporane-
ous with the cancellation of the project indicate the genuinness of the Respon-
dent's concem for the antiquities at the project site and the legitimacy of the
registration of that site under the UNESCO Convention. The most important

 

 

CASES 373

of these acts was Decree No. 90 of 1978, discussed above (paragraph 157). This
decree, which declared lands on the project site to be “public property (Antiq-
uity),” was issued pursuant to Law No. 215 of 1951 for the Protection of Mon-
uments and Antiquities, which, as explained more fully below (paragraph 161),
authorizes expropriation when necessary to protect antiquities.

157. The Tribunal’s determination that the Claimants’ activities on the
Pyramids Plateau would have become internationally unlawful in 1979, but not
before that date, has significant consequences in other respects which are dis~
cussed below (paragraphs 192-93).

The Lawfulness of the Measures Taken by the Respondent to Cancel the Project

158. Clearly, as a matter of international law, the Respondent was entitled
to cancel a tourist development project situated on its own territory for the
purpose of protecting antiquities. This prerogative is an unquestionable at-
tribute of sovereignty. The decision to cancel the project constituted a lawful
exercise of the right of eminent domain. The right was exercised for a public
purpose, namely, the preservation and protection of antiquities in the area. Nor
have the Claimants challenged the Respondent's right to cancel the project.
Rather, they claim that the cancellation amounted to an expropriation of their
investment for which they are entitled to compensation under both Egyptian
Jaw and international law.

159. The rules of Egyptian law and international law governing the exer-
cise of the right of eminent domain impose an obligation to indemnify parties
whose legitimate nights are affected by such exercise. Article 34 of the Egyptian
Constitution provi

“Private ownership shall be safeguarded and may not be put under se~

questration except in the cases specified in the law and with a judicial de-

cision. It may not be expropriated except for a public purpose and against

a fair compensation in accordance with the law. The right of inheritance

is guaranteed in it.”

‘The obligation to pay fair compensation in the event of expropriation applies
equally where antiquities are involved. Thus, Article 11 of Law No. 215 of
1951 for the Protection of Monuments and Antiquities provides:

“In the case of accidental discovery of an Antiquity by an individual or an

entity, the competent departement has the duty to take the measures nec-

essary for its protection and this as of the date of declaration of the Dis-
covery; within two months thereafter it is incumbent on said department
either to remove the Antiquity found on private property (and) (or else)

to take the necessary measures of expropriation of the site of the object

discovered, or to keep it in situ subject to the requirements of registration

pursuant to the present law.

374 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Compensation for expropriated land shall not take into account the value

of the Antiquities.”
The Legal Nature of the Measures Taken by the Respondent

160. The Respondent argues on various grounds that there was no com-
pensable taking of the Claimants’ property. The Respondent contends that the
cancellation of the project was not a “nationalization” or “confiscation” pro-
hibited by Law No. 43 of 1974. The Respondent argues further that under
Egyptian law expropriation does not apply to contractual and other incorporeal
rights, but only to real property rights. Thus, according to the Respondent,
while the real property rights of EGOTH and ETDC may have been expro-
priated, those interests of the Claimants that were affected by the cancellation
of the Pyramids Oasis Project were not the kind of interest that is susceptible
of expropriation under Egyptian law. The Respondent further contends that,
while the contractual rights of the Claimants may have been diminished in their
value, they were not expropriated. Moreover, the Respondent adds, the Ras El
Hekma Project was never cancelled and the Claimants were offered a substitute
site for that on the Plateau, close to the Sixth of October City. This substitute
site, according to the Respondent, offered views and other features similar to
those of the Plateau area. Finally, the Respondent argues that an offer of com-
pensation in the amount of US $1,500,000 was made in order that the Claim-
ants might pursue alternative projects, and it was only because of SPP(ME)’s
arbitrary refusal to pursue such alternatives that the project was ultimately
abandoned and no compensation was paid.

161. The Claimants, for their part, contend that the Respondent's argu-
ments ignore economic reality, They maintain that the cancellation of the Pyr-
amids Oasis Project and the publicity engendered thereby created a climate of
opinion which made it impossible for the Claimants to raise additional funds in
international financial markets and to undertake further investments.

162. The evidence shows that, following cancellation of the project, the
Prime Minister stated that the Claimants would be compensated for their losses,
but no adequate offer of compensation was ever made. The alleged offer of US
$1,500,000 did not involve a cash payment. Rather, the offer was to credit
ETDC with an investment of US $1,500,000 in a new project in which
EGOTH would have a majority interest. Of this credit, only 60 percent or US
$900,000 would have accrued to the Claimants. This amount must be com-
pared with the cash losses suffered by the Claimants as a result of the project's
termination. Even if one considers only the Claimants’ undisputed loans and
capital contributions to ETDC—some US $3,368,000—the offer of a US
$900,000 credit, which was conditioned on the Claimants’ willingness to

 

CASES, 375

proceed as a minority shareholder with an entirely new and different project,
did not, in Tribunal’s view, constitute fair compensation for what was taken.

163. As to the argument that the cancellation of the project did not
involve a nationalization or confiscation, it is the Respondent's contention that
there was no nationalization because there was no transfer of the Claimants’
rights or of the project to the State, and there was no confiscation because there
‘was not a total deprivation of SPP’s rights accompanied by an absence of com-
pensation. The Tribunal cannot accept this contention. As the Tribunal ob-
served in its decision of November 27, 1985:

“it is quite clear that expropriation, the legitimacy of which is not being

contested, if not accompanied by fair compensation, amounts to a confis-

cation, which is prohibited by Law No. 43.” (para. 69.)

164. Nor can the Tribunal accept the argument that the term “expropri-
ation” applies only to jus in rem. The Respondent’s cancellation of the project
had the effect of taking certain important rights and interests of the Claimants.
What was expropriated was not the land nor the right of usufruct, but the rights
that SPP(ME), as a shareholder of ETDC, derived from EGOTH'’S right of
usuffuct, which had been “irrevocably” transferred to ETDC by the State.
Clearly, those rights and interests were of a contractual rather than in rem
nature. However, there is considerable authority for the proposition that con-
tract rights are entitled to the protection of international law and that the taking
of such rights involves an obligation to make compensation therefore.

165. Moreover, it has been long been recognized that contractual rights
may be indirectly expropriated. In the judgment of the Permanent Court of In-
ternational Justice concerning Certain German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia, the
Court ruled that, by taking possession of a factory, Poland had also “expropri-
ated the contractual rights” of the operating company. (P.C.I., Series A, No.
7, 1926, at p. 44.)

166. Decisions of international claims tribunals have been to the same
effect. Thus, in the Amoco Int'l Finance Corp v Iran case (15 Iran-US CTR, p.
89), the Iran-US Claims Tribunal said:

“Expropriation, which can be defined as a compulsory transfer of proper-

ty rights, may extend to any right which can be the object of a commer-

cial transaction . . . .” (para. 108.)

167. And in the Phillips Petroleum Co Iran v Iran case (21 Iran-US CTR, p.
79) the Iran-US Claims Tribunal held that expropriation gives rise to liability
for compensation

“whether the expropriation is formal or de facto and whether the property

is tangible, such as real estate or a factory, or intangible, such as the con

tractual rights involved in the present Case.” (para. 76.)

376 ICSID REVIEW—-FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

168. It follows that the duty to compensate in the event of expropriation
cannot be evaded by contending that municipal regulations give a narrow
meaning to the term “expropriation” or apply the concept only to certain kinds
of property.

169. Asto the argument that the Ras El Hekma Project was not included
in the cancellation, this contention is not realistic. The affectio societatis, which
is the essential basis of any joint venture, had disappeared in the relations
between EGOTH and SPP(ME) as a result of the measures taken by the Re-
spondent with respect to the Pyramids Oasis Project. In particular, the with-
drawal of EGOTH’s contribution to the joint venture with respect to the
Plateau, the blocking by the Central Bank of ETDC accounts, the placing of
ETDC in judicial receivership at the request of EGOTH, and the sequestration
of ETDC’s assets rendered impossible and impracticable the continuation of a
joint venture between EGOTH and SPP(ME) with respect to Ras El Hekma.

170. In these circumstances, it is no answer to say that the Claimants
could have proceeded to develop the Ras El Hekma site or a substitute site in
the vicinity of the Sixth of October City. In the first place, the Ras El Hekma
Project clearly was affected by the cancellation of the Pyramids Oasis Project.
Among the obligations assumed by the Respondent in the Heads of Agreement
was the obligation to form (through EGOTH) and support the joint venture
company that would develop both the Pyramids and Ras El Hekma sites. That
joint venture company—ETDC—was in effect dissolved as a result of the Re-
spondent’s acts. It therefore could not have developed the Ras El Hekma site,
even though the Ras El Hekma Project was never formally cancelled in the
sense that the Pyramids Oasis Project was.

171. Moreover, even if ETDC had somehow been resurrected, as a
matter of commercial and financial reality it is extremely doubtful that ETDC
would have been able to attract the capital necessary for the Ras E] Hekma
project. The evidence shows that the Parties considered Ras E] Hekma to be
of secondary importance to the overall development plan. The Pyramids Oasis
Project received most of the investment and publicity. ETDC’s ability to attract
capital for that project was due in large part to the enthusiastic endorsement of
the project by the Egyptian Government. When that same Government sub-
sequently cancelled the project—the primary part of the development plan en-
visioned by the Parties’ agreements—it clearly impaired ETDC’s ability to go
back to the world’s capital markets and raise financing for another project in
Egypt.

172. Finally, as to the substitute site at the Sixth of October City, the
Claimants’ witnesses gave convincing testimony that the site was totally unsuit-
able for tourist development. In any event, it is clear that the Parties’ agreements

 

CASES a7

provided for development of the Pyramids site, not a substitute site. The
Claimants made a substantial investment pursuant to those agreements, and the
investment was in effect expropriated as a result of the Respondent's cancella-
tion of the Pyramids Oasis Project. Furthermore, the same commercial and fi-
nancial considerations which suggest that financing could not have been raised
for the Ras El Hekma site after the cancellation of the Pyramids Oasis Project
apply to development at the Sixth of October City site. While the Claimants
may have been under an obligation to mitigate the damages incurred as a result
of the cancellation of the Pyramids Oasis Project, such an obligation is not so
broad and all encompassing as to require the Claimants to accept an unsuitable
alternative site that was never contemplated by the Parties’ agreement.

*

173. As to any residuary rights with respect to Ras El Hekma in favour
of the Claimants as shareholders in ETDC, the Claimants advised the Tribunal
in a communication dated July 9, 1991 that

“they seek in these proceedings indemnification for the totality of

SPP(ME)'s investment in ETDC which includes its entire shareholding

interest in ETDC. Upon the award of such indemnification by the arbitral

tribunal, and the actual payment of such award by the ARE, Respondent
would be entitled to a release from any further investment claims Ginelad-

ing if requested a release or transfer of shareholdings in ETDC). .

For its part, the Respondent, in a communication dated September 20, 1991,
commenting on the Claimants’ communication of July 9, 1991 stated:

“Trés subsidiairement, la RAE rappelle que, si par impossible le Tribunal

accueillait en tout ou partie les demandes d’indemnisation des demander-

esses ou de I’une d’entee elles, il lui plairait constater la renonciation (re-

lease) par SPP et/ou SPP (ME), exprimée dans la lettre du 9 juillet 1991,

4 tous leurs droits découlant des contrat relatifs au projet égyptien, et spé-

cialement aux droits d’actionnaires dans ETDC.

In light of this exchange, the Tribunal has decided that, upon payment of the
compensation fixed in this Award, the Respondent shall be released from any
further investment claims concerning the Egyptian project as a whole and the
Claimants’ shareholding in ETDC shall be transferred to the Respondent.
The Mutability of Administrative Contracts

174. The Respondent argues that the Claimants were required to accept
the Sixth of October City site as a modification of the contract because the

contract under Egyptian law belonged to the special category of contracts
known as “administrative contracts.” The Respondent adds that it was in the

378 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

exercise of the powers concerning “the mutability of administrative contracts
in response to the requirements of public service” that it decided to allocate to
ETDC the usufruct rights over an area of six thousand feddans of land in and
around the Sixth of October City, in compensation for the usufruct rights
which had been granted to ETDC on the Pyramids Plateau. The Respondent
contends that it was the Claimants’ refusal to accept this modification of the
contract that made them responsible for the total failure of the project.

175. The Claimants answer to this argument is that the alternative site
proposed by the Respondent was entirely unsuitable for a tourist destination
project, and that they were therefore justified in refusing to proceed with a
project on the alternative site.

i 176. In the Aminoil v Kuwait case, the tribunal referred to the doctrine of
| administrative contracts “as it was originally developed in French law and sub-
{ sequently in other legal systems such as those of Egypt and Kuwait.” (Lloyds
| ab Rep., 1988, at p. 195.) The French doctrine of administrative law con-
| cerning “la mutabilité des contrats administratifs” authorizes the public administra-
tion to introduce unilateral modifications to an administrative contract or
concession or even put an end to it provided that certain conditions are ful-
filled. The first such condition is that the modification be made in the public
* interest and concern what is called in France a “service public,” the second con-
dition is that the modification be accompanied by adequate compensation de-
signed to preserve what is described as “I’équilibye financier du contrat.”

177. The conditions upon which the State may modify or terminate an
administrative contract were described by the tribunal in the Aminoil case as
follows:

“(The public authority can require a variation in the extent of the

other party's liabilities (services, payments) under the contract. This must

not however go so far as to distort (unbalance) the contract; and the State

can never modify the financial clauses of the contract—nor, in particular,

i disturb the general equilibrium of the rights and obligations of the parties
‘that constitute what is sometimes known as the contract's “financial equa-

tion”... .

(i) ‘The public authority may proceed to a more radical step in regard
to the contract, namely to put an end to it when essential necessities con-
| ceming the functioning of the state (operation of public services) are in-
i volved. ...”" (op.cit., at pp. 195-96.)

178. The change of the project's site from the Pyramids Plateau to the vi-
cinity of the Sixth of October City would have involved much more than a
mere variation of the Claimants’ obligations under the contract. As already ex-
plained, it would have fundamentally changed the Parties’ bargain and the un-
derlying financial assumptions. The Respondent's argument that the Claimants

 

 

CASES 379

were required to accept an alternative site as a modification of the Parties’ con-
tract must therefore be rejected.
The Quantum of Compensation

179. The Tribunal having determined that the cancellation of the project
was compensable, there remains the question of the measure of compensation.
The Claimants have put forward three alternative claims for compensation.
First, they claim the following amounts (“the primary claim”) as the value of
their investment in ETDC at the time the project was cancelled:

(1) the value of the investment in ETDC computed at US $41,000,000, or
such other sum as the Tribunal may award, on the basis of (i) the DCF
methodology and/or (ii) the share sales to the Saudi Princes; and

(2) the amount of the loan to ETDC, amounting to US $1,650,000; and

(3) post-cancellation costs for 1978 and 1979, amounting to US $623,000;

and
(4) post-cancellation, legal, audit and arbitration costs from 1980 to 1990,
amounting to US $5,108,000;

together with interest to August 31, 1990

(@) on the value of the investment ((1) herein) at 12.6 percent compounded
annually, amounting (on a value of US $41,000,000) to US
$125,000,000; and

(b) on (3) herein at 12.6 percent compounded annually, amounting to US
$1,874,000; and

(©) on the loan to ETDC (2) herein) at the contractual rate, amounting to
US $6,931,000,

plus further interest to the date of the Award.

180, Alternatively and subsidiarily, the Claimants submit that they should
be awarded the following compensation (“the alternative claim”) for the value
of their investment in ETDC at the time the project was cancelled:

(1) the amount of the loans to ETDC, amounting to US $1,650,000; and

(2) farther monies lent at no interest to ETDC, amounting to US
$408,000; and

(3) the capital invested, amounting to US $1,310,000; and

(4) development costs pre-cancellation, amounting to US $2,254,000; and

(5) post-cancellation costs for 1978 and 1979, amounting to US $623,000;
an

(6) post-cancellation legal, audit and arbitration costs from 1980 to 1990,
amounting to US $5,108,000; and

(7) such additional amount as shall be fixed by the Tribunal to compensate
for the loss of the chance or opportunity of making a commercial suc-
cess of the project;

together with interest to August 31, 1990

380 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

a. on the loan to ETDC ((1) herein) at the contractual rate, amounting to

US $6,931,000; and

‘on (3) herein at 12.6 percent, compounded annually, amounting to US

$4,303,000; and

. on (4) herein at 12.6 percent, compounded annually, amounting to US
$7,404,000; and

on (5) herein at 12.6 percent, compounded annually, amounting to US.
$1,874,000,

plus further interest to the date of the Award.

181. As a further alternative and subsidiary claim, the Claimants claim
only their out-of-pocket expenses (“the farther subsidiary claim”), This farther
subsidiary claim is identical to their alternative claim except that it does not
request compensation for the loss of the opportunity to make a commercial
success of the project.

182. The Claimants have acknowledged that they do not challenge the
Respondent's right to cancel the project. In the Reply they state that:

“SPP(ME) from the outset sought not to challenge the ARE’s acts as

wrongful or void, but sought compensation rather than physical restora

tion of its rights. .
While the Claimants maintain that they are entitled to compensation for the
“repudiation and taking” of their contract rights, they do not claim damages
for breach of contract. Rather, they characterize their claim as follows:

“the claim here by SPP(ME) is not against the ARE for damages for

breach of contract. [tis for compensation on account of the losses occa-

sioned to it by the ARE's exercise of its sovereign powers, which de-
stroyed its property rights (including its contract rights).””

183. Thus, the Claimants are seeking “compensation” for a lawful expro-

| priation, and not “reparation” for an injury caused by an illegal act such as a
| breach of contract. The cardinal point to be borne in mind, then, in determin-
| ing the appropriate compensation is that, while the contracts could no longer

be performed, the Claimants are entitled to receive fair compensation for what
| was expropriated rather than damages for breach of contract.

(i) The DCF Approach

184. The Claimants contend that the measure of compensation for the
taking of an ongoing enterprise should be equal to the value of the enterprise
at the time of taking, and that such value depends on the revenues that the en-
terprise would have generated had the taking not occurred. In quantifying this
value, the Claimants rely primarily on the so-called “discounted cash flow”
(“DCE”) method. This method is intended to determine the present value of
the future earnings expected to be generated by an investment. In applying the

&

 

CASES 381

DCF method, the Claimants have first estimated the net revenues that would
have been eamed over the initial eighteen-year period of development, and
then discounted that revenue flow to a present value, which, according to the
Claimants, represents the value of SPP(ME)’s rights as of May 28, 1978—the
date when the project was cancelled.

185. To project revenues into the future, the Claimants use the actual lot
sales made during the project's lifetime. On this basis, they estimate that the
project would have generated total net profits after tax of US $312,200,000
over the first eighteen years. Using a 20 percent discount rate, the Claimants
then discount the net profits figure to a present value of US $80,100,000,
which, the Claimants say, is the present value of the projected total net profits
after tax for the first eighteen years of the project. This figure is then adjusted
downward to US $68,500,000 to reflect ETDC’s other recorded assets and li-
abilities. Since SPP(ME)’s share of ETDC was 60 percent, the Claimants claim.
60 percent of US $68,500,000 or US $41,000,000 as the value of SPP(ME)’s
equity in ETDC at the time that the project was terminated.

186. The Respondent contests the applicability of the DCF method on
the grounds that it leads to speculative results and takes no account of the real
value of the expropriated assets. In particular, the Respondent contends that in
the present case the project was not sufficiently developed to yield the data nec-
essary for a meaningful DCF analysis.

187. The Respondent has also submitted an expert opinion to the effect
that the DCF method of valuation is unsuitable in this case because of the in-
herent uncertainties of the project and the fragility of a calculation which
depends on forecasting cash flows almost twenty years into the future on the
basis of revenues generated over a period of little more than a year. The Re- |
spondent has also cited the earlier ICC award in this case, where the tribunal '
refused to apply the DCF method on the ground that when the project was i
cancelled “the great majority of the work had still to be done.” Finally, the Re- |
spondent argues that the DCF method would lead to unjust enrichment of the
Claimants.

188, In the Tribunal’s view, the DCF method is not appropriate for de-
termining the fair compensation in this case because the project was not in ex-
istence for a sufficient period of time to generate the data necessary for a
meaningful DCF calculation. At the time the project was cancelled, only 386
lots—or about 6 percent of the total—had been sold. All of the other lot sales
underlying the revenue projections in the Claimants’ DCF calculations are hy-
pothetical. The project was in its infancy and there is very little history on
which to base projected revenues.

382 ICSID REVIEW--FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

189, In these circumstances, the application of the DCF method would,
in the Tribunal’s view, result in awarding “possible but contingent and unde-
terminate damage which, in accordance with the jurisprudence of arbitral tri-
bunals, cannot be taken into account.” (Chorzow Factory case, Series A, No. 17,
1928, at p. 51). As the tribunal in the Amoco case observed:

“One of the best settled rules of the law on international responsibility of

States is that no reparation for speculative or uncertain damage can be

awarded.” (op. cit., para. 238.)

190. Quite apart from the inadequacy of the underlying data, there is a
second reason why the Claimants’ DCF approach must be rejected in the
present case: the Claimants’ DCF approach would in effect award lucrum cessans
through the year 1995 on the assumption that lot sales would have continued
through that year, Yet lot sales in the areas registered with the World Heritage
Committee under the UNESCO Convention would have been illegal under
both international law and Egyptian law after 1979, when the registration was
made. Obviously, the allowance of lucrum cessans may only involve those profits
which are legitimate. As A. de Laubadére has stated:

“le lucrum cessans correspond au “bénéfice légitime” que le co-contractant

pouvait normalement escompter.” (Traité des Contrats Administratifs,

‘TAL, Paris, 1984, at pp. 556 and 1327.) (Emphasis added.)

: 191. Thus, even if the Tribunal were disposed to accept the validity of the
_ Claimants’ DCF calculations, it could only award Imcrwm cessans until 1979,
_ when the obligations resulting from the UNESCO Convention with respect

to the Pyramids Plateau became binding on the Respondent. From that date

forward, the Claimants’ activities on the Pyramids Plateau would have been in
, conflict with the Convention and therefore in violation of international law,
and any profits that might have resulted from such activities are consequently
| non-compensable.

(ii) The Share transactions

192. To confirm the value indicated by their DCF calculations, the
Claimants rely on certain transactions in SPP(ME) shares. These transactions
include: (1) the sale in 1976 of 12,500 shares (25 percent of SPP(ME)) to two
members of the Saudi Arabian royal family at US $700 a share; (2) an offer by
a third member of the Saudi Arabian royal family to purchase 7,500 shares at
US $850 a share; and (3) the repurchase by SPP(ME) of certain of its shares at
prices ranging from US $598 per share to US $630 per share.

193. With respect to the sales at US $700 per share, the Claimants’ expert
pointed out that if one extrapolates the US $700 per share value over the entire
50,000 outstanding shares, the overall value for SPP(ME) at the time of the
share transactions was US $35,000,000. The audited financial statements for

 

CASES 383

SPP(ME) at the relevant time showed that, apart from SPP(ME)’s 60 percent
share of ETDC, its other assets and liabilities had a net value of a negative US
$3,100,000. If the overall value of SPP(ME) was US $35,000,000 (as indicated
by the purchase of 25 percent of SPP(ME)), it follows that SPP(ME)’s 60
percent interest in ETDC had an imputed value of US $38,100,000. The
Claimants’ expert conducted similar analyses on the basis of the US $850 per
share offer and the repurchase of shares by SPP(ME). These analyses indicated
values for SPP(ME)’s 60 percent share of ETDC ranging from US $33,000,000
to US $42,500,000.

194, The Claimants argue that these imputed values are, ifanything, con-
servative because (1) the transactions occurred in 1976 when the project was
not nearly as far along as it was in 1978 when it was cancelled; (2) the transac-
tions involved minority shareholdings; and (3) certain of the transactions in-
volved non-voting shares.

195. The Claimants’ expert testified that the two purchasers of the
SPP(ME) shares had undertaken substantial “due diligence” inquiries before
making their investments and that they were advised by lawyers and economic
consultants.

196. The Respondent's expert, on the other hand, testified that in his
opinion the share transactions were not a valid means of estimating the value
of SPP(ME)’s share in ETDC because

“The situation was that we had a major project which in 1976 was in the

planning stage . . . and it seems to me that we are looking at what should

properly be called venture capital. The princes were invited to put up
venture capital, that is high risk capital, and to suggest that because they

put up that high risk capital that represents the objective value of the en-

terprise at the date seems to me an exaggeration. I do not think it probable

that willing purchasers at that price could have been found in those cir-

cumstances.”

197. In the Tribunal’s view, the purchase and sale of an asset between a
willing buyer and a willing seller should, in principle, be the best indication of
the value of the asset. This is certainly truc in the case of a perfectly competitive
market having many buyers and sellers in which there are no external controls
or internal monopolistic arrangements. In the present case, however, there was
a very limited number of transactions and there was no market as such for the
shares that were sold. The price at which the shares were sold was privately ne-
gotiated. In these circumstances, the Tribunal does not believe that the share
transactions can be used to accurately measure the value of SPP(ME)’s invest-
ment in ETDC.

384 ICSID REVIEW~FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

(iii) The Fair Measure of Compensation

198. The Tribunal will turn now to the Claimant's alternative claim for
compensation, which is essentially a claim for “out-of-pocket” expenses plus
an amount to compensate the Claimants for what they have called “the loss of
the opportunity to make a commercial success of the project.” There is no
question that considerable amounts of time and money were spent on negoti-
ating, planning and implementing the project. SPP(ME) made capital contri-
butions and loans to ETDC, the amounts of which are not disputed by the
Respondent. In the Tribunal’s opinion, these amounts must be reimbursed as
part of the fair compensation to which the Claimants are entitled. In addition,
the evidence shows that, when the project was cancelled, construction was
under way and considerable marketing activity had been carried out. Most of
the detailed engineering design and specifications for the first phase of the in-
frastructure and golf course had been completed. A construction contract had
been concluded for the infrastructure, construction had begun and lot sales had
commenced. To the extent that the expenses associated with this activity have
been proven, the Tribunal is of the view that reimbursement of such expenses
is also part of the fair compensation to which the Claimants are entitled.

199. The Capital Contributions and Loans. From the record it is evident
that there is no dispute as to the amounts of the capital contributions and loans
made by SPP(ME) to ETDC: the capital contributions, made in three install-
ments, totalled US $1,310,000; and the loans consisted of a US $1,650,000
Joan with interest at commercial rates and further loans bearing no interest of
US $408,000.

200. Development Costs. The Claimants submit that they are entitled to be
reimbursed for pre-cancellation development costs of US $2,254,000 and post-
cancellation costs of US $623,000. These costs are disputed by the Respon-
dent. After the final hearings in Paris, the Tribunal, at its meeting in London
in February of 1991, reviewed the evidence relating to development costs. It
determined that the evidence should be supplemented, and accordingly on
February 13th, 1991 it issued a procedural order which directed inter alia that
the Claimants produce

“a document indicating the nature, date and amount of the above-refer-

enced development costs, including the names of the recipients of pay-

ments in excess of US $20,000 and a confirmation that these sums were
legitimately and actually expended for the project and were directly con-
nected with it. The document shall also contain an explanation of why
these costs were not charged to or were not directly recovered from
ETDC.

CASES 385

The procedural order also asked for the Respondent's comments on the in-
formation to be submitted by the Claimants. The Parties responded as de-
scribed in paragraphs 39-40 above.

201. It cannot be disputed that development costs were incurred by the
Claimants. Indeed, the expert report received from the Respondent on June
26, 1991 stated with respect to the development costs reported by the Claim-
ants’ auditors that “it is reasonable to accept that the costs were actually
incurred.”

202. The question that arises from the information submitted by the
Parties in response to the procedural order of February 13, 1991 concems the
extent to which the development costs that were allocated to SPP(ME) and not
reimbursed by ETDC should be taken into account in fixing the compensation
to be awarded to the Claimants. For the most part, the items in question
involve the allocation of salaries and costs incurred by executives and employees
of SPP such as overhead costs, travel and entertainment expenses, and costs in-
curred for recruiting and relocation of personnel, consultations conceming
marketing and banking, and so forth. These expenses were incurred in con-
nection with the project and in order to implement it. If the project had ma-
terialized, these expenses would not have been chargeable to ETDC because
the Claimants had agreed to provide all of the technical expertise required for
the design, construction, management and marketing of the project. However,
because the project was cancelled, the Claimants could not recoup these ex-
penses with future profits, and the expenses thus became irrecoverable losses.
The Tribunal finds that it is reasonable and legitimate to take these losses into
account in determining the fair measure of compensation in this case.

 

203. Not all of the costs claimed have been properly documented,
however. It was explained in an affidavit of SPP(ME)’s former Financial Direc-
tor that many documents and financial records could not be found or were de-
stroyed by reason of the very long period which has passed since the expenses
were incurred. But as the report of the Respondent's expert points out,

“the origins of this claim date from 1978 and I am surprised that in the

circumstances the relevant documents have not been retained. It was fore-

seeable that they were likely to be required in this action.”

‘This report also points out that the information filed by the Claimants in re-
sponse to the Tribunal’s procedural order of February 13, 1991 identified US
$1,719,000 of the claimed costs by payee, but that the recipients of an addi-
tional US $1,545,000 of claimed costs were not identified. In the Tribunal’s
view, it would not be appropriate to award development costs for which the
Claimants are unable to identify the payee. Accordingly, the Tribunal has de-
cided to award development costs only in the amount of US $1,719,000.

 

 

386 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

*

204. The Respondent also maintains that the information filed by the
Claimants in response to the Tribunal’s procedural order contains evidence of
the Claimants’ corruption. Specifically, the Respondent has drawn the Tribu-
nal’s attention to a payment of US $16,000 made in May of 1975 to a former
employee of the Egyptian Government. It is claimed that, while this individual
was employed by the London agency of the Egyptian Ministry of Tourism, he
provided information concerning SPP’s financial and technical capacity to the
Egyptian authorities who were considering the proposed project and who ul-
timately approved it. After leaving the Government, this individual allegedly
assisted SPP in securing agreements with Egyptian authorities relating to the
Pyramids Oasis Project. The Tribunal notes, however, that the same document
which shows the US $16,000 payment also shows that the total payments made
by SPP to this individual after he left the Government amounted for the whole
of the year 1975 to less than US $2,000 a month, a figure which does not
suggest illicit payments to third parties. Accordingly, the Tribunal cannot
accept the Respondent's contention that the information submitted by the
Claimants in response to the Procedural Order contains evidence of the Claim-
ants’ corruption.

205. Legal, Audit and Arbitration Costs. The Claimants seek reimburse-
ment of US $5,108,000 of “post cancellation legal, audit and arbitration costs
from 1980 to 1990.” They contend that all of the legal costs they have incurred
in order to obtain compensation shculd be indemnified, including the legal
costs resulting from the ICC arbitration and related court proceedings. They
argue that all of the legal and related, disbursements should be considered as an
individual whole, since they were made necessary by the Respondent's wrong-
ful refissal to grant fair compensation. The Claimants add, as a further consid
eration, that a great deal of the research and preparation involved in the ICC
arbitration obviated the need to undertake the same work in the ICSID pro-
ceedings.

206. For its part, the Respondent states that the claim for indemnification
of costs incurred in other proceedings is absurd from a legal point of view
because it infringes the sanctity of res judicata, the awards and judgments in the
other cases having already decided the question of costs incurred in those
proceedings.

207. In a case such as the present one, where the measure of compensa-
tion is determined largely on the basis of the out-of-pocket expenses incurred
by the claimant, there is little doubt that the legal costs incurred in obtaining
the indemnification must be considered as part and parcel of the compensation,

CASES, 387

in order to make whole the party who suffered the loss and had to litigate to
obtain compensation. This is particularly so when, as in this case, the amount
offered as compensation by the Respondent was manifestly insufficient.

208. However, only those legal and accounting fees and expenses that
were incurred for work that was relevant and usefull to the present ICSID pro-
ceedings are to be included in the compensation. This Tribunal cannot award
costs for work which was only relevant or usefill to the proceedings before the
ICC tribunal, whose decision was anulled, or proceedings before national
courts to defend the validity of the ICC award or obtain its enforcement.

209. In order to separate the costs that should be allocated to the present
proceedings from those that should be allocated to other proceedings, the Tri-
bunal, in its procedural order of February 13, 1991, asked the Parties to submit

“an itemized list of the legal and accounting fees relating to the present

proceedings, indicating their amount, the respective dates and the phase

of the proceedings to which those fees and expenses relate.”

210. In response to the Tribunal’s procedural order, the Claimants have
submitted a detailed list of all payments made for legal, audit and arbitration
costs in connection with the ICC proceedings, related court proceedings and
the ICSID proceedings. This list includes the amount and the recipient of each
payment. It shows that fees and expenses of US $4,242,000 were incurred
solely in connection with the ICSID proceedings, and that further fees and ex-
penses of US $1,701,000 were incurred in connection with the ICC arbitration
and related court proceedings. However, it is evident from the information
submitted by the Claimants that a substantial amount of the work product
covered by the US $1,701,000 of fees and expenses, such as the factual devel-
opment of the case (including the preparation of various studies, reports and af-
fidavits), was also utilized in the ICSID proceedings. On the basis of this
information, the Tribunal estimates that approximately one-half of the US
$1,701,000 was spent on work product that was utilized directly in the ICSID
proceedings.

211. In light of these considerations, the Tribunal concludes that the total
costs to be reimbursed to the Claimants for legal and accounting work which
has been relevant or useful to the present ICSID proceedings amounts to US
$5,092,000. Undoubtedly, this is a high figure, but it is justified by the extraor-
dinary length and complication of the proceedings in this case.

212. Loss of Commercial Opportunity. The final element in the Claimants’
alternative claim is:

“such additional amount as shall be fixed by the Tribunal to compensate

for the loss of the chance or opportunity of making a commercial success

of the project.”

388 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

‘This element of the alternative claim is what differentiates that claim from the
Claimants’ farther subsidiary claim, which is simply for out-of-pocket ex-
penses. Here, it is important to note that the alternative claim—like the pri-
mary claim which was based on the DCF method and the share transactions
—is intended to recover the value of the Claimants’ investment, This was made
clear during the oral proceedings, and is also explicity stated in the Claimants’
Final Conclusions and Prayer for Relief:

“The Claimants claim secondarily, as an alternative . . . the value of its in-

vestment in ETDC on the basis of its out-of-pocket expenses . . . on the

view that the project would necessarily have realized, at the very least, the
amount invested in it, and an additional amount . . . to compensate for

loss of the chance or opportunity of making a commercial success of the

project... .” (Emphasis added.)

213. In contrast, the Claimants’ further subsidiary claim as articulated in
their Final Conclusions and Prayer for Relief makes no mention of the value
of the investment:

“The Claimants claim as a further, subsidiary 2 alternative . .. the out-of

pocket expenses . . . together with interest .

 

The further subsidiary claim gives up any claim for the value of the invest-
ment and seeks only to put the Claimants back in the position they were in
before they became involved with the Pyramids Oasis Project.

214. During the final hearings on the merits, the Respondent's expert tes-
tified that in his opinion, if damages were to be awarded, the measure of
damages should be the value of the Claimants’ investment in ETDC as of May
1978, when the Pyramids Oasis Project was cancelled. If it were the case that
the Claimants’ investment in the Pyramids Oasis Project had no value—or had
no value greater than the Claimants’ out-of-pocket expenses—then the further
subsidiary claim might ex hypothesi be the appropriate basis for compensation.
In the Tribunal’s view, however, it is incontestable that the Claimants’ invest-
ment had a value that exceeded their out-of-pocket expenses, The record
shows that between February of 1977 and May of 1978, ETDC made sales of
villa sites and multi-family sites totalling US $10,211,000—more than twice
the Claimants’ out-of-pocket expenses. Moreover, construction involving
roads, water and sewage systems, reservoirs, artificial lakes and a golf course had
commenced and the design work for two hotels had been completed. In these
circumstances, the Tribunal cannot accept that the project did not have a value
in excess of the Claimants’ out-of-pocket expenses.

215. It remains, then, for the Tribunal to determine the amount by which
the value of the Claimants’ investment in ETDC exceeded their out-of-pocket
expenses—that part of the alternative claim which the Claimants have called

CASES 389

the “opportunity of making a commercial success of the project.” This deter-
mination necessarily involves an element of subjectivism and, consequently,
some uncertainty. However, it is well settled that the fact that damages cannot
be assessed with certainty is no reason not to award damages when a loss has
been incurred.

216. In determining the amount by which the value of the Claimants’ in-
vestment in ETDC exceeded their out-of-pocket expenses, the Tribunal will
take as a starting point the lot sales actually made during the short life of the
project and the revenues to be imputed to those sales. As the Tribunal has
already observed, the evidence shows that during the period February 1977 to
May 1978, ETDC’s actual sales of villa and multi-family sites amounted to US
$10,211,000. The lots involved—383 villa sites and 3 multi-family sites—rep-
resented only 6 percent of the villa sites and less than ! percent of the multi-
family sites with respect to which ETDC held rights. It is clear, therefore, that
the remaining lots were a potential source of very substantial revenues.

217. The Tribunal will next consider what it took in the way of expen-
ditures by the Claimants to generate the revenues imputed to the lot sales. The
difference between these expenditures and the portion of imputed revenues
corresponding to SPP(ME)’s shareholding in ETDC is, in the Tribunal’s view,
the minimum measure of the value to be ascribed to the opportunity to make
a commercial success of the project.

218. It is not disputed that SPP(ME) made capital contributions to
ETDC of US $1,310,000, and the Tribunal has already determined that the
Claimants’ development costs were US $1,719,000. In addition, loans totalling
US $2,058,000 were made to ETDC, but these loans will be disregarded for
present purposes because they were intended to be reimbursed—for the most
part with interest at commercial rates. The portion of the revenues imputed to
the lot sales corresponding to SPP(ME)’s shareholding in ETDC was 60
percent of US $10,211,000, or US $6,127,000. Thus, the portion of the sales
revenues corresponding to SPP(ME)’s shareholding in ETDC would have ex-
ceeded the Claimants’ non-reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses by US
$3,098,000. In these circumstances, the Tribunal is of the view that the value
cof what the Claimants have called the “opportunity of making a commercial
success of the project” was not less than US $3,098,000. Stated differently, the
value of the Claimants’ investment in May of 1978 when the project was can-
celled exceeded their out-of-pocket expenses by at least US $3,098,000.

219. Interest. The Claimants maintain that it has long been accepted under
international law that appropriate compensation carries with it interest from the
date of the wrong, so as to compensate the injured party for not having had the
use of the money between the date when it ought to have been paid and the

390 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

date of the payment. In support of this contention the Claimants invoke deci-
sions of the Permanent Court of International Justice and various international
arbitration and claims tribunals. The Claimants further assert that the rate of in-
terest should be a reasonable one, based on the amount that a successful claim-
ant would have been in a position to have eamed if it had had the funds
available to invest. Accordingly, it claims a rate of 12.6 percent per annum,
compounded annually from May 28, 1978 to the date of the Award, observing,
that this is the rate of interest agreed between SPP(ME) and ETDC in the loan
agreement of April 15, 1976.

220. For its part, the Respondent contends that, if compensation is to be
awarded, the rate of interest requested by the Claimants, as well as the modal-
ities for its computation, should be rejected as contrary to Egyptian law in ac-
cordance with Article 42(1) of the Washington Convention. The Respondent
calls attention to Article 226 of the Civil Code of Egypt, which provides for a
rate of four percent for civil debts (including administrative contracts) and five
percent for commercial debts, and contends that this is a civil matter, since the.
Heads of Agreement, concluded by a Minister of the Government, could not
be qualified as a commercial act. The Respondent also points out that Article
232 of the Civil Code forbids compound interest, or interest on interest, and
provides that the interest may in no event exceed the principal amount. As to
the date at which interest begins to run, the Respondent contends that under
Article 226 it is the date of the initiation of proceedings in case of “liquid
debts,” so that if the amount is fixed by the award it is only from the date of
the award that interest begins to run.

221. The Claimants, on the other hand, point out that the limitation in

ian law on the rate of interest applies only—according to the terms of
Article 226 of the Civil Code—“when the object of an obligation is the
payment of a sum of money of which the amount is known at the time when
the claim is made,” which, they maintain, is not the case here.

222. In light of these various considerations, the Tribunal reaches the con-
clusion that, subject to the exception discussed below (paragraphs 225-231),
Article 42 (1) of the Washington Convention requires that interest be deter-
mined according to Egyptian law because there is no rule of international law
that would fix the rate of interest or proscribe the limitations imposed by Egyp-
tian law.

223. With respect to the rate of interest, the Tribunal is of the view that
it should be five percent rather than four percent. The argument that the Heads
of Agreement was not a commercial contract is not conclusive because the
present claim is not an action for a breach of that contract, but rather one

CASES 391

seeking compensation for the expropriation of the rights of a commercial en-
terprise for the development of tourism.

224. The provisions of Egyptian law which prohibit compound interest
and require that the interest not exceed the principal are also applicable.

225. The provisions of Egyptian law conceming interest do not apply to
the loan of US $1,650,000 from SPP(ME) to ETDC. The underlying loan
agreement of April 15, 1976 by its terms is governed by English law. Clause 17
of the loan agreement provides:

“This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in all respects in ac-

cordance with the laws of England.”

226. With respect to interest, the loan agreement provides in Clause 4
that:

“During the period from the first Date of Drawdown until the final Date

‘of Payment the Borrower shall pay interest on the Borrowing.”
and that:

“Interest shall be paid in dollars to the Lender in London or in such other

foreign currency and in such other place as may mutually be agreed from

time to time and shall be paid on che relevant Interest Date at the relevant

Interest Rate for that Interest Period.”

227. The term “Interest Rate” is defined as:

“such rate of interest from the first date of Drawdown until repayment of

the Borrowing in respect of each period ending on an Interest Date as

shall be two per centum above the three months offered quotation for the

deposit in Dollars by prime banks to the Lender (as certified by the Lend-

er) in the London Interbank Market at approximately 11.00 a.m, London

time two Business Days before the Date of Drawdown or (as the case may

be) before each relevant Interest Date.”

228. The loan agreement also provides that the interest shall be com-
pounded if interest payments are not made on time:

“If any interest payable hereunder is not paid by noon (London time) on

the day on which the same is due then the interest so in arrears shall

thenceforth itself bear interest at the relevant Interest Rate computed

from the date the same became payable to the date on which it is in fact
paid...

229. Ths, the loan agreement establishes a higher rate of interest than |
that prescribed by Egyptian law and also provides for compound interest.
Moreover, the interest on this loan now amounts to US $8,134,000 and thus
exceeds the principal. However, since the loan agreement is governed by the
laws of England, which allow compound interest and the accrual of interest in
excess of the principal, the Egyptian limitations on interest do not apply. Under

392 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the loan agreement, SPP(ME) had a contractual right against ETDC to interest
at the rate fixed by the loan agreement when the project was cancelled and the
Central Bank blocked the Claimants’ funds. This contractual right was in effect
expropriated. The Claimants do not ask the Tribunal to award interest on the
principal amount as such, but rather to compensate them for the value of the
contractual right taken. That value clearly includes the interest provided for in
the loan agreement.

230. The Respondent argues that it was not a party to the loan agreement
and thus is not bound by the choice of English law. But the Claimants are not
asking for damages for a breach of the loan agreement; they are seeking com-
pensation on account of an expropriation. The credit that SPP(ME) had with
respect to ETDC was expropriated by the Egyptian authorities when the
Central Bank of Egypt, acting on the recommendation of the People’s Assem-
bly Committee, ordered

“the blockage of funds, papers and documents of EGOTH and also the

blockage of the foreign partner funds and documents.”

Thus, ETDC was prevented from repaying the loan and the interest that it
had agreed to. Therefore, this loan is to be reimbursed to the Claimants with
all of the interest stipulated in the loan agreement. This is the full and un-
contestable value of the expropriated credit.

231. Finally, the five percent interest rate prescribed by Egyptian law does
not apply to the loans of US $408,000, since the Parties agreed that these loans
would not bear interest.

*

232. With respect to the date from which interest shall run, the Respon-
dent has invoked Article 226 of the Civil Code of Egypt which provides:
“When the object of an obligation is the payment of the sum of money of
which the amount is known at the time when the claim is made, the debt-
ors shall be bound, in case of delay in payment, to pay to the creditor, as
damages for the delay, interest at the rate of 4% in civil matters and 5% in
commercial matters. Such interest shall run from the date of the claim in
Court, unless che contract or commercial usage fixes another date. This
article shall apply, unless otherwise provided by law.”
{ 233, In the Tribunal’s opinion, the dies a quo established in Article 226,
| “the date of the claim in Court,” only applies to “such interest” which is to be
| paid “in case of delay of payment,” that is, to moratory interest or interest on
| the award. It does not apply to compensatory interest, that is, to interest which
is part of the award. Also, Article 226 refers to “the payment of a sum of money

CASES 393

of which the amount is known at the time when the claim is made,” i.e., a liq-
uidated claim. The present case involves neither moratory interest nor a liqui-
dated claim, Consequently, no provision of the Civil Code or other legislation
concerning the dies a quo applies to compensatory interest for a yet to be deter-
mined amount of compensation arising out of an act of expropriation.

234. Given this lacunae, it is legitimate to apply the logical and normal
principle usually applied in cases of expropriation, namely, that the dies a quo is
the date on which the dispossession effectively took place, since it is from that
date that the deprivation has been suffered. This principle is supported by the
doctrine and the jurisprudence of international tribunals. Moreover, many con-
stitutions and national laws concerning expropriation require that payment be
made prior to or simultaneous with the dispossession, thus supporting the dies
a quo from the date of the taking, in this case May 28, 1978. To fix the dies a quo
from the date of filing the claim or the date of the award, as requested by the |
Respondent, would encourage parties who have expropriated property to refuse |
to pay compensation and to delay the proceedings secking compensation.

235. Asto the dies ad quem for the running of interest, there is no Egyptian
rule that has been called to the Tribunals attention. The prevailing jurispru-
dence in international arbitrations is to the effect that interest runs until the date
of effective payment, and this conclusion is supported by doctrinal opinion.
This conclusion also seems to result implicitly from Article 226 of the Civil
Code of Egypt. t

236. Consequently, as requested by the Claimants, post-award interest
will commence 30 days after the date on which this Award is notified to the
Respondent, and will run until the date of payment. This interest shall be at the
rate of five percent per annum and shall not be compounded.

237. Monetary Adjustment for Currency Devaluation. The five percent rate of
interest which the Tribunal has determined to be applicable in this case does
not fully compensate the Claimants for the losses which they incurred as a con-
sequence of being deprived of money owed them between the time when the
project was cancelled and the date of this Award. The reason that the five
percent rate does not make the Claimants whole is that, since the project was
cancelled in 1978, there has been a significant devaluation of the sHe US dollar.

238. Devaluation is a function of inflation. If the Tribunal had determined
that a “commercial” rate of interest were applicable in this case, devaluation
would be accounted for automatically because commercial interest rates add an
adjustment for inflation to the “real” interest rate. The five percent rate which
the Tribunal has determined to be applicable is not a commercial rate, however.
The record shows that since June of 1978 rates for US dollar deposits quoted
in the London Interbank Market averaged more than 12 percent. Since

394 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

commercial interest rates are always higher (usually by 2-3 percentage points)
than the clearing banks’ base rate, it is evident that the five percent rate does
not compensate the Claimants for the devaluation of the US dollar that has oc-
curred since 1978.

239. Accordingly, it is the opinion of the Tribunal that certain elements
of the compensation based on the Claimants’ out-of-pocket expenses should be
adjusted upward to take into account the devaluation of the US dollar since
1978. This is required in order that the compensation awarded by the Tribunal
give the Claimants the same purchasing power today that they would have had
in 1978 with the dollars that they invested in ETDC. Such a correction is nec-
essary if the compensation is to be fair. If it were otherwise, the Claimants
would be seriously prejudiced as a consequence of the devaluation of currencies
that has occurred during the period in which they have been seeking a remedy
for the loss that they have sustained.

240. In making an adjustment to take account of currency devaluation,
ithe Tribunal has followed the approach adopted by the tribunal in the Aminoil
' case, which included an eminent Egyptian jurist. There, in awarding compen-
‘sation for an expropriated investment, the tribunal stated that
"the proportions assumed by world inflation must lead to appraisals that

are more in line with economic realities, and the determination of an in

demnification cannot be tied down to the inflexible consequences of a

purely monetary designation.” (op. cit., at p. 213.)

The tribunal further said that

“if it were thought necessary to arrive at the total figure of the capital in-

vested by Aminoil in its undertaking it would be appropriate to do so

without holding the dollars of 1977 to be equivalent to those of 1948.”

(ibid)

241. The tribunal referred to “the general principle of the preservation of
the value of money” (paragraph 169), and then stated:

“The Tribunal has not overlooked the fact that there may be different

ways of assessing the levels of inflation . ... In the compensation to be paid

to Aminoil it would be natural to take account of the progress of inflation

generally ...." (op. cit., at p. 214.)

The Tribunal then concluded:

“In order to establish what is due in 1982 account must be taken both of

a reasonable rate of interest, which could be put at 7.5 per cent, and of a

level of inflation which the Tribunal fixes at an overall rate of 10 per

cent—that is to say a total annual increase of 17.5 per cent in the amount

due, over the amount due for the preceding year.” (op. cit., at p. 216.)

242. A monetary adjustment such as that utilized in the Aminoil award
also finds support in Egyptian law. Decisions of the Egyptian Cour de Cassation

|
|
'

 

CASES 395

and doctrinal opinions were called to the attention of the Tribunal. These opin-
ions and decisions concluded that “due regard should be given to the increase
or decrease of the currency price.” These decisions and authoritative opinions
confirm that under Egyptian law consideration is given to changes occurring
“Gn the price of currency in which the compensation is to be estimated.”
(Abdel-Rezzak Ahmed El-Sanhoury, Sources of Obligation, Section 649, at pp.
975-6.)

243. In order to compensate the Claimants for the devaluation of the US
dollar that has occurred since the Pyramids Oasis Project was cancelled in
1978, the Tribunal has adjusted certain of the out-of-pocket expenses incurred
by the Claimants. These adjustments have been made using a “deflator factor”
derived from data published by the International Monetary Fund in Intema-
tional Financial Statistics. This factor is computed on the basis of the United
States Consumer Price Index. For the period May 31, 1978 to December 31,
1991—the most recent date for which the data necessary to calculate the de-
flator factor is available—the deflator factor was 2.2074. In other words, the
purchasing power of 100 US. dollars in May of 1978 was equivalent to the
purchasing power of 220.74 U.S. dollars in December of 1991.

244. As to the elements of compensation to which the deflator factor is to
be applied, the Tribunal is of the view that the invested capital of US
$1,310,000, the development costs of US $1,719,000 and the interest-free loan
of US $408,000 should be adjusted for monetary devaluation. No adjustment
is required for the loan of US $1,650,000, since that loan carries commercial
interest and thus takes account of inflation and the resulting currency devalua-
tion. Nor, in the Tribunal’s view, is adjustment of the legal, audit and arbitration
expenses necessary, since the bulk of these expenses was either incurred in—
or imputed to proceedings that occurred in—the last several years. Finally, no
adjustment of the opportunity cost element of the compensation will be made
because of the nature of that particular cost and the method by which it was
determined.

Mitigating Factors Invoked by the Respondent

245. The Respondent has drawn the Tribunal’s attention to certain cir-
cumstances which, it is claimed, are mitigating factors that should be taken into
account in the event that any compensation is awarded in this case. First, it is
alleged that there has been no enrichment of the State, whereas there has been
an enrichment of the Claimants as a result of the sale of shares to the members
of the Saudi Arabian royal family.

246. It may be true that the Respondent has not benefited financially
from the cancellation of the project. However, the Respondent has obtained

396 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

certain non-material benefits through the preservation of an area constituting a
world cultural heritage, thus becoming entitled to the advantages—including
the possibility of outside financial assistance—deriving from the UNESCO
Convention.

247. Moreover, although unjust enrichment has on infrequent occasion
been used by international tribunals as a basis for awarding compensation, it is
generally accepted that the measure of compensation should reflect the claim-
ant’s loss rather than the defendant’s gain. The question of whether the Re-
spondent was enriched by the cancellation of the Pyramids Oasis Project is not,
in the Tribunals view, relevant to the amount of compensation to be awarded
in the present case.

248. As to the alleged enrichment of the Claimants as a result of the share
transactions, the Tribunal first notes that it disregarded these transactions in
fixing the amount of compensation. If the Tribunal had used the share sales to
measure the value of SPP(ME)’s investment in ETDC, the resulting compen-
sation would have been considerably more than that which the Tribunal has
determined to be appropriate.

249. Furthermare, the record shows that the proceeds from the share
transactions were intended to finance the Pyramids Oasis Project. If some of
those proceeds were not ultimately invested in the project, this was presumably
due to the Respondent's cancellation of the project rather than to any act at~
tributable to the Claimants.

250. The next factor invoked by the Respondent to mitigate the amount
of compensation in the present case is the fact that the reclassification of the land
on the Pyramids Plateau was a lawful act. This factor, however, has already been
taken into consideration in the Tribunal’s decision not to award compensation
based on profits that might have accrued to the Claimants after the date on which
arcas on the Plateau were registered with the World Heritage Committee.

251. Next, the Respondent contends that the project was located in an
area where the Claimants should have known there was a risk that antiquities
would be discovered. Again, this is a factor that is already reflected in the
method used by the Tribunal to value the Claimants’ loss, and particularly in
the Tribunal’s decision and not to base compensation on profits that might have
been earned after the Plateau areas were registered with UNESCO.

252. The Respondent also argues that the Claimants’ rejection of the
Sixth of October City site should be taken into account in fixing the amount
of compensation to be awarded. The Tribunal cannot accept this argument. As
explained above (paragraph 172), the Claimants’ rejection of the substitute site

CASES 397

was entirely justified and is therefore irrelevant to the amount of compensation
to be awarded the Claimants.

253. Finally, the Respondent maintains that certain dangerous events
which occurred in Egypt after 1978, adversely affecting tourism there, should
be taken into account in fixing the amount of compensation. These events are
also irrelevant, because the Tribunal has excluded any profits which might have
been earned after 1978 from the compensation that it has determined to be
appropriate.

The Counter-Claim

254. The Respondent has formally requested the Tribunal to:

“Dire et juger que SPP, et subsidiariement SPP (ME) sont responsables &

Végard de la R-A.E. de la non-réalisation des projets, et qu’elles devront

payer une somme forfaitaire de 30 millions de USD & titre de réparation

du préjudice, incluant les frais de procédure.”

255. In support of the Counter-Claim, the Respondent invokes certain
faults alleged to be attributable to the Claimants, namely:

i) the transformation of the project into a housing project;
ii) the absence of touristic elements (hotels, commercial centers and
villages) in the project;
iii) the Claimants’ abandonment of the Ras E] Hekma Project;
iv) the financial deficiencies of the Claimants; and
v) above all, the Claimants’ refusal to cooperate, and particularly to
consider the solution of an alternative site.

256. It results from what the Tribunal has already said that none of these
alleged faults was committed and none of them was imputed to the Claimants
by the Egyptian authorities as a ground for the cancellation or in any other form
before May 28, 1978. It follows that the Counter-Claim is to be dismissed.

IV. THE OPERATIVE PART (DISPOSITIF)

257. For these reasons,
THE TRIBUNAL, by a majority,
AWARDS to Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited and
Southern Pacific Properties Limited, jointly,
‘THE SUM OF US $27,661,000, consisting of the following:
1. The amount of US $9,784,000, comprised of the US $1,650,000
loan by SPP(ME) to ETDC, plus interest at the rate and on the
terms specified in the loan agreement;

398 ICSID REVIEW-—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

N

‘The amount of US $901,000, comprised of the US $408,000
loans at no interest, plus an adjustment for monetary devaluation
using a deflator factor of 2.2074;

The amount of US $3,799,000, comprised of the US $1,310,000
of capital invested by the Claimants, plus () an adjustment for
monetary devaluation using a deflator factor of 2.2074, and (ii)
simple interest at the rate of five percent per annum from May 28,
1978 to the date of this Award on the amount of US $1,310,000;

The amount of US $4,986,000, comprised of US $1,719,000 of
development costs, plus (i) an adjustment for monetary devalua-
tion using a deflator factor of 2.2074, and (ii) simple interest at the
rate of five percent per annum from May 28, 1978 to the date of
this Award on the amount of US $1,719,000;

. The amount of US $5,093,000, for legal, audit and arbitration
costs attributable to these proceedings; and

The amount of US $3,098,000, which the Tribunal has deter-
mined to be the amount by which the value of the Claimants’ in-
vestment in ETDC exceeded their non-reimbursable out-of-
pocket expenses at the time the project was cancelled.

»

>

wo

a

Post-Award Interest

The amount of US $27,661,000 shall earn simple interest of five percent per
annum, beginning 30 days after the date on which this Award is notified to
the Respondent, until the date of payment.

Decisions on Jurisdiction

The Tribunal’s Decision on Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction of No-
vember 27, 1985, and its Decision on Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction
of April 14, 1988, are incorporated in this Award by reference.

The Counter-Claim

The Counter-Claim by the Respondent against the Claimants is dismissed.

Release of Claims

Upon payment of the present Award, the Respondent shall be released from
any further investment claims in relation to the Pyramids Oasis Project and
the Claimants’ shareholding in ETDC shall be considered as released and
transferred to the Respondent.

Ish
Eduardo Jiménez de Aréchaga

CASES

ee
Mohamed Amin El Mahdi

‘si

“Robert F Pietrowski, Ju

(Date of dispatch to the parties: May 20, 1992]

