INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

STANDARD CHARTERED BANK (HONG KONG) LIMITED

TANZANIA ELECTRIC SUPPLY COMPANY LIMITED

ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20

ANNULMENT PROCEEDING

 

DECISION ON APPLICANT’S REQUEST FOR A CONTINUED

STAY ON ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Claus von Wobeser, President
Christoph Schreuer, Member

Bertha Cooper-Rousseau, Member

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee

Aurélia Antonietti

Date of dispatch to Parties: 12 April 2017

Table of Contents

 

 

 

I. Procedural Background 1
II. The Position of the Parties on the Stay Request........cscscssessessessesseeneeseeseeenees 3
A. Applicant 3
B. Respondent on Annulment: 7
III. The Committee’s Analysi 15

 

IV. Decision 27

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

I. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1. On 6 January 2017, Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited (the
“Applicant,” “Respondent” or “TANESCO’”) filed with the Secretary-General
of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) an
application for annulment (the “Application”) of the award rendered on 12
September 2016 in Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. Tanzania
Electric Supply Company Limited (TANESCO) (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20) (the
“Award”). The Application was filed in accordance with Article 52 of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States (“ICSID Convention”) and Rule 50 of the ICSID

Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“ Arbitration Rules”).

2. Under Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54(2) of the Arbitration
Rules, the Application contained a request for a stay on enforcement of the
Award (“Stay Request”), concerning the amount of US$148.4 million and
interest in favor of Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited (the

“Respondent on Annulment,” “SCB HK” or “Claimant”).!

3. On 13 January 2017, the Secretary-General registered the Application and

provisionally granted the stay on enforcement of the Award.

4. On 10 February 2017, in accordance with Arbitration Rule 52(2), the Secretary-
General notified the “Parties” (together the Applicant and the Respondent on
Annulment) that an ad hoc Committee (the “Committee”) had been constituted,
composed of Claus von Wobeser (Mexican) as President, Christoph Schreuer

(Austrian) and Bertha Cooper-Rousseau (Bahamian) as Members. The

1 The Tribunal ordered as follows at section E. 9.:
“E. Order for Payment.
9. The Tribunal orders that TANESCO pay to SCB HK the amount of US$148.4 million with
simple interest at three month LIBOR plus 4% from September 30, 2015 until the date of this
Award. Interest shall continue at the same rate until full payment is received.”

1

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

annulment proceeding was deemed to have begun on such date. The Parties
were also informed that Aurélia Antonietti, Senior Legal Adviser, ICSID,

would serve as Secretary of the Committee.

On 25 February 2017, the Committee asked the Parties to indicate whether they
would agree to a procedure whereby: (i) the 30-day deadline (set for 13 March
2017) under Rule 54(2) be extended for an additional period of 30 days in order
for the Committee to rule on the continuance of the stay; (ii) the stay would
remain in effect within that extended period; (iii) the Parties would file one
round of submissions conferring among themselves to determine the dates for
them; and (iv) the First Session would be held in London on 29 March 2017 to

discuss both procedural aspects and the continuation of the stay.

On 28 February 2017, the ICSID Secretariat transmitted to the Committee the
communications whereby the Parties reached an agreement on the timetable
for the proceeding, as follows: on 10 March 2017, TANESCO to file its
submission in support of the continuation of the stay; on 21 March 2017, SCB
HK to file its response; and on 29 March 2017 an in-person Hearing to take place
in London. The Parties further agreed that the 30-day deadline be extended for
an additional period of 30 days in order for the Committee to rule on the

continuance of the stay, the stay remaining in effect within this period.

On 3 March 2017, upon the Committee’s proposal and with the agreement of
the Parties, an in-person Hearing (the “First Session”) was rescheduled for 30

March 2017.

On 10 March 2017, the Applicant filed its Submission in Support of a

continuation of the provisional stay (“Stay Submission”) and Annexes 27-42.

On 21 March 2017, SCB HK filed its Reply to the Applicant’s Stay Submission
(‘Stay Reply”), including exhibits LE-1 to LE-12 and Exhibits-001 to 060.

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

10. The First Session took place on 30 March 2017. The Parties and the Committee
Members discussed the draft Procedural Order No. 1 and the Stay Submission
and Reply. The Parties agreed that the decision on the Stay Request would be
rendered separately to Procedural Order No. 1.

11. On 3 April 2017, TANESCO informed the Committee that it had appointed
Clyde & Co as co-counsel, although they had already appeared as counsel for
TANESCO at the First Session.

12. On 3 April 2017, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 1.
IL. THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES ON THE STAY REQUEST
A. APPLICANT

13. The Applicant requests the continuation of the stay on enforcement of the
Award until a decision is rendered by the Committee on the Application.
TANESCO claims that “continuation of the provisional stay on enforcement has

become standard practice in ICSID annulment proceedings.”

14. The Applicant brings forward the following arguments: (i) the balance of both
Parties’ interests supports the maintenance of the stay; (ii) a lift of a stay would
expose TANESCO to an irreparable harm deriving from double payment; (iii)
a lift of the stay could also entail unjustified multiple recovery for SCB HK; and
(iv) the existence of serious grounds for annulment also clearly supports the
maintenance of the stay. The Committee will briefly address each of these

arguments below.

15. First, the Applicant contends that the balance of both Parties’ interests supports

the maintenance of the stay. The Applicant argues that in deciding on whether

2Stay Application, para 11.

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

to maintain or terminate the stay on enforcement of an award, an ad hoc
committee should take into consideration adverse economic consequences on

either party and the balance of both parties’ interests.$

16. | The Applicant argues that SCB HK cannot show any prejudice if the Committee
decides to continue the stay pending the outcome of the annulment
proceedings, because if SCB HK is correct then interest would have been

accruing on the Award.

17. The Applicant argues that if SCB HK is incorrect, and the stay is lifted, the
company will pursue the enforcement proceedings of the Award which it has
already commenced before the High Court of Tanzania and possibly in other
jurisdictions, and TANESCO will suffer great and irreparable harm. In
addition, the Applicant argues that the fact that enforcement proceedings in
Tanzania have been stayed as recently as 27 February 2017 by consent of all
parties to those proceedings (including SCB HK) pending the determination of
the Application before the Committee, and confirmed in an Order of Munisi J,
further supports TANESCO’s position on the continuance of the stay on
enforcement of the Award under the ICSID Convention. The Applicant argues
that having agreed to the stay in the Tanzanian courts, there is no basis for SCB
HK to insist that the stay on enforcement of the Award be lifted by the

Committee.*

3 Stay Submission, para 8, FN 9: “Annex-27, MINE v. Government of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4
(Annulment Proceeding), Interim Order No. I, Guinea's Application for Stay on Enforcement of the Award,
dated 12 August 1988, 5(1) ICSID REVIEW - FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL 129 (Spring 1990),
4 28 (‘Having reviewed the circumstances of the case, the Committee is of the view that termination of the stay at
this time would impose hardships on Guinea whose interests would be severely affected.’); Annex-28, Enron
Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3 (Annulment
Proceeding), Decision on the Argentine Republic's Request for a Continued Stay on Enforcement of the Award,
dated 7 October 2008, 26 (‘Article 52(5) . .. is designed to enable the ad hoc committee to balance the rights of
the parties pending annulment proceedings.’). See also Annex-29, Victor Pey Casado and Foundation
‘Presidente Allende’ v. Republic of Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2 (Annulment Proceeding), Decision on
the Republic of Chile's Application for a Stay on Enforcement of the Award, dated 5 May 2010, § 28.”

4Stay Submission, para 10.

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

18. The Applicant further argues that should the Committee confirm the Award,
there is no element that would suggest a default by TANESCO in its payment

obligations.

19. In addition, the Applicant argues that if the stay is lifted, TANESCO would be
exposed to a risk of double payment, potentially jeopardizing the supply of
electricity by Independent Power Tanzania Limited (“IPTL”) under the Power
Purchase Agreement dated 26 May 1995 (the “PPA”) with TANESCO. In fact,
TANESCO states that should “the Capacity Payment” payable pursuant to clause
5.1(a) of the PPA be paid into court, as requested by SCB HK in local
enforcement proceedings, the same could not be paid to IPTL, which is
currently performing its obligations under the PPA. Furthermore, it argues that
TANESCO could still be forced to litigate enforcement proceedings in Tanzania
and elsewhere while the Application is pending and SCB HK could obtain

multiple recovery.5

20. Second, the Applicant states that a lift of the stay would expose TANESCO to
an irreparable harm. If SCB HK is allowed to enforce the Award ordering
TANESCO to pay tariffs, TANESCO would be exposed to a risk of double
payment, since: (i) it has already paid tariffs totaling more than US$120 million
to IPTL; (ii) it has been and still is paying additional tariffs under the PPA to
IPTL from October 2013 onwards to date; (iii) any additional payments
diverted from IPTL would cause irreparable harm, leaving millions of
Tanzanian residents without electricity; and (iv) SCB HK would recover sums
exceeding from four to twelve times the amount of its original alleged

investment.®

5 Stay Submission, para 13.
6 Stay submission, para 19.

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

21.

22.

23.

24.

Third, the Applicant argues that a lift of the stay would also entail unjustified
multiple recovery for SCB HK. TANESCO refers to two proceedings which
currently risk SCB HK being granted undue multiple recovery.

The first case referred to by the Applicant is before the High Court of England
and Wales, in which SCB HK claims sums under the Loan Facility Agreement
(dated 28 June 1997) against IPTL and current and previous shareholders. On
16 November 2016, Mr. Justice Flaux, rendered his judgment (the “Flaux J
Judgment”) in favor of SCB HK, awarding US$168,800,063.87.7 The Applicant
states that on 9 February 2017, Mr. Justice Sehel registered the Flaux J Judgment
and ordered that IPTL pay the sum to SCB HK.§ The Applicant further argues
that should this Committee allow SCB HK to pursue enforcement of the Award,
SCB HK would have the opportunity to recover the amount of the Flaux
Judgment plus the sum allegedly due for tariffs which were meant to repay the

debt under the Loan Facility Agreement under the Award.

The second set of proceedings, referred to by the Applicant, is the ICSID
arbitration initiated against the United Republic of Tanzania, as the purported
assignee of IPTL under the Implementation Agreement dated 8 June 1995
signed with IPTL. The Applicant argues that the claims are ultimately linked to
the tariffs under the PPA and that SCB HK is claiming an additional amount of
US$616,475,658 in that proceeding.’

Fourth, the Applicant argues that the existence of serious grounds for
annulment also clearly supports the maintenance of the stay and that other
committees have established that a request for continuation of a stay can be

denied only if it is obvious that the application is “without any basis under the

7 Stay Submission para 21, Annex 17.
8 Stay Submission para 21, Annex 39.
° Stay Submission, para 24, Annex 38.

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

[ICSID] Convention” and is purely “dilatory” in nature, which is not the case in

this proceeding.!°

B. RESPONDENT ON ANNULMENT

25.

26.

The Respondent on Annulment opposes the Stay Request, stating mainly the
following arguments: (i) TANESCO has no automatic right to a continuation of
the stay; (ii) termination of the stay on enforcement would not cause severe
prejudice to TANESCO; (iii) SCB HK would suffer severe prejudice if the
provisional stay on enforcement remains in place; (iv) if the stay is continued,
it should be made conditional upon the provision of security; (v) there is no
risk of multiple recovery by SCB HK and no risk of non-recoupment from SCB
HK in the event that the award is annulled; and (vi) the merits of TANESCO’s
application for annulment are irrelevant to the question of whether a stay
should be granted. In addition, SCB HK gives a brief background to the dispute

to provide context to its submissions.

First, the Respondent on Annulment opposes TANESCO’s assertions that,
absent unusual circumstances, the granting of a stay on enforcement pending
the outcome of the annulment proceedings has “become almost automatic,”
arguing that such statement is inconsistent with the provisions of the ICSID
Convention (Article 52(5)), Arbitration Rules (Rule 54(4)) and established
ICSID jurisprudence, which confirm that there is no presumption in favor of a
continuation of the provisional stay on enforcement.!! As a result, SCB HK
sustains that TANESCO has no automatic right to a continuation of the
provisional stay on enforcement, and must prove that circumstances exist
which require the stay to be maintained until the final decision on annulment

is rendered, which in its view TANESCO has failed to do.

10 Stay Submission, para 28, FN 56.

11 Stay Reply, paras 10-17.

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

27.

28.

29.

30.

The Respondent on Annulment argues that SCB HK consented to the stay in
the Tanzanian courts because, with enforcement of the Award stayed
provisionally pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention, it was not
possible for SCB HK to pursue its enforcement and conservatory measures
applications in the Tanzanian courts. However, if the stay is lifted by the

Committee, SCB HK will seek to lift the stay in Tanzania.'?

Second, the Respondent on Annulment argues that termination of the stay on
enforcement would not cause severe prejudice to TANESCO for the following

reasons.

The Respondent on Annulment argues that TANESCO is seeking to rely upon
its own wrongs in order to persuade the Committee to continue the stay on
enforcement of the Award for the following reasons: (i) TANESCO was told
repeatedly by SCB HK, and ultimately by the ICISD Tribunal which rendered
the Award in relation to disputes under the PPA (the “PPA Tribunal”), that
payment to anyone other than SCB HK would not discharge TANESCO’s
obligation to pay SCB HK under the PPA and thus could not be used to reduce
the amount that TANESCO owes SCB HK; and (ii) TANESCO was aware from
2013 onwards that Pan Africa Power Solutions (T) Limited (“PAP”) had
usurped SCB HK's interest in IPTL. Nonetheless, it procured the release of the
funds in the “Escrow Account” (into which TANESCO and the Government of
Tanzania (“GoT”) made payments due under the PPA) and made further
payments to PAP-controlled IPTL.

SCB HK explains that TANESCO's characterization of the harm it will suffer is
confused and contradictory because TANESCO's position in its Stay
Submission on whether it would be able to pay the Award, and the impact that

payment of the Award would have on it, is unclear. On the one hand,

12Stay Reply, para 17.

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

31.

32.

33.

TANESCO states that “there is no evidence that TANESCO would not have the
means of paying the Award, should the Committee not annul it.”13 On the other,
TANESCO states that if the stay on enforcement is lifted: “TANESCO would be
put under considerable financial stress, which would risk undermining its ability to
fulfill its obligations vis-a-vis IPTL and its other contractual counterparties with the
possible consequence that IPTL would no longer be in a position to supply electricity to
TANESCO under the PPA, therefore leaving millions of Tanzanian residents without

electricity.”"4

The Respondent on Annulment argues that, in any event, the inability to pay is
not a circumstance justifying a stay any more than it would justify non-
payment of any award. It further argues that “[t]he relevant test for hardship was
set out by the Committee in Maritime International Nominees Establishment
(MINE) v. Republic of Guinea: whether termination of the stay (or the granting of
security) would have catastrophic, immediate and irreversible consequences for the
award debtor's ability to conduct its affairs.”15 The Respondent on Annulment
argues that TANESCO has provided no evidence that payment of the Award
would result in the inability of TANESCO to fulfil its obligations or affect the

provision of electricity to the citizens of Tanzania.!¢

Third, the Respondent on Annulment argues that SCB HK would suffer severe
prejudice if the provisional stay on enforcement remains in place, as it has not
received any payments of the sums due to it for the last ten years, whether

pursuant to the Loan Facility Agreement or the PPA.

SCB HK argues that not only will TANESCO seek to delay payment of the
Award, there is also a substantial risk that TANESCO will not comply with the
Award, causing SCB HK to suffer severe prejudice. SCB HK argues that its

8 Stay Reply, para 105.
14 Stay Reply, para 105.
8 Stay Reply, para 114.
16 Stay Reply, para 114.

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

34.

35.

36.

belief is well-founded because of TANESCO’s previous actions to delay and
prevent resolution of the various disputes in relation to the power plant at

Tegeta, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.!”

The Respondent on Annulment notes that numerous committees have held that
the risk of noncompliance by an applicant on annulment with the award is a
relevant circumstance in deciding whether to continue the stay on enforcement,

or to order security.18

It is SCB HK's case that the risk of non-compliance by TANESCO justifies the
lifting of the stay, referring to the reasoning by the committee in OI European
Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela: “the risk of noncompliance by the
Applicant with the Award is a relevant circumstance in deciding on the Applicant's

request for the continuation of the stay on enforcement.”!9

The Respondent on Annulment argues that, in the present case, there is a clear
and substantial risk that TANESCO will not comply with the Award in the
event that it is not annulled. This party further argues that TANESCO's conduct
shows it has no regard for the ICSID process, and cannot be trusted to comply
with the Award voluntarily or promptly if the Annulment Application is
rejected. The Respondent on Annulment argues that TANESCO has: (i)
conspired with PAP and the GoT to dissipate the Escrow Account, held at the
Bank of Tanzania, which should have provided security against payment of the
Award; (ii) misled the PPA Tribunal; (iii) is seeking through the Application
and Stay Request to avoid its obligations to SCB HK as determined in the
Award; (iv) made every effort over the last seven years to delay the resolution

of this dispute; and that (v) following the Award, TANESCO sought to resist

17 Stay Reply, paras 121-151.
18 Stay Reply, para 152, FN 145.
1° Stay Reply, para 153, FN 146.

10

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

37.

38.

recognition and enforcement in the Tanzanian Courts, before filing the

Application. 7°

Fourth, the Respondent on Annulment argues that if the stay is continued, it
should be made conditional upon provision of security.2! SCB HK argues that
annulment committees have consistently found that if there is an objective risk
that the applicant on annulment will not honor its commitments, security may
be appropriate to provide assurance that they will comply with the award if it
is ultimately upheld. Further, this party states that the Committee should
follow the approach advocated by the committee in Enron Corporation Ponderosa
Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, where the key test applied was: whether there
is “sufficient doubt” that the applicant on annulment will comply with the
award. It is SCB HK's case that the test of “sufficient doubt” has been satisfied in

the present case.”

The Respondent on Annulment argues that “asset stripping” has already
occurred through the raiding of the Escrow Account and that TANESCO was
complicit in such act. This party further explains that it is unclear from the Stay
Submission whether TANESCO will be able to pay the Award. The Respondent
on Annulment argues that there is in fact a clear and substantial risk that
TANESCO will not comply with the Award in the event that it is not annulled
and that TANESCO's actions show that it cannot be trusted to respect or
comply with the Award. SCB HK’s position it that, given TANESCO's previous
conduct, the approach taken by the committee in Repsol YPF Ecuador, S.A. v.
Petroecuador is appropriate: “the practice of requiring a bond was correct in order to
prevent a party from applying for an annulment for the purposes of delaying or

extending the enforcement date for the arbitral award.”

2 Stay Reply, paras 121-151.
21 Stay Reply, paras 159-167.
2 Stay Reply, paras 155-169.
2 Stay Reply, para 166, FN 153.

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

39.

40.

The Respondent on Annulment argues that if the Committee decides that the
provisional stay on enforcement may be continued, it should subject it to the
condition that TANESCO provides security. In arguing this point, SCB HK
explains that given the way in which the previous security (the Escrow
Account) was dissipated with the complicity of TANESCO, GoT, and the Bank
of Tanzania, any such security should be held outside Tanzania. SCB HK
requests that in such circumstances: “the continuation of the stay should be
conditional upon the provision by TANESCO of an unconditional and irrevocable bank
guarantee or security bond for the full amount of the Award rendered against it,
inclusive of all interest accrued to the date of issuance of said irrevocable bank guarantee
or security bond. The unconditional and irrevocable bank guarantee or security bond
should be issued by a first-tier reputable international credit institution (outside of
Tanzania and with no principal establishment or branch in Tanzania) and to be
immediately payable to or cashable by SCB HK upon the issuance of a decision by the
Committee rejecting annulment, or if the annulment proceedings are withdrawn or

discontinued.”4

SCB HK argues that the money deposited by TANESCO and GoT in the Escrow
Account should have been available as security for the amounts due to SCB HK
pursuant to the PPA and that the provision of security will merely restore SCB
HK to the position which should still be in place had the Escrow Account not
been dissipated. SCB HK argues this point by explaining that although
previous annulment committees have taken differing views in relation to the
issue of betterment, the preferable view is that: (i) the granting of security in
the form of a guarantee does not constitute betterment if it can be considered
that the award debtor will voluntarily comply with its obligations under Article
53 of the ICSID Convention to abide by and comply with the terms of the

award; and (ii) the posting of a guarantee is an appropriate counterbalance to

24 Stay Reply, para 199, (ii).

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

Al.

42.

43.

the negative effect of the stay on the award creditor, in particular where there

is a risk of non-compliance with the award.

Fifth, the Respondent on Annulment argues that there is no risk of multiple
recovery by SCB HK and no risk of non-recoupment from SCB HK in the event
that the award is annulled, because SCB HK is not seeking to recover anything
more than is due to it under the loan and it has an obligation to account to IPTL

for any balance recovered above the amount due under the loan.?>

The Respondent on Annulment argues that given the PPA Tribunal's findings
in the Award, exchange rate movements, and the increase in the amount
outstanding under the loan due to IPTL's continued default, the amount
outstanding under the loan is now over US$168 million, and the Award is only
for US$148 million (plus interest). As such, it argues that now the Award will
not discharge the loan in full and that SCB HK will only recover the loan if: (i)
the Award is paid in full by TANESCO; and (ii) further sums are recovered

under other proceedings.”°

SCB HK argues that its claim in the English High Court pursuant to the loan
was brought not in an attempt to recover more than SCB HK is entitled to under
the loan, but to counter the arguments made in Tanzania for a number of years
concerning the validity of the assignment of the loan. Moreover, it argues that
it is not clear whether SCB HK will be able to enforce the Flaux J Judgment
against IPTL, as the “PAC Report” (a report by the Tanzanian Public Accounts
Committee on 17 November 2014) confirms that once the US$120 million
contained in the Escrow Account was paid to PAP, some US$75 million was
paid to VIP Engineering & Marketing Limited, IPTL's minority shareholder,

following which it “started to be distributed to private individuals” and that

2 Stay Reply, paras 177-189.
26 Stay Reply, paras 177-184.

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

44.

4S.

46.

“[almong the money paid to individuals, there are the names of political leaders,

religious leaders, judges and other government officials.”2”

Further, SCB HK argues, with respect to the Implementation Agreement claim,
that it is claiming damages for GoT's actions with respect to the release of the
Escrow Account funds, among other things, and that if it recovers in excess of

the amount of its loan, it will account for the balance as appropriate.

Finally, the Respondent on Annulment argues that there is no risk of non-
recoupment from SCB HK in the event that the Award is annulled. It explains
that SCB HK is a bank with substantial assets, and with profit in the year ended
31 December 2016 of HK$7,929 million (approx. US$1 billion). It further notes
that it is also a subsidiary of Standard Chartered Bank, a global financial
institution with offices and branches all over the world, including in Tanzania.
It further argues that annulment committees have previously held that, in the
case of large multinational claimant companies, the risk of non-recoupment of
an award is not a relevant factor, referring to CDC Group Plc v. Republic of the

Seychelles.28

The Respondent on Annulment argues that annulment committees have
recognized that the prima facie grounds for annulment are not relevant to

whether an applicant on annulment is entitled to a stay.?°

27 Stay Reply, para 183.
28 Stay Reply, para 188.
2° Stay Reply, para 192: “As noted by the committee in Sempra Energy International v Argentine Republic
(citing the passages relied upon by TANESCO in MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v The
Republic of Chile and CMS Gas Transmission Company v Argentine Republic): ‘Previous ad hoc

 

have rejected the proposition that a preli of the prospects of the

y y
application for annulment should be a factor influencing the Committee's decision whether a stay should be
granted or not.’”

Il.

47.

48.

49.

50.

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

In light of the Parties’ positions set out above, there are three main issues to be
addressed by the Committee. First, whether the stay on the enforcement of the
Award should be maintained pending a decision on the Application (Section
III.1). Second, if the Committee decides to maintain the stay on the enforcement
of the Award, whether the ordering of such stay should be made subject to
conditions (Section III.2). Third, if the Committee decides to impose conditions
on the granting of the stay, what are the conditions that it should impose on the

granting of the stay (Section III.3).

T1 THE GRANTING OF THE STAY ON ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

 

The first issue to be considered is whether the stay on enforcement of the
Award should be maintained pending a decision on the Application. First, the
Committee will address the legal standard for the continuation of the stay
(IIL1.1) and then comment on the factors relevant for issuing this decision of

the stay on enforcement of the Award (III.1.2).

III.1.1 LEGAL STANDARD FOR THE CONTINUATION OF THE STAY

ICSID Convention Article 52(5) stipulates that: “The Committee may, if it
considers that the circumstances so require, stay enforcement of the award pending its
decision. If the applicant requests a stay on enforcement of the award in his application,

enforcement shall be stayed provisionally until the Committee rules on such request.”*°

The use of the phrase: “if it [the committee] considers that the circumstances so
require,” rather than the formulation “so permit,” indicates the necessity for the

committee to positively establish circumstances prone to justify the requested

30 ICSID Convention, April 2006, Article 52(5), pp. 26-27.

15

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

51.

52.

53.

54.

stay on enforcement. The use of the word “may” indicates that it is a matter
within the discretion of the committee whether or not to stay enforcement of

the award pending its decision on an application for annulment.

Although not bound by prior decisions in other ICSID cases, the Committee
has taken note of, and given consideration to, the existing cases on the grant of
stays under Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention referred to by both sides in
their submissions, as well as to the arguments and legal authorities referred to
during the First Session. The Committee considers that in the present case, it is
not necessary to deal extensively with the reasoning of prior decisions on
requests to stay the enforcement of awards. Each decision has been based on a
different set of factual circumstances from the ones at issue, and consideration
of whether to grant a stay must be dependent upon the particular

circumstances of the present case.

In consideration of the previous, it is the view of the Committee that it is
empowered to exercise its discretion as to whether or not to continue the stay

on the enforcement of the Award pending its decision on the Application!

Article 52(5) does not indicate that one particular party bears the burden of
establishing circumstances requiring a stay. It rather seems that establishing
the existence of such circumstances is part of the Committee’s discretionary
power, and that Article 54(4) of the Arbitration Rules require the applicant to

specify the circumstances requiring the stay.

In the opinion of the Committee from an interpretation of the ICSID
Convention and Arbitration Rules, it is for the award debtor to advance

grounds (supported as necessary by evidence) for the stay. If the award creditor

31 See further OI European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25 -
Annulment proceeding, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 4 April 2016, LE-2.

16

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

disputes these grounds, it must also advance evidence in support of any
“positive allegations” that it makes. As clearly expressed in Libananco Holdings
Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey: “The exercise of the discretion of the Committee
depends on the circumstances surrounding the Stay Request ... and the Committee
considers that its decision should be based on an assessment of all relevant

circumstances.” 52

55. According to the above, the Committee must establish the existence of
circumstances sufficient to justify the stay, taking into consideration the
allegations submitted by the Parties. The Committee’s discretion is to be
exercised in consideration of the circumstances of the present case - a specific,

fact-driven decision.

56. Committees have taken into account several factors when assessing whether to
grant a stay on enforcement depending on all relevant circumstances, including
the risk of non-recovery of sums due under the award if the award is annulled,
non-compliance with the award if the award is not annulled, adverse economic
consequences on either party and the balance of both parties’ interests, among

others.5

III.1.2. FACTORS RELEVANT FOR THIS DECISION ON THE GRANTING OF A STAY ON

ENFORCEMENT

57. The following is not intended to provide an exhaustive list of all the
circumstances that may be deemed of relevance by committees to rule upon

requests for stay on enforcement. Rather, in line with the facts-based approach

82 Stay Reply, FN 8: “LE-1, Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No.
ARB/06/8, Decision on Applicant's Request for Continued Stay on Enforcement of the Award, 7 May 2012, at
[43], footnote referencing Pey Casado v Republic of Chile omitted.”

38 Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, up to 5 May
2016.

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

58.

59.

60.

provided in Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention, it aims at addressing some

relevant and duly established factors raised by the Parties in the case at hand.

In deciding on whether to maintain or terminate the stay on enforcement, the
Committee will take into consideration the adverse economic consequences on
either party and the balance of the Parties’ interests should the stay be granted
or lifted. The Parties have pleaded the following factors:
a. strength of the case for or against annulment;
b. risk of non-compliance with the Award and prospect of enforcement
if the Award is upheld; and
c. possible irreparable injury to the award debtor in the case of
immediate enforcement: (i) hardship if the stay is lifted; and (ii)

problems with recovering payment if the award is later annulled.

(A) STRENGTH OF THE CASE FOR OR AGAINST ANNULMENT

The Applicant argues that the existence of serious grounds for annulment also
clearly supports the maintenance of the stay and that other committees have
established that a request for continuation of a stay can be denied only if it is
obvious that the application is “without any basis under the Convention” and is

purely “dilatory” in nature, which is not the case in these proceedings.*4

The Committee does not consider appropriate at this time to evaluate whether
there is a strong case for or against annulment in deciding on the Stay Request.
The Committee is guided by the reasoning expressed by annulment
committees, which have recognized that the prima facie grounds for annulment

are not relevant to whether an applicant on annulment is entitled to a stay.3>

34 Stay Submission, para 28.

35 Stay Reply, para 190-196: “As noted by the committee in Sempra Energy International v Argentine
Republic (citing the passages relied upon by TANESCO in MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v

The Republic of Chile and CMS Gas Transmission Company v Argentine Republic): ‘Previous ad hoc

 

have ly rejected the proposition that a preliminary of the prospects of the

18

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

61.

62.

63.

64.

TANESCO has exercised its right to apply for annulment contemplated under
the ICSID Convention, and as such it has a legitimate right to request that the
stay is continued, until the final decision is rendered by the Committee. There
is no reason to consider that in this particular case the institution of the

annulment proceedings was purely dilatory in nature.

(B) Risk OF NON-COMPLIANCE WITH THE AWARD AND PROSPECT OF

ENFORCEMENT IF THE AWARD IS UPHELD

The approach advocated by the committees in MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. & MTD
Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile and CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine
Republic and Enron Corporation Ponderosa Assets, L.P v. Argentine Republic is
followed by the Committee in the present case. The key test is whether there is
sufficient doubt that the applicant on annulment will comply with the award,

if upheld. %

It is SCB HK's case that the test of “sufficient doubt” has been satisfied in the

present case. The Committee hereby will consider whether this test is met.

First, the Committee gives weight to the fact that in its Stay Submission,
TANESCO's position on whether it would be able to pay the Award is unclear.
On the one hand, TANESCO states that “there is no evidence that TANESCO
would not have the means of paying the Award, should the Committee not annul it.”°”
On the other, TANESCO states that if the stay on enforcement is lifted:
“TANESCO would be put under considerable financial stress, which would risk
undermining its ability to fulfill its obligations vis-a-vis IPTL and its other contractual

counterparties with the possible consequence that IPTL would no longer be in a position

application for annulment should be a factor influencing the Committee's decision whether a stay should be
granted or not.’”

36 Stay Reply, paras 160-162.

37 Stay Submission, para 12.

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

65.

66.

67.

68.

to supply electricity to TANESCO under the PPA, therefore leaving millions of

Tanzanian residents without electricity.”>8

If TANESCO's position is that payment of the Award would put it under
considerable financial stress which would risk undermining its ability to pay
its contractual counterparties, then there must be a risk that TANESCO will be
unable to pay the Award - particularly if payment is further delayed and the

amount due increases as interest continues to accrue.

Further, TANESCO has indicated that should “the Capacity Payment” (payable
pursuant to clause 5.1(a) of the PPA) be paid into court, as requested by SCB
HK in local enforcement proceedings, the same could not be paid to IPTL,
which is currently performing its obligations under the PPA. The former would

jeopardize the supply of electricity by IPTL.°°

From the above assertions, the Committee considers that in the present case,
there is a substantial risk that TANESCO will not comply with the Award in
the event that it is not annulled. Additionally, the Committee notes that in the
present Application, there are serious allegations made by SCB HK that
TANESCO has conspired with PAP and the GoT to dissipate the Escrow
Account, held at the Bank of Tanzania, which should have provided security
against payment of the Award and that TANESCO has misled the PPA
Tribunal,#? which if confirmed, would raise the risk of non-enforcement of the

Award.

Also, the conduct of TANESCO, following the issuance of the Award, gives an
indication as to its possible reluctance to comply. TANESCO sought to resist
recognition and enforcement in the Tanzanian Courts before filing the

Application, arguing that “the amount involved is colossal” and that complying

38 Stay Submission, para 18.
38 Stay Submission, para 13.
40 Stay Reply, paras 121-151.

20

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

69.

70.

with the Award would “affect the operations of the applicant while pending the
determination of the intended application for stay of execution before the ICSID

Tribunal and intended application for annulment are heard and determined.”*!

(C) Risk OF POSSIBLE IRREPARABLE INJURY TO THE AWARD DEBTOR IN THE CASE

OF IMMEDIATE ENFORCEMENT

(i) Hardship if the stay is lifted

The Committee is guided by the following test for hardship set out by the
committee in Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v. Republic
of Guinea: whether termination of the stay (or the granting of security) would
have catastrophic, immediate and irreversible consequences for the award

debtor's ability to conduct its affairs.42

It is likely that if the stay is lifted, SCB HK will pursue the enforcement
proceedings of the Award which it has already commenced before the High
Court of Tanzania and possibly in other jurisdictions. Although enforcement
proceedings in Tanzania have been stayed as recently as 27 February 2017 by
consent of all parties to those proceedings (including SCB HK) pending
determination of the Application before the Committee, SCB HK has expressed
that it would request that such stay be lifted if there is no stay granted in the

current annulment proceeding.*+

41 Stay Reply, para 134, FN 135, Exhibit-051 Miscellaneous Civil Application No. 686 of 2016, Affidavit
of Isdor Paul Nkindi, para 10.

“Stay Reply, para 114, FN 118. Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/01/3 - Annulment Proceeding, Decision on the Argentine Republic's Request for a
Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 7 October 2008, Annex-28 (“Enron v. Argentina’).

4 Stay Submission, para 10.

“Stay Reply, para 17.

21

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

71.

72.

73.

74.

Thus, TANESCO could still be forced to litigate enforcement proceedings in

Tanzania while the Application is pending.*

A lift of the stay would not entail unjustified multiple recovery for SCB HK.
SCB HK has stated that it is not seeking to recover anything more than is due
to it under the loan and that it has an obligation to account to IPTL for any

balance recovered above the amount due under the loan.*¢

(ii) Problems with recovering payment if the Award is later annulled

The Committee considers that in the present case, the risk of non-recoupment
of the Award is not a relevant factor given that a company is involved, as noted
by the committee in CDC Group Plc v. Republic of the Seychelles.*” In the present
case, SCB HK is a bank with substantial assets, and which has stated it had a
profit in the year ended 31 December 2016 of HK$7,929 million (approx. US$1
billion). It is also a subsidiary of Standard Chartered Bank, a global financial
institution with offices and branches all over the world, including in Tanzania.
Thus, there are no elements on record to sustain the risk of non-recoupment.
The press record submitted by TANESCO during the First Session does not

prove otherwise.®

III.2 IMPOSING CONDITIONS ON THE GRANTING OF THE STAY ON THE

ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

The second issue to be considered is whether conditions should be imposed on
the granting of the stay. The Parties disagree on whether the Committee has the

discretionary power to condition the stay.

45 Stay Submission, para 13.
46 Stay Reply, paras 177-189.

*7 Stay Reply, para 188.

48 TANESCO’s Hearing Bundle, Tab. 14.

22

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

Asa starting point, the Committee notes that the terms of the ICSID Convention
are the source of the Committee’s power to modify or grant a stay. The question
whether the Committee can make a stay conditional on the provision of
security is a matter of interpretation of the ICSID Convention. In conducting
such interpretation, the Committee is guided by Articles 31 and 32 of the

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (“VCLT”).

In line with the interpretation carried out in Enron Corporation Ponderosa Assets,
L.P v. Argentine Republic,49 under Article 31.1 of the VCLT, the Committee notes
that the ICSID Convention is silent on the question whether or not an ad hoc
committee can make a stay conditional on the provision of security. The
Committee does not view that silence as meaning that the power does not exist.
That discretionary power to allow or deny such remedy may implicitly include
a power to allow the remedy subject to conditions. This interpretation is
consistent with the object and purpose of Article 52(5), which is designed to
enable the ad hoc committee to balance the rights of the parties pending

annulment proceedings.

According to Article 31.3(b) of the VCLT, “any subsequent practice in the
application of the treaty which establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its
interpretation” shall also be considered. The Committee has not been made
aware that an ICSID Contracting State has expressed concern in any forum that
the decisions issued by a committee conditioning the stay exceeds the ad hoc

committee’s power under Article 52(5).

As for Article 32 of VCLT, the Committee also turns to supplementary means

of interpretation in order to confirm the meaning of Article 52(5).

First, regarding the preparatory work of the ICSID Convention, TANESCO
argues that the Preliminary Draft of the ICSID Convention provided for ad hoc

49 Enron v. Argentina, Annex-28.

23

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

80.

81.

82.

83.

committees to have a power to recommend any provisional measures
necessary for the protection of the rights of the parties in connection witha stay
of enforcement, but that power did not appear in later drafts of the ICSID
Convention.5° The Committee finds that it is not clear why the power to
recommend provisional measures was omitted nor why the ICSID Convention
differs from the New York Convention in this regard. The Committee notes that
Arbitration Rule 53 appears to be broad enough to confer on an ad hoc
committee the power to recommend provisional measures contained in

Arbitration Rule 39.

In view of this, Article 52(5) must be given a broader, rather than a narrower,
interpretation since the ad hoc committee has the power to balance the rights of

the parties pending the annulment proceeding.

Second, as regards previous ICSID decisions: “There have been a total of 43
requests for a stay of enforcement in the 90 registered annulments, 41 of which have
led to Committee decisions. Thirty-six decisions granted the stay of enforcement. In 22
of those instances where a stay was granted it was conditioned upon the issuance of
some type of security or written undertaking. In 11 of those 22 cases, the stay was

terminated because the condition had not been satisfied.”>+

The Committee considers that although not bound by these decisions, weight
must be given to the fact that a sizeable group of committees have ordered stays

conditional on the provision of security.

As regards to doctrine, the Committee has not been referred to any doctrine

expressing the view that there is no power under Article 52(5) to make a stay

50 Transcript, 30 March 2017, pp. 140-141.
51 Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, up to 5 May

2016.

24

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

84.

85.

86.

conditional on security. On the contrary, the Committee has been referred to

doctrine affirming the existence of this power. °?

Further, the obligation that each State assumed on ratification of the
Convention, under Article 53, to comply with awards against it is particularly
important. This obligation is as important as the right to pursue annulment
under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. These two articles are linked

together.

Having regard to all these matters, the Committee finds that, under Article
52(5) of the ICSID Convention, it may make the continuation of the stay on

enforcement conditional.

In the present case, the Committee considers it necessary to grant the stay on
enforcement of the Award, given that there is a possible risk that prior to the
decision on annulment, TANESCO may suffer considerable financial stress,
which could risk undermining its ability to continue fulfilling its obligations
vis-a-vis IPTL and its other contractual counterparties with the possible
consequence that IPTL would no longer be in a position to supply electricity to
TANESCO under the PPA, leaving millions of Tanzanian residents without
electricity. Notwithstanding the former, these assertions have also led the
Committee to decide to condition such a stay. Given TANESCO’s own
assertions that it would be in considerable financial stress should the Award be
enforced, this raises a valid concern on the part of SCB HK that there is
uncertainty as to TANESCO’s ability and willingness to fulfill the Award. By
conditioning the stay, Claimant’s right of enforcement shall also be protected,

in order to balance the interest of the Parties.

* Hearing Bundle, Exhibit 17, Christoph H. Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention, A Commentary,
Second Edition, p. 1081.

25

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

87.

88.

The Committee rejects the argument that security constitutes betterment. The
lifting of the provisional stay or imposition of a guarantee are not punishments:
the parties have a procedural right guaranteed by the ICSID Convention that
allows them to request the annulment of an award, but this right cannot operate
against the presumption of validity of awards rendered under the ICSID
Convention. Therefore, the Committee is convinced that the stay on

enforcement shall be conditioned as detailed below.

III.3. CONDITIONS TO BE IMPOSED ON THE GRANTING OF THE STAY ON THE

ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

In light of the facts, the Committee decides that: The provisional stay on
enforcement of the Award is extended until such time as the Committee
determines, on the condition that TANESCO provides, within 30 days of the
decision of the Committee, an unconditional and irrevocable bank guarantee
or security bond issued by a first-tier reputable international credit institution
(outside of Tanzania and with no principal establishment branch in Tanzania)
for the full amount of the Award rendered against TANESCO, inclusive of all
interest accrued to the date of issuance of said irrevocable bank guarantee or
security bond, and immediately payable to or cashable by SCB HK upon the
issuance of a final decision of the Committee rejecting the annulment, or if the
annulment proceedings are withdrawn or discontinued. In the event that
TANESCO declines to issue such guarantee and informs the Secretary-General
of ICSID within 30 calendar days following the notification of this Decision, the

stay on enforcement shall be automatically terminated. In the case that the

58 Transcript, 30 March 2017, p.166. See further Stay Reply, para 172: ’....in Sempra Energy International
v Argentine Republic: ‘the Committee considers that the appropriate comparison is not with a scenario where
the award debtor would not comply with its obligation under Article 53 (where a guarantee would obviously be
“better”), but with one where the debtor would comply. In such case the guarantee would not place the award
creditor in a better situation...Although not relevant for the comparison, if there is a risk that the award debtor -
whether a State party or a foreign investor - would not comply with its obligation under Article 53, the safeguard
inherent in provision of a guarantee would be fully warranted.”

26

Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. TANESCO
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20 - Annulment Proceeding

 

IV.

89.

90.

Committee annuls the Award, the bank guarantee or security bond granted

will be released.
DECISION

The Committee decides to continue the stay on enforcement of the Award
pending a decision on the Application and subject to the conditions set out

above in numeral III.3.

If the conditions set out above are not complied with, the stay on enforcement

shall be automatically terminated.

4 ty

On behalf of the ad hoc Committee
Dr. Claus von Wobeser
President of the ad hoc Committee

Date: 12 April 2017

27

