SCC Arbitration V (2012/175

In the matter of an arbitration pursuant to the Arbitration Rules 2010 of the Arbitration Institute
of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce

between

STATE ENTERPRISE ‘ENERGORYNOK’ (UKRAINE)
and

THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA

 

FINAL AWARD

 

Nancy B. Turck, Chairperson

Prof. Dr. Rolf Knieper, Arbitrator Joseph Tirado, Arbitrator

Stockholm, Sweden 29 January 2015

Representing Claimant: Representing Respondent:

Sergei Adamovitch Voitovich Mihail Buruiana

Grischenko and Partners Buruiana & Partners

37-41 Artema str. Mihail Kogalniceanu Street No. 81/4, #2

Kyiv 04053, Ukraine MD-2009 Chisinau, Republic of Moldova

Table of Contents

Vi.

INTRODUCTION
A. The Parties..

 

 

 

 

 

 

B. Commencement of the Arbitration - 1
C. The Arbitral TribUnal.........00...cceccc cece eee cece eeeeeeeeeeteeeeeeeeeeeeeneeaees 2
D. The Background of the Dispute...............0...::ccccccccseeeeeeeeeesseeeeeeeeeeeenees 3
E. Procedural History.............0.ccccccccccessseeeeeceesessseeeeeeeeeetetseseeeeeeseenenaeee 7
THE CLAIMS IN THIS ARBITRATION AND THE RELIEF SOUGHT............... 12
A. The Claimant's Position...........00.0..cccccccccc cece eect eeeeeeeeceenneeeeeeeeeeeee 12
B. The Respondent’s Position...........0.0..cccce cece cece cece eeeee ee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenenaes 13
C. Applicable Law.............cccccccc cee cc cece e eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseteeeeeeeeeeetneneaaes 13
JURISDICTION 14
A. The Claimant's Position on Jurisdiction. .14
B. The Respondent's Position on Jurisdiction .

C. The Tribunal’s AnalySis..............0000c:ccccccessseeeeeceesetesnseeeeeeeeentsseeaeeenees 20
INTEREST... 0.00 ce eee e cece cece cece cece ance cree eee ceeeeeeeeeeseseu saa eae eee eeeteeeeeeeeeeeeees 28
COSTS... 0c eee e cece cece cece cece eee eee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeesea gaa e ea eeeeeeseeeseseeeeeeeees 29

INTRODUCTION

The Parties

The Claimant, State Enterprise “Energorynok” (Ukraine) (“Claimant” or “Energorynok”), is a
Ukrainian state enterprise, registered on 8 June 2000, and having its office at Simon Petlyura str.
27, 01032 Kyiv, Ukraine. The Claimant is represented in this arbitration by the duly authorized
attorneys mentioned on the cover page.

The Respondent is the Republic of Moldova (“Respondent” or “Moldova”), a sovereign state,
addressed through Government House, Piata Marii Adunari National 1, Chisinau MD 2033 and
the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Moldova, Str. 31 August 1989, 82 Chisinau MD 2012.
The Respondent has been represented in this arbitration by the duly authorized attorneys
mentioned on the cover page.

The Claimant and the Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties”.
Commencement of the Arbitration

On 20 December 2012 the Claimant filed a Request for Arbitration with the Stockholm Chamber
of Commerce (“SCC”) under Article 2 of the 2010 Arbitration Rules of the SCC (hereinafter the
“SCC Rules”) and under Article 26(4)(c) of the Energy Charter Treaty (hereinafter the “ECT”).
The ECT entered into force for Moldova on 16 April 1998 and for Ukraine on 27 January 1999."

SCC Rules, Article 5, permits the Secretariat of the Arbitration Institute of the SCC (hereinafter
the “SCC Secretariat”) to set a time for the Respondent to file an Answer. By letter dated 21
December 2012, the SCC Secretariat set a one month time limit, or until 21 January 2013, as the
date for the Respondent to submit an Answer.

On 21 January 2013, Lilian Apostol, Agent for the Government from the Ministry of Justice of
Moldova, requested from the SCC, under SCC Rules, Article 7, a two month extension of time,
until 21 March 2013, for the Respondent to file an Answer. The Respondent cited the time to
gather materials, as well as the Government's requirement for public selection of lawyers for
international arbitrations, a procedure that Mr. Apostol wrote could take more than two months.

www.encharter.org, “Members and Observers”

On 24 January 2013, the Claimant notified the SCC Secretariat that it objected to the
Respondent's request, citing, inter alia, that the Respondent had filed its request on the last day it
was to have filed its Answer, that it had not yet commenced the public selection of counsel, that it
was well aware of the dispute and that the Answer, being limited, does not require a respondent
to set out its position of the case.

By letter dated 28 January 2013, the SCC Secretariat granted the Respondent until 11 February
2013 to file its Answer to the Request for Arbitration. The Respondent filed its Answer on that
date.

The Claimant, on 27 February 2013, commented on the Answer, stating that while the
Respondent had jurisdictional objections, the Respondent had not disclosed the essence of the
objections. The Claimant requested the SCC to proceed with the case. By letter dated 15 March
2013, the SCC advised the Parties that the SCC “does not manifestly lack jurisdiction over the
dispute” and that it had appointed the Chairperson.

The Arbitral Tribunal

The Claimant appointed as an arbitrator:

Mr. Joseph Tirado
WINSTON & STRAWN
CityPoint

One Ropemaker Street
London EC2Y 9HU
United Kingdom

The Respondent appointed as an arbitrator:

Prof. Dr. Rolf Knieper
Ferriére

F-21530 St. Andeux
France

The Arbitration Institute of the SCC on 15 March 2013 appointed as Chairperson:

Nancy B. Turck

Flat 3, 40 Lower Sloane Street
London SW1W 8BP

United Kingdom

The SCC Secretariat referred the case to the Tribunal on 2 May 2013.

Background of the Dispute

On 20 March 1993, the Governments of Ukraine and Moldova signed an Agreement on
Cooperation in the Field of Electricity (CCLA-117). That agreement, in Article 2.4, stated that the
“Contracting Parties through the relevant organizations shall in good time agree on the procedure
of the technical exploitation of the existing and under construction power installations...”.

On 20 February 1995, pursuant to the Agreement referenced in Paragraph 14 above, the Ministry
of Energy, Industry and Electrification of Ukraine (hereinafter the “Ukrainian Ministry”) and the
State Department of Energy Industry and Energy Resources of the Republic of Moldova
(hereinafter the “Moldovan Ministry”) entered into an Agreement on the Parallel Operation of the
Energy Systems of Ukraine and Moldova (the “APO”). ®

The APO, in Article 4.3, provides that provision of surplus energy shall be compensated. “Any
deviation from the agreed flow balance shall be charged in money at a three-area tariff rate,
subject to the following tariff rate area ratio. The agreement reached upon the tariff rate shall be
documented.” APO Article 4.4 provides for compensation for deviations from the agreed balance
also to be paid in kind. The Claimant's claim, however, relies on Article 4.3.

The APO, in Article 7.3 provides that “[I/f the Parties are unable to reach a mutual agreement, all
disputes and differences arising between them out of or in relation to this Agreement shall be

resolved by a state arbitration court in the state of the Plaintiff's choice.”* APO Article 7.4 states
wd

that “[T]he arbitration’s court shall be final and binding upon both Parties.

APO Article 9.3 provides that “/T]he rights and obligations of the Parties under this Agreement
may not be transferred thereby to any third party without mutual consent.”

CC-8, CC-9, CC-10 and CCLA-112. The Respondent disputed the validity of the Claimant’s copy of the APO
(CC-8) and that the APO could be an exhibit, rather than a legal authority. Hence, the Respondent
submitted its own copy as a legal authority (CCLA-112). The Claimant subsequently submitted two other
certified copies of the APO (CC-9 and CC-10). The text of all the copies provided by both Parties in this
arbitration is identical (and the Parties so agree) save for an identification number. The dispute over this
identification number, or whether the APO is a treaty or an interstate agreement, or a legal authority or
an exhibit, is not relevant, in the Tribunal’s view, for the Tribunal’s analysis in this arbitration.

The APO is written in Russian. The Claimant's translation of the APO, (CC-8) capitalizes the word
“Plaintiff” whereas the Respondent contends the word should not be capitalized in translation. The
Tribunal believes the meaning is clear, irrespective of whether the word is capitalized or not.

Both Parties pointed out that, in the former USSR, an “arbitration” court is not an arbitration tribunal but
rather an “arbitrazh” court dealing with economic issues. See SoD 1116 and SoR fn 56.

3

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

APO Article 10 vests “[t]he performance of the technical and operational conditions” arising from
the APO in two state enterprises, the National Control Centre of Ukraine (“NCC”) for the
Ukrainian Ministry and Moldenergo SC (“Moldenergo”) for the Moldovan Ministry. Article 10 also
contains the bank account sort codes for each of those two state enterprises. As will be
discussed below, the Parties are agreed that the APO remains in force; it appears to be operated
by the Ministries and, on the Ukrainian side, Ukrenergo as to execution and transmission.

Moldtranselectro is a state enterprise which, as a result of Decision No. 1059 of the Moldovan
Government of 13 November 1997, became a successor to Moldenergo for electricity
transmission as a result of the reorganization of Moldova's energy sector (CC-204).

On 15 April 1998 the National Energy Company “Ukrenergo” was created as a state enterprise by
Order No. 54 of the Ukrainian Ministry of Fuel and is the successor to NCC, including for
purposes of APO Article 10 (CC-113).

In October 1998, there occurred an overflow of electricity in the amount of 50,000,000 kWh (the
“Overflow”) from Ukraine to Moldova, triggering, under APO Article 4.3, compensation due in the
amount of USD1,662,297.81. The fact of the Overflow and the amount of compensation due for
that Overflow are not in dispute. The dispute in this arbitration involves, inter alia, whether

compensation has already been made and, if not, from and to whom the compensation is owed.

On 25 November 1998, (a) Ukrenergo as Principal, (b) the International Fund for Emergency
Assistance for the Black Sea Economic Cooperation States (the “Fund”) as the Guarantor and (c)
Moldtranselectro entered in to Surety Agreement 463/01 (CC-169) whereby the Fund guaranteed
to NPC [Ukrenergo] Moldtranselectro’s obligations to return “the unscheduled received
electricity..in the amount of 50,000,000 kWh”. Should Moldtranselectro not fulfill its obligations by
28 November 1998, the Fund agreed to repay the existing indebtedness to NPC [Ukrenergo] by
the supply of equipment equal to the value of the indebtedness. This Surety Agreement was one
of several surety agreements arising out of the APO.

It appears that Neptun, subcontracted by the Fund, in 1999 delivered equipment to a “structural
subdivision” of Ukrenergo®. According to the Claimant, as Ukrenergo had no contracts with the
Fund, “the equipment was capitalized off [Ukrenergo’s] balance sheet”. (CC-172). When 80% of
the obligation under the Surety Agreement was repaid through equipment, the Arbitration Court of
Kiev, on the petition of Ukrenergo®, declared in December 1999 that the Surety Agreement was

SoD 943, Day 2/132, citing CC- 237 through CC-242.

CC-178.

25.

26.

null and void on the grounds that the Ukrainian Ministry had not authorized Ukrenergo to sign the
Surety Agreement.’ The Claimant asserts that, following the nullification of the Surety Agreement,
the equipment was returned. The Respondent acknowledges equipment was returned but
contends that it was equipment supplied by Moldova to Ukraine during the same period pursuant
to other contracts than the Surety Agreement and, thus, compensation for the Overflow has been
fully paid.®

Pursuant to Resolution No. 755 dated 5 May 2000 of the Ukrainian Cabinet Ministers,
Energorynok, until then a division of Ukrenergo, was established as a separate state-owned
enterprise (CC-9). The Claimant's functions are set out in the ministerial resolution and a
Charter®. The Claimant states, in Paragraph 56 of its SoR, that the transfer to it of the debt due by
Moldova for the Overflow under the APO “was separately formalized by the Separation Balance
Sheet” approved by the Ukrainian party to the APO—the Ministry of Fuel and Energy of Ukraine,

The Claimant

the appropriate Separation Protocol"’ and by the Order No. 23 of Ukrenergo
summarizes in SoR Paragraph 57 that, by virtue of these three documents, it is the “due legal
successor of the receiver of the debt of the Moldova party under the APO” and thus has a right to

a claim of money conferred by contract. '*

The Claimant's counsel, at the Hearing in this arbitration held on 9-10 September 2014 in
Stockholm, stated that the Claimant had over 5 years unsuccessfully tried to obtain compensation
from Moldtranselectro. Having failed in that attempt, the Claimant brought an action in 2002 in
the Economic Court in Kiev against the Moldovan Ministry (case No. 27/52 Energorynok v. The
Ministry of Energy Industry of the Republic of Moldova and InTA-AUDIT)."* On 25 December
2002, the Kiev court ordered the Moldovan Ministry to pay the Claimant USD1,745,412.71 and
litigation costs (hereinafter the “2002 Decision”).'° The amount of money awarded the Claimant
pursuant to the 2002 Decision is hereinafter referred to as “the Debt”. The Claimant states that,

CC-127.

RPHM 4/5; Day 2/151.

CC-119 and CC-199. The Claimant's submission of excerpts of the Charter (CC-119) referenced Article 7,
entitled “Purpose and Objects of the Enterprise Activities” as well as Articles 9-11 and 14-26. The
Respondent's submission of excerpts of the Charter excluded Article 7 but included Articles 4, 6, 12-13,
16, 20, 27, 29-35, 42 and 46-53. Neither Party submitted the Claimant’s complete Charter.

c113.

c114.

CC-2, p.1 last paragraph; CC-121.

In its written Hearing Presentation, the Claimant, on page 7, stated that it became the legal successor of
the Debt only on 1 July 2000 in compliance with the Separated Balance Sheet.

Day 1/163-164. The Respondent, on Day 2/88-89, noted the Claimant by 2002 only had been in existence
for 2, not 5, years. The record shows other parties attempted to seek payment of the Debt prior to 2000.
cc-2.

27.

28.

29.

30.

as a result of the 2002 Decision, its claim for money is not only a right conferred by contract but
also by law.

Beginning in 2003, the Claimant sought recognition and enforcement of the 2002 Decision in
Moldova. According to SoC Paragraphs 28-63, various judges remanded the case five times
over five years for a new trial. On 4 July 2009, the Supreme Judicial Chamber of Moldova denied
the appeals of two Moldovan ministries, thereby giving enforcement to the 2002 Decision (the
“2009 Decision”). As described in the Claimant's various pleadings, a Moldovan state enterprise,
Energoatom, claimed a debt from the Claimant and transferred that debt to Remington Worldwide
Limited who, in turn, transferred the debt subsequently to two other parties, the last being Pinar-
Com, a Moldovan entity.

On 10 July 2009 the Claimant submitted to the Enforcement Bureau of Buiucani, Chisinau
(hereinafter the “Enforcement Bureau”) an application for the initiation of executive proceedings to
recover, pursuant to the 2009 Decision, the amount of the Debt plus interest (CC-41). The
Moldovan Ministry of Economy issued a payment order to the Enforcement Bureau (dated 15
December and received (together with the funds) on 17 December 2009) to pay the Claimant in
accordance with the enforcement order'®. On 16 December 2009, pursuant to a request for an
interim order by Pinar-Com, a Moldovan court ordered the attachment in favor of Pinar-Com of
the funds destined for the Claimant at the Enforcement Bureau (CCB-56). Following a hearing on
24 December 2009, at which the Claimant was not present, and pursuant to a court order, the
funds were transferred to Pinar-Com.

The Claimant appealed the 24 December 2009 decision in favor of Pinar-Com. There followed a
series of court procedures; on 22 November 2011, the District Economic Court of Chisinau
dismissed Pinar-Com’s claim (CC-94). As Pinar-Com lacked collectible assets, the state
enforcement officer acknowledged the impossibility of enforcement of the decision in favor of
Energorynok and closed the enforcement proceedings on 23 May 2013 (CC-95).

On 19 September 2012, the Claimant, by letter to the Government of Moldova, the Ministry of
Justice of Moldova, the Ministry of Economy of Moldova and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
for the European Integration of the Republic of Moldova (hereinafter “Moldovan Addressees”) (a)
invited the Moldovan Addressees to consider the proposal of amicable settlement of the dispute
according to Article 26(2) of the ECT and (b) notified the Moldovan Addressees to consider the 19
September 2012 letter a written request to start negotiations for the purposes of Article 9(2) of the
CC-55; CC-193. The Parties could not agree on the English translation and, therefore, each retained their

own versions in the Common Core Bundle. In the Tribunal’s opinion, the slight variations of translation
are irrelevant to consideration of the dispute.

31.

32.

33.

34.

Agreement between the Government of Ukraine and the Government of the Republic of Moldova
on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments (hereinafter, the “Ukrainian-Moldovan
BIT”) (CC-3). On 26 November 2012, the Claimant sent a reminder letter to the Moldovan
Addressees (CC-4).

On 7 December 2012, the Moldovan Ministry of Economy replied to the Claimant, citing a series
of prior correspondence and stating that the court decisions of Moldova “are beyond doubt’, that
the Claimant “does not have any creditor rights on the territory of the Republic of Moldova” and
that the Claimant “is not an investor, which excludes, in turn, the possibility to consider the
dispute in international arbitration” (CC-5).

Procedural History

Following the events described in Sections |(B) and I(C) above, the SCC notified the Tribunal by
letter dated 2 May 2013 that the Claimant had paid the total advance on costs for both Parties,
the Respondent not having paid its share of the costs.

The Chair, on 9 May 2013, circulated to the Parties an agenda for a teleconference and a
proposed Procedural Order (hereinafter “PO”) No. 1 setting out a timetable. By letter dated 15
May 2013, the Claimant proposed two rounds of written submissions, 3 months for the first and 2
months for the second. By letter of the same date, the Respondent also proposed two rounds of
written submissions, 4 months for the first and 3 months for the second.

Following a conference call on 16 May 2013, in which Mr. Apostol participated on behalf of the
Respondent, the Tribunal issued PO1 on 24 May 2013, which was mutually agreed by the
Parties. PO1 contained the following provisions:

a. The Claimant clarified there was but one Respondent in the arbitration, namely the
Republic of Moldova and, therefore, all references henceforth to the Respondent would be
“The Republic of Moldova”;

b. The Parties were asked if they wished to bifurcate the Tribunal’s consideration of
jurisdiction and the merits of the dispute; each Party declined and agreed that there
should be no such bifurcation (Paragraph 2.1 of PO1);

c. Each Party was granted 3.5 months (using a 30 day month) for its initial submission;

d. Following submission of the Statement of Defense (“SoD”), the Parties and the Tribunal
would consult on the further timetable but that it “likely would be that each Party would not
have more than 2.5 months to prepare its Reply and Rejoinder, as the case may be”
(Paragraph 2.4, PO1);

35.

36.

37.

38.

e. Assuming two rounds of submissions, PO1 stated a hearing could take place between
mid-May and the end of June 2014; and

f. Taking into account SCC Rules, Article 37, and pursuant to the Tribunal’s request to the
Board of Directors of the Arbitration Institute of the SCC (hereinafter the “SCC Board”),
PO1 set forth that the Board agreed to extend the time limit for a final award to 1
September 2014.

On 18 June 2013, the Claimant requested the Tribunal to issue a separate award ordering the Respondent to
reimburse the Claimant the amount of €77,000 for the latter’s payment on 10 April 2013 of the Respondent's
share of the advance payment, together with 9% interest p.a., starting to accrue on 10 April 2013. By PO2,
dated 19 June, the Tribunal gave the Respondent until 5 July 2013 to reply to the Claimant's request. The
Respondent objected to the request.

On 19 July 2013, the Tribunal issued PO3 stating that it would decide on the Claimant's request in its Final
Award in the arbitration. The Tribunal stated that “as /ong as it appears the Respondent may object to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction, the issue of jurisdiction is pending. The Tribunal may not be empowered to render a
partial award without first affirming its own jurisdiction.”

The Claimant filed its Statement of Claim (SoC) on 30 August 2013. Pursuant to PO1, the
Respondent was to have filed its SoD on 13 December 2013. On 4 November, Mr. Mihael
Buruiana notified the Tribunal and the Claimant that, on 28 October 2013, he had been retained
to represent the Respondent; he requested an extension of time until 15 February 2014, or 3.5
months, to file the SoD because time was needed to obtain relevant documents and facts and to
deal with various state agencies and officers “and such procedures are usually lengthy and time
consuming.” The Claimant, by letter to the Tribunal dated 6 November 2013, objected to the
Respondent's request and submitted with its objection the official Moldovan resolution No. 737
dated 18 September 2013 awarding the tender for representation in this Arbitration to Buruiana &
Partners. The Claimant contended that having 5.5 months to prepare the SoD “will infringe the
requirement of procedural fairness..and cause undue delay in the proceeding’. The Claimant
further contended that the Respondent's counsel had at least from 18 September to work on the
case but, should the Tribunal find it necessary to grant an extension of time, that such extension
be not later than until 30 December 2013. By PO4, dated 7 November 2013, the Tribunal granted
the Respondent until 10 January 2014 to submit its SoD.

On 30 December 2013, the Respondent again requested a further extension of time from 10
January until 17 January 2014 to submit its SoD, citing public holidays on 1 January, 6-7 January
and 13-14 January 2014 and asserting that many people would work only part time from 1-14

39.

40.

4.

42.

January 2014. The following day, the Claimant e-mailed the Tribunal with its objections and the
Respondent e-mailed a reply on 1 January 2014. By POS dated 2 January 2014, the Tribunal
granted Respondent a final extension until 17 January 2014 to submit its SoD.

In preparation for a teleconference on 29 January 2014, the Tribunal circulated for comments
draft PO6 with a timetable for the remainder of the arbitration. The Claimant filed comments on
22 January and the Respondent on 23 January 2014. On 13 February 2014 the Tribunal issued
PO6, which established the continued timetable and procedural aspects of the arbitration,
including the dates of the hearing. PO6 also noted a second extension of time, until 31
December 2014, for the Tribunal to issue its award, as approved by the SCC Board. PO6,
Paragraph 3.1, amended Paragraph 6.1 of PO1 by providing that should one Party object to the
English language translation of a document submitted by the other Party, the Parties would first
attempt to jointly agree a translation and that “[T]ranslations have to be certified at the specific
request of the other Party, should the Parties be unable to agree a translation of the document or
written submission in question.”

The Claimant filed its Reply (SoR), including an expert witness statement, on 28 March 2014.
Pursuant to PO6, Paragraph 2.2, the Respondent was to have filed its Rejoinder (“RoRy”) on 6
June 2014, together with any witness statement. On 3 June 2014, by two e-mails, the
Respondent requested the Tribunal to grant an extension of time to file its RoRy until latest 27
June 2014 because the “Respondent encountered some unforeseeable and unpredictable
problems and delays in obtaining a number of documents that are material to the proceedings
and have an impact on the position of the Respondent’. The Respondent claimed it anticipated
receiving the last part of the requested documents around 23-24 June 2014. The Claimant, by
two e-mails to the Tribunal on the same day, objected to the extension, stating the Respondent
had sufficient time to collect any necessary documents, would have an unequal and preferential
position for submission of documents and, pursuant to PO 6, Paragraph 5.2, could supplement
the record with documents before 1 August 2014. By PO7 dated 4 June 2014, the Tribunal
granted the Respondent a “final” extension of time until 13 June 2014 to file its RoRy.

On 6 June 2014, the Respondent not having paid its share of a second tranche of fees requested
by the SCC Secretariat, the Claimant paid €18,634.50 on behalf of the Respondent.

On 13 June the Respondent submitted what it entitled the First Part of a RoRy. In Paragraph 2
thereof, the Respondent unilaterally, without leave of the Tribunal, stated it would submit the
Second Part of its Rejoinder on 27 June 2014, as it had not yet received relevant documents and
also would submit on 27 June 2014 “a short Expert Opinion in response to the Expert Opinion

43.

44,

45.

46.

submitted by Claimant on 28 March.” On 14 and 16 June 2014, the Claimant by e-mail to the
Tribunal objected to the Respondent's intent, citing what it described as the Respondent's
“platant’ disregard of PO7 and what it considered an unequal time to present its case. By email
on 17 June 2014, the Respondent requested the Tribunal to permit it to file what it called the
second part of its RoRy by 27 June 2014 or, in the alternative, to permit the Respondent to file at
that time an amendment or supplement to its RoRy pursuant to SCC Rules, Article 25. By email
to the Parties dated 18 June 2014, the Tribunal stated that:

“The Tribunal already had noted Respondent's failure to meet the deadline
set out in the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 7, finds little reasonable
cause for such failure and reserves its right to make all appropriate
inferences from such conduct and any late filing of additional materials.

As for a request under SCC Rule 25, the Tribunal cannot consider a Second

Part of the RoRy as an amendment or supplement, as each of the latter Terms implies the
existence of a complete submission which is to be complemented, and neither term
contemplates being the second part of a submission split into two distinct parts.”

The Respondent never submitted a second part of the RoRy.

PO8, dated 23 June 2014, in furtherance of the timetable set out in PO6, advised the Parties to
submit the Joint Chronological List (JCL) and the Common Core Bundle (CCB), each referred to
in PO6, by 8 August 2014 and provided a suggested model for each.

The Tribunal, on 17 July 2014, advised the Parties of its decision regarding the referral to the
Tribunal by the Parties of their respective requests for the production of certain documents.

On 1 August 2014, pursuant to PO6, Paragraph 5.2, each Party submitted additional documents.
The Claimant submitted 15 new exhibits and 13 new legal references, some of which were not
referenced in the Claimant's pleadings. The Respondent submitted 40 new exhibits, 7 new legal
references and, despite the Tribunal’s PO7, an Expert Opinion in response to the Claimant's
Expert Opinion submitted on 28 March 2014. The Respondent continued to submit further
documents after 1 August 2014. Further, for a period of weeks the Parties had exchanged
emails, copying the Tribunal, regarding mutual allegations of deliberate mistranslations,
authentication of the APO, whether the original APO had a number or not, and whether the APO
should be submitted as an exhibit (as the Claimant had done) or as a legal authority (as the
Respondent had done, claiming the APO is a treaty).

10

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

On 5 August the Tribunal advised the Parties that:

a. The cut-off date for additional documents had passed;

b. The Tribunal considered it inappropriate for either Party to continue to engage in
pleadings via e-mail comments;

c. The Respondent had not yet submitted an index to all the documents it presented
on 1 August;

d. The Respondent's Expert Opinion was submitted not only long after the Respondent had
sight of the Claimant's Expert Opinion but also long after the 27 June 2014 date on which
it was promised (which already was a delay of the specified submission date of 6 and
then 20 June 2014);

e. Several of the Respondent's documents had been submitted without English
translations and the Tribunal exceptionally would give two more days to receive
such translations, after which the Tribunal would disregard said exhibits; and

f. The Tribunal fully expected the deadline for the JCL (8 August 2014) would be adhered
to and it would draw appropriate conclusions if the deadline were not adhered to.

The Parties exchanged multitudes of e-mails disagreeing over their respective drafts of the JCL,
which was, in the Tribunal’s view, to be a list of dates and events which should not have been in
dispute. The Parties, despite the Tribunal requesting them to work out their differences between
themselves, copied the Tribunal on all such e-mails. On 28 August 2014, the Tribunal advised
the Parties it would accept as the JCL the three documents submitted by the Claimant earlier that
day, as the Tribunal felt too much time had been spent arguing about the content of a list which
was meant solely to aid the Tribunal and to be provided to the Tribunal sufficiently in advance of
the Hearing to assist the Tribunal’s preparations.

The pre-Hearing conference call was held on 25 August 2014.

A Hearing was held in Stockholm on 9 and 10 September, 2014. Dr. Sergei Voitovich, and
Messrs Sava Poliakov and Maksym Makhyna represented the Claimant. Mr Mihail Buruiana
represented the Respondent. Also present for the Claimant were Messrs Andreii Andyshula and
Dmytro Sakva and, for the Respondent, Ms Corinna Voda assisting Mr. Buruiana. There were no
witnesses.

At the end of the Hearing each Party stated that it believed it had had a reasonable opportunity to
present its case and had had reasonable equality of treatment.

11

52.

53.

54.

The Parties submitted their respective Post-Hearing Memorials (hereinafter the “CPHM"” and the
“RPHM”) to the Tribunal on 16 October 2014 and the Tribunal, in turn, distributed each Party's
PHM to the other Party. On 19 October 2014, the Claimant wrote the Tribunal, objecting that the
Respondent, in the RPHM, had not limited its comments to a summation of issues discussed at
the Hearing but rather “improperly refers” to documents not in the record and “attempts to
belatedly rebut the Claimant's written submissions... which had not been addressed within the
written stage of the proceedings or at the hearing.” On 21 October 2014, the Respondent wrote a
lengthy rebuttal to the Tribunal. On the same day, the Tribunal directed the Parties by e-mail that
there “shall be no further communications from either Party regarding the post-hearing Memorials
unless otherwise directed by the Tribunal.”

The Parties submitted their respective legal costs and expenses to the Tribunal on 5 November
2014.

THE CLAIMS IN THIS ARBITRATION AND THE RELIEF SOUGHT

The Claimant's Position

The Claimant's position, expressed in the SoC, the SoR and the CPHM, is that (a) its claim to
money arising from the 2002 Decision is an energy-related financial asset which constitutes an
investment in the energy sector of Moldova pursuant to the ECT, (b) the Tribunal has jurisdiction
to hear the dispute pursuant to the ECT, (c) in violation of Moldovan and international law, the
courts of the Respondent protracted for seven years the Claimant's request to enforce the 2002
Decision, (d) the Claimant's investment was de facto expropriated in violation of ECT, Article
13(1) and the Claimant has been deprived of its investment, and (e) the Respondent also has
breached Article 10.1 (the fair and equitable treatment provision) and Article 10(12) (the “effective
means provision”) of the ECT. The Claimant seeks the following relief, as set forth in Paragraph
60 of its Request for Arbitration, Paragraph 407 of the SoC, Paragraph 260 of the SoR and in
Paragraph 127 of the CPHM:

a. Adeclaration that the Republic of Moldova has violated Articles 10(1), 10(12) and 13(1) of
the ECT and the Respondent's obligations under general international law;

b. An order that the Respondent pay compensation for losses incurred by the Claimant in the
amount of USD1,745,754.84;

12

55.

56.

An order that the Respondent pay interest on the total sum awarded at a rate as
determined in Paragraphs 393-400 of the SoC, compounded annually from 20 January
2003 and until payment is made;

An order that the Respondent pay the costs of the arbitration;

An order that the Respondent pay legal fees;

An order that the Respondent pay €77,000 as reimbursement of the payment made by the
Claimant on 23 April 2013 for the Respondent's share of the costs of the arbitration, and
interest on the said sum at 9% per annum, starting to accrue on 10 April 2013 and until
payment is made; and

An order that the Respondent pay €18,634.50 as reimbursement of the payment made by
the Claimant on 6 June 2014 for the Respondent's further share of the costs of the
arbitration, and interest on the said sum at 9% per annum, starting to accrue on the
relevant payment date and until payment is made.

The Respondent’s Position

It is the Respondent's position, expressed in the SoD, the RoRy and the RPHM, that (a) the Tribunal
lacks jurisdiction to hear this arbitration, (b) the Respondent has not breached its obligations under
the ECT, (ci) the courts of Moldova have not violated Moldovan and international law in relation to the

2002 Decision, (d) the 2002 Decision violates international and national law and (v) the 2002 Decision

is unlawful and unenforceable. The Respondent seeks the following relief, as set forth in Paragraph
347 of the SoD:

ooa2o 8 p

A declaration that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the Claimant's claims;

A dismissal by the Tribunal of all claims of the Claimant;

A declaration that the Respondent has not violated any obligation arising under the ECT;
An order that the Claimant pay the arbitration costs; and

An order that the Claimant pay the legal fees incurred by Respondent.

Applicable Law

As the Claimant brings its claim pursuant to the ECT, and also alleges violations of international
law, the Tribunal will apply the provisions of the ECT in determining its jurisdiction and apply
general principles of international law. The Parties (whose legal teams are Ukrainian and

Moldovan lawyers) made references to Ukrainian and Moldovan law as relevant to many aspects

13

57.

58.

59.

60.

of their claims. As appears below, the Tribunal has not found it necessary to decide issues of
Moldovan or Ukrainian law in order to address the claims in this arbitration.

In the arbitral procedure, the Tribunal is governed by the procedural provisions of the ECT (in
particular, Article 26 of the ECT), the SCC Rules and, as Stockholm is the venue of arbitration, by
the mandatory rules of the Swedish arbitration law, as well as by the procedural orders of the
Tribunal.

In its analysis below, the Tribunal has considered not only the positions of the Parties as
summarized in this Award, but also the numerous detailed arguments made in the Parties’
respective written memorials, including case law, and at the Hearing on 9-10 September 2014 in
Stockholm, Sweden. To the extent that these arguments and cases are not referred to expressly

in this Award, they should be deemed to be subsumed in the Tribunal’s analysis.

JURISDICTION

The Tribunal first will turn to the issue of whether it has jurisdiction over the matter.

The Claimant’s Position on Jurisdiction

The Claimant contends that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over this matter pursuant to Article 26 of

the ECT, which in relevant parts provides that

“(1) [D]isputes between a Contracting Party and an Investor of another Contracting Party
relating to an Investment of the latter in the Area of the former, which concern an alleged
breach of an obligation of the former under Part III shall, if possible, be settled amicably” and
that

“(2) [l]f such disputes cannot be settled amicably according to the provisions of paragraph (1)
within a period of three months from the date on which either party to the dispute requested
amicable settlement, the Investor party to the dispute may choose to submit it for resolution to
international arbitration or conciliation.”

14

61.

62.

63.

The Claimant claims that the Respondent's unconditional consent to arbitrate is contained in
Article 26(3)(a) of the ECT" and that the Claimant has consented to the present arbitration by
virtue of Paragraph 12 of its Request for Arbitration’®. Therefore, the Claimant asserts, there is a
valid arbitration agreement between the Parties.

The Claimant claims it is an Investor and has an Investment for purposes of the ECT. The ECT,
Article 1(6), defines “Investment” as “every kind of asset, owned or controlled directly or indirectly

by an Investor and includes:

a. Tangible and intangible, and movable and immovable, property, and any property
rights such as leases, mortgages, liens and pledges;

b. LJ]

c. Claims to money and claims to performance pursuant to contract having an economic

value and associated with an Investment;

a. LJ]
e. L.-J
f. Any right conferred by law or contract or by virtue of any licenses or permits granted

pursuant to law to undertake any Economic Activity in the Energy Sector.”

The Claimant has modified its position during the course of the arbitration. In its SoC, the
Claimant states its claim is a claim to money arising from the 2002 Decision. The Claimant
contends its claim to money arising from the 2002 Decision is an Investment because the claim

(a) is an “energy-related financial assef’ arising “from a functional transfer of the electric energy to

19

Moldova due to the specific parallel operation of the two energy systems”~ and (b) as required by

ECT Article 1(6)(c), is associated with an Economic Activity in the Energy Sector which, under
Article 1(5) of the ECT includes “transmission, distribution, trade and sale of Energy materials and
Products’.”° According to the Claimant, in its SoR, Paragraph 72, the Overflow “indisputably falls
within the definition of Economic Activity in the Energy Sector which is conducted by

Article 26(3) states that “[SJubject only to subparagraphs (b) and (c) [which do not apply in the instant
case], each Contracting Party hereby gives its unconditional consent to the submission of a dispute to
international arbitration or conciliation in accordance with the provisions of this Article.”

Paragraph 12 of the Request for Arbitration states that “the offer (unconditional consent) of the Republic
of Moldova to conclude the arbitration agreement, as contained in Art. 26(3) of the ECT, is hereby
accepted by Energorynok in accordance with Art. 26(4)(c ) of the ECT to constitute together a valid
agreement to submit the dispute to arbitration.” In turn, Article 26(4)(c) provides that “/IJn the event that
an Investor chooses to submit the dispute for resolution under subparagraph (2)(c ), the Investor shall
further provide its consent in writing for the dispute to be submitted to.....an arbitral proceeding under the
Arbitration institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce.”

SoC 4] 233

SoC 41 219.

15

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

Energorynok, which means that the Energorynok’s investment ‘is associated with an Economic
Activity in the Energy Sector’ as required by” ECT Art. 1(6) subsection 3.

The Claimant further contends, in SoC, Paragraph 234, that its claim to money, having been
recognized by the 2002 Decision, acquired the additional characteristic of an Investment as being
a right conferred by law or contract, meeting the criteria in ECT Article 1(6)(f).

The Claimant avers that (a) because APO Article 4.3 provides for the compensation of surplus
energy, the APO “gave rise to the payment obligation and respective contractual right of the
Ukrainian side’ and (b) “a right to compensation for an overflow of electric energy under the
APO is fully covered by the protected Investment according to the ECT Article 1(6)(c ) and (f)”.”?

The Claimant further contends that, under Article 4 of the 2004 Law of Moldova on Investments in
the Business Activity’, “an investment, among others, may take the form of ‘rights arising out of
debt obligations or other forms of obligations towards the investor having economic and financial

value’.”°°

The Claimant refined its position on jurisdiction during the course of the arbitration. In its SoR,

Paragraph 68, the Claimant rei its “claim to money/right conferred by ighi
conferred by law, which arose in 1998 and was confirmed by court in 2002, objectively fits the
criteria of the protected ‘Investment” under the ECT.™* The Claimant speaks in SoR, Paragraph
63, of its Investment as being an “asset covered by Article 1(6)(c ) and (f)" and that its Investment

has the “characteristics of’ a claim to money and a right conferred by law and contract.

During the Hearing the Claimant referred to having acquired an ownership right to its Investment
and not a contractual right to it in the process of legal succession.” The Claimant stated its
Investment is the right to compensation which originally arose from the APO and was confirmed
by the 2002 Decision, itself a “document which reflects the underlying economic operation”. The
Claimant's counsel continued that “we do not say that APO is an investment or the 2002 decision
is an investment. We say the investment is an energy-related asset, which is ... a right to
compensation for the uncompensated overflow of electricity. We are saying that these [the APO

SoR 41112.
SoR 4171.

SoR 91220.

Claimant reiterates this position in CPHM 4111.
Day 2/142.

16

69.

70.

71.

and the 2002 Decision] are two documents which reflect one and the same investment....right to

compensation.”*°

The Claimant summarized its position on jurisdiction (its position on the merits being the same
throughout the course of the arbitration) in CPHM Paragraph 13 as follows:

“The Energorynok’s ‘right for compensation’ is determined by two legal instruments:

(i) the APO and (ii) the 2002 Initial Decision. These two legal instruments may not be viewed
in isolation, they constitute the protected Investment jointly. In the Claimant's view, it is not
methodologically correct to assert that, for example, ‘the APO is not an investment’ or that

‘the 2002 Initial Decision is not an investment’. To be accurate, Claimant does not assert
that ‘the APO plus the Kiev court decision are the investments 7 neither that the
investment ‘is the overflow’. The investment, under the ECT, is an asset (in_this case-the right
for compensation for the overflow), rather than a legal document (a contract or a court
decision). These two legal it jointly ine the I '..., Which is ulti
owned and controlled by Energorynok.” (Claimant's emphasis)

 

The Claimant relies on several arbitral decisions that a claim to money is a protected Investment
under ECT Article 1(6), notably the decisions in Electrabel v. Hungary, Remington v. Ukraine,
Petrobart v. Kyrgyz Republic and Plama v. Bulgaria. The Claimant further cites several arbitral
decisions arising out of Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs) to support that a claim to money is a
protected investment under many BITs. The Tribunal will deal with these cases as appropriate in
its reasoning.

The Respondent’s Position on Jurisdiction

The Respondent's objection to jurisdiction is two-pronged: in the first instance, it claims that the
Claimant's claim was fraudulently and illegally obtained by the Claimant in the 2002 Decision and
therefore that, like Plama v. Bulgaria, the Claimant should not be entitled to protection under the
ECT.” The second argument against the Tribunal's jurisdiction is that the Claimant does not
meet the requirements of the ECT for bringing a claim.

Day 1/70-71. The Claimant, in CPHM 4139, reiterated that it “does not assert that the 2002 Initial Decision
isan investment ‘on its own’, ‘in and of itself’. Claimant emphasizes that the 2002 Initial Decision adds
an essential legal characteristic to the Energorynok’s Investment as a right conferred by law, and
chrystallises the basis for an investment treaty claim, rather than for a contract claim.”

Indeed the Plaintiff, in CPHM fn 26, states that “for the sake of clarity, the Claimant does not assert, for
example, that even if the right for compensation under the APO hypothetically had not been the right of
Energorynok, the 2002 Initial Decision in itself would have established the right of Energorynok as an
Investment.”

RoRy 41138, referring to Plama Consortium Limited v. Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Award 27
August 2008 ls 135 and 138-140. CCLA-134.

17

72.

73.

74,

With respect to the argument that the 2002 Decision was fraudulently and illegally obtained, the
Respondent relies, inter alia, on Inceysa v. El Salvador”? and World Duty Free v. Kenya.”
Specifically, the Respondent alleges that:

a. The Tribunal may decide this issue independently from the judgments of the Moldovan
and Ukrainian courts;

b. The Claimant is not a Party to the APO and, therefore, had no standing to bring the claim
against the Moldovan Ministry in the Kiev court in 2002;

c. Neither was there duality of APO parties and, therefore, the Claimant is not an integrated
party to the APO;*"

d. The APO is “a treaty concluded between the two States in written form, governed by
international law’. Consequently, the Respondent argues the APO should be interpreted
in accordance with the international law rules on the interpretation of treaties whereas, the
Respondent contends, the Kiev court based the 2002 Decision on Ukrainian domestic
substantive law;°*

e. The Claimant is not a legal successor of Ukrenergo with respect to the functions first of
NCC and then of Ukrenergo under APO Article 10;°°

f. APO Articles 7.3 and 7.4 contain an “inter-State” arbitration clause which does not “offer
international competence for the Economic Court of Kiev to entertain any claim of
Enorgorynok’;** and

g. The Moldovan Ministry was not a proper respondent in the case, as it had no relationships
with NCC, Ukrenergo or the Claimant;® rather, Moldtranselectro was the proper party.

In response to the Respondent's position that the Claimant is not a party to the APO and hence
has no standing to bring the arbitration, the Claimant contends that the Respondent did not
challenge Claimant's standing in the litigation surrounding the 2002 Decision nor in any of the
subsequent Moldovan proceedings brought by Claimant.

As to the Respondent's position that the Claimant is not a proper party to the arbitration because
there was no mutual consent to transfer to the Claimant the Ukrainian Ministry's rights and

Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador, |CSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award ls 240-244. CCLA-
150.

World Duty Free Company Limited v. the Republic of Kenya, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/07, Award. CCLA-149.
RPHM 9117.

RoRy 4119.

RPHM 412.

RoRy 419.

RPHM 9113.

SoR 4129.

18

75.

76.

obligations under the APO, as required by APO Article 9.3, the Claimant asserts that it is nota
third party but rather a legal successor to NCC/Ukrenergo with respect to repayment of the Debt;
as such, the Claimant asserts that Article 9.3’s requirement of mutual consent is not applicable.

The Respondent alleges that, were the Tribunal to find the 2002 Decision is a legal decision,
which it denies, the Claimant does not meet the requirements of a claim under the ECT.
Specifically, the Respondent maintains that:

a. Under the ECT, the Claimant must demonstrate that it owns a protected Investment in the
area of the Republic of Moldova and has failed to do so. The Respondent states that the
Claimant is not a party to the APO and, therefore, has no claim to money thereunder and,
if it had a claim to money, it did not own the claim. The Respondent contends the
Claimant acted as a collector of debts for Ukraine’s Ministry of Energy Industry and
Electrification who, according to the Respondent, is the actual party to the APO;

b. The Claimant's “claim to money’ is not an “asset’ covered by ECT Article 1(6) because
the Claimant's claim to money was not acquired as a result of or in connection with an
economic investment process. The Respondent reasons that ECT Art. 1(6), when read in
conjunction with Parts III and IV of the ECT, “provides that all forms of assets owned by
the Investor as a result of its investment activity be subject to protection, even if they are
not the direct or only consequence of the investment activity” but that “[IJnitially, however,
there should be an investment activity taking place.’*”

c. The Claimant's investment does not meet the characteristics set forth in Salini v.
Morocco, those characteristics being (a) a contribution of money or other assets of an
economic value, (b) certain duration, (c) an expectation of commercial profit, (d) an
element of risk and (e) a contribution to the host state’s development. The Respondent
alleges that the Claimant fails to prove any of these characteristics are present and,
therefore, there is no Investment; and

d. Moreover, a claim to money is not a “right conferred by law” under ECT Art. 1(6)(f).

The Respondent further alleges that the Overflow was fully compensated by the Fund and by
Moldtranselectro and that the equipment provided to Ukrenergo pursuant to the Surety
Agreement was never returned to the Fund.*°

SoD 41250.
Salini Costruttori S.P.A. and Italstrade S.P.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco (Decision on Jurisdiction), ICSID Case
No. ARB/00/4, dated 16 July 2001.

SoD {is 252-256.

RPHM ls 5 and 6.

19

c

77.

78.

The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Respondent's defense to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is, as above, two-fold, based first on an
allegation that the 2002 Decision was illegally and fraudulently obtained and hence cannot be
protected under the ECT and, secondly, even if the Tribunal were to find the 2002 Decision was
not fraudulently obtained, the Claimant has not satisfied the criteria of the ECT to bring a claim
thereunder.

The Tribunal believes, however, that it cannot determine whether the 2002 Decision was
fraudulently or illegally obtained unless it finds it has jurisdiction to determine the dispute.
Therefore, the Tribunal must first consider if it has jurisdiction under the ECT and, if it did so
find, whether the 2002 Decision is a bar to that jurisdiction.

ECT Article 26

79.

Article 26 of the ECT, set forth in paragraph 60 above, relates to the settlement of disputes
between an “Investor” and a Contracting Party to the ECT. The Claimant claims it is the Investor
and an Investor in its own name." In its CPHM, Paragraphs 71 and 72, the Claimant notes, as a
matter of principle, that there are no limitations in the express language of the ECT for a
governmental agency to be an investor. The Tribunal agrees that ECT Article 1(7) does not
preclude a government agency from being an Investor. Further, Article 26(1) speaks of disputes
between a Contracting Party and “an Investor of another Contracting Party relating to an
Investment of the latter in the Area of the former..." The issues, then, are whether, under the
ECT, there is an Investment, whether the Claimant is an Investor and whether the Investment, if
there is one, is in the Area of Moldova.

ECT Article 1(6,

80.

Relying on ECT 1(6), the Claimant alleges, that (a) its investment is a claim to money/right for
compensation for the Overflow and (b) this right for compensation is the energy related asset
having an economic value.” It adds that this energy related asset (claim for money/right to
compensation) is “in three forms provided by Article 1(6) of the ECT: (i) claim to money, (ii) right
conferred by contract and (iii) right conferred by law’.“* The right for compensation originates, the
Claimant contends, in the APO but the Claimant states that the APO in itself is not an
investment.“ The Respondent contends that the APO was a cooperation agreement/treaty

Day 1/74; CPHM 116

CPHM 419.

Day 1/16; CPHM 4110.

Day 1/70. Claimant's counsel states “we do not say that APO is an investment or the 2002 decision is an
investment. So we say that the investment is an energy-related asset, which is right to—all is connected in

20

81.

82.

83.

between states in relation to the energy power market access and transit and was not an
agreement for the sale, purchase, supply or delivery of electricity; accordingly, the Respondent
contends the APO does not qualify as an Investment.”°

The Tribunal believes, in contrast, that the APO in itself can evidence an Investment.

The APO is an agreement relating to the transportation, distribution and supply of Energy
Materials and Products by way of transmission and distribution grids (meeting the requirement in
ECT Understandings IV (2)(iii)); electrical energy is an Energy Material/Product (see ECT Annex
EM 27.16). The Energy Material/Product was transmitted/distributed in Moldova and added
economic value to Moldova. That the APO was signed by Ministries, and that two state entities,
NCC and Moldenergo (neither being Parties to the APO), were designated in Article 10 to carry
out the performance of the technical and operational functions under the APO, does not change
the characterization of the APO. The APO confers to the Party/Ministry a right to undertake an
economic activity concerning the transit of electricity in the host State; that activity, in the
Tribunal’s view, constitutes an Investment according to the ECT. However, as noted below, the
Tribunal believes the Claimant has and had no role in the economic activity carried out under the
APO.

The Tribunal also finds that the Overflow, which the Claimant describes as a “triggering event”®
for its claim but which the Claimant describes as itself not an Investment,” is an Investment
because it is in the Area of Moldova and arose out of the APO.

The Claimant relies heavily on two ECT cases for its position: Petrobart Limited v. The Kyrgyz
Republic (SCC Arbitration No. 126/2003), Award of 29 March 2005, and Remington Worldwide
Limited v.Ukraine (SCC Case No. V 116/2008), Award of 28 April 2011.“° Petrobart asserted that
a contract (in that case, for the sale of gas condensate), a court judgment (for money owed for
the sale of gas) and a claim to money (for the sale of gas) all were Investments under the ECT.
The Petrobart tribunal concluded that the “[C]ontract and the judgment are not in themselves
assets but merely legal documents or instruments which are bearers of legal rights, and these
legal rights, depending on their character, may or may not be considered as assets. The relevant

 

this construction... And we are saying that the Initial [2002] Decision crystalized not the investment but the
basis for the present investment dispute.”

SoD 4261-262.

CPHM fn 21.

CPHM 413, Day 1/159-160.

The Claimant refers in SoC 41228 to Remington involving a claim for money found to be an Investment; the
Claimant refers in SoRy 1105 to Remington’s claim for money having been assigned several times over.
However, as discussed below, in this arbitration the Tribunal does not believe the Claimant has proved it
was assigned its claim for money.

21

85.

question which requires consideration is therefore whether the rights provided for in the Contract
and confirmed in the judgment constituted assets and were therefore an investment within the
meaning of the Treaty’.“® The Petrobart tribunal further concluded that “a right conferred by
contract to undertake an economic activity concerning the sale of gas condensate is an
investment according to the Treaty. This must also include the right to be paid for such a sale."
But the Petrobart tribunal also recognized the circularity of ECT Article 1(6)(c), a position with
which this Tribunal agrees. Specifically, the Petrobart tribunal observed:

“As regards the Energy Charter Treaty, the Arbitral Tribunal considers

that the wording ‘claims to money and claims to performance pursuant to

contract having an economic value and associated with an Investment’ present certain
ambiguities. In particular, it is not entirely clear whether the words ‘pursuant to contract
having an economic value and associated with an Investment’ or parts of these words—
‘having an ic value and ic with an It ’ or ‘ ie with an
Investment’'—relate only to ‘claims for performance’ or also to ‘claims for money’. If we
assume that at least the terms ‘associated with an Investment’ also relate to ‘claims for
money’, we are faced with the logical problem that the term ‘Investment’ is not only the
term to be defined but is also used as one of the terms by which ‘Investment’ is defined.
This means that the definition is in reality a circular one which raises a logical problen

and creates some doubt about the correction interpretation. “1

The Petrobart Tribunal sought guidance in its interpretation of an Investment in ECT Article
1(6)(f), concluding under that provision that the gas condensate which Petrobart sold is to be
regarded as Energy Materials and Products and is an Investment under the ECT for which

Petrobart had the right to be paid.

The Electrabef* tribunal also addressed the circularity of ECT Article 1(6)(c). Having first posed
the question of whether the separate components of the overall investment alleged by that
claimant constituted separate or stand-alone investments, the Electrabel tribunal concluded that

 

“[HJowever the phrase ‘ i with an i ’ found in subparagraph (c) it a
limitation on the notion of ‘investment’... Under the Vienna Convention, the correct

Petrobart at 71.
Petrobart at 72.

Petrobart at 72.

Electrabel S.A. v. Republic of Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/19), Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law
and Liability, 30 November 2012. The Claimant submitted in evidence (CCLA-22) five pages of the
Electrabel award, but not the entirety of the award on jurisdiction and not including the paragraphs cited
in this Award. The Respondent submitted in evidence (CCLA-128) the entirety of the award.

22

86.

87.

88.

89.

interpretation must give effect to the terms in their context and avoid obscure results. To this
end, as a matter of common sense, it is necessary to understand ‘investment’ in sub-paragraph
(c) to mean an investment other than the one addressed in the same sub-paragraph...In other
words, the Tribunal agrees ..that this category of investment is dependent on the overall

investment.”

Unlike Electrabel, on which the Claimant relies, and Amto,** which the Electrabel tribunal cited,
the Claimant is not a shareholder in an entity directly or indirectly engaged in the underlying
economic activities which those tribunals found constituted Investments. And while Petrobart,
like the Claimant, obtained a court decision in its favor for a payment, unlike the Claimant
Petrobart actually delivered the gas condensate for which payment was due, delivering the gas
condensate in several instalments over a certain period of time. At all times during the period of
the underlying contract, Petrobart had full control over its own sales and deliveries and was a
full party to the sale and delivery contract.

Petrobart owned and controlled its claim to payment for the gas that it, and not another party,
supplied; Petrobart made the Investment in the Area of the Kyrgyz Republic. Petrobart had a
financial interest in the transmission of the gas condensate; it operated or had substantial
influence in the operation of the transmission lines; it likely had substantial influence in the
selection of the management operating the Investment. Petrobart, in the words of Prof. Zachary
Douglas, committed “resources to the economy of the host state entailing the assumption of risk

in expectation of commercial return’ .*°

The Claimant, in CPHM footnote 65, dismisses as “not of the essence” that Petrobart was the
initial supplier of the gas, on the grounds that, in the Claimant's view, “the ECT does not require
that an Investor personally supply/transmit energy related materials or be an ‘initial’ Investor.
The similarity which is of essence, is that Petrobart and in the instant case each claimant owns
or controls the right under the underlying contract and this right is confirmed by a court decision.
This is sufficient for having a protected Investment under the ECT.”

The Tribunal agrees that ECT Article 1(6) requires the Investor to own or control the asset. But
does this mean that the Claimant need only own or control the claim to money? Or must the
Claimant have some ownership or control, directly or indirectly, of the Investment to which the

Electrabel, 4\s 5.52 and 5.53.

Limited Liability Company Amto v. Ukraine (SCC Arbitration No. 080/2005), Final Award of 26 March 2008.
CCLA-168. Zachary Douglas The Plea of Illegality in Investment Treaty Arbitration at 37, citing Z. Douglas,
The International Law of Investment Claims, fn 12, ch. 5.

23

90.

91.

92.

93.

56

claim of money, as per ECT Article 1(6)(c), must be related? In this regard, ECT Understandings
48 advises that
“control of an Investment means control in fact, determined after an examination of the
actual circumstances in each situation. In any such examination, all relevant factors should
be considered, including the Investor's
(a) financial interest, including equity interest, in the Investment;
(b) ability to exercise substantial influence over the management and operation of the
Investment; and
(c) ability to exercise substantial influence over the selection of members of the board
of directors or any the managing body.
Where there is doubt as to whether an Investor controls, directly or indirectly, an Investment,
an Investor claiming such control has the burden of proof such control exists.”

As to a financial interest in the Investment (the Investment here being the claim to money), the
Claimant has a financial interest in recovering the Debt it acquired. But the Claimant has
offered no proof that it has any financial or equity interest in the economic activity it claims its
Investment arises out of. Indeed, as referenced below, the Claimant could not state what role it
plays in the APO or in the transmission of electricity to Moldova.

The Claimant appears to have no ability to exercise substantial influence of the management
and operation of the transmission of electricity under the APO and never had. If anyone has
that ability, it would appear to be the Ukrainian Ministry or Ukrenergo.

The Claimant appears to have no right now or in the past to exercise any influence over the
selection of members of the board of directors or any other managing body involved in the
transmission of electricity to Moldova under the APO.

In fact, the Claimant at the Hearing could not respond to who controls the APO, stating that the
“factual side of all these things, which are beyond the scope of the dispute, were not the subject
of our analysis.” Despite having two representatives of the Claimant present at the Hearing,
the Claimant's counsel could not answer the Tribunal’s questions as to what, if any, specific
responsibilities the Claimant had acquired with respect to APO Article 10 and what, if anything,
the Claimant had to do with the APO other than having “acquired” on its balance sheet the claim

7

for payment for the Overflow.°” Indeed, counsel could not even definitely answer at the

Hearing whether the APO still was in force; counsel, on conferring with the representatives in

Day 1/159.
Day 2/109-111,

24

94.

95.

96.

the room, responded that “to our knowledge” the APO is still functioning, and Respondent
concurred.©° Following the Hearing, in CPHM, footnote 36, the Claimant states, without further
clarification, that “to Claimant's best knowledge, from the Ukrainian side, the performance of the
APO is controlled partly by the Ministry of Energy, partly by Ukrenergo and Energoroynok as
enterprises-executors”. Surely the Claimant must be able to know what its specific role is, if
any, with regard to an ongoing activity, namely the transmission of electricity to Moldova under
the APO.

Perhaps because the record is not clear who controls the APO now, the Claimant asserts “it is
hardly material for the Claimant’s position who controls the APO now. It is rather material, who
controls the right for compensation arising from the APO with respect to 50million kWh

overflow_indisputedly Energorynok owns and controls this right.”°°

The Claimant alleges that “the only express requirement of Article 1(6) of the ECT is that an
investor owns or controls an energy-related asset (in the territory of the host State). This
requirement is fully met by Energorynok.”® “Energorynok legitimately and reasonably expects
payment for the consumed electricity as a ‘return’ from its Investment. The economic operation
(the overflow of electric energy from Ukraine to Moldova) undoubtedly assisted to the
‘development of the economic activity in the host State’."*' The asset which the Claimant
asserts is its Investment, namely a claim to money, is not in the territory of Moldova. What
“return” is there on a claim to money other than receiving payment? The Claimant's statement
immediately above, found in CPHM Paragraph 25, makes no sense unless the Claimant also is
stating that its investment is the transmission of electricity (for which it expects payment as a
return on investment) and/or the Overflow. But the Claimant is stating neither. The Claimant is
not and never was engaged in the transmission of electricity in Moldova; indeed, the Claimant
had neither a right nor an obligation to be so engaged because the contractual position of the
investor under the APO never was assigned to the Claimant. The Claimant did not exist at the
time of the Overflow. Its Investment cannot be the Overflow. In summary, the APO appears to
continue to operate but without the Claimant having any role, control or activity in it, and never
having any role, control or activity in it.

In CPHM Paragraph 35, the Claimant states that both legal instruments (the APO and the 2002
Decision) “determining the Investment definitely indicate the required by the ECT territorial

Day 1/72. Respondent on same page of the transcript stated that it “confirms that it [the APO] is still in
force.”

CPHM 4122.

CPHM 4125.

CPHM 4126 and Day 1/18-19.

25

97.

nexus.” The Claimant first says that the electricity was transmitted to and consumed in Moldova
and, therefore, the investment was originally made in Moldova. That an investment of that
nature was made in Moldova the Tribunal does not disagree but it is not the Claimant's claimed
Investment; namely, a claim to money crystallized by a court decision. The Claimant states that
the Supreme Court of Moldova recognized and approved for enforcement in Moldova that 2002
Decision and that, therefore, the Claimant's right for compensation is the Investment in the
territory of Moldova.” The Tribunal cannot agree that a decision of a court in a host State to
enforce a claim in that host State constitutes an investment in the territory of the host State by
the plaintiff in the said case.

The Tribunal finds confusing and inconsistent the Claimant's characterization of how it came to
have the claim to money. How it obtained the claim is important to whether it is an Investor,
although the Claimant denies it is important. “How the right for compensation was acquired by
Energorynok, and who had been the original owner of this right for compensation is immaterial
under the ECT for the Claimant's case. It is material, under the ECT, that Energorynok had
acquired the right for compensation in question, which is undisputed.” The Claimant variously
says that it acquired the general rights of enterprise-executor under the APO in the course of
legal succession from NCC and Ukrenergo but that the “specific right for compensation was
acquired in the balance sheet”. °4 But it also speaks of the “investment position” being assigned
to and acquired by the Claimant.® The Claimant also states in the same paragraph that it
acquired the specific (Claimant's emphasis) right for compensation “from Ukrenergo (not from
a ministry or any other governmental agency) as the ‘ownership right’ rather than a ‘contractual
right’ under the APO."® During the Hearing, Claimant's counsel asserted “[O]ur position is that
Enorgorynok owns the ownership right on this balance sheet, not the contractual right. So the
point is not with the contractual relationships between those entities [Ukrenergo and NCC], but
that Energorynok was assigned ownership right, irrespective of what was written in the APO”
(Tribunal’s emphasis added).°” It appears to the Tribunal that the Claimant is aware that, had it
acquired, or been assigned, the right for compensation as a contractual right, the Moldovan
Ministry's assent would have been required pursuant to APO Art. 9.3. No such assent was
granted.

CPHM 4135.
CPHM 4117.

CPHM 4120. Cf. SoR fs 30 and 56.

CPHM 4123.

CPHM 4123; Day 1/89-90.

DAY 1/89-90.

In SoR 41105, the Claimant asserts an ownership right can be freely transferred and suggests it agrees with
the Respondent that the contractual right of the Party-Receiver under APO Article 4.5 cannot be freely
transferred.

26

98.

99.

100.

The Claimant further states, in its CPHM, that “on the one hand’ it was “authorized by the
respective provisions of its Charter... to perform financial settlements under the APO generally”
and “on the other hand..with permission of the Ukrainian Ministry..obtained the ownership right
from Ukrenergo for compensation of the 50 million kWh overflow into its balance sheet’.
However, the Claimant admits, in CPHM fn. 38, that “/TJhe record of the case does not show in
detail how Ukrenergo arrived at its rights or obligations under the APO, in particular, with
respect to the right for compensation for the 50 million kWh overflow. It is only clear that
Ukrenergo is a due fully-fledged successor of the NCC inter alia with respect to its rights and
obligations under the APO."”” The Tribunal has not been convinced how Ukrenergo can pass
on to another entity the former's rights to a claim for money via transfer to a balance sheet.
Such an act seems to disassociate, rather than associate, the Claimant from the APO and to
make it a debt collector of a single debt. Indeed, the National Electricity Regulation Commission
of Ukraine and the 2000 Ministerial Resolution establishing the Claimant each refers to the
Claimant as a “settlement operator in the wholesale electricity market of Ukraine.””'

The Claimant's Charter refers among its objects to “perform the functions of the administrator of

the settlement system and the manager of the funds of WEM [Wholesale Electricity Market].”””

Indeed the Tribunal is struck by the degree to which the Claimant appears to remove itself from
the APO. On the one hand, the Claimant claims it is part of the Ukrainian “integrated Party’ to
the APO” and not a third party. This argument, the Tribunal believes, is because were the
Claimant a third party, pursuant to APO Article 9.3, the Respondent would have had to consent
to a transfer of rights to the Claimant. No such consent was requested or given. But the
Claimant adds that this term “integrated Party’ does not mean that the Claimant was part of the
Ukrainian Ministry. Rather, the Claimant says it is using the term “solely for demonstration of
how the APO was intended to operate with regard to the ‘functions’ of the respective
governmental organs and enterprise-executors on each side”.”* The Tribunal does not believe
the Claimant is a Party, integrated or otherwise, to the APO.

In another demonstration of distancing itself from the APO, the Claimant stated, as referenced
in Paragraph 93 above, that the contractual relationships between NCC and Ukrenergo are not
the point. The Claimant stresses, at the same time it claims to be part of the Ukrainian

CPHM 4155.

CPHM fn. 38; SoR 948-49.

CC-9; CC-88

Cc-119.

CPHM 9151. See also SoR 4131, Day 1/32-34.
CPHM 4153.

27

integrated Party to the APO, that it is a separate legal entity from the Ministry, the legal Party to
the APO.” The Claimant cannot be both. The Claimant further stated it saw no need to argue
that the Ministry is an investor’, or to consider how compensation was handled under the APO
“because it is beyond the scope of our specific dispute...because we did not explore so much
on the facts which are beyond the scope of October 1998.””” And yet if the Ministry is not the
Investor in the transmission of electricity in Moldova, who is? And how is the Claimant's
Investment associated with an economic activity which constitutes an Investment if the Claimant
sees no need to argue (1) who is an Investor other than itself who would have assigned the
Investment to the Claimant (and that only with respect to a claim for money) and (2) what
ownership or control the Claimant has in the economic activity with which its Investment must

be associated?

Summary

101.

102.

103.

104.

In summary, taking “associated with an Investment” to mean an investment other than the one
addressed in Article 6(1)(c), and the Claimant not having met the burden of proof that it has any
direct or indirect control over the economic activity undertaken pursuant to the APO, the
Tribunal finds the Claimant has not met the burden of proof under the ECT that its claim to
money is associated with an Investment made by the Claimant or validly assigned it. The
Claimant acquired a debt, or was authorized to collect a debt, but did not acquire an Investment

under the ECT.

Having so concluded, the Tribunal need not consider the Respondent's second argument in

objection to jurisdiction.

Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes it has no jurisdiction over this dispute.

INTEREST

The Claimant, citing ECT Article 26(6) which gives a tribunal the right to decide issues in
accordance with, inter alia, international law, seeks in compensation for damages compound
interest on the sum of the 2002 Decision, being USD 1,745,754.84, from 20 January 2003, the
date when the Economic Court of Kiev issued the formal enforcement order in respect of the

2002 Decision.

Day 1/90. Cf also SoR 4131 and SoC 945.
Day 1/74, 87.
Day 1/85-86.

28

105.

106.

107.

108.

The Respondent maintains the Claimant suffered no damages because it had no valid claim
against the Moldovan Ministry in the courts of Ukraine or of Moldova, has no claim under the
ECT, and has not proved any relationship of alleged wrongful acts of the Moldovan courts and its
alleged damages.

Were the Tribunal to find that the Claimant suffered damages, the Respondent maintains that (a)
the liability for damages is on the Claimant and not the Respondent, (b) the starting date cannot
be 20 January 2003 because the Claimant had no valid claim at that time against any Moldovan
ministerial body, (c) the rate should not be the commercial lending rate of Moldovan banks and
(d) compound interest is not normal.

The Tribunal having determined that it does not have jurisdiction in this arbitration, the issue of
interest for damages is moot.

The Claimant also seeks interest at 9% per annum on the funds that it paid the SCC Secretariat
for the Respondent's share of the Arbitration Costs (as defined below) and for which the Claimant
seeks an order for reimbursement in this arbitration. The Tribunal has determined, as discussed
below, that each Party should bear its own legal costs and should equally share the Arbitration
Costs. The Tribunal does not consider it appropriate that the Respondent pay interest on any
funds in excess of the Arbitration Costs which the SCC Secretariat shall return to the Claimant.
The Claimant has not sought interest in connection with its demand for an order that the
Respondent pay all the costs of the arbitration and the Claimant's legal costs; accordingly, the
Tribunal has not considered this point.

Vv COSTS

109.

110.

SCC Rules, Article 43(1), distinguishes between (a) ‘Arbitration Costs’ (e.g., arbitrators’ fees, the
SCC Arbitration Institute’s administrative fee, arbitration expenses and the fees of any experts
appointed by the Tribunal) and (b) the Parties’ own costs for legal representation. The Arbitral
Tribunal has the power to make orders with respect to both types of costs.

SCC Rules, Article 43(5), on Payment of Arbitration Costs states that:
“Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, the Arbitral Tribunal shall, at the request of a
party, apportion the Costs of the Arbitration between the parties, having regard to the

outcome of the case and other relevant circumstances.”

29

111.

112.

113.

114.

SCC Rules, Article 44, regarding the Costs incurred by a Party states:

“Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, the Arbitral Tribunal may in the final award upon
the request of a party, order one party to pay any reasonable costs of another party,
including costs for legal representation, having regard to the outcome of the case and
other relevant circumstances.”

The Claimant and the Respondent each have sought an award of costs in its favor, including
counsel's fees, and Arbitration Costs. The Claimant additionally requests an award that the
Respondent reimburse the Claimant with interest the fees paid by the Claimant on behalf of the
Respondent to the SCC Arbitration Institute. Each Party has submitted statements quantifying
their respective legal costs and expenses; the Tribunal considers that both Parties’ counsel fees
are appropriate under the complex circumstances of the case.

All issues in this arbitration have been strongly contested. Both Parties, sometimes despite
instructions from the Tribunal to the contrary, copied the Tribunal in e-mails contesting, i.e., the
nature of exhibits (whether or not they were legal authorities), translations, and the timeline of
events. The behavior of both Parties, and particularly of the Respondent, has substantially, and
in the Tribunal’s view, unnecessarily, increased the amount of time that the Tribunal and each
Party has had to devote to this case. Therefore, while the Claimant has failed to satisfy the
Tribunal that the latter has jurisdiction in this case, the Tribunal believes that, given the
complexity of the dispute, the uncertainty of facts alleged in the matter, the difficulty of the legal
issues and the behavior of the Parties during the arbitration, it is appropriate that the Parties
should (a) share equally the Arbitration Costs and (b) bear their own respective costs for legal
representation and other expenses.

The SCC Arbitration Institute has determined the Arbitration Costs to be EUR 134,806.89 and
SEK 212,717.13, comprised of the following:

SCC Arbitration Institute:

Administration Fee EUR 15,487.00
Hearing Venue Expenses SEK 122,062.00
Court Reporter Expenses SEK 90,655.13

30

Tribunal’s Fees and Expenses:

Nancy B. Turck

Fee EUR 50,933.00
Travel Expenses EUR 460.00

EUR 52.00
Conference Calls EUR 78.50
Courier Costs EUR 48.18
Daily Allowance EUR 1,500.00

Dr. Rolf Knieper

Fee EUR 30,560.00
Travel Expenses EUR 811.00
EUR 52.00
Courier EUR 20.00
Daily Allowance EUR 1,500.00
Joseph Tirado
Fee EUR 30,560.00
Travel Expenses EUR 132.00
EUR 1,113.21
Daily Allowance EUR 1,500.00

115. The Respondent shall pay Swedish VAT of twenty-five per cent (25%) on a portion of its fifty per
cent (50%) share of the SCC Arbitration Institute's fees and costs. The SCC Secretariat has
determined that the amount of VAT payable by the Respondent is EUR 1,935.87 and SEK
26,589.64.

116. In accordance with Article 43(6) of the SCC Rules, the Parties are jointly and severally liable to
the Tribunal and the SCC Arbitration Institute for the Arbitration Costs. As between the Parties,
the Respondent shall reimburse the Claimant (a) EUR 67,403.45 and SEK 106,358.56 for the
Respondent's fifty per cent share of the Arbitration Costs and (b) EUR 1,935.87 and SEK
26,589.64 for the VAT deducted by the SCC Arbitration Institute from the funds deposited with the
SCC Arbitration Institute by the Claimant.

31

vi DECISION

117. Having considered the claims and defenses submitted by the Parties, and all the submissions
and evidence in relation thereto, and in light of the Tribunal’s analysis herein, the Tribunal

decides and declares:
a. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the claims submitted by the Claimant;
b. The Parties are jointly and severally liable for payment of the Arbitration Costs under
Article 43 of the SCC Rules. The Arbitration Costs are determined to be EUR 134,806.89

and SEK 212,717.13, comprised of the following:

SCC Arbitration Institute:

Administrative Fee
Hearing Venue Expenses
Court Reporter Expenses

Nancy B. Turck

EUR 15,487.00
SEK 122,062.00
SEK 90,655.13

Fee EUR 50,933.00
Travel Expenses EUR 460.00

52.00
Conference Calls EUR 78.50
Courier Costs EUR 48.18
Daily Allowance EUR 1,500.00

Dr. Rolf Knieper

Fee EUR 30,560.00
Travel Expenses EUR 811.00

EUR 52.00
Courier Costs EUR 20.00
Daily Allowance EUR 1,500.00

Joseph Tirado
Fee EUR 30,560.00
Travel Expenses EUR 132.00
EUR 1,113.21

32

Daily Allowance EUR 1,500.00
c. The Parties shall each be liable for fifty per cent (50%) of the Arbitration Costs.

d. The Respondent shall be liable for Swedish VAT of twenty-five (25%) on a portion of its
fifty per cent (50%) share of the Arbitration Costs.

e. The Arbitration Costs will be drawn from the advances paid to the SCC Arbitration
Institute.

f. The Respondent never having paid any funds toward the Arbitration Costs, as between
the Parties the Republic of Moldova is ordered to reimburse State Enterprise
“Energorynok” (Ukraine) the amounts of (1) EUR 67,403.45 and SEK 106,358.56 as the
Respondent's fifty per cent share of the Arbitration Costs and (2) EUR 1,935.87 and SEK
26,589.64 for the twenty-five per cent Swedish VAT payable on the Respondent's share
of the Arbitration Costs, for a total amount reimbursable to the Claimant of EUR 69,339.32
and SEK 132,948.20.

g. Each Party is to bear its own costs for legal representation and other expenses.
118. A Party may bring an action for the amendment of the Award within three months from the date

upon which the Party received the Award. Such action shall be brought before the Svea Court of
Appeal in Stockholm.

THIS SPACE DELIBERATELY KEPT BLANK

33

119. | A Party may bring an action against the Award regarding the decision on the fees of the arbitrators
within three months from the date upon which the Party received the Award. Such action shall be
brought before the District Court of Stockholm.

Place of Arbitration: Stockholm, Sweden
Date of Award: __ January 2015

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

Nancy B. Turck
Chairperson

Mr Joseph Tirado Professor Rolf Knieper
Arbitrator Arbitrator

34

