EXCERPTS

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
STATE GENERAL RESERVE FUND OF THE SULTANATE OF OMAN

Claimant

and

REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/15/43

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Vaughan Lowe Q.C., President
Mr. David R. Haigh Q.C., Arbitrator
Prof. Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Sara Marzal Yetano

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 13 August 2019

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman v. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the State General Reserve Fund Representing the Republic of Bulgaria:

of the Sultanate of Oman:

Mr. Boris Kasolowsky

Mr. Robert Whitener

Mr. Carsten Wendler

Mr. Alexander Monro

Ms. Sarah Lemoine

Ms. Stuti Gadodia

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Bockenheimer Anlage 44

60322 Frankfurt am Main

Germany

and

Mr. Noah Rubins

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
2 Rue Paul Cézanne

75008 Paris

France

and

Mr. Willibald Plesser

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Seilergasse 16

1010 Vienna

Austria

Mr. Ivan Kondov

Ministry of Finance

of the Republic of Bulgaria
102 Rakovski Street

Sofia, 1040

Republic of Bulgaria

and

Mr. David Reed

Mr. Patricio Grané Labat

Mr. Dmitri Evseev

Mr. Monty Taylor

Mr. Timothy Smyth

Mr. Bart Wasiak

Arnold & Porter Kaye Scholer (UK) LLP
Tower 42, 25 Old Broad Street

London EC2N 1HQ

United Kingdom

and

Mr. Paolo DiRosa

Ms. Katelyn Horne

Amold & Porter Kaye Scholer LLP
601 Massachusetts Ave., NW
Washington, D.C. 20001-3743
United States of America

and

Mr. Lazar Tomov

Ms. Sylvia Steeva

Ms. Yoana Yovnova
Tomov & Tomov

4, Svetoslav Terter Str.
Ist floor

Sofia, 1124

Republic of Bulgaria

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman vy. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

TABLE OF CONTENTS”

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1
Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 1
Il. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 8
IV. PARTIES’ CLAIMS AND REQUESTS FOR RELIEF... ccccesesesssseseseseeeeeeseeeeeeeeneees 8
V. DECISION ON THE CLAIM 9
VI. COSTS 9

A. Claimant’s Cost Submissions 9

B. Respondent’s Cost Submission 10

C. The Tribunal’s Decision on Costs .........c:cecsessesseesecsessessesesesseeseeseeseeseesessnssnssnsenseneeneesee 11
VII. AWARD 15

 

TABLE OF SELECTED ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINED TERMS

* The page numbers in the Table of Contents of these Excerpts do not correspond to the original page numbers of the
Award

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman vy. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the Treaty between the
Sultanate of Oman and the Republic of Bulgaria on the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments, which entered into force on 22 October 2014 (the “BIT” or
“Treaty”) and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States

and Nationals of Other States, dated 14 October 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

The claimant is the State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman (“SGRF” or the

“Claimant’”), a State-owned entity of the Sultanate of Oman.
The respondent is the Republic of Bulgaria (“Bulgaria” or the “Respondent”).

The Claimant and the Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The Parties’

representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

This dispute arises out of an alleged investment made by SGRF in [...] through SGRF’s

wholly-owned [...] subsidiaries, [...].

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 28 September 2015, ICSID received a request for arbitration, dated 28 September 2015,
from SGRF against Bulgaria, together with Exhibits C-1 through C-85, and Legal
Authorities CL-1 through CL-3 (the “Request”).

On 22 October 2015, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request in accordance
with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and notified the Parties of the registration. In
the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute
an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Rule 7(d) of ICSID’s Rules of

Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman v. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

The Parties agreed to constitute the Tribunal in accordance with Article 37(2)(a) of the
ICSID Convention as follows: the Tribunal would consist of three arbitrators, one to be
appointed by each Party and the third, presiding arbitrator, to be appointed by agreement
of the Parties.

The Tribunal is composed of Prof. Vaughan Lowe Q.C., a national of the United Kingdom,
President, appointed by agreement of the Parties; Mr. David R. Haigh Q.C., a national of
Canada, appointed by Claimant; and Prof. Brigitte Stern, a national of France, appointed

by Respondent.

On 16 February 2016, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”), notified the Parties
that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore
deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms. Sara Marzal Yetano, ICSID Legal

Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1), the Tribunal held a first session with the

Parties on 13 April 2016 by teleconference.

Following the first session, on 14 April 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1
recording the agreement of the Parties on procedural matters and the decision of the
Tribunal on disputed issues. Procedural Order No. 1 provides, inter alia, that the applicable
Arbitration Rules would be those in effect from 10 April 2006, that the procedural language
would be English, and that the place of proceeding would be Washington D.C., United
States of America. Procedural Order No. 1 also sets out a timetable for the

jurisdictional/merits phase of the proceedings.

On 6 May 2016, Claimant filed a letter seeking permission from the Tribunal to make a
request for the early production of certain documents. On 13 May 2016, Respondent filed
a letter objecting to Claimant’s application. On 27 May 2016, the Tribunal decided to

permit the document request to be made, in the form of a Redfern Schedule.

20.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman v. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

On 15 June 2016, following exchanges between the Parties, Claimant submitted a Redfern
Schedule for the early document production request, which included Respondent’s
objections to each of the requested documents. On 23 June 2016, the Parties exchanged
communications regarding certain allegedly inaccurate statements contained in the Redfern

Schedule submitted by Claimant.

On 30 June 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, ordering Respondent to
produce the documents identified in the “Tribunal’s Decision” column in the Redfern

Schedule.

On 7 July 2016, Respondent informed the Tribunal that it was unable to produce certain
documents by the deadline set in Procedural Order No. 2. On 8 July 2016, Claimant sought
a suspension of the deadline for the filing of the Memorial. On 11 July 2016, the Tribunal

granted this request.

On 26 August 2016, the Parties submitted a joint letter which enclosed a draft procedural
Order concerning the confidentiality of documents submitted or produced in the present
arbitration. In the joint letter, the Parties requested the Tribunal to issue the draft Order to
protect against the disclosure of documents produced or submitted in this arbitration
proceeding, stating that the issuance of the Order would expedite the production of the

relevant documents by Respondent to Claimant.

On 27 August 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 concerning confidentiality

of documents, in accordance with the Parties’ joint request.

On 27 September 2016, the Parties submitted a joint proposal to amend the procedural

timetable. On 29 September 2016, the Tribunal confirmed the revised timetable.

Pursuant to the revised timetable, on 22 December 2016, Claimant submitted its Memorial
on the Merits and on Jurisdiction (“Memorial”), together with Exhibits C-86 through
C-257, Legal Authorities CL-4 through CL-104, the Witness Statement of [...], and the
Expert Reports of [...].

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman v. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

On 20 October 2017, the Parties submitted a joint letter requesting the Tribunal to adopt
an enclosed draft procedural Order concerning further confidentiality protection for certain

specific categories of documents, pursuant to paragraph 5d) of Procedural Order No. 3.

In accordance with the Parties’ joint request, on 26 October 2017, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 4 concerning further confidentiality protection for specific categories

of documents.

On 31 October 2017, the Parties jointly requested the Tribunal to order the amendment of
the procedural calendar, pursuant to section 6 of Procedural Order No. 1. On 1 November
2017, the Tribunal approved the request and transmitted to the Parties a revised procedural

timetable reflecting their amendments.

On 1 November 2017, Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial on the Merits and on
Jurisdiction (““Counter-Memorial’), together with Exhibits R-1 through R-311, Legal
Authorities RL-3 through RL-122, the Witness Statements of [...], and the Expert Reports
of [...] (together with Appendices 1 & 2, and Exhibits [...] through [...]), [...] (together
with Appendices 1 through 9, and Exhibits [...]through
[...]), and [...] (together with Appendices 1.1-1.3, 4.2-4.17, 6.1-6.2, and 7.1-7.4, and
Exhibits [...] through [...]).

On 16 November 2017, the Parties requested the Tribunal to order the amendment of the
procedural calendar in connection with the document production phase of this arbitration.
On 20 November 2017, the Tribunal approved the request and transmitted to the Parties a

revised procedural timetable reflecting their amendments.

On 20 December 2017, the Parties submitted their Redfern Schedules containing their
requests for production of documents. On 26 January 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural

Order No. 5 deciding on the production of documents.

On 4 January 2018, Mr. Haigh sent a communication informing the Parties that he had just
become aware of the fact that the Respondent had submitted an expert report from

[...] in support of its Counter-Memorial. Mr. Haigh disclosed that in a long-running

4

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman v. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

UNCITRAL arbitration he is acting as counsel to a Respondent State party which had

engaged [...] as experts.

Pursuant to the Tribunal’s invitation, on 10 January 2018, the Parties submitted
observations on Mr. Haigh’s letter. Claimant argued that Respondent should remove
[...] from the case, or that he should withdraw voluntarily, failing which Claimant reserved

its right to apply to the Tribunal for appropriate relief.

By letter of 15 January 2018, the Respondent declined to remove [...] from this case and

said that [...] had expressed no intention of withdrawing.

On 16 January 2018, Claimant filed a letter applying for the disqualification of
[...] in this arbitration. On 19 January 2018, Respondent filed a letter arguing that

Claimant’s application lacked merit and should be dismissed.

On 12 February 2018, Mr. Haigh sent a communication to the Parties including a copy of
a decision concerning a challenge against him in a previous case which arose from a

disclosure regarding his relationship with [...] in other arbitration proceedings.

Following the Tribunal’s instructions, on 14 February 2018, the Parties submitted
observations on Mr. Haigh’s communication. In their respective letters, Claimant
maintained its application for disqualification of Respondent’s expert [...] and Respondent

reiterated its request that the application be dismissed.

On 19 February 2018, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Claimant’s Request to Disqualify
Respondent’s Expert on Damages. The Tribunal decided, by a majority, to “/decline] to
order that [...] refrain from participating or rendering further assistance to Bulgaria in
this arbitration.”' The decision was adopted by a majority because the Tribunal decided

unanimously that, in order to avoid any concern that Mr. Haigh was deciding upon a matter

' Decision on Claimant’s Request to Disqualify Respondent’s Expert on Damages, {j 36.

5

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman v. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

in which he had an involvement, the decision on the application would be taken by Prof.

Stern and Prof. Lowe alone.

Additionally, [...] was directed to submit a statement of any material contacts or
relationships that he has had with Mr. Haigh. [...] statement was submitted on

2 March 2018.

On 28 May 2018, the Parties jointly proposed a revised timetable. On 29 May 2018, the

Tribunal confirmed the revised timetable.

Pursuant to this revised timetable, on 25 June 2018, Claimant submitted its Reply on the
Merits and on Jurisdiction (“Reply”), together with Exhibits C-258 through C-309, Legal
Authorities CL-108 through CL-137, and the Second Expert Reports of [...].

On 8 November 2018, Respondent submitted its Rejoinder on the Merits and on
Jurisdiction (“Rejoinder’), together with Exhibits R-3 16 through R-446, Legal Authorities
RL-137 through RL-165, the Second Witness Statements of [...], and the Second Expert
Reports of [...] (together with Exhibits [...]through [...]), [...] (together with Appendices
1 and 2, and Exhibits [...] and [...]), and [...] (together with Appendices 2A-B and 3A,
and Exhibits [...]through [...]).

By letter dated 10 December 2018, Claimant notified the Tribunal that it “withdraws ‘with
prejudice’ its claims in this arbitration” and that, accordingly, it was no longer necessary
to hold the oral hearing which, in accordance with the revised timetable agreed by the
Parties in May 2018, had been scheduled for January 2019 in Washington. However,
Claimant maintained its request that it be awarded costs and requested the Tribunal to
“proceed to make a decision on costs and bring this arbitration to an end.” To this effect,
Claimant proposed that the Tribunal direct the Parties to make simultaneous written

submissions on costs.

In response to this letter, on 14 December 2018, Respondent requested that the Tribunal
proceed to issue a final award (and not a “decision”), setting out the Parties’ claims and

defences and reflecting the fact that the Claimant has withdrawn its claims “with

6

40.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman v. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

prejudice.” Bulgaria requested further that the award deal with the issue of costs pursuant

to Article 61 of the ICSID Convention, by making an award of costs in Bulgaria’s favour.

Additionally, Respondent argued that, if Claimant were to be permitted to maintain certain
arguments “on the merits” set out in its letter of 10 December 2018 in support of its costs
request, then this would require the determination by the Tribunal of factual issues that are
in dispute between the Parties. In the circumstances, Respondent should be afforded the
opportunity to cross-examine the Claimant’s only witness, [...] on whose written testimony

many of the Claimant’s contentions rest.

On 19 December 2018, Claimant submitted observations to Respondent’s letter, stating
that it does not consider it necessary for the Tribunal to hold a hearing to allocate costs. In
particular, Claimant noted that the Parties are in agreement that the arbitration should be
brought to a close with a determination by the Tribunal as to the appropriate allocation of
costs, and mentioned that it is requesting “that the Tribunal exercise its broad discretion
under Article 61 of the ICSID Convention to make a decision on costs based on its

assessment of the reasonableness of each party’s procedural conduct in this arbitration.”

By communication dated 21 December 2018, the Tribunal notified the Parties of its
decision not to arrange at this stage a hearing on the question of costs and to proceed, at
least initially, on the basis of written submissions. The Tribunal invited the Parties to make
two rounds of simultaneous written submissions and specified that any request for a hearing
on the question of the allocation of costs should be included, together with supporting

reasons, in the second-round of written submission.

Pursuant to the Tribunal’s instructions, the Parties simultaneously filed their first
submissions on costs on 31 January 2019 (“First Submissions on Costs”) and a second

submission on costs on 28 February 2019 (“Second Submissions on Costs”).

The proceeding was closed on 3 June 2019.

45.

It.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman vy. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

Pursuant to the Tribunal’s instructions, the Respondent submitted an updated supplemental
submission of costs on 10 June 2019 (“Respondent’s Supplemental Submission on

Costs”).

FACTUAL BACKGROUND
[el
[el
[el

PARTIES’ CLAIMS AND REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

As was noted above,” Claimant withdrew its principal claims in this arbitration on 10
December 2018. Those claims were set out, and discussed in detail, in the written

submissions of the Parties. The claims were defined by the terms of Claimant’s requests

for relief.
[el
[el
[el
[el

See 438 supra.

54.

55.

56.

VI.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman vy. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

DECISION ON THE CLAIM

As was noted above, Claimant expressly withdrew its principal claims “with prejudice”,
and Respondent requested that the Tribunal issue an Award dismissing all Claimant’s

claims with prejudice.

The Tribunal notes that the Claimant has not objected to Respondent’s request and that,
accordingly, both Parties agree that the Tribunal shall render an Award dismissing all of
Claimant’s claims “with prejudice” and deciding on the only pending dispute between the

Parties, i.e. the issue of costs, under Article 61 of the ICSID Convention.

The Tribunal is satisfied that it is competent and has jurisdiction to render the present
Award under the ICSID Convention and the underlying BIT. The Tribunal accordingly
considers it appropriate to proceed to issue a formal Award dismissing all of Claimant’s
claims with prejudice, and here decides to do so for the reasons set out in this Section, in

accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 47(1)(i).

COSTS

CLAIMANT’S COST SUBMISSIONS

[el
[el
[el
[el

Claimant accordingly claimed its costs for the period 6 November 2015 to 31 March 2018,

which it summarized as follows:

(i) USD 400,000.00, which corresponds to the advances on the
fees and expenses of the Tribunal and administrative fees of ICSID
made by SGRF;

64.

65.

66.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman vy. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

(ii) [...], which corresponds to the travel and other expenses
incurred by SGRF’s witness and its representatives;

(iii) [...], which corresponds to the fees and disbursements of
SGRF’s international counsel, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
LLP;

(iv) _ [...], which corresponds to the fees and disbursements of
SGRF’s Bulgarian counsel, [...];

(v) [...], which corresponds to the fees and expenses of SGRF’s
banking, accountancy, and quantum experts, [...];

(vi) _ [...], which corresponds to the fees of [...].

RESPONDENT’S COST SUBMISSIONS

 

 

In Respondent’s Second Submission on Costs, Respondent requested the Tribunal to:

(a) Issue an Award dismissing with prejudice all of the Claimant's
claims;

(b) Order the Claimant to pay {...) to cover the costs of the
proceeding and [...]* and [...] to cover the legal fees and expenses
incurred by Bulgaria during this proceeding, plus interest on that
amount at the fixed rate of 2.95% compounded annually from the
date of the Award to the date of full payment; and

(c) Order the Claimant to pay any additional costs, including legal
fees and expenses incurred by Bulgaria after 31 January 2019 but

Pursuant to footnote 73 of Respondent’s Second Submission on Costs: “Bulgaria understands that as of 18
January 2019, there was an available balance of [...]. See Email from ICSID to the Parties, 18 January
2019. To the extent that Bulgaria is reimbursed for any unused funds, it will not seek to recover that amount.”
According to footnote 74 of Respondent’s Second Submission on Costs, this figure only reflects the costs
incurred by Bulgaria through 31 January 2019.

10

67.

68.

69.

70.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman vy. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

before the Tribunal renders its Award, plus interest at the rate

specified in subparagraph (b) above.° (original footnotes omitted,

emphasis in original)
As mentioned above, on 10 June 2019, Respondent submitted a Supplemental Submission
on Costs, which included the costs accrued from 1 February 2019 onwards and the

following revised request for relief to the Tribunal:

a. Issue an Award dismissing with prejudice all of the Claimant's
claims; and

Order the Claimant to pay [...]to cover the costs of the proceeding,
as well as [...]to cover the legal fees and expenses incurred by
Bulgaria during this proceeding, plus interest on that amount at the
fixed rate of 2.95% compounded annually from the date of the
Award to the date of full payment.

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON Costs

Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as
the parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the
parties in connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how
and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members
of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the
Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.
This provision gives the Tribunal discretion to allocate all costs of the arbitration, including

attorney’s fees and other costs, between the Parties as it deems appropriate.

The Tribunal has considered the Parties’ respective submissions. In deciding upon the
allocation of costs in circumstances where the claim is completely withdrawn before any
hearing in the case, it has not made any determinations on questions at issue in the case.
Its decision is based on the assumption that each Party has presented its case in good faith,

believing the facts alleged to be true.

Respondent's Second Submission on Costs, | 52.

ll

71.

72.

73.

74.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman v. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

The Parties referred to a number of arbitral decisions addressing the question of the
allocation of costs, including Accession Mezzanine Capital v. Hungary, Quadrant Pacific
Growth Fund v. Costa Rica, Foresti v. South Africa, PNG v. Papua New Guinea, and
Burlington v. Ecuador.® The references imply that both Parties wish the Tribunal to
exercise its discretion in conformity with the approach generally adopted in investment

arbitrations, as exemplified by such awards.

The Tribunal considers that the basic principle that is generally accepted and applied in
relation to the allocation of costs in investment arbitrations in accordance with Convention
Article 61 is that the tribunal has a discretion in respect to the allocation of costs, to be
exercised taking into account all of the circumstances of the instant case, and in particular
the outcome of the parties’ respective claims, defences, and applications in the case. The
reasonableness of the parties’ costs is also to be taken into account in determining precisely

how much each party is to recover.

In the present case the Tribunal, as was noted above, does not suppose that either Party
acted in bad faith at any stage of the proceedings. The very late decision of Claimant to
withdraw its claims with prejudice is certainly a salient feature of the proceedings; but the
Tribunal considers that the timing of this decision is of less importance than the fact of the

withdrawal of the claim.

It is a wise and important step for parties to reappraise their position repeatedly during the
long process leading to the rendering of an arbitral award, and to examine the scope for an
adjustment of their claims and defences. Decisions on costs should not be used to deter or
punish such reappraisals. On the other hand, the fundamental principle underlying all

awards is that parties are to be recompensed and “made whole” when they are unlawfully

Accession Mezzanine Capital L.P. and Danubius Kereskedéhaz Vagyonkezelé Zrt. V. Hungary (ICSID Case
No. ARB/12/3), Award, 17 April 2015 (CL-142); Quadrant Pacific Growth Fund L.P and Canasco Holdings
Inc. v Republic of Costa Rica (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/08/1), Order of the Tribunal Taking Note of the
Discontinuance of the Proceedings and Allocation of Costs, 27 October 2010 (CL-138); Piero Foresti, Laura
de Carli and others v. Republic of South Africa (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/1), Award, 4 August 2010
(RL-166); PNG Sustainable Development Program Lid. v. Independent State of Papua New Guinea (ICSID
Case No. ARB/13/33), Award, 5 May 2015 (CL-139); and Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador
(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5), Decision on Reconsideration and Award, 7 February 2017 (RL-112).

12

75.

76.

77.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman v. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

injured. The award to a successful party of its costs incurred in vindicating its rights is
essentially a part of the reparation for the consequences flowing naturally and (where the
existence of the dispute is properly notified) foreseeably from the initial wrong. That is
the essence of the “loser pays” or “costs follow the event” principle, although it is important
to recall that it is a principle and not a rule: its application in any particular case may be

affected significantly by factors specific to that case.

Where the principal claims in a case are withdrawn there is no winner and no loser in the
way that there is in a case that proceeds to an adjudication on the merits. There is, however,
a presumption that parties have acted lawfully unless the contrary is established: the
respondent’s position must be deemed to emerge untarnished after a claim is withdrawn.
Moreover, the respondent in such circumstances has been obliged to participate in a
procedure in order to maintain the defences that were made known to the claimant at the

outset of the arbitration procedure.

The Tribunal considers it appropriate to apply the principle adopted in the Foresti case,
that “while claimants in investment arbitrations are in principle entitled to the costs
necessarily incurred in the vindication of their legal rights, they cannot expect to leave
respondent States to carry the costs of defending claims that are abandoned.” Further, it
sees no circumstances in the present case that warrant a departure from that principle. In
particular, it does not consider that the costs of the pursuit of the proceedings during the
period prior to the disclosure of [...]should be borne by Respondent: it does not consider
that Respondent’s conduct in not disclosing [...] earlier was improper or an abuse of the

arbitration process.

The Tribunal, by a majority, therefore decides that Claimant should in principle bear all of
the costs of the arbitration, subject to consideration of the reasonableness of Respondent’s

costs.

” Foresti v. South Africa (RL-166), § 132.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman v. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

Having considered the detailed submissions of the Parties concerning the amounts of the
costs claimed, the Tribunal does not find the claims unreasonable in the context of an

international investment arbitration.

The Tribunal, by a majority, therefore decides that Claimant should bear all of the costs of
the arbitration, as well as Respondent’s costs as claimed by Respondent. Those costs
include reimbursement of the Respondent’s share of the advance payments made during
the proceeding to cover the costs of the arbitration (Claimant’s having paid its own share),

as well as claimed interest.

The costs of the arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, ICSID’s

administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to (in USD):8

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses

Prof. Vaughan Lowe USD 42,656.25
Mr. David R. Haigh USD 32,111.92
Prof. Brigitte Stern USD 75,046.50
ICSID’s administrative fees USD 148,000.00
Direct expenses (estimated)? USD 726.87
Total USD 298,541.54

The above arbitration costs have been paid out of the advances made by the Parties in equal

parts.'° As a result, each Party’s share of the costs of arbitration amounts to [...].

Accordingly, the Tribunal orders Claimant to pay Respondent [...] for the expended

portion of Respondent’s advances to ICSID and [...] to cover Respondent’s legal fees and

The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed Financial Statement of the case account once
all invoices are received and the account is final.

This amount includes estimated charges relating to the dispatch of this Award (courier, printing and copying).

The remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Parties in proportion to the payments that they advanced to
ICSID.

14

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman vy. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

expenses, plus interest on those amounts at the fixed rate of 2.95% compounded annually
from the date of the Award to the date of full payment.

Vil. AWARD

83. For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal decides as follows:
(1) To dismiss with prejudice all of the claims made in this arbitration by SGRF; and

(2) By a majority, that SGRF shall pay the Republic of Bulgaria [...], plus interest on
those amounts at the fixed rate of 2.95% compounded annually from the date of the

Award to the date of full payment.

State General Reserve Fund of the Sultanate of Oman v. Republic of Bulgaria
Excerpts of Award

 

Mr. David R. Haigh Q.C. Prof. Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: Date:

Prof. Vaughan Lowe Q.C.
President of the Tribunal

Date:

