INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the annulment proceeding between
SUEZ, SOCIEDAD GENERAL DE AGUAS DE BARCELONA S.A.
AND INTERAGUA SERVICIOS INTEGRALES DE AGUA S.A.
Claimants

and

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17

 

DECISION ON ARGENTINA’S APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT

 

Members of the Committee
Professor Donald M. McRae, President
Professor Doug Jones, Member of the Committee
Tan Sri Dato’ Cecil W.M. Abraham, Member of the Committee

Secretary of the Committee
Mr. Francisco Grob, ICSID

Date of dispatch to the Parties: December 14, 2018

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Argentine Republic:

Dr. Bernardo Saravia Frias

Dr. Ernesto Lucchelli

Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Subprocurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Posadas 1641, CP 1112

Buenos Aires,

Argentine Republic

Representing Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas
de Barcelona S.A., and Interagua Servicios
Integrales de Agua S.A.:

Mr. Nigel Blackaby

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
700 13th St NW,

Washington, DC 20005

USA

Mr. Elliot Friedman

Ms. Noiana Marigo

Mr. Ben Love

Ms. Amanda Lee

Ms. Katherine Ibarra

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP
601 Lexington Avenue, 31st floor

New York, NY 10022-4664

USA

Til.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

INTRODUCTION 1
PARTIES 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
A. — Registration and Constitution 1
B. _ First Session 2
C. — Stay of the Enforcement 2
D. — Submissions on Argentina’s Application for Annulment

E. — Hearing on Annul 3
F. Post-Hearing Pi dures 4

 

THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS, THE AWARD AND PRE-AWARD

DECISIONS, AND THE RECTIFICATION DECISION

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. — The Arbitration Proceeding 5
B. Decision on Jurisdiction 6
C. Decision on the Disqualification Proposal
D. Decision on Liability 7
E. Award 7
F. Decision on Rectification 8
THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS ON THE INTERPRETATION OF ANNULMENT
GROUNDS 8
A. — The Scope of Annul 8
a. Summary of Argentina’s Position. 8
b. Summary of Claimants’ Position. 9
B. Improper Constitution of the Tribunal (Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention)......... 10
a. Summary of Argentina’s Position.
b. Summary of Claimants’ Position
Cc. Manifest Excess of Powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention) .
a. Summary of Argentina’s Position.
b. Summary of Claimants’ Position 1S
D. — Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure (Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention) 16
a. Summary of Argentina’s Position.

 
 

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position.

VI.

VII.

Vii.

E. Failure to State Reasons in the Award (Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention) ........ 18

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position.

 

 

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position............

THE PARTIES ARGUMENTS FOR AND AGAINST ANNULMENT...
A. — Reproduction by the Tribunal of the Findings Made in Other Arbitrations.....

 

 

 

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position.

 

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position.
B. Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s Appointment as Director of UBS and her Failure to

Disclose and Investigate 26

 

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position.

 

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position....

C. Failure to Comply with the 18 Months’ Local Litigation Requirement

 
 
 
 

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position.
b. Summary of Claimants’ Position
D. Necessity under Customary International Law
a. Summary of Argentina’s Position.

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position

 

E. Valuation of Damages

 

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position...........

   

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position...........

   

THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS
A. — Reproduction by the Tribunal of the Findings Made in Other Arbitrations......

 

 

B. Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s Appointment as Director of UBS and her Failure to

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

Disclose and Investigate 51
C. Failure to Comply with the 18 Months’ Local Litigation Requirement.... sere 8
D. Necessity under Customary International Law ........... -.60
E. Valuation of Damages 63
DECISION ON COSTS 68
A. Argentina’s of Costs 68
B. — Claimants’ of Costs 68
C. Committee’s Decision 69

 

DECISION 72

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

APSA
AGBAR
Argentina-France BIT

Argentina-Spain BIT

Argentina’s Application

Argentina’s Memorial
Argentina’s Reply
Argentina’s Statement of Costs

Award

BITs

Claimants

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial

Claimants’ Rejoinder

Claimants’ Statement of Costs

Committee

Aguas Provinciales de Santa Fe S.A.
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.

Agreement between the Government of the Argentine
Republic and the Government of the French Republic on the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed
on July 3, 1991, and in force since March 3, 1993

Agreement between the Argentine Republic and the
Kingdom of Spain on the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments, signed on October 3, 1991, and
in force since September 28, 1992

Argentina’s Application on Annulment dated September 16,
2016

Argentina’s Memorial on Annulment dated May 8, 2017
Argentina’s Reply on Annulment dated October 5, 2017
Argentina’s Statement of Costs dated March 2, 2018

Award dated December 4, 2015, rendered in the case of
Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and
Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v. the Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)

Argentina-France BIT and Argentina-Spain BIT

Suez, a company incorporated under the laws of France,
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
(*“AGBAR”), and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua
S.A. (“Interagua’”), companies incorporated under the laws
of Spain

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Annulment dated August
7, 2017

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Annulment dated December 4,
2017

Claimants’ Statement of Costs dated April 11, 2018

Ad hoc Committee in the case of Suez, Sociedad General de
Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales
de Agua S.A. v. the Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/17)

Decision on Jurisdiction

Decision on Liability

Decision on Rectification

ETOSS

FET
IBA Guidelines

Ic]
ICSID
ICSID Arbitration Rules

ICSID Convention

IDB
IFC
ILC Draft Articles

Interagua
MEN
POI

Resolution 602/99

Second Challenge Decision

Decision on Jurisdiction dated May 16, 2006 issued in the
case of Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v. the
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Liability dated July 30, 2010 issued in the case
of Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and
Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v. the Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)

Decision on Rectification dated May 20, 2016 issued in the
case of Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v. the
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)

Ente Tripartito de Obras y Servicios Sanitarios, the
regulatory authority in Argentina

Fair and Equitable Treatment

IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International
Arbitration adopted by resolution of the IBA Council on
May 22, 2004

International Court of Justice
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings in
force as of April 10, 2006

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States

Inter-American Development Bank
International Finance Corporation

Draft Articles of Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts adopted by the International Law
Commission in 2001

Interagua Servicios Integrales del Agua S.A.
Most Favored Nation

Procedural Order No. | dated February 7, 2017, concerning
procedural matters

Resolution ETOSS No. 602/99 dated July 8, 1999

Decision on a Second Proposal for the Disqualification of a

Member of the Arbitral Tribunal, May 12, 2008, issued in
the case of Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona

Tribunal

Vienna Convention

S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v. the
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)

Arbitral Tribunal in the case of Suez, Sociedad General de
Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Interagua S.A. v. the Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties signed on May
23, 1969, and entered into force on January 27, 1980

IL.

Il.

INTRODUCTION

This proceeding concerns an application by the Argentine Republic for annulment
(“Argentina’s Application” or the “Application’”) of the Award rendered in the underlying
arbitration proceedings on December 4, 2015 (the “Award”), including the Decision on
Jurisdiction dated May 16, 2006 (the “Decision on Jurisdiction”), the Decision on Liability
dated July 30, 2010 (the “Decision on Liability”), and the Decision on Rectification dated
May 20, 2016 (the “Decision on Rectification’).

The Award related to a dispute submitted to the International Center for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) on the basis of the Agreement between the Government of
the Argentine Republic and the Government of the French Republic on the Reciprocal
Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed on July 3, 1991, and in force since March
3, 1993 (the “Argentina-France BIT”), and the Agreement between the Argentine Republic
and the Kingdom of Spain on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments,
signed on October 3, 1991 and in force since September 28, 1992 (the “Argentina-Spain
BIT”), as well as the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States

and Nationals of other States (the “ICSID Convention’).
PARTIES

The Parties are Suez, a company incorporated under the laws of France, Sociedad General
de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A. (“AGBAR”), and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.
(“Interagua”), both companies incorporated under the laws of Spain (together the
“Claimants”), and the Argentine Republic (“Argentina”) (each a “Party”, and together, the

“Parties”). The Parties’ representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).
PROCEDURAL HISTORY

REGISTRATION AND CONSTITUTION

Argentina submitted its Application on September 16, 2016. It also requested that

enforcement of the Award be stayed until the Application was decided.

On September 21, 2016, the Secretary-General registered Argentina’s Application. The
Parties were also notified that the enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed

pursuant to Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

By letter dated December 15, 2016, the Parties were notified that, in accordance with Rule
52(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, an ad hoc Committee composed of Professor Donald
M. McRae (a national of Canada and New Zealand), Tan Sri Dato’ Cecil W.M. Abraham (a
national of Malaysia), and Professor Doug Jones (a national of Australia and Ireland) (the
“Committee”) had been constituted. The Parties were also informed that Professor McRae
would be the President of the Committee and Mr. Francisco Grob, Legal Counsel at ICSID,

would serve as Secretary.

FIRST SESSION

As agreed by the Parties, the first session of the Committee was held on February 1, 2017,

by telephone conference (the “First Session”).

Following the First Session, the Committee issued on February 7, 2017, Procedural Order
No. | concerning various procedural matters. The Parties confirmed, among others, that the

2006 ICSID Arbitration Rules would apply to the annulment proceedings.

STAY OF THE ENFORCEMENT

Before the First Session, the Parties agreed on a schedule for written pleadings concerning
the stay of enforcement of the Award. This agreement was set out in the Claimants’ and

Argentina’s letters of December 22 and 23, 2016, respectively.
In accordance with the agreed schedule and further revisions, the Parties made three
simultaneous rounds of submissions on the stay of enforcement. No hearing was convened.

On June 21, 2017, the Committee issued its Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the
Award. The Committee lifted the stay without conditions and deferred the decision on costs

to a later stage of the proceeding.

SUBMISSIONS ON ARGENTINA’S APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT

On May 8, 2017, Argentina submitted its Memorial on Annulment (“Argentina’s
Memorial’), accompanied by Exhibits A RA-104 to A RA-177, and Legal Authorities AL
A RA-S2 to AL A RA-107.

On August 7, 2017, the Claimants submitted their Counter-Memorial on Annulment
(“Claimants’ Counter-Memorial”), accompanied by Exhibits AC-12 to AC-31, and Legal
Authorities ACLA-52 to ACLA-88.

On October 5, 2017, Argentina submitted its Reply on Annulment (“Argentina’s Reply”),
accompanied by Exhibits A RA-178 to A RA-250, and Legal Authorities AL A RA-108 to
AL A RA-132.

On December 4, 2017, the Claimants submitted their Rejoinder on Annulment (““Claimants’
Rejoinder”), accompanied by Exhibits AC-32 to AC-48, and Legal Authorities ACLA-89
to ACLA-95.

HEARING ON ANNULMENT

On January 17 and 18, 2018, the Committee held a Hearing on Annulment at the World
Bank’s headquarters in Washington D.C.

The following persons were present at the Hearing:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Committee

Prof. Donald M. McRae President of the ad hoc Committee
Tan Sri Dato’ Cecil W.M. Abraham Member of the ad hoc Committee
Prof. Doug Jones Member of the ad hoc Committee
ICSID Secretariat

Mr. Francisco Grob Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Argentine Republic

Counsel

Dr. Bernardo Saravia Frias Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dr. Ernesto Lucchelli Subprocurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ms. Marfa Teresa Gianelli Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién

 

 

 

 

 

Ms. Maria Alejandra Etchegorry

Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién

 

Ms. Gisela Ingrid Makowski

Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién

 

Ms. Belén Maria Ibafiez

Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién

 

Ms. Inda Valeria Etchechoury

Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién

 

Mr. Nicolas Duhalde

Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién

 

de Agua S.A.

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales

 

Counsel

 

Mr. Nigel Blackaby

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer

 

Mr. Elliot Friedman

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer

 

Mr. Ben Love

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer

 

Ms. Amanda Lee

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer

 

Ms. Katherine Ibarra

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer

 

Ms. Yesica Crespo

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer

 

Interpreters

 

Ms. Silvia Colla

English-Spanish interpreter

 

Mr. Daniel Giglio

English-Spanish interpreter

 

Mr. Charles Roberts

English-Spanish interpreter

 

Court Reporters

 

Mr. David Kasdan

Worldwide Reporting, LLP, English Court
Reporter

 

Mr. Rodolfo Rinaldi

DR-Esteno, Spanish Court Reporter

 

Ms. Elizabeth Cicoria

 

 

 

DR-Esteno, Spanish Court Reporter

 

POsT-HEARING PROCEDURES

On March 2, 2018, Argentina submitted a Statement of Costs (“Argentina’s Statement of
Costs”), and on April 11, 2018, the Claimants submitted a S it of Costs (“Clai ”

Statement of Costs”), accompanied by its Annex A.

The Committee declared the proceeding closed on December 7, 2018, in accordance with

Rules 53 and 38(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

IV.

20.

21.

THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS, THE AWARD AND PRE-AWARD
DECISIONS, AND THE RECTIFICATION DECISION

Argentina requests the annulment of the Award including the Decision on Jurisdiction, the
Decision on Liability, and the Decision on Rectification, which it describes as an integral
part of the Award.! It also contends that the Tribunal was improperly constituted as a result
of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s ties with UBS, a company that held shares and other
interests in Suez during the arbitration proceedings, and of the two unchallenged arbitrators’

decision to dismiss Argentina’s proposal to disqualify her.

THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDING

The arbitration proceeding was heard by a tribunal composed of Professor Jeswald W.
Salacuse (President), a national of the United States of America, Professor Gabrielle
Kaufmann-Kohler, a national of Switzerland, and Professor Pedro Nikken, a national of
Venezuela (the “Tribunal”). It concerned a series of measures adopted by Argentina in
respect of the water and waste management concession held (indirectly) by the Claimants.
An identically composed tribunal was constituted by agreement of the respective parties to
hear the claims brought by two other Suez-led consortia in respect of water and waste
management concessions for the cities of Buenos Aires and Cordoba. These other cases are
Suez et al v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. 03/18, Suez et al v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. 3/19
and AWG v. Argentina, an UNCITRAL (1976) proceeding (Suez 3/18, Suez 3/19 and AWG,
respectively). Suez 3/18 was discontinued by agreement of the parties on January 24, 2007.”
Suez 3/19 and AWG were handled together by agreement of the parties and produced two
awards. Argentina sought vacatur of the AWG award before US courts, an application that

was denied by a decision issued on September 30, 2016.* Meanwhile, Argentina requested

' Argentina’s Application, para. 1.

2 See Aguas Cordobesas S.A., Suez and Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/18), Order of the Tribunal Taking Note of the Discontinuance of the Proceeding, January 24, 2007.
3 The Republic of Argentina v. AWG Group Ltd., No. 1:15-cv-01057-BAH (D.D.C. September 30, 2016) Memorandum
Opinion, A/CLA-57, pp. 24, 26-27.

22.

23.

the annulment of the Suez 3/19’s award. This application was also rejected by an ICSID

committee in a decision rendered on May 5, 2017.4

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

In its Decision on Jurisdiction of May 16, 2006, the Tribunal rejected all the objections raised
by Argentina, except for one, which had become moot because of the discontinuance of the
proceedings in respect of the claimant against which it was addressed. The Tribunal found
the dispute to be of legal nature and to arise directly out of Claimants’ investments in the
water distribution and waste water services of the Province of Santa Fe in Argentina. It
considered that the existence of a dispute settlement clause in the concession contract
concluded by Aguas Provinciales de Santa Fe S.A. (“APSA”), an Argentinian corporation
in which the Claimants had shares and other interests, and the Province of Santa Fe for the
operation of the water services in that Province did not preclude the Claimants from bringing
this arbitration based on breaches of the Argentina-France and the Argentina-Spain BITs. It
also found that the Claimants Interagua and AGBAR were entitled, by operation of the most-
favored-nation (“MFN”) clause of the Argentina-Spain BIT, to avail themselves of the more
favorable treatment of the Argentina-France BIT and did not, therefore, need to resort to the

local courts of Argentina before initiating this arbitration.

DECISIO!

 

IN THE DISQUALIFICATION PROPOSAL

By a decision dated May 12, 2008, Professors Salacuse and Nikken, the two unchallenged
members of the Tribunal, rejected Argentina’s (second) proposal to disqualify Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler. They found no conflict that could result in Professor Kaufmann-Kohler
manifestly lacking independence and impartiality to hear this case. In their view, considering
the size and scope of UBS’s operations, the outcome of the arbitration would at best have a
negligible financial effect on Suez and, consequently, an insignificant effect on UBS.

Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s financial position would not thus be altered by the result of

+ Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case
No. ARB/3/19), Decision on Argentina’s Application for Annulment, May 5, 2017.

24.

25.

this arbitration in any material form. Nor did they believe that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s
nondisclosure of her UBS directorship demonstrated lack of independence or impartiality.
They concluded that she was unaware of UBS’s shareholdings in Suez and did not participate
“in the day-to-day management of the corporation.” Moreover, she had reason to rely on
the UBS’s conflict review after having submitted a list of her arbitrations to the company for

that purpose. They therefore rejected the disqualification proposal.

DECISION ON LIABILITY

 

The Tribunal determined in its Decision on Liability that Argentina did not expropriate
Claimants’ investment and did not deny them full protection and security under the
applicable investment treaties. It did, however, conclude that Argentina denied the Claimants
fair and equitable treatment (“FET”) in that its “...actions in refusing to revise the tariff
according to the legal framework of the Concession and in pursuing the forced renegotiation
of the Concession Contract contrary to that legal framework violated its obligations under
the applicable BITs...”.° Although the Claimants had argued that Argentina’s unilateral
termination of the Concession also violated their rights under the investment treaties, the
Tribunal rejected that claim, stating that it had no jurisdiction to judge whether Argentina’s
actions breached the Concession Contract since “[wJhether [Argentina] breached the
Concession Contract by terminating it is a matter for the dispute resolution procedures
provided in the Concession Contract itself.”” The Tribunal rejected Argentina’s necessity
defense, including its allegation that Article 5(3) of the Argentina-France BIT, as well as

international law, exempted it from its BIT obligations during times of emergency.

AWARD

The Tribunal awarded damages for USD 211,661,453 to the Claimants, plus interest. This

included damages to Suez for losses on guaranteed (sponsored) debt including contingency

5 Decision on a Second Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral Tribunal (“Second Challenge
Decision”), May 12, 2008, para. 39.

© Decision on Liability, July 30, 2010, para. 227.

7 Ibid., para. 226.

26.

27.

28.

29.

debt losses, equity, management fees, and loans to APSF; to AGBAR for losses on
guaranteed debt including contingency debt losses, and equity; and to Interagua for losses
on guaranteed debt including contingency debt losses, and equity. On the issue of costs, the
Tribunal determined that each party should bear its own costs and that the cost of the

proceedings shall be divided equally.

DECISION ON RECTIFICATION

Upon Claimants’ request, the Tribunal corrected two errors in its calculation of losses with
respect to one of the items, the so-called contingency debt. As a result, the total amount of

the Award came to USD 225,696,464, plus interest.

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS ON THE INTERPRETATION OF ANNULMENT
GROUNDS

THE SCOPE OF ANNULMENT

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position

For Argentina, the annulment mechanism is an essential part of the ICSID regime without
which States would have been unlikely to join the ICSID Convention. Its essential purpose
is to safeguard the integrity of the arbitral process in all its facets, including the integrity of

the tribunal, the process and the award.

Although annulment is not an appeal, as it does not authorize substituting the annulled
decision with another, this does not mean that annulment grounds should be construed
strictly. As with any other provision of the ICSID Convention, they must be interpreted in
accordance with their ordinary meaning, in good faith, with due regard to context, and in the

light of the object and purpose of the Convention.

In this case, the flaws of the underlying proceeding and Award could not have been
addressed during the arbitration through the remedies of rectification, interpretation or

supplementation. Rectification only allows a tribunal to “rectify any clerical, arithmetical or

similar error”®; interpretation only enables a tribunal to clarify the “meaning or scope of an
award.”°; and a supplemental decision is available “only in the case of inadvertent omissions
of a technical character but not in the case of a considered omission affecting a fundamental
aspect of the tribunal’s reasoning.” '° None of the issues raised in this annulment proceeding

fall within the limited scope of application of these remedies.

30. Argentina’s request is not frivolous or dilatory. Argentina has not sought annulment of all
the ICSID awards rendered against it as the Claimants suggest. Also, where it has done so,
its applications have been based on well-grounded reasons. That is why it has succeeded in
annulling several awards.'! Even where the requests for annulment have been unsuccessful,

committees have stopped short of finding Argentina’s applications frivolous or dilatory.

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position

31. The Claimants consider that Argentina misapprehends the proper scope and role of ICSID
annulment proceedings. All its claims seek an impermissible de novo review of points on

which it lost.

32. Annulment, however, is not an appeal. It is an extraordinary remedy reserved for “egregious

12

violations of certain basic principles” ‘“, which threaten the very legitimacy of the decision-

making process. Article 52’s annulment grounds provide a narrow exception to the principle

that an ICSID tribunal’s decision is final. These grounds are exhaustive and must be

* ICSID Convention, Article 49(2).

° Ibid., Article 50.

‘© Argentina’s Reply, para. 10, citing to Christoph Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2009, AL
ARA 56, p. 860.

‘| Argentina’s Reply, para. 3. Argentina cites to the following decisions: CMS Gas Transmission Company v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Decision on Annulment, September 25, 2007, AL A RA 39; Sempra
Energy International v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16), Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2010,
AL A RA 40; Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. & Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/3), Decision on Annulment, July 30, 2010, AL A RA 41.

2 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 71, citing Tulip Real Estate and Development Netherlands BV v. Republic of
Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/I 1/28), Decision on Annulment, December 30, 2015, AL A RA 78, para. 39.

33.

34.

35.

interpreted strictly, permitting no form of substantive review. Any complaint falling short

of this exceptionally high standard cannot form the basis of an annulment.

Annulment is premised on deference to a tribunal’s decision. Therefore, even when a tribunal
has committed errors of fact or law (which is not the case here), annulment committees
cannot substitute their own views for those of the tribunal. Annulment is not a remedy against

an incorrect decision.

Moreover, not all annullable errors justify annulment. Article 52(3) of the Convention
provides that “‘[t]he Committee shall have the authority to annul the award” if a ground under
Article 52(1) is found to have been met.!? Article 52(3) does not require a committee to do
so. Among other considerations, committees must assess whether an otherwise annullable
error had a material impact on the outcome of an award before deciding whether to exercise

its annulment powers.

IMPROPER CONSTITUTION OF THE TRIBUNAL (ARTICLE 52(1)(A) OF THE ICSID
CONVENTION)

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position

Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention provides that either party may request annulment
of an award on the basis “that the Tribunal was not properly constituted.” To determine this,
regard must be had to Chapter IV, Section 2 of the ICSID Convention, which regulates the
“Constitution of the Tribunal” (Articles 37 to 40). In accordance with Article 40, arbitrators
must “possess the qualities stated in paragraph (1) of Article 14.” Such qualities are: (a) “be
persons of high moral character,” (b) “with recognized competence in the fields of law,
commerce, industry or finance,” and (c) “who may be relied upon to exercise independent
judgment.”!* Article 57 of the ICSID Convention provides that a party may propose the

disqualification of an arbitrator on account of any fact indicating “the lack of the qualities

3 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 73.
4 Argentina’s Reply, para. 19.

10

36.

37.

38.

39.

required by of Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention” or “on the ground that he was

ineligible for appointment to the tribunal under Section 2 of Chapter IV.”'5

The text and context of Article 52(1)(a) make it clear that the manifest lack of the qualities
required by Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention authorizes a party to propose the
disqualification of an arbitrator and, once the award is rendered, to request its annulment as
a result of the improper constitution of the tribunal. So too does the object and purpose of
the ICSID annulment procedure, which is to ensure the integrity of ICSID tribunals, and the
principle of effet utile interpretation. If a party could not question the constitution of a
tribunal under Article 52(1)(a), despite having timely submitted a disqualification proposal,

then Article 52(1)(a) would be meaningless.

Supplementary means of interpretation confirmed this conclusion. As Professor Schreuer
has explained based on the preparatory works of the ICSID Convention, if a party requesting
disqualification in the original arbitral proceeding is unsuccessful, its right to challenge the
constitution of the tribunal as a ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID

Convention “remains unaffected.” !

This interpretation is also supported by case law. Unlike the incorrect approach followed by
the Azurix decision, the EDF committee accepted that annulment is available where an
arbitrator does not meet the qualifications required under Article 14(1) (it erred, however, in
that it unduly limited the scope of review in deference to the unchallenged arbitrator’s
decision on the disqualification proposal, a restriction that is nowhere to be found in the

ICSID Convention). The same can be said about the Suez 3/]9 committee’s decision.

Although the existence of a decision on disqualification in the original arbitration proceeding
may be an element of judgment for the annulment committee when verifying the proper

constitution of the tribunal, it is not binding on the committee nor should it limit its

'S Argentina’s Memorial, paras. 28-34.
'6 Argentina’s Reply, para. 23, citing Christoph Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2009, AL A
RA 56, Art. 52, para. 129.

40.

Al.

42.

jurisdiction to determine the proper constitution of the tribunal. Article 52 of the ICSID

Convention does not provide for any such limitation.

In addition, there is an “essential difference” between a request for annulment under Article
52(1)(a) and the other annulment grounds.'’ Whether a tribunal is properly constituted is
expressly subject to the decision of an annulment committee under Article 52(1)(a). The
limitations imposed on an ad hoc committee in connection with the merits of the dispute are
inapplicable to its analysis on this ground. While ““‘an ad hoc committee does not have the
jurisdiction to review the merits of the original award,’ insofar as ‘[t]he annulment system
is designed to safeguard the integrity, not the outcome, of ICSID arbitration proceedings,’
as the guardian of ‘the fundamental integrity of the ICSID arbitral process in all its facets,”

‘[a]n ad hoc committee is empowered to verify [...] the integrity of the tribunal — its proper
2918

 

constitution (Article 52(1)(a)) [.

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position

Claimants contend that Argentina’s Memorial proceeds on the wrong assumption that an
annulment committee is empowered to determine, afresh, whether the requirements of
Article 14(1) have been met, and, if not, the committee must annul the award under Article
52(1)(a). This approach ignores, however, that where an annulment committee is called to
consider an arbitrator challenge that was decided during the underlying arbitration, the
committee does not “write on a blank sheet.”!? Previous annulment committees have
consistently held that, in such circumstances, a committee’s scope of review is very limited.

Two lines of authority have emerged from these decisions.

The first approach is that followed by the annulment committee in Azurix v. Argentina. The
Azurix committee held that the inquiry under Article 52(1)(a) is a purely procedural one,

restricted to verifying whether the procedure for constituting a tribunal and for resolving a

"7 Argentina’s Reply, para. 27.

'8 [bid., para. 29, citing Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7), Decision on
Annulment of June 5, 2007, AL A RA 51, paras. 20-23.

© Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 81, citing EDF International SA and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case
No ARB/03/23), Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2016, AL A RA 67, para. 145.

12

43.

challenge to an arbitrator have been complied with. If they have, an annulment application
cannot succeed. The second approach was articulated by the committee in EDF v. Argentina,
later followed by the Suez 3/19 committee. Under this approach, a committee may inquiry
into the substance of a disqualification decision. However, annulment under Article 52(1)(a)
or (d) is not possible “unless the decision not to disqualify the arbitrator in question is so
plainly unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker could have come to such a

decision.””°

Contrary to Argentina’s position, Article 14(1) does not empower an ad hoc committee to
scrutinize a tribunal’s handling of an arbitrator challenge, as if it were a matter of first
impression. Article 14(1) says nothing about the standard of review to be applied by an
annulment committee. This is to be found in the architecture of the ICSID system and in its
object and purpose. As noted above, the annulment mechanism acts as a safeguard against
“egregious violations of certain basic principles”.?! The ICSID Convention charges the
unchallenged members of the tribunal (or, in extraordinary circumstances, the Chairman of
the Administrative Council) with responsibility for ensuring that only impartial,
independent, and expert tribunals are constituted to hear claims. The purpose of this is that
any challenge is resolved as early and efficiently as possible during the proceedings, rather
than many years later, once an award is rendered. Neither Article 58 nor Article 52 contains
any indication that an ICSID tribunal’s power to resolve pre-award arbitrator challenges
should be shared with (much less displaced by) an ad hoc committee. Raising an arbitrator
challenge during the arbitration is not simply a procedural formality designed to preserve a
party’s ability to raise the argument once again during an annulment. A pre-award challenge
is the opportunity for a party to present an arbitrator challenge and to have that challenge
resolved on a full evidentiary record. That is why the EDF committee did not contradict

itself by, on the one hand, acknowledging that it is possible for an award to be annulled under

2° Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 89, citing EDF International SA and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case

No ARB/03/23), De

  

sion on Annulment, February 5, 2016, AL A RA 67, para 145.

2! Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 16; Claimants’ Counter-Memorial para. 71, citing Tulip Real Estate and Development
Netherlands BV y. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No ARB/11/28), Decision on Annulment, December 30, 2015,
AL ARA 7B, para. 39.

44.

4S.

46.

47.

Article 52(1)(a) on the basis of an arbitrator’s lack of the requisite qualities under Article
14(1), while on the other hand, holding that where a tribunal has previously decided an
arbitrator challenge, an ad hoc committee cannot annul unless the tribunal’s decision is
“plainly unreasonable”.”? Moreover, it is Argentina’s interpretation of Article 52(1)(a) that

runs contrary to the object and purpose of annulment in the ICSID system.

This being clear, there is no need to resort to supplementary means of interpretation. The
treaty text is neither ambiguous nor does it lead to absurd or unreasonable results. In any
event, the supplementary sources that Argentina cites fail to support its view of Article
52(1)(a). The drafting history of Article 52 confirms that the Convention’s framers did not
intend for an annulment application under Article 52(1)(a) (or under any ground) to trigger
de novo review so much so that the drafters of the Convention considered and rejected a
proposal to permit annulment “on the grounds that a member of the Tribunal lacked the

qualities listed under Article 14(1)” by 16 votes to 4.73

Argentina’s distinction between Article 52(1)(a) and all other grounds for annulment is
flawed. There is no “essential difference” between them. Every issue addressed by Article
52 is “expressly subject to the decision of the annulment committee” and is likewise subject

to a deferential standard of review.*
MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS (ARTICLE 52(1)(B) OF THE ICSID CONVENTION)

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position

According to Argentina, a manifest excess of powers may relate to: (a) the scope of the

tribunal’s jurisdiction, (b) the applicable law, and (c) the issues raised by the parties.

In respect of the first category, Argentina contends that it does not propose a de novo review

of the Tribunal’s jurisdictional findings as the Claimants suggest. What it seeks is that the

% Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 25, citing EDF International SA and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No
ARB/03/23), Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2016, AL A RA 67, para. 145.
3 [bid., para. 22, citing History of the ICSID Convention, Volume I, Part 2, Documents 44-146 (1968), A RA 111, p.

852.

2 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 29.

48.

49.

50.

51.

Committee examines whether the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers when it exercised
jurisdiction in this case. Although this may require a degree of argumentation and analysis,

it does not prevent a finding of manifest excess of powers.

On the second category, Argentina claims that it has not invoked an erroneous application
of the law in the present case. Its application on this point is based on the Tribunal’s failure
to apply the law. Even so, annulment committees have accepted that an error of law may in
some circumstances constitute a manifest excess of power under Article 52(1)(b) of the
ICSID Convention where it is tantamount to a failure to apply the law, regardless of its
general or specific nature. Examples can be found in the decisions of the Enron and Sempra
committees. The former annulled the award because the tribunal failed to specify the legal
standards applicable to the necessity defense, thus omitting to apply the applicable law,
whereas the latter set aside the award “on the basis of manifest excess of powers (Article
52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention) in respect of failure to apply Article XI of the BIT”

invoked in this case.”°

With respect to the third category, Argentina argues that both parties agree that a tribunal
manifestly exceeds its powers where it decides questions not submitted to it or refuses to

decide questions properly before it.

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position

For the Claimants, annulment on any Article 52(1) ground requires a committee to conclude
that an annullable error had a material impact on the outcome of a case, Article 52(1)(b)

being no exception.

Contrary to Argentina’s suggestions, an excess of powers cannot be “manifest” if it is
discernible only through elaborate interpretation or requires a committee to decide between

competing positions on a debatable legal issue. It must be obvious, self-evident, clear,

25 Argentina’s Reply, para. 42, citing Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/16), Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Application for Annulment of the Award, June 29, 2010, AL A
RA 40, para. 159.

52.

53.

54.

55.

flagrant and discernable without great effort or extensive analysis to satisfy this standard.
An error of law, even a serious error of law, is not an excess of powers under Article 52(1)(b)

let alone a manifest one.

The weight of authority agrees also that the manifest requirement applies equally to both
jurisdictional and merits decisions. Thus, any suggestion that a jurisdictional error is by its

very nature manifest must be rejected.

To find an excess of power for failure to apply the applicable law, there must have been a
failure to apply the law in toto. ICSID annulment committees have consistently held that
only a complete failure to apply the correct law may amount to a manifest excess of powers.
The reason is very straightforward. As Professor Schreuer has put it, ““[p]artial non-
application and erroneous application are indistinguishable’ — and neither is a ground for
annulment”.”© The decisions Argentina cites in support of this claim are no more than outliers

in an otherwise constant jurisprudence.

SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE (ARTICLE 52(1)(D)

OF THE ICSID CONVENTION)

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position

Argentina contends that Article 52(1)(d) means that a set of minimal standards of procedure
must be observed in ICSID proceedings, which includes the right to an independent and
impartial tribunal. These standards, however, are not confined to the rules of procedure
provided for in the arbitration rules, but they also embrace principles of natural justice such

as due process, the right to be heard, proper treatment of evidence, among others.

Contrary to Claimants’ position, an application for annulment must simply demonstrate the
impact that the situation could have had on the award, that is to say, that observance of the

rule departed from had the potential of causing the tribunal to render a substantially different

2 Claimants’ Reply, para. 67, citing Christoph Schreuer et al, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2009 (2%
Edition), A/CLA-61, p. 964.

16

56.

57.

58.

59.

award from the one it actually rendered. It need not prove that the tribunal would have

effectively reached a different decision.

Where applied to the resolution of a disqualification proposal, this standard is not confined
to verifying that the applicable procedures have been followed. It also includes reviewing
whether an arbitrator possesses the requisite qualifications to serve as such. The EDF
committee accepted this, though it unduly limited the scope of review in deference to the

two unchallenged members’ initial decision on the disqualification proposal.

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position

The Claimants agree that Article 52(1)(d) is intended to ensure that minimal standards of
procedure are observed in the arbitral proceedings. They stress, however, that the applicant
bears the burden of proving both that the tribunal committed a serious departure from a

procedural rule, and that the rule was fundamental.?”

In order to be serious, the violation of the rule must have caused the tribunal to reach a result

substantially different from what it would have decided had such a rule been observed.?*

In respect of a disqualification proposal, arbitrators are subject to a duty to investigate and
disclose true conflicts, but that duty is not in and of itself a fundamental rule of procedure;
it is at most a reflection of the requirement that arbitrators must remain independent and
impartial. As recognized by Professors Salacuse and Nikken, as well as the EDF tribunal
and ad hoc committee, nondisclosure in itself cannot be a ground for disqualification where,

as here, the facts not disclosed do not evidence a conflict of interest.2°

27 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 201.
28 Tbid., para. 202.
2° Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 60.

60.

61.

62.

63.

FAILURE TO STATE REASONS IN THE AWARD (ARTICLE 52(1)(E) OF THE ICSID

CONVENTION)

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position

The requirement that tribunals state reasons for their decisions is an essential aspect of the

ICSID system.*”

As several committees have pointed out, a failure to state reasons may lead to annulment
where there has been a total absence of reasons, which encompasses cases in which merely
frivolous reasons have been stated; where a tribunal’s reasoning is contradictory; or where
the reasoning is lacking in coherence that a reader cannot follow it (i.e. incomplete or
inadequate reasons). Moreover, as the TECO committee recently noted, the omission to
address certain evidence relevant to the assessment of damages may also amount to a failure

to state reasons under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.*!

It is not for a committee to substitute its determination on the merits for that of the tribunal,
nor should give the reasons that were not stated by the tribunal; “[a]ll it can do is annul the

decision of the tribunal.”*? The ICSID Convention requires that the reasons be stated.

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position

The Claimants argue that the purpose of Article 52(1)(e) is to ensure that ICSID awards are
the result of reasoned decision-making. It is not for an ad hoc committee to assess the quality,
persuasiveness, or correctness of a tribunal’s reasoning.** Only the complete absence of
reasoning on an outcome determinative point, or the statement of reasons that are so
genuinely contradictory so as to cancel each other out may lead to annulment under Article

52(1)(e).*4

3 Argentina’s Memorial, para. 52.

 

% Argentina’s Reply, para. 59.
* Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 219.
4 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 147.

64.

65.

VI.

66.

Although a tribunal is required to decide every question put before it, there is no duty to
comment on every argument raised, or piece of evidence submitted, by the parties. As the
TECO committee, whose decision Argentina cites to on this point, made clear a tribunal
cannot be required to address within its award each and every piece of evidence in the

record.>>

Neither Article 48(3) nor Article 52(1)(e) specifies the manner in which tribunals must state
their reasons. A tribunal’s reasons may also be implicit as long as they are understandable.*°
Where a tribunal fails to address a question raised by one of the parties or the parties desire
a further clarification of a tribunal’s decision, they can request that the tribunal supplements
its award or interprets its ruling. Annulment is not the proper avenue to address these

issues.°7

THE PARTIES ARGUMENTS FOR AND AGAINST ANNUL!

 

iT
REPRODUCTION BY THE TRIBUNAL OF THE FINDINGS MADE IN OTHER ARBITRATIONS

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position

Argentina contends that the Tribunal reproduced in this case the findings of the Suez 3/19
and AWG decisions, disregarding the factual differences between these cases, the distinct
legal frameworks, the behavior of the parties and the specific geographic and socioeconomic
circumstances pertaining to each of the concession areas.** In some parts of the Decision on
Liability, the Tribunal did not even substitute the correct name of the participating agencies,
or the number of parties and BITs involved, let alone the specific terms of the concession
agreements. This had a clear and decisive impact on the outcome of the present case and

particularly on the fate of the FET claim, the necessity defence and the valuation of

38 Tbid., para. 149.

  

s’ Counter-Memorial, para. 225.
Rejoinder, para. 151.

38 Argentina’s Memorial, para. 64.

67.

68.

damages.** It also constitutes a manifest excess of powers, a serious departure of

fundamental rules of procedure and a failure to state reasons.”

In relation to the FET claim, the Decision on Liability suggests that the Tribunal’s
conclusions would have been different had the Province “relieved [the Concessionaire], at
least temporarily, of investment commitments” to “avoid an increase in tariffs during a time
of crisis”, or if the Province had been willing to renegotiate the concession terms in good
faith instead of forcing the concessionaire to accept “imposed” terms. The problem is that
this is exactly what the Province of Santa Fe did.*! Unlike the Federal Government in the
Suez 3/19 and AWG cases, the Province authorized the Concessionaire (APSF) to suspend
and reduce investments significantly below what was required under the Contract without
imposing any fines in an effort to keep the Concession afloat.*? Moreover, there was nothing
“forced” or compulsory about this process as the decision wrongly suggests.** Nor did the
Province “abruptly” terminate the Concession relying on “serious fault” by APSF; rather,
the contract was terminated due to dissolution of APSF. All of these are misplaced findings

belonging to a different case.

With respect to Argentina’s necessity defence, the Tribunal limited its discussion to 15
paragraphs out of which only 9 are really devoted to analysis, and it yet copied almost word
by word from the decision on liability in the Suez 3/19 and AWG cases. This led the Tribunal
to ignore the critical situation of the Province of Santa Fe, which was even more serious than
that experienced at a national level and was subsequently aggravated by floods in 2003. The
Tribunal only mentions the floods in passing in its general account of the facts, but does not

really take them into account in its analyses of Argentina’s necessity defence. This is

°° For instance, Argentina claims that “[o]ut of the 248 paragraphs that make up the Decision on Liability in the present
case Suez 3/17, a total of 217 correlate to the paragraphs in the decision on liability issued in the Suez 3/19 and AWG
cases, which represents 87.5% of them.”

49 Argentina’s Reply, para. 126.

4! Tbid., para. 91.

* Agreement between APSF and the Province of Santa Fe on transitory measures to enable the conduct of the
renegotiation process, October 29, 2002, R-98, C-106, Exhibit A RA 141, Art. 1.

43 Argentina’s Reply, para. 98.

4 Argentina’s Memorial, paras. 72-74.

20

69.

70.

particularly evident when the Tribunal states that the Province “could have attempted to
apply more flexible means”, another statement copied from the Suez 3/19 decision, which
does not apply to this case. As noted above, the Province allowed the Concessionaire to hold

and reduce investments substantially below the contractual targets.

On damages, the Tribunal used Acta I/I, a proposal for amending the existing regulatory
framework prepared in 2000 by the provincial Government and never formally adopted, to
build its valuation model considering it “strong evidence of how a reasonable regulator
would act.” The Tribunal reproduced this statement verbatim from the Suez 3/19 case where
the tribunal used Resolution 602/99 as a basis for its counter-factual scenario. But unlike
Resolution 602/99, which the regulator in the Suez 3/19 case did in fact follow at some point
(although it was never formally adopted), Acta II was explicitly rejected by the regulator in
this case and never used for any purpose. Moreover, Argentina presented an alternative
scenario, but it was ignored by the Tribunal which simply substituted Acta II] for Resolution
602/99 providing no explanation for this approach. The Tribunal failed also to address
Argentina’s objections to Claimants’ initial capital base and economic bids, neither of which
had been raised in the Suez 3/19 and AWG cases. The Claimants alleged that the Tribunal
was unconvinced by Argentina’s arguments but this is mere speculation because no reasons
are offered in the decision. Nor is it true that Argentina’s counterfactual scenario was
unrealistic or that it did not reflect a productive and cooperative working relationship
between the parties. It did contain modifications to the applicable regulatory framework as

well as concrete adjustment proposals with respect to various assumptions. *°

The parties’ agreement to submit these proceedings to identically composed tribunals did
not entail an authorization for the arbitrators to resolve them as if they were one and the
same, by transposing the findings made in one into the other, while overlooking their
differences. This was a decision adopted out of procedural economy concerns - nothing else.

Nor does the fact that some of the arguments contained in Argentina’s pleadings are similar

+5 Argentina’s Memorial, paras. 171-172, citing Decision on Liability, para. 238.
46 Argentina’s Memorial, paras. 89-91.

71.

72.

mean that the cases are identical. As a matter of fact, Argentina spent a great deal of effort
showing the particularities of this case both in its pleadings on the merits and in its
submissions on quantum. Following the Decision on Liability, for instance, Argentina
reiterated the flexibility measures adopted by the Province of Santa Fe in relation to the

Concession, although to no avail.47

In reproducing the findings of the Suez 3/19 and AWG cases, the “Tribunal failed to apply
the applicable law to the facts of this case” and therefore manifestly exceeded its powers.*®
Similarly, by transposing the findings of Suez 3/19 and AWG cases into the present case,
instead of adopting a decision based on the facts and arguments of this case, the Tribunal
infringed upon the right of the parties to be heard by an open-minded tribunal and prejudged
the facts and issues raised by the parties in this arbitration. This constitutes a serious
departure from fundamental rules of procedure. Finally, the Tribunal failed to state reasons
because it merely reproduced another case’s findings. Neither did the Tribunal address all
the issues submitted for decision as required by Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention,

which is a reason for annulment under any and all of the foregoing annulment grounds.

Contrary to Claimants’ suggestions, Argentina could not have remedied this problem while
the arbitration was pending. As noted above, the remedies of annulment, rectification and
supplementation are not available in respect of pre-award decisions. Nor is it possible to file
a request for reconsideration against any such decision, as the Perenco and ConocoPhillips
cases have shown. This is not to say that Argentina never expressed any concerns, which it
did. In view of the Decision on Liability, Argentina took special care to point out the facts
and circumstances that substantially differed in this case from the Suez 3/19 and AWG cases,
and it warned that the decisions reached in the Suez 3/19 and AWG cases could not be copied

into this arbitration.”

47 See measures listed in Argentina’s Reply, para. 96.

+8 Argentina’s Reply, para. 128.

* Letter SPTN No. 92/AI/15 from the Argentine Republic to the Members of the Tribunal, May 22, 2015, ARA 154;
see also Argentina’s Response to Dr. Deep’s Request for Additional Information, May 9, 2012, A RA 173, p. 1.

723.

74.

75.

76.

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position

The Claimants argue that the Tribunal did not exceed its powers when making common
findings in this and the Suez 3/19 arbitration. Nor did the Tribunal depart from a fundamental

rule of procedure or fail to state reasons.*°

On the first annulment ground, Argentina has not really identified a single instance of the
Tribunal failing to apply the governing law or exceeding its power.°! That many of the
Tribunal’s findings are consistent is not an excess of powers nor is it evidence of any
impropriety; it is just the natural consequence of the substantial factual and legal parallels
between the cases and the parties’ desire for consistency by appointing the same tribunal,

something to which Argentina consented from the outset.*”

Indeed, this case and Suez 3/19 concerned the same type of investments, made by essentially
the same companies, and governed by virtually identical terms; the same kinds of unlawful
acts by Argentina and its instrumentalities; and the same political and economic background.
Additionally, both cases were litigated by the same counsel teams, which presented
substantially similar arguments on the many overlapping facts and legal principles relevant
to the disputes. Large tracts of Argentina’s own pleadings in the two cases are identical. In
these circumstances, it is by no means surprising that the Tribunal reached the same or
similar conclusions on certain disputed issues. Had Argentina wanted the decision-makers
in Suez 3/17 isolated from the facts and arguments in Suez 3/]9, Argentina should have

insisted on the appointment of different tribunals.**

Needless to say, Argentina has grossly overstated the extent to which the Tribunal adopted
common factual findings. Its arguments are replete with inaccuracies and exaggerations.*

Contrary to Argentina’s suggestions, the Tribunal regularly accounted for differences

50 See Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras. 193-199.
5! Jhid., para. 196.

22 Tbid., para. 198.

53 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 124.

54 See, e.g., Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 128-130.

77.

78.

79.

between these cases. Argentina’s own figures reveal this. For instance, the 42.3% overlap
that Argentina calculates can hardly be considered a blind copy and paste exercise of which
the Tribunal is accused. In any event, this is all beside the point because Argentina has not
stated an excess of powers case: The Tribunal’s findings of fact, even if they overlapped

with its findings in the liability decision of Suez 3/19 case, are unreviewable on annulment.*>

Insofar as Argentina’s second ground for annulment is concerned (i.e. departure from a
fundamental procedural rule), the Committee need not even consider it. This claim is clearly
time-barred under ICSID Arbitration Rules 9(1) and 27. Argentina’s complaints stem mostly
from the content of the Decision on Liability, which was issued over five and a half years
before the Award. This is not about whether Argentina could or could not have sought the
annulment of that decision or its reconsideration by the original Tribunal as Argentina
wrongly suggests. Even if it was clear (which it is not) that reconsideration of pre-award
decisions is impermissible, the point is that Argentina had the chance to raise this allegation
before; it was required to do so and yet it never did until now. Indeed, a review of the
evidence relied on by Argentina to show that it did protest reveals actually that it merely
argued that differences existed in the two cases that the Tribunal had to take into account at

the quantum phase.*° That is it. Argentina therefore waived its right to object.

As for Argentina’s allegations concerning the Tribunal’s lack of reasoning in respect of its
findings on Claimants’ FET claim, Argentina’s necessity defence and the Tribunal’s
valuation of damages, they do not really have anything to do with missing reasons. Rather,
Argentina seeks to question the quality or correctness of the Tribunal’s reasons, which is not

a proper basis for annulment.

First, the Tribunal’s liability and FET findings are clearly supported by reasons. The
Tribunal did not “overlook” Argentina’s arguments; it rejected them. The Tribunal assessed

the evidence submitted by the parties and found that the Province did not reduce APSF’s

55 Tbid., para. 123.
56 See Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 143-146.

80.

81.

investment commitments after the crisis; it actually increased them and refused to adjust
tariffs.°” It also found that the renegotiation process had not been “genuine” as the “Province
unfairly curtailed APSF’s reasonable freedom to negotiate the terms of the Concession
Contract.”** In coming to these conclusions, the Tribunal addressed the specific facts of this
case and the actions of the Province of Santa Fe. That the ultimate conclusion is aligned with
that in the Suez 3/19 case is unremarkable: the actions of both the Federal Government and
the Province were consistent, and both violated the Claimants’ rights. Whether the Tribunal
favored one piece of evidence over another, or did not address a specific document is simply

irrelevant.

Second, the Tribunal’s reasoning for rejecting Argentina’s necessity defense is also stated in
the Award. Far from uncritically reproducing findings from Suez 3/19, the Tribunal
considered the issues specific to the Province of Santa Fe, such as flooding, but found that
the Province could still have adopted more flexible means for dealing with the Claimants’
rights. The Tribunal concluded therefore that Argentina failed to satisfy the “only way”
requirement. Argentina also failed to satisfy the “non-contribution” requirement, which is
alone sufficient to reject Argentina’s necessity defense. Even if Argentina were correct in
the sense that the Tribunal should have done more to establish the full contours of the
necessity defense’s legal standard, that would go to the extent or quality of the Tribunal’s

reasons and still not be an annullable error.

Finally, the Tribunal also stated reasons when deciding common damages issues in this case
and Suez 3/19. The Tribunal stated in clear terms that it did not find Argentina’s arguments
sufficiently detailed or convincing to undermine Dr. Deep’s analysis on the but-for scenario.
The Tribunal did not repeat its findings from Suez 3/19 in the Award; it rejected Argentina’s

position. That this is consistent with the Suez 3/19’s conclusions is of no surprise. The

5) Thid., para.189.

58 Thid., para. 192, citing Decision on Liability, para. 222.
5 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras. 254-255.

© Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 195-198.

82.

83.

84.

Tribunal had good reason (in both cases) to disregard Argentina’s damages arguments.
Argentina never mentions how a reasonable regulator would have fairly and equitably treated
APSF and its investments. It instead advocated for a strict and unyielding application of the
terms of the Concession in the hypothetical but-for scenario, an approach which the Tribunal

rejected altogether.*!

PROFESSOR KAUFMANN-KOHLER’S APPOINTMENT AS DIRECTOR OF UBS AND HER

FAILURE TO DISCLOSE AND INVESTIGATE

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position

Argentina claims that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler had a clear conflict of interest for which
she should have been disqualified. She was a member of the Board of Directors of UBS, a
company holding shares and other interests in Suez, during the arbitration proceedings. Not
only did she fail to investigate and disclose this fact to the parties but also she refused to
resign. This undermined the integrity of the Tribunal and warrants annulment of the Award
for improper constitution of the Tribunal and serious departure from fundamental rules of

procedure.

Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler accepted her position in UBS in April 2006. During the three years
in which Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler was part of UBS’s Board, the parties submitted all their
briefs on the merits, a hearing was held in which all relevant evidence was produced on

liability, and the arbitrators’ deliberations began.

Argentina learned about Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s engagement in UBS in November 2007
and filed a proposal for disqualification as soon as she confirmed that UBS had indeed

shareholdings in Suez of which she was unaware. UBS also encouraged investment in

&! Phid., paras. 199-214.

© Argentina’s Reply, para. 138.

© Tbid., para. 146.

© Letter from Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler to UBS, December 17, 2007, attached to Letter from Gabrielle Kaufmann-
Kohler to the ICSID, December 21, 2007, A RA 116.

26

85.

86.

87.

water concessionaires, mentioning among them the businesses of Suez Environment and
AGBAR and during 2006 and 2007 it marketed and commercialized investments in water

concessionaires, including Suez.

With the support of an expert opinion prepared by ethics Professor Charles W. Wolfram,
Argentina conclusively established that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler had at least two distinct
interests, which were incompatible with her duty to the parties to exercise independent and
impartial judgment. First, she was legally bound by a fiduciary duty to the company that she
was a director of, which required her to put the company’s interests ahead of her own.
Secondly, she had a personal economic interest in the performance of UBS, since she
received a significant percentage of her remuneration in UBS shares. She had to accept at

least 50% of her remuneration in USB shares, and could accept up to 100% thereof.

Notwithstanding this evidence, the unchallenged members of the Tribunal rejected the
Proposal for Disqualification and Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler remained as a director of UBS. In
doing so, they only performed a quantitative analysis of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s
economic self-interest, and did not refer to the fiduciary duty to protect UBS’s interests in
Suez or her natural inclination to do so, or her institutional duty to advance such interests.”
As the Vivendi committee noted, such fiduciary duty exists regardless of the value at stake,
“however small it may be”. A similar approach was endorsed by the Chairman of ICSID’s

Administrative Council in the Blue Bank v. Venezuela case.”

As a result of this, the integrity of the proceedings was irreversibly broken and the Tribunal

stayed improperly constituted.”” Two fundamental rules of procedure were also breached:

© Argentina’s Reply, para. 140, citing Disqualification Proposal, Exhibit A RA 115, paras. 30-33.

© See Report of expert Charles W. Wolfram, February 29, 2008, Exhibit A RA 118, paras. 11-15.

© Argentina’s Reply, para. 144.

8 Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3), Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for Annulment of the Award rendered on August 20, 2007,
August 10, 2010, AL A RA 52, para. 218.

® Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd. v. Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20), Decision on the
Parties’ Proposals to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, November 12, 2013, AL A RA 53, para. 40.

% Argentina’s Reply, para. 151.

88.

89.

(i) the right to be heard by an impartial and independent tribunal, and (ii) the arbitrators’

duty to investigate and disclose.

As noted by the Vivendi committee, Professor Kaufmann-Kohler should have: (a) properly
investigated whether the bank had any connections with the parties to the pending
arbitrations; (b) disclosed any such connections to the parties to such arbitrations; and (c)
notified the parties of the appointment, regardless of any existing connections, so that they
may be properly informed.’! Professor Kaufmann-Kohler did none of this. Providing UBS
with a list of pending matters at the time of her appointment is certainly insufficient. If the
Vivendi committee did not annul the award in that case it is only because it found that
“Professor Kaufmann-Kohler had no actual knowledge of the connection between UBS and
the Claimants until after the Award was rendered,” and so it decided that the conflict could

not have had any material impact on the decision.””

Claimants rely on the EDF, Suez 3/19, AWG and Azurix decisions to contest Argentina’s
arguments. However, the first two tribunals considered that their review was limited, which
is not supported by the text of Article 52. Moreover, in EDF v. Argentina, the conflict of
interest was much less significant, something that weighed heavily in the committee’s
decision. EDF and UBS had common interests in subsidiary companies and EDF had entered
into a financial agreement with a group of companies including UBS. Similarly, the AWG
award was reviewed under a much higher standard of “manifest lack of impartiality” set out
in the US federal Arbitration Act and UBS had no stock in AWG. Finally, the Azurix decision
is unduly restrictive and its reasoning has been rejected, including by Prof. Schreuer and the

EDF and Suez 3/19 committees.”*

| Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3), Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for Annulment of the Award rendered on August 20, 2007,
August 10, 2010, AL A RA 52, para. 204.

® Tbid., para. 234.

3 Argentina’s Reply, paras, 167-170.

90.

91.

92.

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position

The Claimants contend that Argentina’s case is based on the incorrect premise that the
Second Challenge Decision was wrongly decided. Even if that were the case, which it is not,
this Committee is not tasked with determining whether Argentina’s challenge was correctly
decided. The Committee’s role under either Article 52(1)(a) (i.e. tribunal’s improper
constitution) or (d) (i.e. serious departure of fundamental rule of procedure) is restricted to
determining whether the Second Challenge Decision constituted such an egregious violation
of certain basic principles that the Award issued by that Tribunal nine years later cannot

stand. Argentina’s Application, however, fails under either annulment ground.”

First of all, the Tribunal’s factual determinations and legal conclusions are not open to
challenge and, even if they were, they are correct. Argentina misrepresents facts and
contends various legal findings that were conclusively established by the Decision on
Disqualification, which are not subject to review or reassessment at this stage. A factual
record exists, which is binding upon this Committee. Based on such record, the unchallenged
arbitrators found that the links between the Claimants and Professor Kaufmann-Kohler were
both indirect and highly immaterial. Argentina’s biased account omits to mention, for
instance, that UBS investments were “passive, portfolio” investments, with a “large portion
[being] managed on behalf of clients”, whose total value represented a very small fraction
of UBS’s worldwide investments - only 0.056% considering both UBS’s investments in Suez
and in Vivendi.> Nor had Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler neglected to investigate potential
conflicts. She submitted a list of her arbitrations to UBS to ensure that no conflicts existed
before accepting her directorship, which the unchallenged arbitrators viewed as a reasonable

effort to investigate potential conflicts.”

It is not true that the Decision on Disqualification performed a mere quantitative analysis of

Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s economic interest. Although they did not have to, the

74 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 8-9.

75 Tbid., para. 39, citing Second Challenge Decision, para. 36; see also Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 103 and
footnote 159.

7 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 113.

93.

94.

unchallenged arbitrators evaluated in detail Argentina’s allegations with reference to four
qualitative criteria: proximity, intensity, dependence, and materiality. If they did not address
Argentina’s allegations concerning Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s fiduciary duty and
institutional loyalties, it is because they had already concluded that the interests of UBS in
the Claimants were immaterial and could thus have had no potential impact on Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler whatsoever.” It is therefore of no surprise that Prof. Wolfram’s extreme
views on conflicts, which are based on US law, have been rejected by no fewer than four
different sets of arbitrators in cases involving Argentina’s attempted removal of Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler. Not even the US District Court, applying US law, in the AWG

proceeding, was persuaded by them.’

The decisions in Suez 3/19, EDF, and AWG are directly relevant and highly persuasive for
this Committee. For instance, not only did the Suez 3/19 committee consider identical
arguments on whether the tribunal was properly constituted, the committee’s decision was
founded on the very same factual and legal record, including the Second Challenge Decision
that is now before this Committee. Yet Argentina makes no attempt to address the Suez 3/19
committee’s conclusions to disregard Argentina’s application for annulment. The only thing
Argentina does is force a distinction between the EDF case and this case. But, if anything,
there is a great similarity in the two cases insofar as UBS’s interests in the claimants were,
as both tribunals found, de minimis. Argentina also misrepresents the US legal standard of
evident partiality in its attempts to distinguish the US District Court’s decision in AWG. In
any event, this case represented yet another instance of an independent decision-maker
examining and upholding the same facts and Decision on Disqualification that is now before

this Committee.”

Lastly, Argentina does not dispute that the Tribunal followed the proper procedures for
hearing and deciding an arbitrator challenge. Nor does Argentina claim that it was denied an

opportunity to present its case on Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s independence and

7 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 44.
8 Tbid., para. 48.
9 Tbid., paras. 52-57.

30

95.

96.

impartiality. While arbitrators are subject to a duty to investigate and disclose true conflicts,
that duty is not in and of itself a fundamental rule of procedure; it is at most a reflection of
the requirement that arbitrators must remain independent and impartial. Nondisclosure in
itself cannot be a ground for disqualification where, as here, the facts not disclosed do not
evidence a conflict of interest. Therefore, Argentina’s Application under Article 52(1)(b)

must likewise fail.®°
FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THE 18 MONTHS’ LOCAL LITIGATION REQUIREMENT

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position

According to Argentina, the Tribunal committed two annullable errors when it permitted
AGBAR and Interagua to rely on the MFN clause of the Argentina-Spain BIT to import the
dispute settlement provision contained in the Argentina-France BIT and circumvent the
otherwise applicable 18-month local court litigation requirement of Article X of the
Argentina-Spain BIT.*! It manifestly exceeded its powers because it exercised jurisdiction

without Argentina’s consent and in doing so it also failed to state supporting reasons.**

The Tribunal “manifestly” exceeded its powers because it went far beyond the parties’
consent, something that is readily apparent from a mere reading of the Award. The Tribunal,
on the one hand, recognized the 18-month local litigation requirement as a mandatory
condition and, on the other hand, it acknowledged that such requirement had not been
satisfied by AGBAR and Interagua.*? Yet, it concluded that AGBAR and Interagua were
nonetheless permitted by virtue of the MFN clause to bring an ICSID arbitration without
having to resort first to the local courts of Argentina. But, as the JCS v. Argentina tribunal
concluded, an MEN clause cannot be applied to jurisdictional matters unless clear and

unambiguous consent to that effect is established. Similarly, a Swedish Court of Appeal

80 Tbid., paras. 58-61.

8! This provision requires an investor to bring a judicial proceeding in the local courts and allows it to have recourse
to arbitration only after a further period of eighteen months in the local courts.

82 Argentina’s Memorial, para. 137; Argentina’s Reply, para. 171.

83 Argentina’s Reply, para. 189.

recently set aside one of the Yukos decisions because the tribunal improperly applied an

MEN clause to grant an investor access to arbitration in excess of its jurisdiction.**

97. The Tribunal made another annullable error where it failed to explain how jurisdictional
issues, which are clearly different from substantive issues, may fall within the scope of “all
matters” relating to the term “treatment” in Article IV.*° Although it alluded to the wording
of this provision and said it was guided by “established principles of treaty interpretation’”,*°
the Tribunal did not really apply such rules when interpreting Article X of the Argentina-
Spain BIT. Nor did the Tribunal consider Argentina’s subsequent treaty practice despite
Argentina’s arguments both in its written submissions and in oral pleadings.*’ The evidence,
which, according to Claimants was not submitted to the Tribunal, was attached by Claimants
themselves.** Therefore, the issue was discussed and addressed at the jurisdictional phase
and the Tribunal had all the necessary evidence before it to give due regard to Argentina’s

subsequent practice.

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position

98. For the Claimants, Argentina’s arguments on this point are no more than an impermissible
attempt to have the Committee revisit the merits of the Tribunal’s interpretation and

application of the MFN clause in the Spanish treaty. The relevant question, however, is not

4 Argentina’s Reply, para. 192, citing Russian Federation v. GBI 9000 SICAV S.A., ALOS 34 S.L., Orgor de Valores
SICAV S.A. and Quasar de Valors SICAV S.A., Case No. 9128-14, Judgment of the SVEA Court of Appeal, January
18, 2016, AL A RA 124, p. 10.

85 See Argentina’s Memorial, para. 147.

8 Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 54.

87 See Argentina’s Memorial, para. 154 (“the State Parties did not intend the MFN Clause contained in Article IV of
the Argentina-Spain BIT to apply to the settlement of disputes...[t]his is evidence of the practice subsequently
followed in applying the treaty...”). See also Argentine Republic’s Memorial on Jurisdiction of November 26, 2004,
paras. 157-158 and Tr. Hear. Jurisdiction, May 9, 2005, 120:1-22 (Claimants’ Statement) (English version), A RA
191, and Tr. Hear. Jurisdiction, May 9, 2005, 160-161 (Argentina’s Statement) (English version), A RA 191.

88 See exhibit Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, A RA 192, para. 219, fn. 149, List of BITs entered into by Argentina.
Exhibit C-148 filed by Claimants together with their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, Exhibit A RA 228.

  

 

99.

100.

101.

whether the Tribunal was right or wrong, but whether the Tribunal’s decision is supported

by reasons and/or constituted a flagrant jurisdictional overreach.*

It is clear from the Decision on Jurisdiction that the Tribunal gave due consideration to this
issue. It devoted an entire section of nearly 10 pages to it. The Tribunal explained that access
to dispute settlement, a “matter” governed by Article X of the Spanish treaty, is a right or
privilege covered by the notion of “treatment” that authorizes application of the MFN clause
pursuant to the ordinary meaning of the term treatment. Whether Argentina agrees or not

with this conclusion, that is irrelevant; reasons were given.”°

Argentina never argued before the Tribunal any subsequent treaty practice concerning the
Spanish treaty. Nor did it submit the evidence on the record upon which it now seeks to rely.
As the Suez 3/19 committee held, a tribunal cannot be faulted for failing to address an issue
which the parties themselves never raised during the arbitration proceedings.”! Leaving aside
that a tribunal is under no obligation to address every conceivable argument that anyone can
think of, in this case Argentina’s invocation of the Contracting State’s alleged subsequent
practice by reference to other arbitrations is simply misguided. A position taken by a
disputing State in its defensive brief in a specific international arbitration does not amount
to State practice under the Vienna Convention. The tribunal in Telefonica v. Argentina

rejected the same argument from Argentina.

Argentina’s second annulment ground should also be dismissed. As noted above, a
jurisdictional error is by no means a per se manifest excess of powers. This position not only
contradicts extensive authority in ICSID arbitrations, but it would also remove all content
from the Article 52 requirement that an excess of powers be “manifest.” The few authorities

that Argentina seeks to rely on are of no avail. The Quasar de Valores case (formerly Renta

* Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras. 133-135.

% Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 156, citing Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 52-66.

°! Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 235.

° Telefonica SA v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/20), Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to
Jurisdiction, May 25, 2006, A/CLA-76, paras, 112-114. See also Suez 3/19, Annulment Decision, A/CLA-56, para.
258.

102.

103.

104.

4) concerned a domestic proceeding before the Swedish Court of Appeal and was based on
a different treaty. In any event, Sweden is a Model Law jurisdiction, which means that
Swedish courts are permitted to review a tribunal’s jurisdictional decisions de novo,

something ICSID annulment committees do not have the power to do.**

As several committees have held, for an excess of powers to be “manifest,” the underlying
issue cannot be subject to more than one reasonable interpretation or otherwise be open to
debate.** In this case, the Tribunal’s jurisdictional decision was at the very least reasonable
and, in fact, consistent with all prior and subsequent decisions on the scope of the MFN
clause in the Spanish treaty. Yet, even if a full merits review were available, Argentina has
failed to show any jurisdictional error at all. Extensive case law supports the use of MFN

clauses in the present circumstances.”
NECESSITY UNDER CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL LAW

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position

Argentina contends that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state
reasons when it rejected Argentina’s necessity defence without identifying the applicable
legal standards, or analyzing Argentina’s concurrent obligation to guarantee the human right
to water to its population, or otherwise considering the voluminous evidence submitted by

Argentina into the record.°°

First of all, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by failing to apply the proper law
because it did not establish the legal standards applicable in respect of the “only way” and
“non-contribution” requirements of the necessity defence. It also failed to state reasons for
its decision on this point. Instead, it simply asserted that it was “not convinced” that the first
of these requirements had been met as the Province “could have attempted to apply more

flexible means”, a statement that is a mere copy of the decision on liability in the Suez 3/19

°3 See Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras. 136-142.

% See e.g., Impregilo, Suez 3/19 and Daimler.

°5 See Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 143 and the cases cited by the Claimants therein.
°6 Argentina’s Memorial, para. 165.

and AWG cases, and that Argentina did in fact contribute to the crises to the extent that it
was brought about by a combination of endogenous and exogenous factors. As noted by the
Enron committee and more recently by the Urbaser tribunal that reasoning is insufficient to
make a legal determination on this contentious point. That is the key reason for which the

Enron committee annulled the award in that case.”

105. Secondly, the Tribunal failed to offer support for its decision to disregard Argentina’s
arguments in connection with its obligation to guarantee the human right to water. Unlike
the lengthy analysis of the Urbaser decision, the Tribunal in this case simply stated that
Argentina could have complied with both obligations under the applicable BITs and the
human right to water without offering any analyses or providing any further guidance with

regard to how the Province could have done so in the circumstances.**

106. Lastly, the Tribunal disregarded all the documentary, witness and expert evidence offered
by Argentina in support of its necessity defence, without stating the reasons for which such
evidence was considered insufficient, unpersuasive or otherwise unsatisfactory. The
evidence included 14 witness statements provided by 9 witnesses; 13 reports prepared by 9
experts, and further documentary evidence comprising dozens of academic papers and
newspaper articles from Argentina and the rest of the world, as well as indicators clearly
showing the emergency situation and the crisis in Argentina and, particularly, the Province
of Santa Fe. As noted above, the few passages in which the Tribunal refers to this matter
are copied from the Suez 3/19 and AWG decisions. This led the Tribunal to overlook the
particular situation of the Province of Santa Fe, which was one of the most affected by the
crisis, with much higher unemployment and poverty rates. In addition, severe floods hit the
Province in 2003, further aggravating the crisis. As the TECO v. Guatemala committee
pointed out in annulling the award in that case, a tribunal cannot ignore evidence which is

relevant for a party and has the “potential”, which is all that is required, to affect the outcome

°7 Argentina's Reply, paras. 197, 199-206; Argentina’s Memorial, paras. 167-176.
°8 Argentina's Reply, paras. 197, 207-213; Argentina’s Memorial, paras. 186-188.
%® Argentina’s Reply, para. 219.

107.

108.

of the case without a proper analysis or explanation.!° That case is similar to the present
one to the extent that both the TECO tribunal and the Tribunal in this case ignored significant
evidence and, as a result, found against the party who had filed it, following a line of
reasoning that is hard to comprehend. It is not true that this evidence was irrelevant. In any

event, the Claimants cannot substitute their own analysis for that of the Tribunal.!°!

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position

The Claimants denied that the Tribunal had manifestly exceeded its powers or failed to state

reasons when dismissing Argentina’s necessity defense. !°*

The Tribunal did state the legal standards it purported to apply and provided reasons for its
interpretation. Argentina does not deny that Section IX of the Award and the reasons stated
therein exist; it protests instead that those reasons are insufficient. However, paragraph 238
of the Decision on Liability shows that the Tribunal took the words “only way” to mean that
a measure must be the sole available response for addressing a situation of necessity, an
interpretation that is reasonable and which it was entitled to make. The Tribunal concluded
then that the measures adopted by Argentina were not the “only way” to preserve its essential
interests because Argentina “could have attempted to apply more flexible means to assure
the continuation of the water and sewage services to the people of Santa Fe and at the same
time respected its obligations of fair and equitable treatment.”!°? Although at this point the
Tribunal need not address the non-contribution requirement (since both requirements are
cumulative), it did so anyway finding that Argentina “substantial[ly] contributed” to the
situation of necessity, a statement that was likewise supported by reasons. It is evident that
the Tribunal reached this conclusion after interpreting this requirement to mean precisely

what those words say, i.e. that “a State must not have contributed to its situation of

' TECO Guatemala Holdings LLC v. Guatemala (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23), Decision on Annulment, April 5,
2016, AL A RA 61, paras. 131, 135 and 138.

‘0! Argentina’s Reply, paras. 214-238.

'©2 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 162; Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 238.

3 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 164, citing Decision on Liability, para. 238.

necessity”.!°* Argentina may not like this conclusion and may have wished instead that the
Tribunal followed an approach similar to that suggested by the much-criticized Enron

committee. However, such disagreement does not amount to an annullable error. 105

109. Nor did the Tribunal fail to consider Argentina’s evidence on necessity. As noted above,
tribunals are the sole finders of fact, and do not have an obligation to address each and every
piece of evidence submitted by a party. The analogy that Argentina seeks to make with the
TECO decision is misguided. In the TECO case, the tribunal affirmatively found that there
was insufficient evidence on a central quantum issue, even though the parties had in fact
introduced such evidence, as a result of which the committee “struggled to understand the
Tribunal’s line of reasoning.”!°° None of that happened here. It is plain from the Decision
on Liability that the Tribunal weighed the evidence submitted with respect to the “only way”
and “non-contribution” requirements. !°’ Even Argentina and its experts, Professors Ratti and
Roubini, conceded that it had contributed at least in part to the situation of necessity, an

admission that disposes of the necessity defense altogether.

110. The Tribunal also gave reasons to reject Argentina’s attempt to shield its actions under the
cover of the human right to water. The Tribunal found that Argentina was obliged to respect
both its human rights obligations and its treaty obligations and that it could have done so.!°*
To support this the Tribunal identified various specific measures that the Province could
have taken “that would have protected both its interests and those of the Claimants,”
including “reliev[ing] APSF, at least temporarily, of investment commitments that were
placing a crippling burden on the Concession,” and “allow[ing] tariff increases for other

consumers while applying a social tariff or a subsidy to the poor,” consistent with Article 81

‘4 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 165, citing Decision on Liability, para. 241.

5 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 167-168.

16 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 247, citing TECO Guatemala Holdings LLC v. Republic of Guatemala (ICSID
Case No ARB/10/23), Decision on Annulment, April 5, 2016, AL A RA 61, para. 128.

7 See Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 171-174; and Decision on Liability, paras. 215 and 242.

"8 See Decision on Liability, para. 240: “Argentina could have respected both types of obligations.”

111.

112.

113.

of the Water Law and Article 11.5.3 of the Concession Contract. Argentina, however, did

none of this.!

Consequently, neither did the Tribunal fail to state reasons nor did it exceed its powers.
Argentina simply disagrees with how the Tribunal applied the law to the facts, which is not

a ground for annulment.
VALUATION OF DAMAGES

a. Summary of Argentina’s Position

The Tribunal committed several annullable errors in determining damages in this case: (1) it
awarded damages for a measure that was not found to violate the applicable BITs; (2) it
valued damages by reference to principles that are at odds with the applicable legal
framework as established in the Decision on Liability; (3) it ruled that compensation should
be awarded in relation to management fees, even though it did not hold the management
contract to be a protected investment nor did it determine the nature of such claim, and
ordered compensation for services not rendered; and (4) it applied interest rates that

exceeded those requested by the Claimants.!!?

First, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and contradicted itself (thus failing to
provide reasons) when it awarded damages for claims arising out of the termination of the
Concession Contract. Although the Claimants argued in the original proceedings that the
termination was in violation of Argentina’s BITs, the Tribunal disagreed and dismissed this
claim. In doing so, it also confirmed that it could only compensate Claimants for losses
resulting from wrongful acts. When determining damages, however, the Tribunal
compensated the Claimants for cash flows until the scheduled end of the Concession in 2025;
this is, well beyond the Contract’s (lawful) termination in 2006. The Tribunal thus treated

the termination as if it had violated applicable BITs. This is not an issue of selecting the right

‘© Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 174, citing Argentina’s Reply, para. 209 and Decision on Liability para. 215.
410 Argentina’s Reply, para. 240.

114.

115.

valuation date, as the Claimants contend, but one concerning the valuation period used by
the Tribunal. The Tribunal’s approach could only be justified in case of an expropriation, a

finding that the Tribunal never made.!!!

Conscious that the 2006 termination had to be considered in its valuation, the Tribunal stated
that the termination risk would be factored in as part of the discount rate.''? However, this
risk was not really accounted for by the Tribunal’s expert. Moreover, this was not even a
risk but a fact that actually occurred. A premium should thus have been added to the discount
rate applied in respect of cash flows projected after 2006, or the Beta should have been
raised; neither of which was done. It cannot be simply assumed that such a consideration

was included in the rate absent any indication.!!*

Secondly, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, seriously departed from a rule of
procedure, and failed to state reasons when it endorsed the valuation proposed by the
Tribunal’s expert, Dr. Akash Deep. Dr. Deep relied on a proposal to modify the Concession
Contract, known as Acta III, to build its valuation. This proposal, however, was not part of
the applicable framework. The Tribunal explicitly ruled it out in its Decision on Liability
stating that no equilibrium principle existed under the Concession Contract. Apart from
never being in force, Acta III was also at odds with basic principles underlying the
Concession Contract, an agreement that was based on targets and objectives subject to
business and financial risk. Acta III, by contrast, turned the Concession Contract into a rate-
of-return arrangement, which ensured the Concessionaire a minimum return at all events. In
other words, the Tribunal ended up applying the very same principles that it had excluded
and rejected before. In doing so, it manifestly exceeded its powers by failing to apply the
proper law and contradicted itself to such an extent that no supporting reasons exist for its

decision on this point.!!+

111 Tbid., paras. 241-244.

112

Award, para. 41 (“the risk of termination was always present in the Concession; however, that risk, along with

other risks, would be accounted for in the discount rate applied to discount to present value the remaining twenty-
three years of projected cash flows.”)

113

Argentina’s Reply, para. 253.

414 Argentina’s Memorial, paras. 211-222.

116.

117.

118.

15

Additionally, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and seriously departed from
fundamental rules of procedure where it considered the sponsored debt to be a protected
investment for the first time in the Award. This prevented the parties from having the chance
to discuss this issue during the arbitration. The Tribunal also exceeded its powers and failed
to state reasons where, in contradiction of its own previous findings, it concluded that the
Province would only have acted fairly and equitably if it had reviewed tariffs so as to enable
APSF to repay the secured debt in full regardless of any other consideration such as the level
of financial leverage, thereby effectively removing any financial risk from the

Concessionaire.'!

Thirdly, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state reasons by
compensating Suez for management fees through 2025. It exceeded its powers because, as
with the sponsored debt, it only defined management fees as a protected investment in the
Award. It failed to state reasons because it followed conflicting reasoning by which, on the
one hand, it determined that the operator’s fees were a protected investment and, at the same
time, it applied the damages calculation prepared by the expert, which assumed that such
fees were a rendered service, not a return on investment. Moreover, such fees were awarded
to Claimants for services never provided, after the Contract was terminated in 2006. This in
and of itself amounts also to an excess of powers and a failure to state reasons as discussed

under Section V(c) and (e) above.

Finally, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state reasons by using
interest rates higher than those suggested, and agreed to, by the parties. At the merits phase,
the parties’ experts agreed that the applicable rate for all purposes should be the 6-month
United States Treasury Bill rate. Such rate was, on average, lower than that proposed by the
independent expert and finally used by the Tribunal: the six-month Eurodollar rate. This
finding is ultra petita and therefore imports a manifest excess of powers. It is also

unsupported by any analysis, which constitutes a failure to state reasons. !!°

Argentina’s Reply, paras. 274-278.

46 Thid., paras. 296-306.

40

119.

120.

121.

b. Summary of Claimants’ Position

For the Claimants, Argentina’s criticisms of the Tribunal’s valuation methodology amount
to no more than complaints that the Tribunal calculated damages incorrectly. That, however,

is not a basis for annulment.

The Tribunal acted within its powers and provided copious reasons when calculating
damages. Argentina mischaracterizes how the Tribunal valued the Claimants’ loss. The
Tribunal stated very clearly that it did not attribute any damages to the termination of the
Concession. Instead, it based its damages calculation on Argentina’s treaty breaches that
preceded the termination. It thus measured compensation “at a point in time just before those
actions took place” to provide the Claimants with full compensation.'!? The subsequent
termination of the Concession was considered an event incapable of relieving Argentina of
liability. The risk that Argentina would prematurely terminate the Concession was accounted
for in the discount rate used by Dr. Deep to reduce to present value the future expected cash

flows and, specifically, in his “market risk premium,”!!®

which incorporates the “systematic
risk coefficient (or ‘beta’)” applied to the discount rate calculation and expressed “the
riskiness of a regulated water and sewerage utility such as APSF.”!!? Argentina’s criticism
in this regard is simply misplaced. But even if Argentina were right, this would have, at
most, resulted in a miscalculation of the discount rate applied to hypothetical cash flows, for

which annulment is no remedy. No excess of powers or failure to state reasons exists.

The Tribunal also acted within its powers and provided reasons when constructing the “but-
for” scenario. During the arbitration, the Tribunal considered and rejected arguments against
the use of Acta III as one of the parameters to build the but-for scenario. It found that Acta
III provided the best available guidance of “mutual sacrifice” and cooperative spirit as it
reflected policies that had actually been developed and considered by the Provincial

government in order to deal with APSF’s financial difficulties. Argentina fails to appreciate

417 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 81, citing Award, para. 41.

48 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 88. See also Award, para. 41 and Final Report of the Financial Expert to the Tribunal,
May 21, 2014, A RA 151, paras. 367-379.

419 See Final Report of the Financial Expert to the Tribunal, May 21, 2014, A RA 151, para. 221.

4

122.

123.

the difference between the “actual” and “but-for” (hypothetical) worlds. In making its
calculation, the Tribunal was not bound by the actual conditions prevailing in Argentina at
the time. The Tribunal found that answer in the principles underlying Acta II/, and in the fact
that the investors would have received some liquidity relief in exchange for making financial
sacrifices of their own. While Argentina has stated many disagreements with the Tribunal’s
reasoning, it has not identified any genuine contradictions or other failures to state reasons
in the Tribunal’s decision. Nor has it been able to articulate any basis for an excess-of-powers

claim. !7°

The Tribunal did not breach any rule of procedure or exceed its powers when determining
that APSF’s secured or “sponsored” debt constituted an investment. The status of that debt
as a protected investment was not decided for the first time in the Award as Argentina
contends; it was just never in question. During the arbitration, the Claimants consistently
argued that APSF’s secured debt was a covered investment, and consistently sought damages
for that investment. The Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction specifically identified
their debt participation as an investment.'?! Argentina never objected to this characterization
and cannot therefore do so now. That is why the Suez 3/19 committee did not hesitate to
dismiss this eleven-hour argument. Argentina’s claim that it should not bear any of the
financial consequences sustained as a result of APSF’s inability to service its international
loan obligations should likewise be rejected. There is no principle of law which requires the
inclusion or exclusion of certain hypothetical facts in the determination of a “but-for”
valuation scenario. Argentina may disagree with the Tribunal’s decision on this point but
this is not a base for annulment. As noted by other committees, the evaluation of damages

falls within the discretionary power of tribunals in light of the circumstances of the case. !?*

The Tribunal also acted within its powers when awarding compensation for management

fees and supported this finding by lengthy reasons. The Tribunal explained that it agreed

120 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 91-98.
121 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 162, referring to Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, February 1,
2005, A/C-17, para. 8.

122

See Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 101 and references cited thereunder.

42

124.

125.

with Dr. Deep’s “middle ground” approach including its decision not to apply interest to
unpaid management fees, because this was what a reasonable regulator would have probably
done in the circumstances. The Tribunal and Dr. Deep took a consistent view on the
characterization of management fees as compensation for services rendered, and not as an

9123

“expected return, as Argentina alleges. Argentina may not share these conclusions but it

cannot deny that they are clearly stated in the Award and are well within the Tribunal’s

powers, !4

The Tribunal did not overstep its powers nor did it fail to state reasons when selecting the
applicable interest rate for calculating damages. Contrary to Argentina’s contentions, no
party agreement existed on the applicable interest rate. The Claimants sought pre-award
interest at three different rates; one for the period between Argentina’s main breach in 2001
and the termination of the Concession in January 2006; another for the 9-month period
immediately thereafter and another for the remainder time until the date of the Award (e.g.
2015-2016). Save for a brief period of 9-month overlap where both parties asked for a risk-
free rate based on 6-month US T-Bills, the Claimants and their experts never “agreed” with
Argentina on interest. In fact, the Eurodollar rate proposed by Dr. Deep, and adopted by the
Tribunal was lower than the one proposed by the Claimants.'?> Notwithstanding the vast
discretion that tribunals have in selecting interest rates, the Tribunal took the time to explain
its decision on this point. It cannot thus be seriously argued that the Tribunal failed to state

reasons or that it acted ultra petita.'

Nor did the Tribunal exceed its powers or fail to state reasons in relation to the figures it used
and the interest rate it applied in the Decision on Rectification. The Claimants argued during
the arbitration that they should be compensated for the amount payable to the Inter-American
Development Bank (“IDB”) and International Finance Corporation (“IFC”) under the Debt

Restructuring Agreement as a result of Argentina’s breaches. The Tribunal agreed with the

23 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras. 269-270.
24 Thid., para. 271.

125

See Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 112-116.

26 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras. 178-182.

43

Claimants and determined that the Claimants’ loss on this point was USD 29.0 million,
including interest until December 31, 2012. The Tribunal inadvertently failed, however, to
allocate this amount among the individual Claimants and to update it to the date of the
Award. In its Decision on Rectification, the Tribunal corrected these clerical mistakes and it
applied to this portion of the Award the interest rate provided for in the Debt Restructuring
Agreement (i.e. the interest rate effectively paid to the IDB and IFC) by the Claimants in
their capacity as co-guarantors, something that is entirely within its powers. The parties had
again ample opportunity to discuss this matter. Argentina may not like this conclusion but
the Tribunal did provide reasons and in doing so it did not overstate its mandate in any

way. 127

VII. THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

126.

Although the Parties both start from the common position that annulment is governed by the
terms of Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, they paint the powers of an annulment
committee in somewhat different terms. The Respondent quotes from the Azurix decision
that annulment is there to preserve “the integrity of the ICSID arbitration system and a state
party participant’s continued confidence in it”.!?8 This leads the Respondent to see a rather
broad role for an ad hoc annulment committee. It adopts the words of the Soufraki
committee, which turned the words “integrity of the system” into the “fundamental integrity
of the ICSID arbitral process in all its facets”.'” This means, according to the Respondent,

integrity in terms of the tribunal, the proceedings and the award. '*°

27 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras. 183-191.
28 Argentina’s Memorial, para. 22, citing Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Decision
on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, December 28, 2007, AL A

RA 1, para. 30.
29 Argentina’

  

Memorial, para. 23, citing Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates (ICSID Case No.

ARB/02/7), Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007, AL A RA 51, para. 23.
130 Argentina’s Memorial, para. 23.

127.

128.

129.

130.

The Claimants see it differently. The Claimants describe annulment as an “extraordinary
remedy,” concerned with “egregious violations of certain basic principles” which “threaten
the very legitimacy of the decision-making process”. Only a complaint that reaches this

131

“exceptionally high” standard can justify annulment Accordingly, there is a “heavy

burden placed on a party seeking annulment”. !*?

The Committee sees no value in engaging in an essentially abstract debate about the scope
of Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. It agrees with the Klockner committee that Article
52 is to be interpreted neither narrowly nor expansively. Article 52 is a treaty provision and
must be interpreted in accordance with the ordinary meaning of the words used, in their
context and in light of the object and purpose of the Convention. Article 31(1) of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties requires no less. Where particular issues of interpretation
arise that require a consideration of the objectives of annulment, the Committee will deal

with them at that time.

REPRODUCTION BY THE TRIBUNAL OF THE FINDINGS MADE IN OTHER ARBITRATIONS

Argentina argues that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers (Article 52(1)(b)),
seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure (Article 52(1)(d)) and failed to state
reasons (Article 52 (1)(e)), by reproducing in its Award substantial portions of what was

included in the Suez 3/19 and AWG decisions.

This reproduction from other awards means that the Tribunal has ignored the factual
differences between the cases and the different legal frameworks that are applicable, as well
as the particularities of each case including socio-economic differences and the different
actions of the parties.'*> The magnitude of the overlap between the Award in the present
case and the other cases is illustrated, Argentina claims, by the fact that of the 248 paragraphs

in the Decision on Liability, 217 of those paragraphs correlate to the decisions in Suez 3/19

5! Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 71.
82 Tbid., para. 74.
33 Argentina’s Reply, para. 61.

45

131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

and AWG. Thus, Argentina argues, up to 87% of the Decision on Liability was drawn from

the decisions in the other cases.

Argentina argues that the approach of the Tribunal had an impact on its finding of a violation
of the fair and equitable treatment standard, on the application of the necessity defence and
the valuation of damages. In each instance, by reproducing the analysis applicable to the

other cases, the Tribunal disregarded the specific factual differences in the present case.

The Claimants take issue with the factual allegation of the extent of copying by the Tribunal.
In their view the alleged copying is not as extensive as Argentina alleges it to be and there
is no evidence that the Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law. Thus there is no

foundation to the claim that there had been a manifest excess of power by the Tribunal.

The Claimants also argue that there was no departure from a fundamental rule of procedure
in part on the ground that such a claim should have been raised much earlier and not at this
late stage as part of the annulment process. Argentina has thus waived its right to make this
claim. In any event, the Claimants argue, consistency between the decisions is to be expected
when a common tribunal is formed to hear similar cases. As regards the claim that copying
the decisions in other cases amounted to a failure to state reasons, the Claimants argue that

the Tribunal did give reasons for its decision on damages as well as on the necessity defence.

The Committee observes that the parties had agreed to have a common tribunal for the three
cases and that the parties themselves recognized that there were issues that were in common
in the three cases by reproducing the same legal arguments for all of the cases on some issues
before the Tribunal. In those circumstances it could have been expected that the Tribunal
would have common answers on some issues and the volume of common extracts is not a
decisive factor. Therefore, the Committee does not consider that the fact that the language
in each case was identical of itself shows that there had been a manifest excess of power, or
a violation of a fundamental rule of procedure. Nor does it give any indication that there has

been a failure to state reasons.

However, the Committee observes that the fact that cases have been placed before a common

tribunal is not a license for the tribunal to treat them as if they were a single case. The parties

136.

137.

138.

139.

to each of the cases are entitled to a separate consideration of the issues applicable to them.
Thus, a tribunal must take care that when it repeats the same reasoning in each of the cases
it has also made clear that each case has been considered on its own merits. Failure to identify
the facts and circumstances of a case correctly can readily lead to the impression that the
tribunal has not devoted the necessary care to the substantive analysis applicable in each case
separately. It is not surprising, therefore, that the extent of repetition identified by the
Respondent in this case as well as the errors in identifying facts and circumstances raised
concerns that the Tribunal had not given full consideration to the particular issues of this

case.

The substantive question, therefore, is whether the reproduction from other awards in this
case was inappropriate because the extracts related to the other awards were not relevant to
Suez 3/17. In this regard, the Committee notes Argentina’s argument that some of the extracts
contained references to facts and circumstances that related to the other cases and not to the

claims in the present case.

The Committee observes that the reproduction of the text from the other awards appears to

fall into three categories.

First there are examples where the Tribunal used a term that was applicable to the other cases
but not to the present case. These included references to AASA instead of APSF, or to
Argentina or the Argentine State when it should have been a reference to Santa Fe Province,
or references to a “metropolitan area” when it should have been a reference to the “Santa Fe

Concession Area”.

Second, there are examples where the Tribunal appears to refer to arguments that are relevant
to the other cases but not to the present case. These include the use of the terms “abrupt”
and “suddenly” with respect to termination which did not apply in the case of the Santa Fe
Concession, or references to “serious fault” and “heavy fines”, which were not part of the
present case, or a “revenue stream of 21 years” which was not applicable in the present case,

or a “five year tariff review” which did not apply in the present case.

47

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

Third, there were examples of reproduction inapplicable to the Santa Fe concession that
Argentina argued directly influenced the decision of the Tribunal on fair and equitable
treatment, on the necessity defence and on valuation. These include references to a
“consistent refusal to revise the tariff’ (FET), which had not occurred in the present case, or
omissions of references to the harshness of the impact on the Santa Fe area and the flooding
that affected that area (necessity) and the failure to provide alternative valuation scenarios

which may have been so in the other cases but was not true of the present case.

With regard to the first category of reproductions, the Committee observes that there is some
laxity by the Tribunal in ensuring that it was referring to the correct entities and to facts
relevant to this case. However, the Committee does not consider that this goes far enough to
constitute a manifest excess of powers, violation of a fundamental rule of procedure or a
failure to state reasons. There would have to be more evidence than this to give some
indication that the Tribunal had failed to give due consideration to the arguments of the
parties or ignored relevant evidence. There is no evidence that the errors in this category

meet that test.

With regard to the second and third categories of reproductions, the question is whether they
indicate a failure by the Tribunal to consider properly the arguments of Argentina and that
this would amount to a manifest excess of power, a violation of a fundamental rule of
procedure or a failure to state reasons. The Claimants argue that there could be no manifest
excess of powers because there is no allegation that the Tribunal failed to apply the
applicable law and that the claim that there was a violation of a fundamental rule of

procedure has been made much too late.

The Committee agrees with the Claimants that there is no manifest excess of powers. There
is no serious allegation of a failure to apply the applicable law or any evidence that the

Tribunal in fact failed to apply the applicable law.

However, the Committee is not convinced by the Claimants’ argument that Argentina is
prevented from arguing a violation of a fundamental rule of procedure by failing to raise its

concerns about the Decision on Liability at an earlier stage. As Argentina correctly points

48

145.

146.

out a decision of a tribunal cannot be annulled; only an award can be annulled. 134 And while
rectification or reconsideration may be a possibility, it was hardly a realistic possibility when
Argentina was not claiming that there were errors that could be rectified; its challenge is to
the reasoning and analysis of the Decision of Liability that were much more fundamental.
The consequence of the Claimants’ argument is that a party that believes that an annullable
error has been committed must disclose its arguments on annulment long before the
opportunity for bringing a request for annulment arises. Such an approach is inconsistent

with the equality that the parties must have in being able to manage their claims in arbitration.

There remains nonetheless the question whether the second and third category reproductions
in the Award result in a departure from a fundamental rule of procedure or constitute a failure
to state reasons. In this regard, while recognizing that it is not satisfactory for a tribunal to
rely on the reasoning from the decision in another case without differentiation, the
Committee has difficulty seeing what rule of procedure has been violated by the reproduction
of text from the other arbitrations in this case. Argentina makes no claim that it has been
denied due process or denied equal treatment or that its claim has been affected by some
procedural irregularity. Argentina asserts that reproduction of text from the other cases
constitutes a denial of its right to be heard by an open-minded tribunal, but its objection
relates less to being heard than to the reasons advanced by the Tribunal in support of its

conclusions.

Indeed, the more substantial argument advanced by Argentina relates to the failure to state
reasons, specifically in relation to fair and equitable treatment, the necessity defence and
valuation. Yet, even here, the Committee is unable to conclude that the Tribunal failed to

state reasons or that it had ignored arguments made by Argentina.

'34 Argentina’s Reply, paras. 74-75. See EDF International S.A, SAUR International S.A. and Le6n Participaciones
Argentinas S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/23), Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2016, AL
ARA 67, para. 62. See also Christoph Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2009, AL A RA 56. p.

921.

49

147.

148.

149.

For example, Argentina claims that the Tribunal concluded on the basis of arguments made

in the other cases that “more flexible means”!

could have been adopted to relieve the
burden on the Concessionaire but that this conclusion is irrelevant in the context of the Santa
Fe Concession and some temporary relief was granted. However, in the Committee’s view,
rather than a failure to state reasons this constitutes a rejection of the arguments of Argentina
that this relief was sufficient. Equally, in respect of the arguments of Argentina regarding

the Tribunal’s comments on the “persistent refusal to revise the tariff”!°

and “forced
renegotiation” '?’, the complaints in substance are about the fact that the arguments of
Argentina were rejected rather than they were not considered. In the Committee’s view, there

was no failure to state reasons.

The Committee reaches the same conclusion with respect to Argentina’s arguments
regarding the defence of necessity and valuation. The Tribunal did not give the weight to the
harshness of the effects on the Province of Santa Fe or that flooding that took place there
that Argentina would have liked'**, although both were mentioned in the Decision on
Liability, but that does not constitute a failure to state reasons. The conclusion of the Tribunal
that there was no “equally detailed and convincing scenario”!*? for valuation put forward
constitutes a rejection of the scenarios proposed by Argentina for the Santa Fe Concession,
not a failure to state reasons. Furthermore, the arguments of Argentina against the adoption
by the Tribunal of a valuation model based on Acta /// are arguments that go to the merits of

the decision in respect of valuation; they do not demonstrate a failure to state reasons.

Thus, there is no evidence that the Tribunal failed to consider the arguments of Argentina.
An inference is sought on the basis of the fact that language has been reproduced from the
other awards that the Tribunal had not considered the specific facts of the Santa Fe

Concession. But such an inference is not supported by any evidence. And in any event it is

85 Argentina’s Memorial, para. 80.
'36 Tbid., para. 81.

37 Tbid., para. 82.

138 Tbid., paras. 87-88.

189 Tbid., para. 92.

50

150.

151.

152.

153.

beyond the scope of annulment for a committee to reweigh the evidence considered by the

tribunal.

In short, the Tribunal relied on reasons with which Argentina did not agree and did not agree
with arguments made by Argentina. In substance, Argentina’s argument is that the Tribunal
was wrong in its conclusions on the merits. But, even if it could be shown that a tribunal is

in error on the merits, this is not the basis for the annulment of an award.

Accordingly, the Committee rejects Argentina’s claim that the reproduction from texts of
other awards constitutes a manifest excess of powers (Article 52(1)(b)), a serious departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure (Article 52(1)(d)) or a failure to state reasons (Article

52(1)(e)).

PROFESSOR KAUFMANN-KOHLER’S APPOINTMENT AS DIRECTOR OF UBS AND HER

FAILURE TO DISCLOSE AND INVESTIGATE

The Respondent argues that the Tribunal was not properly constituted because one of the
arbitrators, Professor Kaufmann-Kohler, did not meet the requirements of the ICSID
Convention for appointment as arbitrator. Specifically, during the course of the arbitration
Professor Kaufmann-Kohler accepted an appointment as a member of the Board of Directors
of UBS, a company that held shares in one of the claimant companies, Suez. This, the
Respondent argues, meant that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler could not “be relied upon to
exercise independent judgment” contrary to the specific requirement of Article 14(1) of the
ICSID Convention. '*° Professor Kaufmann-Kohler failed to disclose this appointment to the
parties and once it heard about the appointment the Respondent proposed her

disqualification.

The two unchallenged members of the Tribunal rejected the proposal for disqualification.
However, the Respondent argues, the two arbitrators focused on the question of economic

interest and failed to consider the obligation of institutional loyalty that Professor Kaufmann-

40 Tbid., para. 30.

154.

155.

156.

Kohler had to UBS which created a conflict when she had to consider the interests of Suez

in which UBS held shares. '“!

The Claimants argue that the Respondent’s challenge under Article 52(1)(a) is based on an
assumption that a tribunal may decide anew whether the requirements of Article 14(1) have
been met. Moreover, in this case the challenge under Article 52(1)(a) has already been
determined by the Tribunal. The Claimants refer to a body of annulment decisions dealing
with similar circumstances which, they say, the Respondent has failed to mention, and state
that what the Respondent is trying to do is draw the Committee into a de novo review of the

decision in disqualification. "7

The Claimants identify two lines of reasoning in the annulment cases so far relating to
annulments in cases where there has been a decision on disqualification of an arbitrator,
neither of which permits a de novo consideration of whether the challenged arbitrator should
be disqualified. One, based on the Azurix decision envisages only a review of the procedure
under which that decision was made.'*? The other decision, EDF, contemplates annulment
of a decision relating to disqualification only where the decision is “so plainly unreasonable
that no reasonable decision-maker could have come to such a decision”.'*+ That approach

was endorsed in the Suez 3/19 case.'45

The Respondent argues that neither the approach in Azurix nor the approach in EDF find
support in the wording of Article 52(1)(a).'“° They both impose limitations on the powers
of an annulment committee without explaining how these limitations are justified under the

terms of Article 52(1)(a). The fact that there has been a decision on disqualification in the

41 Tbid., para. 129.
'2 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 82.
483 Tbid., para. 85.

144

Ibid., para. 91, citing Suez 3/19, Decision on Annulment, May 5, 2017, A/CLA-56, para. 94 (quoting the EDF

 

Decision on Annulment).
45 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, paras. 90-91.
446 Argentina’s Reply, paras. 18 and 26.

157.

158.

159.

context of the original proceedings does not limit the jurisdiction of an annulment committee

“to determine the proper constitution of the tribunal”.!47

In response, the Claimants object again to the Respondent’s perception of the standard of
review and argue that the Respondent’s interpretation of Article 52(1)(a) is incorrect and that
decision of EDF was based on a “meticulous analysis” of the annulment provisions of the
Convention.'** In any event, the Claimants argue, the Respondent has not shown that the
Second Challenge Decision was so plainly unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker

could have come to that decision.

The disagreement of the Parties on the standard of review comes to the fore in their
consideration of Article 52(1)(a). The Respondent’s position is that since it is the
responsibility of the committee to protect the integrity of the process in relation to the
constitution of the tribunal in the case for which annulment is sought, it can review whether
the tribunal was properly constituted. That to the Claimants constitutes de novo review. In
short, the Claimants see the Respondent’s approach as essentially an appeal from the Second

Challenge Decision.

It is widely recognized that the power of annulment under Article 52 of the Convention does
not extend to an appeal on facts or law. The question is where the distinction between appeal
and annulment should be drawn. The Respondent claims that annulment should not be
opposed to an appeal; the scope of annulment is determined by reference to the wording of
Article 52 interpreted in accordance with the rules for the interpretation of treaties.'4? The
Claimants do not disagree with that assertion, although it disagrees with the Respondent’s
interpretation of Article 52(1)(a) which it considers amounts to mandating a de novo
consideration of the issues. Rather, in the view of Claimants, the Committee must approach

the interpretation of Article 52(1)(a) with a “deferential standard of review”. !°°

47 Tbid., para. 30.

448 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 21-28.
449 Argentina’s Reply, para. 6.

'59 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 30.

160. The Committee sees neither party as capturing accurately the standard of review when
annulment is requested under Article 52(1)(a). That provision does not permit an annulment
committee to consider the question whether a tribunal has been properly constituted as if it
were deciding the matter for the first time. Further, the existence of a Decision on
Disqualification by the original tribunal has to be something more than “an element of

judgment” for an annulment committee to consider. '*!

161.

But, equally, there is nothing in Article 52(1)(a), or elsewhere in Article 52, that prescribes
a deferential standard of review. The Committee has to construe Article 52(1)(a) in light of
the facts on which the claim to annulment takes place. Here the facts are that there has been
a Decision on Disqualification by the unchallenged members of the original Tribunal and
that must be addressed in any request for annulment on the basis that the Tribunal was not

properly constituted.

162. In EDF, the committee made an important distinction between annulment requests under
Article 52(1)(a) where no decision has already been made on disqualification and requests
for annulment where a decision has already been made on disqualification by the original
tribunal. This case falls into the latter category — a decision has already been made rejecting

the request for disqualification.

163. In such a case, an annulment committee cannot take on itself the task of deciding whether
the tribunal has been properly constituted. Article 58 has assigned that task to the
unchallenged members of the tribunal and when those members have exercised that function
an annulment committee is faced with findings of fact, an assessment of those facts and an

152

application of law to those facts.“ The role of an annulment committee in these

circumstances, the EDF committee said, is not to act as if it were sitting in appeal on those

'5! Argentina’s Reply, para. 30.
'S2 EDF International SA and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No ARB/03/23), Decision on Annulment,
February 5, 2016, AL A RA 67, para. 145.

164.

165.

166.

167.

findings; it can only find that a ground of annulment exists if the decision is “so plainly

unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker could come to such a decision”. !**

The request before the Committee is for the annulment of the decision of the original
Tribunal on disqualification and it is the decision of the Tribunal that must be looked at. In
this case the Tribunal made a decision on its constitution. It considered the challenge to an
arbitrator in accordance with Article 58 and concluded that the challenge could not be
sustained. Thus, the request before this Committee is not whether in the abstract the Tribunal
was properly constituted but whether the decision to reject the request for disqualification
and accordingly that the Tribunal was properly constituted meets the appropriate standard of

review.

The EDF committee, and subsequently the Suez 3/19 committee, considered that the
appropriate standard to apply was whether the decision was “so plainly unreasonable that no
reasonable decision-maker could come to such a decision”. This limited standard of review,
set forth in EDF, is not derived expressly from an interpretation of Article 52(1)(a); it is
derived from the view that annulment involves review of a limited nature; it does not operate

as an appeal.!*4

The Committee is of the view that the approach in EDF and Suez 3/19 should be followed.
It is consistent with the more limited role that annulment plays in the ICSID system, but at
the same time it appropriately protects the integrity of ICSID dispute settlement. The
integrity of that system depends not on whether decisions are right or wrong — arbitrators
may differ in their conclusions — but the integrity of the system will be under challenge if

tribunals reach decisions that no reasonable decision-maker would reach.

In their Decision on Disqualification the unchallenged members of the Tribunal carefully
reviewed the request made, the facts and arguments on which it was based, the law applicable

to disqualification and how that applied to the request in respect of Professor Kaufmann-

53 Ibid.
'S¢ EDF International SA and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No ARB/03/23), Decision on Annulment,
February 5, 2016, AL A RA 67, para. 145.

168.

169.

170.

Kohler. They identified the criteria to be considered in determining whether an arbitrator’s
independence or impartiality would be affected. They considered the particular context in
which Professor Kaufmann-Kohler operated as a director of UBS. Ultimately, they
concluded that the alleged connection between the Claimants and Professor Kaufmann-
Kohler did not lead to the conclusion that there was a manifest lack of the qualities of
independence and impartiality that an arbitrator must have. Accordingly, they dismissed the

request for the disqualification of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler.

As other committees have pointed out, there may be disagreements over the assessment of
or weight to be given to particular facts or the application of the criteria for determining
whether independence or impartiality can be called into question. But, on the basic question
of whether the decision on disqualification was so plainly unreasonable that no reasonable
decision-maker could have reached such a decision, the answer is clear. The decision on
disqualification in the present case could not be regarded as so plainly unreasonable that no
decision-make could have reached that decision. Indeed, decision-makers in other cases have
reached precisely the same decision on essentially the same grounds in respect of attempts

to disqualify Professor Kaufmann-Kohler as was reached in the present case.

Accordingly, the Committee rejects the claim that the Tribunal was not properly constituted
on the ground that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler manifestly lacked the necessary

independence and impartiality required by Article 14 of the ICSID Convention.

In the Committee’s view, this conclusion that the Tribunal was not improperly constituted
covers equally the contention of Argentina that its right to an impartial and independent
tribunal was contravened, leading to a breach of a fundamental rule of procedure pursuant
to Article 52(1)(d). The conclusion of the unchallenged members on disqualification that
the allegations against Professor Kaufmann-Kohler did not compromise her independence
and impartiality was a decision that the Tribunal as composed was an independent and
impartial Tribunal. Their conclusions also exonerated Professor Kaufmann-Kohler from
breaching any obligation to investigate and disclose which could have amounted to a breach

of a fundamental rule of procedure. The question for the Committee is whether that decision

171.

172.

was so plainly unreasonable that no decision-maker could have reached it. Again, it must

be answered that it was not.

Having said this, the Committee notes the generally unsatisfactory nature of the process for
dealing with challenges to arbitrators, which poses a particular burden on the unchallenged
members who are required to determine whether the other member of the tribunal should be
disqualified. The difficulty of this role extends to formulating the appropriate test for
deciding on disqualification in the absence of clear guidance in the Convention. In this
regard, the Committee has some reservations about certain aspects of the test applied by the
unchallenged arbitrators in deciding on the issue of disqualification in this case. The test, the
Tribunal said, is whether the facts show that an “informed reasonable person” would
conclude that the person in question “clearly or obviously lacks the quality of being able to
exercise independent judgment and impartiality”.!°° Yet, when it comes to their analysis, the
unchallenged members show that a quite detailed understanding of the nature of a director’s
interest, the way UBS functions and the implications of UBS’s holding shares in other
companies is required to assess whether there is a manifest lack of independence and
impartiality. In other words, in practice the reasonably informed observer has to be a well-
informed observer capable of understanding a level of detail not readily ascertained by the

reasonable observer.

The Committee’s concern, therefore, is that in establishing the level of knowledge that needs
to be had to understand whether there is manifest lack of independence or impartiality,
insufficient attention may be given to the question of the perception of lack of independence
or impartiality. In this respect there may be a difference between commercial arbitration, for
which the IBA rules were developed, and investment arbitration where there is much greater
a degree of public interest in the process and outcomes. In the Committee’s view, these are
matters that might be taken into account in the future when challenges are made to arbitrators

on the basis of a conflict of interest.

'55 Second Challenge Decision, para. 29.

173.

174.

175.

176.

FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THE 18 MONTHS’ LOCAL LITIGATION REQUIREMENT

Argentina argues that the decision of the Tribunal to allow AGBAR and Interagua, through
the application of the MEN provision in Article IV(2) of the Argentina-Spain BIT, to be
relieved from the obligation under Article X(3)(a) to commence litigation and pursue it for
18 months before bringing their claim should be annulled. The provisions of the Argentina-
France BIT, which had no 18-month local litigation requirement, were invoked as a
justification for not complying the 18-month litigation rule. This decision is claimed by
Argentina as annullable both on the basis that it constitutes a manifest excess of power and

on the basis that there has been a failure to state reasons.

The Committee observes that the question of whether an MFN provision in an investment
agreement can be invoked in order to obtain the benefits of dispute settlement provisions in
another investment agreement, and specifically an 18-month local litigation requirement, has
arisen in a good many cases and inspired a substantial scholarly literature. Arbitrators have
divided on the question, but there is a considerable body of jurisprudence supporting the
position taken by the Tribunal in this case. At the same time there have been a number of
cases, including more recent decisions, which have interpreted MEN clauses not to include

areference to dispute settlement provisions.

In the Committee’s view, the matter depends on the interpretation of the MEN provision in

question. The MEN provision in this case, Article IV(2) of Argentina-Spain BIT, provides:

In all matters governed by this Agreement, such treatment shall be no less

favorable than that accorded by each Party to investments made in its

territory by investors of a third country.
Provisions with essentially identical wording have been interpreted to permit the importation
of dispute settlement provisions from other BITs and used as a basis for permitting a claimant
to bypass the 18-month local litigation requirement.!°° In light of the fact that there is a body

of jurisprudence that supports using MEN clauses in this way, the Committee has difficulty

86 See Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Decision of the Tribunal on
Objections to Jurisdiction, January 25, 2000, AL A RA 91.

58

177.

178.

179.

seeing how the Tribunal in this case has “manifestly exceeded its powers”. It is true that
there are contrary decisions, but even if there were a divided jurisprudence with strong
support for the view contrary to that taken by the Tribunal, a claimed excess of power could
not be “manifest”. In saying this, the Committee takes no position in the debate over MFN

clauses and their application to procedural or dispute settlement provisions.

Argentina argues that there was a manifest excess of power because the Tribunal established
that there was a mandatory rule in the BIT that there must be an 18-month resort to local
jurisdiction but then disregarded that mandatory rule. But here Argentina is begging the
question. The 18-month local litigation requirement stands only if it is not superseded by
application of the MEN clause. The Tribunal decided that it was so superseded. There can

be no manifest excess of power here.

In respect of both its claim that there has been a manifest excess of powers and the failure to
state reasons, Argentina invokes the argument that the decision of the Tribunal is contrary
to the consent that it gave on entering into the Argentina-Spain BIT. But this is an argument
on the merits of the use of MFN clauses to incorporate procedural or dispute settlement
provisions and it is commonly raised by the parties in cases where the MFN clause has been
invoked in respect of such dispute settlement provisions. It is beyond the mandate of an
annulment committee to consider the merits of the case and thus these arguments cannot

support a claim to annulment.

Argentina refers to other instances where it considers that the Tribunal did not take its
arguments into account, including its subsequent practice in concluding bilateral investment
treaties and other indications of its intent on agreeing to the MEN provision. In this regard,
Argentina seeks to build an inference of failing to consider evidence on the basis that there
was no specific mention of it. But the Tribunal interpreted the MEN provision on the basis
of Article 31 of the Vienna Convention and concluded that it did not find evidence of the
intent of the parties for the position claimed by Argentina. It is not possible to draw from
this conclusion the supposition that the Tribunal must have ignored arguments for the
contrary position. Moreover, Argentina’s arguments essentially go to the merits of the

interpretation of the MFN clause. Argentina does not agree with the Tribunal’s interpretation

180.

181.

182.

of the MEN provision in this case, but because there is disagreement with a tribunal’s
conclusions does not mean that the tribunal has failed to state reasons. In the present case,
the Tribunal discussed the arguments of Argentina and reviewed relevant case law. It stated
reasons for its decision and disagreement with those reasons or with the result reached cannot

lead to the conclusion that the Tribunal failed to state reasons.

Accordingly, the Committee rejects Argentina’s claim for annulment on the basis that the
wrongful application of the MFN provision constituted a manifest excess of power or a

failure to state supporting reasons.

NECESSITY UNDER CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL LAW

Argentina argues that the Tribunal exceeded its powers by failing to establish the legal
standards applicable to the “only way” and “non-contribution” requirements for the defence
of necessity. It also argues that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for its conclusions on
these matters, or provide reasons for its rejection of Argentina’s arguments on the human
right to water. Further, Argentina claims, the Tribunal ignored large volumes of
documentary, expert and witness evidence submitted to it by Argentina. It claims that the
Tribunal did not meet the standards set out by the Enron annulment committee for the

consideration and analysis of evidence and arguments.

The Tribunal identified the four conditions that must be met to sustain a defence of necessity,
on the basis of ILC Article 25(1), and then analyzed each in turn.'*” In respect of the “only
way” condition, the Tribunal stated that it was not convinced that the only way for Argentina
to satisfy its essential interest in the health and well being of the population was to adopt a
measure that violated Argentina’s treaty obligations. It stated that more flexible means could
have been adopted. In respect of the “non-contribution” condition the Tribunal noted that the
word “contribution” was not the same as “cause”. The question then was whether

Argentina’s contribution to the crisis was sufficiently substantial to rule out the defence of

'57 Decision on Liability, paras. 237-242.

60

183.

184.

185.

186.

necessity. It concluded that government policies and shortcomings were sufficiently

substantial contributions to the crisis and as a result rejected the defence of necessity.

The Committee notes that the ad hoc committee in Enron, identified a number of questions
that on the facts of that case should have been asked before determining the application of
the “only way” test. In the present case, however, it is clear that the Tribunal took the view
that if there were other available measures that could have been taken then the “only way”
condition would not be satisfied. And it found on the facts that there were other and more
flexible means that could have been resorted to. The Committee does not see any failure to

articulate the applicable law or any other manifest excess of power here.

In respect of the “non-contribution” condition, the Tribunal identified the relevant legal
requirement that the contribution be sufficiently substantial to prevent the defence of
necessity from being relied on. It made a determination on the facts that the contribution by
the Argentine government both through its policies and its failure to act when it might have
done so to be sufficiently substantial within the meaning of the test so identified. The
Tribunal established the legal standard and applied the facts to it. For the Committee to go
behind this would be to engage in an analysis of the substantive issues in the case, something
beyond the mandate of an ad hoc committee. In short, the Committee does not consider that
the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in the application of the “non-contribution”

condition in considering the defence of necessity.

Accordingly, the Committee rejects Argentina’s contention that the Tribunal manifestly

exceeded its powers, contrary to Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention.

Argentina’s further argument is that the Tribunal failed to state reasons in its treatment of
the necessity defence. According to Argentina, the Tribunal failed to provide reasons for its
rejection of Argentina’s argument relating to the human right to water, drawing a comparison
with the treatment of that issue in the Urbaser decision. It further argued that the Tribunal
had disregarded a substantial body of documentary, expert and witness evidence put forward
by Argentina. In this respect Argentina invokes the decision of the annulment committee in

TECO v. Guatemala.

187. The Tribunal indicated in its Decision on Liability that it did not find any basis in
international law or the BIT for the view that the human right to water somehow overrode
Argentina’s obligations under its BIT or gave it a right to disregard those obligations. !**
Those obligations had to exist alongside each other and the Tribunal considered that it was

possible to comply with both.

188. The Committee does not find here a failure to state reasons. While it is true that the Urbaser
tribunal put much more weight on the human right to water, that is a difference in assessing
the strength of legal argument, not a failure to provide reasons. The Tribunal stated reasons

albeit they were reasons with which Argentina does not agree.

189. Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal disregarded a substantial body of documentary,
expert and witness evidence is also difficult to sustain. Clearly a tribunal does not have to
provide an analysis and conclusions on every piece of evidence before it. Thus, the absence
of mention of a specific document or report cannot lead to the conclusion that it was
necessarily ignored. As mentioned in the conclusions on the reproduction issue, for example,
the Tribunal did refer to the flooding that took place in the Province of Santa Fe. It had before
it all of the materials in the pleadings and it was for the Tribunal to assign the appropriate
weight to that material. This is not a case like TECO v. Guatemala where the tribunal
proceeded on the basis that there was no evidence when in fact there was evidence before it
on the issue.'*? Again, Argentina is seeking to draw from the fact that the Tribunal disagreed
with its arguments an inference that it had failed to consider the evidence in support of those

arguments.

190. In short, what Argentina is attacking is the substance of the issue. It does not agree with the
Tribunal on the merits of its decision. But that is not a ground on which there can be

annulment. The Committee thus rejects Argentina’s contention that the Tribunal failed to

'58 Decision on Liability, para. 240.
'5° TECO Guatemala Holdings LLC v. Guatemala (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23), Decision on Annulment, April 5,
2016, AL A RA 61, para. 133.

191.

192.

193.

194.

state reasons in respect of the necessity defence contrary to Article 52(1)(e) of the

Convention.

VALUATION OF DAMAGES

Argentina identifies four bases for the annulment of the Award of the Tribunal in relation to

the valuation of damages. The Committee will deal with each of these separately.

Argentina argues that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, and failed to provide
reasons, by awarding damages for termination of the Concession Contract, even though it
had found in its Decision on Liability that there had been no breach of the BIT through the

termination of the Concession Contract.

The Tribunal dealt with this issue when considering the length of the valuation period.
Indeed, Argentina had made precisely the same argument to the Tribunal. However, the
Tribunal took the view that it was not providing damages as if there had been a termination
of the Concession Contract. Rather, it was recognizing that the Claimants were entitled to
recover the full extent of their loss, which could not be reduced because of some potential
future termination of the Concession Contract. The risk of termination was a factor taken
into account in the discount rate applied to the twenty-three years of projected cash flows. !©°
Argentina argues that there is no proof that the risk of termination was factored into the
discount rate. However, the Claimants argue that a market risk premium included the risk of

termination.

The Committee notes that the arguments made by Argentina here were precisely those raised
by Argentina before the Tribunal and rejected. Thus, Argentina is essentially asking for a
reconsideration of the Tribunal’s decision on the merits of the damages award. There can be
no manifest excess of power where a tribunal makes a decision on a matter that is within its
jurisdiction to make — the length of the valuation period for determining loss. In addition,

the Tribunal stated reasons for not limiting the period to the date on which termination had

160 Award, December 4, 2015, paras. 40-42.

195.

196.

197.

198.

taken place. It considered that such a limitation would undercompensate the Claimants for

their loss.

Furthermore the Tribunal said that the risk of termination had been factored into the discount
rate. Argentina queries whether this was so since there was no specific mention on that fact
in the Report of the Expert, but in the face of the Tribunal’s statement that the risk of
termination had been included in the discount rate, there is no basis for speculating

otherwise.

The Committee thus concludes that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers or fail
to state reasons in respect of the length of the period chosen for the valuation of loss and the
treatment of the risk of termination within the discount rate for the twenty-three year period

of cash flows.

Argentina also argues that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and seriously
departed from fundamental rules of procedure and failed to state reasons in relying on the
report of the expert Dr. Deep who had based his valuation on a proposal known as Acta II,
which had never been adopted and was not part of the applicable framework. The principles
behind Acta III, Argentina contends, had been rejected by the Tribunal in its Decision on
Liability.'!

Whether it was appropriate to rely on Acta III was argued before the Tribunal, which
considered the arguments made by Argentina and concluded that the expert Dr. Deep had
relied appropriately on Acta JIT, not because it was part of the applicable legal framework,
but because it was “strong evidence of how a reasonable regulator would act” in
circumstances at the time of the Argentinian crisis.!° In short, the Tribunal considered the
arguments of Argentina opposing reliance on Acta III and rejected them giving reasons for
doing so. Argentina’s complaint is with the decision reached by the Tribunal, but that is not

a basis for annulment.

"6! Decision on Liability, para. 119.

162

Award, para. 58.

64

199.

200.

201.

202.

203.

On this basis the Committee can see no manifest excess of power or any serious departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure or a failure to state reasons in the reliance placed on

Acta IIT.

Argentina also argues that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and seriously
departed from a fundamental rule of procedure by including sponsored debt as a recoverable
loss even though it did not identify it as a protected investment earlier in the proceedings.
Equally, it manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state reasons in concluding that
Argentina would have provided fair and equitable treatment if it had reviewed tariffs to allow

APSF to repay the secured debt.

The Tribunal rejected Argentina’s view that sponsored debts should not be recoverable
because they were highly risky on the basis that all investment contains some risk. The
reason for allowing recovery was that losses on sponsored debt were a “direct consequence

of Argentina’s treaty violations”!

The Committee cannot see how the inclusion of losses on sponsored debt constituted a
manifest excess of power. It was part of the process of assessing and quantifying loss,
something that is clearly within the power of a tribunal. The Tribunal provided reasons for
so doing — it was a loss that flowed from Argentina’s breach of the BIT. Accordingly, the

Committee does not find the Tribunal’s treatment of sponsored debt as an annullable error.

Argentina further argues that including management fees within the recoverable loss
constitutes a manifest excess of power and a failure to state reasons, claiming that
management fees were only defined as a protected investment in the decision on damages in
the Award. The Tribunal took the view that the management contract, which provided for
the payment of fees, was an integral part of the Claimants’ investment! and thus the loss
of management fees was an appropriate item to include in the loss suffered by Suez as a

result of Argentina’s failure to provide fair and equitable treatment.

163 Tbid., para. 66.
164 Thid., para. 72.

204.

205.

206.

207.

208.

The Committee considers that whether management fees were to be recovered fell clearly
within the power of the Tribunal to determine damages and thus there can be no manifest
excess of power. Thus, Argentina’s complaint that recovery should not be allowed for
management fees is a complaint about the substantive conclusion of the Tribunal on the

merits of the case, which is not a matter for annulment.

In concluding that management fees were recoverable, the Tribunal considered extensively
the justification in the Management Contract for the payment of such fees and the report of
the expert on how those fees and interest were to be calculated. The Committee considered

that this ample treatment of the issue fully responds to the need to state reasons.

Argentina argues in addition that the treatment of interest by the Tribunal in actualizing
damages constituted a manifest excess of power by the Tribunal and a failure to state reasons
in that the Tribunal used an interest rate that was higher than that agreed between the parties.
It also argued that the Tribunal rectified the decision on contingency debt with an interest
rate higher than that suggested by the parties. Thus, the decision of the Tribunal on interest
was ultra petita. The Claimants deny that there was agreement on an interest rate and argued

that what the Tribunal awarded was within the range put forward by the Claimants.

The Tribunal had to determine the amount payable on sponsored debt as a result of the
APSF’s default which was a consequence of Argentina’s measures. That default had
triggered contingent obligations to pay to the lenders. The losses to the Claimants were
determined by the Tribunal to be the amounts actually paid and then actualized to December
31, 2012, on the basis of the interest rate proposed by the expert Dr. Deep of a compounded
six-monthly Eurodollar rate. The Claimants had proposed instead a rate based on the APSF’s
weighted cost of capital. The Tribunal rejected this rate because it was based on treating the
amounts payable as an investment rather than as a debt and the Tribunal simply followed Dr.

Deep’s recommendation of the compounded six-monthly Eurodollar rate.

In respect of the rate applied to the rectification of the decision on contingency debt, the
Tribunal applied the rate that was stipulated in the Debt Restructuring Agreement of March
3, 2005.

66

209.

210.

211.

The Committee notes that the position of the Claimants on the applicable interest rate did
vary in respect of different periods for which damages were payable and that at one point
the parties both proposed a risk free rate based on 6-month US Treasury Bills for the period
February-November 2006. But for the rest the parties differed. However, as the Claimants
point out in Appendix II to their Rejoinder, overall their position on interest was for an
amount higher than that of Argentina and than that ultimately adopted by the Tribunal.!°
Argentina produces no evidence to support its proposition that the parties had agreed on the

interest rate.

Accordingly, the Committee does not see any basis for a claim that the decision of the
Tribunal on interest was ultra petita. A Tribunal has some discretion in the determination
of interest!®° and there is no indication that the decision on interest here exceeded the powers
of the Tribunal. Equally, the Committee does not see the adoption of the interest rate set out
in the Debt Restructuring Agreement to exceed the powers of the Tribunal. The Committee
also considers that the decision of the Tribunal is reasoned. It adopts the analysis of the
expert Dr. Deep and explains fully its position on the claims made. There is thus no failure

to state reasons.

As a result, the Committee finds no manifest excess of power contrary to Article 52(1)(b) or
failure to state reasons contrary to Article 52(1)(e) of the Convention in respect of the

valuation of loss by the Tribunal.

65 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 113-115.
66 Wena Hotels LTD. v. Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on the Application by the Arab Republic of
Egypt for Annulment of the Arbitral Award dated December 8, 2000, February 5, 2002, AL A RA 74, para. 97.

67

VIII. DECISION ON COSTS

A. ARGENTINA’S STATEMENT OF Costs

212. Argentina requests that the “Claimants bear all of [the] attorneys’ fees and any costs arising

from this proceeding.”!©’ These costs are broken down in Argentina’s Statement of Costs as

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

follows:
Description Dollars (USD)
ICSID Costs 675,000.00
Treasury Attorney-General’s Office personnel costs | 103,801.31
Airline tickets, hotel and travel expenses 21,850.00
Translations 6,626.10
Courier 4,235.24
Stationar 850.00
Communication expenses 300.00
Total 812,662.65

 

 

 

 

B. CLAIMANTS’ STATEMENT OF Costs

213. Claimants request that “Argentina bear all costs and expenses incurred by the Claimants in

connection with the present annulment proceedings, including the fees of the Centre, the

costs and fees of the ad hoc Committee, and the Claimants’ legal fees and expenses.” !

These costs are broken down in Annex A to the Claimants’ Statement of Costs as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Legal Fees and Expenses Totals

Legal Fees $1,250,783.08
Translations $23,468.89
Travel $13,542.84
Printing $9,618.69
Courier $3,428.87
Online Research $1,072.73
Total $1,301,915.10

 

 

 

‘61 Argentina’s Memorial, para. 251; Argentina’s Reply, para.

168 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, para. 301.

307.

214. Claimants refer to Article 52(4) of the Convention, which grants annulment committees the

215.

c.

216

power to require losing parties “to pay their opponents’ expenses in appropriate
circumstances”. Claimants argue that the circumstances in these proceedings justify

Argentina bearing the Claimants’ costs because:

a. Annulment committees have ordered unsuccessful applicants to pay part or all of the
prevailing party’s costs in comparable cases, particularly where applications for

annulment have been rejected in their entirety; 109

b.  Cost-shifting is the only check on the losing party’s temptation to commence
annulment proceedings as a matter of course, and holding Argentina accountable for
the costs of this proceeding will discourage future abusive requests for annulment. In
this regard, the Claimants observe that “it should not be overlooked that Argentina has

sought the annulment of every ICSID award rendered against it”!”°

and argue that costs
should be awarded “to disincentive [sic.] the reflexive use of the annulment

mechanism’!”! by Argentina.

Claimants further observe that “the practice of dividing arbitration costs and legal fees

172

evenly has increasingly fallen out of favor”’’~ and that the question before the Committee in

this proceeding is “less whether the costs of the proceeding should remain with Argentina
and more whether Argentina should also pay the Claimants’ legal fees and expenses.”!”
Claimants submit that most committees have simply applied the rule that “costs follow the
event”, even when they have not cited the weakness of an annulment application as a reason

for allocating costs.

COMMITTEE’S DECISION

. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the parties
otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in connection with

169 Thid., para. 304.

170

Ibi
1" Tp

id., para. 306.
id.

'2 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 217.
"3 Tbid., para. 218.

217.

218.

219.

220.

the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the fees
and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the
facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.
This provision, together with Arbitration Rule 47(1)(j) (applied to these proceedings by
virtue of Arbitration Rule 53) gives the Committee discretion to allocate all costs of the

arbitration.

In accordance with Administrative and Financial Regulation 14(3)(e), Argentina, as the
Party seeking annulment of the Award, has been responsible to date for all the advance
payments required to cover the costs of the proceeding, including the fees and expenses of

the members of the Committee.

The costs of the proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the Committee, ICSID’s

administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to:

Committee’s fees and expenses:
Professor Donald M. McRae USD 72,811.90
Professor Doug Jones USD 119,653.71
Tan Sri Dato’ Cecil W.M. Abraham USD 87,141.65

ICSID’s administrative fees USD 116,000.00
Direct expenses!” USD 52,710.80
Total USD 448,318.06

The Committee notes that the Claimants were successful in opposing the annulment in this
case and that success by a party should have an impact on costs. Nonetheless, the Committee
does not consider that the request for annulment in this case can be regarded as an abusive
request for annulment as the Claimants assert. As the Committee has pointed out, the extent

to which the Award of the Tribunal reproduced reasoning from other arbitrations and errors

‘74 This amount includes charges relating to court reporting and interpretation, catering and courier, and estimated
charges relating to the dispatch of this Decision (courier, printing and copying).

70

made in identifying facts and circumstances created an understandable apprehension on the

part of Argentina, although in the end it did not justify annulment.

221. Accordingly, the Committee decides that the parties should each bear their own costs and
share equally the costs and expenses of these proceedings. The Claimants shall thus pay half
of the costs of the annulment proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the Members

of the Committee and the costs of the Centre.!7°

175 The remaining balance of the advances will be reimbursed to Argentina. The ICSID Secretariat will provide the
Parties with a detailed financial statement of the case account as soon as all invoices are received, and the account is
final.

IX. DECISION

222. For the reasons set out above, the Committee decides as follows:
1. Argentina’s request for annulment is denied.

2. Each Party shall bear its own legal costs and expenses incurred in connection with this

annulment proceeding.

3. Each Party shall bear half of ICSID’s administrative fees and expenses incurred in
connection with this proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the Members of the

Committee.

4. All other requests by the Parties are dismissed.

[Signed] [Signed]

 

Tan Sri Dato’ Cecil W.M. Abraham Prof. Doug Jones
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee
November 22, 2018 November 27, 2018
[Signed]

Prof. Donald M. McRae
President of the ad hoc Committee

December 3, 2018

2B

