International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Washington, D.C.

In the proceedings between

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and Vivendi Universal S.A.
(Claimants)

and

The Argentine Republic
(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19

and

 

In the arbitration under the Rules of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law between

AWG Group Ltd. (Claimant)
and

The Argentine Republic (Respondent)

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Jeswald W. Salacuse, President
Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Arbitrator
Professor Pedro Nikken, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Representing the Claimants Representing the Respondent
Messrs. Nigel Blackaby and Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino
Lluis Paradell and Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacion Argentina
Ms. Noiana Marigo Dr. Jorge Barraguirre
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP Dr. Ignacio Torterola

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina
Buenos Aires
Reptiblica Argentina

Date of Decision: August 3, 2006

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

L Procedure

1. On April 17, 2003, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or “the Centre”) received a Request for Arbitration (“the Request”) against the
Argentine Republic (“the Respondent” or “Argentina”) from Aguas Argentinas
S.A.(“AASA”), Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. (“AGBAR”),
Vivendi Universal S.A. (“Vivendi”) and AWG Group Ltd (“AWG”), (together, “the
Claimants”). AASA is a company incorporated in Argentina. Suez, and Vivendi, both
incorporated in France, AGBAR, incorporated in Spain, and AWG, incorporated in the
United Kingdom, were shareholders in AASA. The Request concerned the Claimants’
investments in a concession for water distribution and waste water treatment services in
the city of Buenos Aires and some surrounding municipalities and a series of alleged acts
and omissions by Argentina, including Argentina’s alleged failure or refusal to apply

previously agreed adjustments to the tariff calculation and adjustment mechanisms.!

2. In the Request, Claimants Suez and Vivendi, invoked Argentina’s consent to
dispute settlement through ICSID arbitration provided in the 1991 Bilateral Investment
Treaty between France and the Argentine Republic (the “Argentina—France BIT”) and
AGBAR relied on Argentina’s consent in the 1991 Bilateral Investment Treaty between
the Argentine Republic and the Kingdom of Spain (the “Argentina-Spain BIT”)?
Claimant AWG invoked Argentina’s consent to arbitrate investment disputes under the
1990 Bilateral Investment Treaty between the Argentine Republic and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the “Argentina-UK BIT”)‘, which
provides in Article 8 (3) that in the event an investment dispute is subject to international
arbitration Argentina and the investor concerned may agree to refer their dispute either to
ICSID arbitration or to arbitration under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (“UNCITRAL Rules”) and that failing such
agreement after a period of three months the parties are bound to submit their dispute to
UNCITRAL Rules arbitration. Although the required three months had elapsed without
agreement, AWG in its Request for Arbitration invited Argentina to agree to extend

ICSID arbitration to AWG’s claims under the Argentina-UK BIT.

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

3. On April 17, 2003, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (Institution
Rules), acknowledged receipt and transmitted a copy of the Request to the Argentine

Republic and to the Argentine Embassy in Washington D.C.

4. On July 17, 2003, the Acting Secretary-General of the Centre registered the
Request, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (the “ICSID Convention” or “the
Convention”). The case was registered as ICSID Case No. ARB/O3/19 with the formal
heading of Aguas Argentinas S.A., Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic.° On that same date, the Acting
Secretary-General, in accordance with Institution Rule 7, notified the parties of the
registration of the Request and invited them to proceed, as soon as possible, to constitute
an Arbitral Tribunal. Argentina did not agree to extend ICSID jurisdiction to the claims
of AWG but it did agree to allow the case, although subject to UNCITRAL rules, to be
administered by ICSID.

5. The parties could not reach an agreement on the number of arbitrators to comprise
the arbitral tribunal nor on the method for their appointment. Accordingly, on September
22, 2003, the Claimants requested the Tribunal to be constituted in accordance with the
formula set forth in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention; i.e. one arbitrator
appointed by each party, and the third arbitrator, who would serve as president of the
tribunal, to be appointed by agreement of the parties. The Claimants appointed Professor
Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, a Swiss national, as arbitrator. The Argentine Republic in

turn appointed as arbitrator Professor Pedro Nikken, a national of Venezuela.

6. In the absence of an agreement between the parties on the name of the presiding
arbitrator, by letter of October 21, 2003 the Claimants, invoking Article 38 of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 4 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
(Arbitration Rules), requested the Centre to make this appointment. With the agreement
of both parties, the Centre appointed Professor Jeswald W. Salacuse, a national of the

United States of America, as the President of the Tribunal.

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

7. On February 17, 2004, the Deputy Secretary-General of ICSID, in accordance
with ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1), notified the parties that all three arbitrators had
accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to be constituted
and the proceedings to have begun on that date. On the same date, pursuant to ICSID
Administrative and Financial Regulation 25, the parties were informed that Mr. Gonzalo
Flores, Senior Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal. The
parties agreed that the same tribunal would hear and decide ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19
and the UNCITRAL arbitration initiated by AWG, along with two other cases involving
water concessions in the provinces of Santa Fe (ICSID Case No ARB/03/17) and
Cordoba (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/18).

8. Under ICSID Arbitration Rule 13, the Tribunal shall hold its first session within
60 days after its constitution or such other period as the parties may agree. The parties
could not agree on a suitable date for the first session within the prescribed time limits.
The Tribunal accordingly held its first session without the parties via telephone

conference on April 19, 2004.

9. On June 7, 2004, the Tribunal held a session with the parties at the seat of the
Centre in Washington, D.C. During the session the parties in ICSID case No. ARB/03/19
confirmed their agreement that the Tribunal had been properly constituted in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules
and that they did not have any objections in this respect. Similarly, in the case governed
by the UNCITRAL Rules, AWG and Argentina also agreed that the Tribunal had been

properly constituted.

10. During the session the parties also agreed on a number of procedural matters
reflected in written minutes signed by the President and the Secretary of the Tribunal.°
The Tribunal, after consultation with the parties, fixed the following timetable for the

written and oral pleadings in this case:

(1) Merits (in the event Argentina raised no objections to jurisdiction):

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

a. The Claimants would file a memorial on the merits on January 1, 2005;

b. The Respondent would file a counter-memorial on the merits within one

hundred and twenty (120) days from its receipt of the Claimants’ memorial;

c. The Claimants would file a reply on the merits within sixty (60) days from

their receipt of the Respondent’s counter-memorial;

d. The Respondent would file its rejoinder on the merits within sixty (60) days

from its receipt of the Claimants’ reply; and

e. The Tribunal would thereafter hold a hearing on the merits. The Tribunal
envisaged holding this hearing on October 24-28, 2005 which dates the

parties agreed to reserve for this purpose.

(2) Jurisdiction (in the event Argentina raised objections to jurisdiction):

a. If the Respondent decides to file objections to jurisdiction, it would do so
within sixty (60) days from its receipt of the Claimants’ memorial on the

merits;

b. Thereafter the proceedings on the merits would be suspended in accordance

with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(3);

c. The Claimants would file their counter-memorial on jurisdiction within thirty
(30) days from their receipt of the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction;

and

d. The Tribunal would thereafter hold a hearing on jurisdiction. The Tribunal
envisaged holding this hearing on May 11-12, 2005, which date the parties

agreed to reserve for this purpose.

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

(3) Tf the Tribunal decides that it has jurisdiction or to join the question of jurisdiction

to the merits of the dispute, the proceedings on the merits would be resumed and:

a. The Respondent would have for the filing of its counter-memorial on the
merits the number of days equal to the original one hundred and twenty
(120) less the number of days used for the filing of its objections to

jurisdiction;

b. The Claimants would then file their reply on the merits within sixty (60)

days from their receipt of the Respondent’s counter-memorial;

c. The Respondent would file its rejoinder on the merits within sixty (60) days

from its receipt of the Claimants’ reply; and

d. The Tribunal would then, in consultation with the parties as far as possible,

fix a date for a hearing.

11. In accordance with the agreed timetable, on January 1, 2005 the Claimants filed a
joint Memorial on the Merits with accompanying documentation with respect to ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/19 and the arbitration under UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules relating to
the AWG claims. On February 28, 2005 Argentina filed its Memorial with objections to

jurisdiction with respect to these two cases.

12. By letter of March 17, 2005 the Tribunal confirmed the suspension of the
proceedings on the merits in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(3) and Article
21 of the UNCITRAL Rules. On April 6, 2005, the Claimants filed their Counter-

Memorial on Jurisdiction.

13. As agreed upon during the June 7, 2004 session, a hearing on jurisdiction was
held at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. on May 11, 2005. Messrs. Nigel
Blackaby and Lluis Paradell and Ms. Noiana Marigo, from the law firm of Freshfields

Bruckhaus Deringer LLP, Mr. Bernardo Iriberri, from the Buenos Aires-based law firm

6

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

of Estudio Cardenas Cassagne y Asociados, Mr. Patrice Herbert from Suez
Environnement and Mr. Miquel Grifio, from AGBAR, attended the hearing on behalf of
the Claimants. Mr. Ignacio Torterola from the Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Argentina, attended the hearing on behalf of the Respondent. Also present on behalf of
the Respondent were Messrs. Alejandro Labado, Emilio Lentini, and Carlos Rivera,
representing the Ente Tripartito de Obras y Servicios (ETOSS). During the hearing
Messrs. Blackaby and Paradell addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Claimants. Mr.
Torterola addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Argentine Republic. The Tribunal
posed questions to the parties, as provided in Rule 32(3) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules
and Article 25 of the UNCITRAL Rules.

14. On January 28, 2005, five non-governmental organizations, Asociacién Civil por
la Igualidad y la Justicia (ACIJ), Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales (CELS), Center
for International Environmental Law (CIEL), Consumidores Libres Cooperativa Ltda. de
Provisién de Servicios de Accién Comunitaria, and Unidn de Usuarios y Consumidores,
filed a “Petition for Transparency and Participation as Amicus Curiae” (the “Petition”)
with the Secretary of the Tribunal. Following the filing of the Petition, the Tribunal
invited the parties to make any observations they might have in this regard, and both
parties submitted their views on this matter. On May 19, 2005, the Tribunal issued an
Order in Response to a Petition for Participation as Amicus Curiae (available online at
ICSID’s web site at www.worldbank.org/icsid) setting out the conditions under which the

Tribunal would consider amicus curiae submissions.”

15. Following the hearing on jurisdiction, the Respondent at various times filed
unsolicited documents and arguments further contesting the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. On
each occasion, the Tribunal requested the Claimants views on these arguments and
documents, and the Claimants totally rejected them each time. Finding that the
Respondents had a full and complete opportunity to present their objections to
jurisdiction in their memorial and oral arguments at the hearing on jurisdiction and
finding further that the arguments presented in these unsolicited filings duplicated those

that the Respondents had submitted in their oral arguments and memorial, the Tribunal by

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

letter of March 24, 2006 requested the parties to refrain from making any new unsolicited

submissions.

16. By letter of February 9, 2006, counsel for the Claimants informed the Tribunal
that the Claimant shareholders of AASA were in the process of selling their interests in
AASA to third parties and that “...in order to facilitate the required approval by the
Republic of Argentina of such sale, AASA has decided to withdraw its claim in the
above-referenced arbitration” but that such withdrawal was expressly without prejudice
to the Claimant Shareholders’ claims in this proceeding. Upon invitation of the Tribunal,
the Respondent filed its observations to this withdrawal by letter of February 15, 2006.
The Respondent did not object to the withdrawal of AASA but requested that the
Claimant AASA provide the Respondent copies of the minutes of the shareholders’
meeting (Asamblea de Accionistas de AASA) with respect to the decision authorizing such
withdrawal. At the same time, Respondent advanced further arguments objecting to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction and asserting that AASA’s decision to withdraw extinguished the
claims of the other claimants in this case. At the invitation of the Tribunal, counsel for
AASA provided copies of the minutes of the AASA’s shareholders’ meeting of February
8, 2006, authorizing the discontinuance of its claim before this Tribunal. At the same
time, counsel for the Claimants rejected each of the Respondent’s arguments challenging
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction with respect to the other Claimants. The Tribunal provided
copies of these documents to the Respondent and requested its observation concerning
AASA’s withdrawal. By letter of March 31, 2006, the Respondent informed the Tribunal
that “... the Argentine Republic does not oppose the proposed cessation by the
Concessionaire... AASA...” in ICSID arbitration ARB/03/19 (“.... la Reptiblica
Argentina no se opone al desistimiento planteado por la[s] Concesionaria[s] AASA...”),
(para. 9) but argued that such withdrawal had legal consequences with respect to the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the shareholder Claimants and their claims.

17. In its deliberations on this request, the Tribunal found that neither the ICSID
Convention nor the Rules specifically provide for the withdrawal of one party from an
arbitration proceeding that is to continue thereafter. ICSID Arbitration Rule 44, the

provision of closest relevance to the action requested by the Claimant AASA, allows the

8

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

discontinuation of an arbitration proceeding at the request of a party when the other party
does not object. But Arbitration Rule 44 by a strict reading of its terms does not apply to
the withdrawal of a single party. Nonetheless, the Tribunal, relying on Article 44 of the
ICSID Convention, which grants ICSID tribunals the power to decide procedural
questions not covered by the Convention or the Rules, concluded that it had the power to
order the discontinuance of proceedings with respect to one party at its request when the
other party did not object. The Tribunal found that permitting such discontinuance in the
conditions presented by this case was in accordance with the basic objective of the ICSID
Convention of facilitating the settlement of investment disputes, of which ICSID
Arbitration Rule 44 is a specific manifestation. It also was of the view that the continued
participation of AASA in this proceeding would serve no useful purpose in bringing

about a fair and correct resolution of the present arbitration.

18. On April 14, 2006, the Tribunal therefore entered Procedural Order No. 1
Concerning the Discontinuance of Proceedings with Respect to Aguas Argentinas S.A.
(available online at www.worldbank.org/icsid), directing that: (i) the proceedings in
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19 with respect to the Claimant Aguas Argentinas S.A. be
discontinued and that the said Claimant Aguas Argentinas S.A. cease to be a party with
effect from April 14, 2006; and (ii) that the proceedings in ICSID Case No ARB/03/19
continue in all other respects. With respect to the Respondent’s arguments that the
withdrawal of AASA from the case had implications for the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over
the shareholder Claimants and their claims, the Tribunal concluded that these objections
were more appropriately addressed in its decision on jurisdiction. They are in fact

considered in subsequent sections of the present decision.

19. The Tribunal has deliberated on the parties’ written submissions on the question
of jurisdiction and on the oral arguments delivered in the course of the May 11, 2005
hearing. Since the parties pleaded ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19 jointly with the
UNCITRAL case of AWG v. Argentina and filed joint memorials relating thereto and
since the facts and the legal questions in both cases are virtually identical, the Tribunal
has determined that it is appropriate to issue a single Decision on Jurisdiction covering

both cases. Having considered the relevant facts and evidence, the ICSID Convention,

9

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

the UNCITRAL Rules, the Argentina—France BIT, the Argentina-Spain BIT, and the
Argentina-U.K. BIT, as well as the written and oral submissions of the parties’
representatives, the Tribunal has reached the following decision on the question of

jurisdiction with respect to both cases.

IL. Factual Background

20. The Respondent is a federal republic consisting of the autonomous city of Buenos
Aires and twenty-three provinces. Prior to the investment undertaken by the Claimants,
the Obras Sanitarias de la Nacién (OSN), a state-owned company, had the responsibility
of providing water and waste water services to City of Buenos Aires and certain

surrounding municipalities.*

21. In 1989, Argentina enacted the State Reform Law’ that declared the country’s
public services to be in a state of emergency and proposed to launch a broad program of
privatization to remedy the situation, by which the Argentine government would transfer
the assets, operations, and functions of various designated State-owned companies and
entities to private and primarily foreign investors. The State Reform Law also invited the
country’s provinces to participate in the privatization process. Subsequently, Argentina
took certain other measures to attract private and foreign investment to its territory. Less
than two years after the State Reform Law, Argentina adopted the Convertibility Law”
by which it tied or “pegged” the value of the Argentine Peso to the United States Dollar
and established a currency board requiring that the amount of Argentine currency in
circulation be equivalent to the foreign currency reserves held by the State. Starting in
1990, it also began to conclude bilateral treaties “for the reciprocal promotion and
protection of investments” with various countries. By the year 2000, it had concluded 57
such bilateral investment treaties, commonly known as BITs, including the December
1990 Argentina-U.K. BIT, the July 1991 Argentina-France BIT, and the October 1991
Argentina-Spain BIT.

22. As part of its reform and privatization program, Argentina enacted Decree No.

2074/90 of October 5, 1990 to establish a regulatory framework by which various

10

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

designated public services, including OSN, would be privatized and transferred to private
and foreign investors through a bidding process whereby they would be granted long-
term concession agreements that would require the infusion by investors of new capital
and technology.!! The federal government actively publicized its desire to privatize these
services and made significant efforts, including a road show in Brussels, to interest
particularly qualified foreign enterprises to invest in the privatized entities, preparing and
distributing a prospectus toward this end.'* On June 30, 1992, the Argentine government
issued Decree 999/92, known as the “Water Decree” to establish a regulatory framework
for the privatization of OSN and to provide for the rights and obligations of the future
concessionaire, the related regulatory bodies, and the users of the service.'? In order to
attract the most experienced investors and to secure investment on the most favorable
terms, the government established a rigorous international bidding process that included a
prequalification procedure which would allow only the most financially and technically
qualified enterprises to engage in actually bidding to take over the privatized public
service. Based on the principles set down in the Water Decree, the Federal Ministry of
Public Works and Services promulgated detailed Original Bidding Rules (Pliego de
Bases y Conditiones) that stated the object, term and rules of the Concession, defined the
bidding procedure, specified the rules concerning the concession contract, and also set
out a model of the future Concession contract. These rules and the related model contract
specified certain important provisions governing the financial aspects of the proposed
concession, including investment commitments, tariff adjustments, and the equilibrium to
be maintained between the costs of operation and the financial returns to the eventual

successful concessionaire.

23. In response to these measures, Suez, AGBAR, Vivendi and AWG, together with
Argentine companies Banco de Galicia y Buenos Aires S.A., Sociedad Comercial del
Plata S.A., and Meller S.A., formed a consortium in 1992 to participate in the bidding for
the concession to operate specified water distribution and waste water systems in the city
of Buenos Aires and surrounding municipalities. On December 9, 1992, the Government
of Argentina awarded this consortium the concession to operate the water and waste
water services system in the City of Buenos Aires and surrounding municipalities, at that

time the largest privatized water concession in the world. Pursuant to the bidding rules,

11

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

the consortium subsequently formed an Argentine company, Aguas Argentinas S.A.
(AASA) to hold and operate the concession. On April 28, AASA formally concluded a
thirty-year concession contract with the Government, and on May 1, 1993 it assumed
control and management of the designated water distribution and waste water systems.
According to the Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, by 2001 AASA had invested a total
of US$ 1.7 billion in the concession, consisting of US$120 million in AASA’s initial
capital, US$706.1 million primarily from multilateral lending institutions, and the

remainder from cash flows generated by AASA."4

24. In 1999, the Argentine Republic began to experience a severe economic and
financial crisis that had serious consequences for the country, its people, and its investors,
both foreign and national. In response to this continuing crisis, the government adopted a
variety of measures to deal with its effects in the following years. In 2002, it enacted a
law! that abolished the currency board that had linked the Argentine Peso to the U.S.
dollar, resulting in a significant depreciation of the Argentine Peso. Claiming that these
measures injured their investments in violation of the commitments made to them in
securing the concession, the Claimants sought to obtain from the Argentine government
adjustments in the tariffs that AASA could charge for water distribution and waste water

services, as well as modifications of other operating conditions.

25. After a fruitless period of negotiations, the Claimants in April 2003 submitted
their dispute with the Argentine Republic for settlement by arbitration to ICSID under the
ICSID Convention pursuant to the Argentina-France and the Argentina-Spain BITs and,
in the case of Claimant AWG, under UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules pursuant to the
Argentina-U.K BIT. In their Memorial, the Claimants allege that the Argentine Republic
is legally responsible under the above-mentioned BITs for its wrongful actions, which
expropriated Claimants’ investments in violation of Article 5(2) of the Argentina-France
BIT, Article V of the Argentina-Spain BIT, and Article 5(1) of the Argentina-U.K. BIT
and which failed to treat Claimants’ investments fairly and equitably in breach of Article
3 and S(1) of the Argentina-France BIT, Article IV(1) of the Argentina-Spain BIT, and
Article 2(2) of the Argentina-U.K. BIT. As a result, pursuant to the applicable BITs,

Claimants seek compensation for their alleged loss. The Claimants at the initiation of

12

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

this proceeding consisted of AASA (now withdrawn), the concession company, and four
of its non-Argentine shareholders: Suez, a French company holding 39.93% of AASA
shares; Vivendi, also a French Company, holding 7.55% of AASA shares; AGBAR, a
Spanish Company holding 25.01% of AASA shares, and AWG, a U.K. company holding
4.25% of AASA shares.'® In addition, the shareholders hold various other financial

obligations made by AASA.

26. In response to the Claimants’ Memorial, the Respondent submitted a Memorial
with objections to jurisdiction on February 28, 2005, alleging six specific grounds as to
why ICSID and the present Tribunal are without jurisdiction to hear and decide
Claimants’ claim for damages. Certain of these objections apply only to Claimants Suez,
Vivendi, and AGBAR, which are asserting ICSID jurisdiction, while others are
applicable to all the Claimants. The purpose of the present Decision is to consider and
decide upon each of the objections to jurisdiction raised by the Respondent. In
undertaking this task, the Tribunal is mindful of the fact that other ICSID tribunals in
other cases involving the Respondent have decided similar, if not identical jurisdictional
issues, in particular this Tribunal’s own Decision on Jurisdiction of May 16, 2006 in
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17 (Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and
InterAguas Servicios Intergrales del Agua S.A v. the Argentine Republic) relating to
investments in the concession to operate water distribution and waste water services in
the Argentine Province of Santa Fe. While these decisions are not binding upon the

present Tribunal, they are nonetheless instructive.

Ill. Consideration of Jurisdictional Objections
First Jurisdictional Objection: The Dispute Does Not Arise Directly Out Of An

Investment.

27. Article 25 (1) of the ICSID Convention provides:
“The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision

or agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in

writing to submit to the Centre” (emphasis supplied).

The Respondent challenges ICSID’s and this Tribunal’s jurisdiction on the ground
that the underlying dispute between the Claimants Suez, AGBAR, and Vivendi, on the
one hand, and the Respondent Argentina, on the other, does not arise directly out of an
investment, as the ICSID Convention requires. The Respondent argues that in reality this
dispute is about the wisdom of general economic measures taken by the government of
Argentina to deal with the economic and financial crisis it was facing. In that light,
according to the Respondent, the dispute in this case does not arise directly out of an
investment, but rather out of the general measures adopted by the government. Further,
Respondent argues that the word “directly” could also be “translated” as meaning
“specifically” and that since none of the measures complained of were directed
specifically at the Claimants’ investments, but rather were measures of general
applicability, it cannot be said that the dispute in the present case arises “directly” out of
the Claimants’ investment.'’ In support of its position, the Respondent cites certain
language from the NAFTA/UNCITRAL case of Methanex Corporation v. United States

of America. 1s

28. Claimants Suez, AGBAR, and Vivendi assert that the Respondent errs when it
states that they complain of general economic measures and that, in these circumstances,
the dispute cannot arise directly out of investments as required by Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention. Indeed, the Claimants complain that Argentina’s measures
specifically, concretely and directly violated commitments made to them as foreign
investors in the privatized water industry, in particular Argentina’s failure to reestablish
the concession’s financial equilibrium and to adjust tariffs. The Claimants further argue
that Methanex, though not directly relevant to this case, actually supports their position in
that the words “relating to” in Article 1101(1) of the NAFTA were interpreted to mean
that “there must be a legally significant connection between the measure and the claimant
investor or its investment”. Moreover, this holding should be interpreted in conjunction
with the rejection in Pope & Talbot v. Canada, another NAFTA case, of Canada’s

submission that “a measure can only relate to an investment if it is primarily directed at

14

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

that investment and that a measure aimed at trade in goods ipso facto cannot be addressed

as well under Chapter ir?

29. The Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s interpretation of Article 25(1) of
the ICSID Convention. Article 25(1) requires a connection of a sufficient degree of
directness between a dispute submitted to ICSID and a claimant’s investment2° The
International Court of Justice has defined the word “dispute” to mean “‘a disagreement on
a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal views or interests between parties.””! That a
disagreement exists between the Claimants and the Respondent about law, facts, and
legal views is beyond doubt. It is also beyond doubt (which the Respondent does not
contest) that the Claimants have made an investment in certain water distribution and
waste water systems in the city of Buenos Aires and surrounding municipalities. The
disagreement between Claimants Suez, AGBAR and Vivendi and the Respondent arises
directly out of Claimants’ investments in the water distribution and waste water systems
in the city of Buenos Aires and surrounding municipalities since the disagreement is
specifically about the legality under international law of the treatment accorded to those
investments by the measures taken by the Respondent. The Claimants allege that the
treatment they have received violates Argentina’s treaty obligations towards those
investments, while the Respondent takes a different view. That disagreement arises
directly out of the investment impacted by governmental measures, not out of the
measures themselves. The Tribunal is not concerned with the wisdom, legality, or
soundness of the policy measures taken by Argentina to deal with the economic crisis.
Rather, the Tribunal’s task is to judge, at the merits stage of this case, whether the effect
of Respondent’s actions on the Claimants’ investments violates the Respondent’s
international legal obligations contained in the Argentina-France, the Argentina-Spain,
and the Argentina-U.K. BITs. In short, the core of the dispute centers on a basic
question: Did the Respondent by its actions violate the rights granted to the Claimants

and their investments under international law?

30. The Respondent’s proposed interpretation of the ICSID treaty that jurisdiction
only exists if the measure in question was aimed or directed “specifically” at the

investment finds no basis in the plain language of the treaty. First, the jurisdictional

15

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

element demanded by the ICSID Convention is a dispute arising directly out of an
investment. The Convention makes no reference to governmental measures as a
jurisdictional element. To infer that requirement without justification in the face of the
plain meaning of Article 25 of the Convention would do violence to the arbitral regime
that was carefully put in place by its founders. Second, it would lead to results that were
clearly not intended by the drafters of the Convention. For example, such an
interpretation would exclude from ICSID jurisdiction disputes caused by a governmental
act of general expropriation while a governmental act expropriating a specific investment
would be within the jurisdiction of the Centre. The Respondent cites language from
Methanex v. United States of America in support of its position. In the Methanex case,
the tribunal was interpreting Article 1101(1) of the NAFTA whose fundamental
jurisdictional requirement, unlike Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, applies the dispute
settlement provisions of Chapter 11 to “measures adopted or maintained by a Party
relating to: (a) investors of another Party [or] investments of investors of another party in
the territory of a Party” (emphasis supplied). An interpretation of that provision requires
quite a different analysis from that required by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.
Whereas NAFTA requires by its terms a connection between the investments and
contested governmental measures, Article 25 of the ICSID Convention requires a direct
connection between the investment and the dispute. As a result, the language from the
Methanex case advanced by the Respondent is not relevant to an interpretation of Article

25.

31. The Tribunal finds support for its conclusion that the dispute in the present case is
directly related to an investment in the ICSID case of CMS v. Argentina” which also
addressed the question of whether the dispute in question arose directly out of an
investment. In that case, the claimant, which had invested in the context of Argentina’s
privatization program in a gas distribution system, brought a claim in ICSID arbitration
under the Argentina-U.S. bilateral investment treaty on the grounds that various
economic measures taken by the government violated its rights under that BIT. In that
case, as in the present dispute, Argentina challenged the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and
ICSID on grounds, inter alia, that the dispute did not arise directly out of an investment

and that the claimant was asking the tribunal to judge the validity of general economic

16

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

measures. The tribunal in CMS v. Argentina rejected that objection to jurisdiction, stating
that while it does “not have jurisdiction over measures of general economic policy and
could not pass judgment on whether they were right or wrong”, it did have jurisdiction
“*,.to examine whether specific measures affecting Claimant’s investments or measures
of general economic policy having a direct bearing on such investment have been
adopted in violation of legally binding commitments given to the investor in treaties,

9923

legislation or contracts It further clarified its position by stating: “[w]hat is brought

under the jurisdiction of the Centre is not the general measures in themselves but the

extent to which they may violate those specific commitments.””*

32. On the basis of its foregoing analysis, the Tribunal holds that the dispute between
Claimants Suez, AGBAR, and Vivendi and the Respondent arises directly out of the
Claimants’ investment in the water distribution and waste water systems of the city of
Buenos Aires and surrounding municipalities and that therefore the Respondent’s first
objection to jurisdiction must fail. Although the parties did not address the issue
specifically, the Tribunal also affirms, for the reasons stated above, that AWG’s dispute
with Argentina is a dispute with regard to an investment which arises within the terms of
Article 8 of the Argentina-U.K. BIT, a necessary element for establishing UNCITRAL

arbitration under the treaty.

Second Jurisdictional Objection: The Dispute Is Not A Legal Dispute.

33. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention not only requires as a jurisdictional element
that a dispute arise directly out of an investment but it also requires that the dispute be a
“legal” dispute (it is to be noted, with regard to AWG’s claim that neither the
UNCITRAL Rules nor the Argentina-U.K. BIT specifically mention as a jurisdictional
requirement to international arbitration that an investment dispute be “legal.”). The
Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of ICSID and of the Tribunal on the grounds that
the dispute which Claimants Suez, AGBAR, and Vivendi have submitted to arbitration is
not “legal” in nature. It supports this position by pointing out that the Claimants’ case is
based upon Argentina’s failure to adjust the tariff regime and to respect the equilibrium
principle whereby Claimants would be assured a fair return on their investment, but that

neither Argentine law nor the Respondent’s contract with the Claimants imposes a legal

17

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

obligation to do so. Consequently, the Respondent asserts that the dispute between the
Claimants and the Respondent is a business or commercial dispute rather than a “legal”
dispute required to establish ICSID jurisdiction. The Respondent further alleges that the
dispute over the effects of the devaluation measures on the concession is one over policy
and fairness (“una cuesti6n de politica publica y de equidad”, Memorial on Jurisdiction,

para. 52), hence not legal in nature.

34. A legal dispute, in the ordinary meaning of the term, is a disagreement about legal
rights or obligations. In its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, the Claimants assert that
their claim is indeed based on legal rights — the legal rights granted to them under the
Argentina-France and the Argentina-Spain BITs. They allege that, by failing to make
tariff adjustments and to respect the equilibrium principle, the Respondent violated its
legal obligations under the Argentina-France BIT to accord “just and equitable treatment,
in accordance with the principles of international law” to the Claimants and their
investments and “ not [to] take, directly or indirectly, any expropriation or nationalization
measures or any other equivalent measures having a similar effect of dispossession”
without payment of prompt and adequate compensation (Art. 3, 5(1), and 5(2)). They
further allege that the Respondent also violated its legal obligations under the Argentina-
Spain BIT to guarantee “fair and equitable treatment of investments made” by the
Claimants and to pay compensation for “the nationalization, expropriation or any other
measures having similar characteristics or effects” taken by Respondent (Art. IV(1) and

V).

35. At this stage of the proceedings, the task of the Tribunal is not to judge the merits
of these claims but to determine whether the claims made by the Claimants Suez,
AGBAR and Vivendi are legal in nature and therefore constitute a basis for establishing
ICSID jurisdiction. Furthermore, although the ICSID Convention itself does not define
the meaning of “legal dispute,” the accompanying Report of the Executive Directors of

the World Bank gives some clarification:

"The expression “legal dispute” has been used to make clear that while conflicts

of rights are within the jurisdiction of the Centre, mere conflicts of interests are

18

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

not. The dispute must concern the existence or scope of a legal right or
obligation, or the nature or extent of the reparation to be made for breach of a

legal obligation. 25

36. In his commentary on the ICSID Convention, Professor Schreuer characterizes
legal disputes as follows:
“The dispute will only qualify as legal if legal remedies such as restitution or
damages are sought and if legal rights based on, for example, treaties or
legislation are claimed. Consequently, it is largely in the hands of the claimant to

present the dispute in legal terms. 726

37. In the present case, the Claimants Suez, AGBAR, and Vivendi clearly base their
case on legal rights which they allege have been granted to them under the bilateral
investment treaties that Argentina has concluded with France and Spain. In their written
pleadings and oral arguments, the Claimants have consistently presented their case in
legal terms. Bilateral investment treaties are not mere statements of good will or
declarations of benevolent intent toward the investors and investments of the two
countries concerned. They are international legal instruments by which sovereign states
make firm commitments under international law concerning the treatment they will
accord to investors and investments from the other State. A basic purpose of the
Argentina-France BIT and the Argentina-Spain BIT, as their titles indicate, is the

“protection of investments.” They seek to achieve this goal by granting investors and
investments from the treaty partner certain legal rights and to provide a legal means for
their enforcement. In the present case, the Claimants have invoked both BITs as a basis
for their claim and have based their claims on the specific legal rights enumerated in
specific treaty provisions, which they allege have been granted to them by the treaties in
question. Whether they will prevail in establishing their legal rights and the
Respondent’s violation thereof remains to be seen and is for a subsequent stage of this
proceeding. What is certain at this stage, however, is that the dispute as presented by the
Claimants is legal in nature. As a result, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent’s

second objection to jurisdiction must also fail.

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

Third Jurisdictional Objection (now moot): AASA Does Not Qualify As A Foreign
Investor Under The Applicable Treaty And, In Any Event, Has Not Consented To The
Jurisdiction Of ICSID And Of The Tribunal.

38. AASA, one of the original Claimants in this dispute, is an Argentine corporation
which formally holds the concession for water distribution and waste water treatment in
the City of Buenos Aires and surrounding municipalities and through which the other
Claimants made their investments. Since AASA is not a foreign entity, but a national

entity, the Respondent asserted that AASA is not entitled to bring a case to ICSID.

39. In response, the Claimants argued that AASA must be deemed a French investor
because Suez, a French company, effectively controls AASA and that therefore it is to be

deemed a French investor according to Article (1)(2)(c) of the Argentina-France BIT.

40. Since the Tribunal, at the request of AASA and without opposition from the
Respondent, has ordered the discontinuance of the proceedings in this case with respect
to AASA in Procedural Order No. 1, discussed above, and since this third objection to
jurisdiction relates to and affects only AASA and none of the other Claimants, the
Tribunal has concluded that it need not consider and decide upon this objection to

jurisdiction.

Fourth Jurisdictional Objection: Claimants’ Right To Bring An Action In Arbitration
Is Precluded By The Dispute Resolution Clause in the Concession Contract Concluded
By AASA.

Al. The contract granting AASA a concession to operate the water distribution and
waste water systems in the City of Buenos Aires and surrounding municipalities
contained a dispute resolution clause whereby the parties to the contract agreed to submit
all disputes relating to its interpretation and execution to the federal administrative courts
in the City of Buenos Aires.”” From this fact, the Respondent draws two implications
challenging ICSID and the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. First, the dispute resolution clause,
according to the Respondent, shows that AASA did not agree to ICSID or UNCITRAL
jurisdiction, thus vitiating a fundamental jurisdictional element of both arbitration

systems: consent. Second, by agreeing to settle all disputes arising out of their

20

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

transaction, including those that are the basis for the present arbitration, in the courts of
Argentina, not before an ICSID or UNCITRAL tribunal, both the Claimants and the
Respondent agreed to settle their disputes in a manner which necessarily excludes

recourse to international arbitration.

42. The Claimants object that arbitral tribunals have consistently rejected arguments
relating to the preclusive effect of contractual dispute resolution clauses providing for the
jurisdiction of local courts where breaches of the BITs were alleged and that they do not
claim any contractual right or assert any cause of action under the concession contract. In
support of their position, the Claimants rely in particular on decisions in other ICSID
cases involving Argentina, namely CMS v. Argentina, Enron v. Argentina, Azurix v.
Argentina, Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Compagnie Générale des Eaux v.
Argentina, as well as on other decisions such as Salini v. Morocco and CME Czech
Republic B.V. v. The Czech Republic. The Claimants further specify that their claims are
for breach of the treaty protection and not for breach of contract. In this respect, they
gave particulars of the principles and provisions of the concession contract solely to
explain the investment regime that Argentina established in order to attract foreign

investments.

43. In order to assess the Respondent’s jurisdictional objection on this point, one must
consider the nature and implications of the dispute settlement clause concluded by AASA
and Argentina. By its terms, the dispute resolution clause covers all controversies arising
out of the concession contract. The dispute resolution clause makes no mention of
Claimants’ rights under the Argentina-France BIT, the Argentina-Spain BIT, the
Argentina-U.K. BIT, or their right to seek recourse in international arbitration for
violation of those rights. In the present case, the Claimants, as they rightly point out, do
not allege any violation of their rights under the concession contract. Rather, the basis of
their claim is that the Respondent has violated the Claimants’ rights under the applicable
BIT. BIT claims and contractual claims are two different things. As the ICSID
Annulment Committee stated in Vivendi, which involved one of the BITs at the center of

the present dispute:

21

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

“A state may breach a treaty without breaching a contract, and vice versa [...]”;

“[...] whether there has been a breach of the BIT and whether there has been a
breach of contract are different questions. Each of these claims will be
determined by reference to its own proper or applicable law — in the case of the
BIT, by international law; in the case of the Concession Contract by the proper
law of the contract [...] 728
44. Many other international arbitral tribunals have taken the position that a dispute
resolution clause in an underlying contract whereby contractual disputes are within the
exclusive jurisdiction of local courts or arbitrations does not preclude an investor who is a
party to such contract from bringing an arbitration proceeding to enforce its rights under a

bilateral investment treaty.”

45. It follows from the above discussion that, contrary to Argentina’s argument, the
execution of a dispute resolution clause in the concession agreement does not mean that
the parties have waived ICSID or UNCITRAL jurisdiction. Certainly, the execution of a
dispute settlement clause, like the one in the AASA concession contract, which makes no
reference to the BIT or to the treatment that the BIT guarantees investors, cannot support
any inference that such dispute resolution clause is a waiver of the investors’ rights under
a BIT. The Tribunal concludes that the existence of the dispute resolution clause in the
concession contract does not preclude the Claimants from bringing the present
arbitration. Consequently, Respondent’s fourth objection to the ICSID’s and this

Tribunal’s jurisdiction must fail.

Fifth Jurisdictional Objection: Suez, Vivendi, AGBAR, and AWG As Mere
Shareholders Of AASA Are Not Legally Qualified To Bring Claims In International
Arbitration For Alleged Injuries Done To AASA

46. The Respondent contends that the four AASA shareholders, Suez, Vivendi,
AGBAR, and AWG, have no standing to bring a claim in arbitration for alleged injuries
done to AASA. In support of this position, the Respondent, drawing analogies to

domestic corporation law, argues that any injury to the shareholders is derivative of the

22

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

alleged injury to the company in which they hold shares, as opposed to a direct injury to
the shareholders themselves. The alleged injury is done to the corporation, not to the
shareholders whose shares, because of an alleged wrongful action done to the
corporation, may have diminished in value. Thus, the shareholders have no right to bring
an action on grounds that they have sustained a direct injury by virtue of the alleged
wrongful actions of the Respondent. The right to bring an action for any alleged injury
lies with the corporation itself, not its shareholders. The Respondent further pointed out
that to award a monetary recovery to the Claimants in their capacity as shareholders, as
well as to AASA as the entity directly wronged, would result in an unjust double
recovery and moreover would grant a recovery to specific shareholders, thus prejudicing
other shareholders as well as AASA creditors. The Respondent also reiterated this
argument at the time that the Tribunal, at the request of AASA to withdraw from this case
and without objection from the Respondent, ordered the discontinuance of the
proceedings with respect to AASA. In its submissions of March 31, 2006, the
Respondent argued that the shareholder Claimants’ claims were dependent or derivative
of AASA’s claim and that since AASA was no longer a party, the Claimant shareholders
had no right to bring a claim in ICSID or UNCITRAL arbitration in the absence of
AASA.

47. In response, the Claimants argue that the basis for a shareholder having standing
to bring a case because of an alleged injury is to be found in international law, not
domestic law. Specifically, it is to be found in the Argentina-France, the Argentina-
Spain, and the Argentina-U.K. BITs which were concluded by the countries concerned to
protect the investors and investments of one State in the territory of another State. Suez
and Vivendi are French nationals under the Argentina-France BIT and as such fall within
the definition of the term “investor” in Article 1(2)(b). Under Article 8 of the Argentina-
France BIT, an “investor” may have recourse to ICSID arbitration with respect to “... any
disputes relating to an investment under this Treaty.” Article 1(1) contains a quite

detailed definition of investment. It provides in part:

1. The term “investment” shall apply to assets such as property, rights and

interests in any category, and particularly but not exclusively to: ...

23

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

b) Shares, issue premiums and other forms of participation, albeit
minority or indirect, in companies constituted in the territory of either

Contracting Party...” 0

48. The Claimants likewise refer to Article I(2) of the Argentina-Spain BIT which
defines investments as “any kind of assets, such as property and rights of every kind

"31 and to Article

[...]”, including “shares and other forms of participations in companies”
1(a) of the Argentina-U.K. BIT which states that “investment” means “every kind of
asset defined in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Contracting Party in
whose territory the investment is made and admitted in accordance with this Agreement
and in particular, though not exclusively, includes ... (ii) shares in and stock and
debentures of a company and any other form of participation in a company , established
in the territory of either of the Contracting Parties;...” The Respondent has not suggested

anywhere in its pleadings that shares in a company are not “assets” under its laws.

49. Accordingly, under the plain language of these BITs, the Tribunal finds that the
AASA shares owned by all four Claimants were “investments” under the Argentina-
France, Argentina-Spain, and the Argentina-U.K. BITs. These shareholders thus benefit
from the treatment promised by Argentina to investments made by French, Spanish, and
U.K. investors in its territory. Consequently, under Article 8 of the French treaty and
Article X of the Spanish treaty, these shareholder Claimants are entitled to have recourse
to ICSID arbitration to enforce their treaty rights. Similarly, under Article 8(3) of the
Argentina-U.K. BIT, Claimant AWG is entitled to have recourse to UNCITRAL
arbitration to enforce its treaty rights. Neither the Argentina-France BIT, the Argentina-
Spain BIT, the Argentina-U.K. BIT, the ICSID Convention and Rules, nor the
UNCITRAL Rules limit the rights of shareholders to bring actions for direct, as opposed
to derivative, claims. This distinction, present in domestic corporate law of many

countries, does not exist in any of the treaties applicable to this case.

50. During the oral arguments, the Respondent relied heavily on the International

Court of Justice case Barcelona Traction,” in which Belgium sought damages against

24

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

Spain for injuries done to Belgian shareholders in a Canadian corporation that was
operating an electricity distribution system in Barcelona. The Court held that Belgium
lacked jus standi to exercise diplomatic protection of shareholders in a Canadian
company with respect to measures taken against that company in Spain. In the Tribunal’s
opinion, Barcelona Traction is not controlling in the present case. That decision, which
has been criticized by scholars over the years, concerned diplomatic protection of its
nationals by a State, an issue that is in no way relevant to the current case. Unlike the
present case, Barcelona Traction did not involve a bilateral treaty which specifically
provides that shareholders are investors and as such are entitled to have recourse to
international arbitration to protect their shares from host country actions that violate the
treaty. In this regard, it is interesting to note the ICJ’s commentary on the
underdeveloped state of international investment law in 1970, the year of the Barcelona

Traction decision:

“Considering the important developments of the last half-century, the growth of
foreign investments and the expansion of international activities of corporations,
in particular of holding companies, which are often multinational, and
considering the way in which the economic interests of states have proliferated, it
may at first sight appear surprising that the evolution of the law has not gone
further and that no generally accepted rules in the matter have crystallized on the

+ . 33
international plane.

At that time, the movement to conclude bilateral investment treaties was in its
infancy. Today, over 2200 bilateral investment treaties exist in the world, and Argentina
alone has concluded fifty seven. Moreover, there exists today a growing jurisprudence of
arbitral decisions interpreting investment treaty provisions, something which hardly
existed in 1970. The applicable international law on investment between Argentina and
France, Argentina and Spain, and Argentina and the United Kingdom found in the

relevant BITs is much more specific and far reaching than was the case in 1970.

51. Relying on the specific language of each BIT, which gives shareholders the right

to have recourse to arbitration to protect their shares, the Tribunal finds that Suez,

25

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

Vivendi, and AGBAR have standing to bring an ICSID arbitration and that AWG has
standing to bring an UNCITRAL arbitration. Many other decisions in ICSID cases,
including a good number involving Argentina, have made similar holdings. While the
Respondent’s concern about the danger of double recovery to the corporation and to the
shareholders for the same injury is to be noted, the Tribunal’s decision at this point
relates only to jurisdiction. Moreover, the Tribunal believed that any eventual award in
this case could be fashioned in such a way as to prevent double recovery. In any event,
the withdrawal of AASA from the case vitiates any concerns about a possible double
recovery to the shareholders and the corporation for the same injury in their proceedings.
Finally, the Tribunal believes that the discontinuance of these proceedings with respect to
AASA does not affect the rights of the shareholder Claimants to bring claims in
arbitration under the three BITs in question. The Claimant shareholders would have had
a right to bring such claims independently without the participation of AASA in first
instance. The initial participation of AASA and its subsequent withdrawal do not alter
the Claimant shareholders’ rights. According to Art.1(1)(b) of the Argentina-France BIT,
Article (2) of the Argentina-Spain BIT, and Article 1(a) of the Argentina-U.K. BIT
(quoted above, para. 47 and 48), shares fall within the definition of investments protected
by the BITs. AASA’s withdrawal cannot erase the legal effects of the shareholders’
investment nor affect their ius standi under the BITs. As a consequence, the Tribunal

concludes that the Respondent’s fifth objection to jurisdiction fails.

Sixth Jurisdictional Objection: Since Claimants AGBAR And AWG Respectively Have
Not Complied With The Provisions Of The Argentina-Spain BIT And The Argentina-
U.K. BIT Requiring Submission Of An Investment Dispute To Local Courts Before
Invoking International Arbitration, They Have No Standing To Have Recourse To
International Arbitration At This Time.

52. Claimant AGBAR, a national of Spain, seeks to assert its claims under the
Argentina-Spain BIT, and Claimant AWG presses its claim under the Argentina-U.K.
BIT. Unlike Article 8(2) of the Argentina-France BIT, which allows an investor to have
recourse to international arbitration after a period of six months of negotiation from the
time it asserts its claim, Article X of the Argentina-Spain BIT requires the investor, at the

end of the same six month period, to bring a judicial proceeding in the local courts and

26

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

allows it to have recourse to arbitration only after a further period of eighteen months in
the local courts. Similarly Article 8(2) of the Argentina-U.K BIT allows the investor to
have recourse to international arbitration only after a period of eighteen months has
elapsed from the time the dispute was submitted to a local court of the Contracting Party
in whose territory the investment was made. Neither AGBAR nor AWG has pursued
their claims by litigation in Argentina’s courts. As a result, the Respondent argues that
these two Claimants have no standing at the present time to pursue their cases before this
tribunal. In response, the Claimants argue that by virtue of the most-favored-nation
clause in the Argentina-Spain BIT, AGBAR may take advantage of the more favorable
treatment provided in the Argentina-France BIT with respect to dispute resolution and
that therefore they may bring their action to ICSID without first pursuing their claims in
the local courts of Argentina. Similarly, AWG asserts that it may have recourse to
UNCITRAL arbitration because the most-favored-nation clause in the Argentina-U.K.
BIT allows it to have the benefit the more favorable treatment provided in the Argentina-
France BIT with respect to dispute resolution. The Respondent opposes this
interpretation of the Argentina-Spain and Argentina-U.K. BITs, arguing that the most-
favored-nation clause in both treaties does not include matters relating to investment

dispute settlement.

53. A decision on this objection requires the Tribunal, as with Respondent’s other
objections, to begin with an interpretation and analysis of the relevant BIT provisions.
Article IV of the Argentina-Spain BIT, entitled “Tratamiento” (Treatment) is relied upon
by AGBAR as obviating the need to have recourse to Argentine courts before bringing an

international arbitration. The first three paragraphs of Article IV provide as follows:

1. Cada Parte garantizard en su territorio un tratamiento justo y equitativo a

las inversiones por inversores de la otra Parte.
2. En todas las materias regidas por el presente Acuerdo, este tratamiento

no serd menos favorable que el otorgado por cada Parte a las inversiones

realizadas en su territorio por inversores de un tercer pais.

27

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)

Decision on Jurisdiction

3. Este tratamiento no se extenderd, sin embargo, a los privilegios que una

Parte conceda a los inversores de un tercer Estado en virtud de su participacién

en:

Una zona de libre cambio

Una unién aduanera

Un mercado comin

Un acuerdo de integracién regional, 0

Una organizacion de asistencia econémica mutual en virtud de un
acuerdo firmado antes de la entrada en vigor del presente Acuerdo
que prevea disposiciones andlogas a aquellas que son otorgadas

por esa Parte a los participantes de dicha organizacion.”

The English translation of this provision in the United Nations Treaty Series is as

follows:

1. Each Party shall guarantee in its territory fair and equitable treatment of

investments made by investors of the other Party.

2. In all matters governed by this Agreement, such treatment shall be no less

favorable than that accorded by each Party to investment made in its territory by

investors of a third country.

3. Such treatment shall not, however, extend to the privileges which either

Party may grant to investors of a third State by virtue of its participation in:

A free trade area;

A customs union:

A common market;

A regional integration agreement; or

An organization of mutual economic assistance by virtue of an
agreement concluded prior to the entry into force of this
Agreement, containing terms similar to those accorded by that

Party to participants of said organization.”

28

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

54. In interpreting these provisions, the Tribunal is guided by established principles of
treaty interpretation as provided by Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, pursuant to which treaty language is to be interpreted in accordance with its
“ordinary meaning.” In that respect, the text of the treaty is presumed to be the authentic
expression of the parties’ intentions. The starting place for any exercise in interpretation

is therefore the treaty text itself.

55. The text quoted above clearly states that “in all matters” (en todas las materias) a
Contracting party is to give a treatment no less favorable than that which it grants to
investments made in its territory by investors from any third country. Article X of the
Argentina-Spain BIT specifies in detail the processes for the “Settlement of Disputes
between a Party and Investors of the other Party.” Consequently, dispute settlement is
certainly a “matter” governed by the Argentina-Spain BIT. The word “treatment” is not
defined in the treaty text. However, the ordinary meaning of that term within the context
of investment includes the rights and privileges granted and the obligations and burdens
imposed by a Contracting State on investments made by investors covered by the treaty.
In the present situation, Argentina concluded a BIT with France which permits aggrieved
investors, after six months’ of attempting to resolve their disputes to have recourse to
international arbitration without the necessity of first bringing a case in the local courts of
a Contracting State. Consequently, French investments in Argentina, as a result of the
Argentina-France BIT, receive a more favorable treatment than do Spanish investments
in Argentina under the Argentina-Spain BIT. That being the case, by virtue paragraph (2)
of Article IV, Spanish investments are entitled to a treatment with respect to dispute
settlement no less favorable than the one accorded to French investments. In specific
terms, granting a treatment to Spanish investments that is no less favorable than that
granted to French investments would mean that the holders of Spanish investments would
be able to invoke international arbitration against Argentina on the same terms as the
holders of French investments. That is to say, Spanish investors, like French investors,
may have recourse to international arbitration, provided they comply with the six months
negotiation period but without the need to proceed before the local courts of Argentina

for a period of eighteen months.

29

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

56. The language of the most-favored-nation clause in the Argentina-U.K. BIT, relied
upon by AWG, differs from that of the Argentina-Spain BIT. Article 3 of the Argentina-
U.K. BIT provides:

National Treatment and Most-favored-nation Provisions

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investments or returns
of investors of the other Contracting Party to treatment less favorable than that
which it accords to investments or returns of its own investors or to

investments or returns of investors of any third state.

(2) Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investors of the

other Contracting Party, as regards their management, maintenance, use,

 

joy or dis} l of their ii to less favorable
than that which it accords to its own investors or to investors of any third
state.
Like the Argentina-Spain BIT, Article 7 of the Argentina-U.K. BIT, contains a list
of matters that are excepted from most-favored-nation treatment. Dispute resolution is

not among them.

57. Despite the difference in language of the most-favored-nation clauses in the two
BITs, the Tribunal believes an interpretation of each leads to the same result. The
Argentina-U.K. BIT, like the Argentina-Spain BIT, does not define the word “treatment.”
The Tribunal gives that word the same interpretation in the two treaties: the rights and
privileges granted and the obligations and burdens imposed by a Contracting State on
investments made by investors covered by the treaty. Paragraph (2) of Article 3 of the
Argentina-UK BIT, quoted above, states that a Contracting state may not subject an
investor to a treatment less favorable with respect to “the management, maintenance,
use, enjoyment or disposal of their investment” than it accords to investors from other
countries. The right to have recourse to international arbitration is very much related to
investors’ “management, maintenance, use, enjoyment, or disposal of their investments.”

It is particularly related to the “maintenance” of an investment, a term which includes the

30

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

protection of an investment. Thus French investors by virtue of the Argentina-France
BIT having the right to proceed directly in international arbitration without the necessity
of first submitting their claims to local courts are treated more favorably with respect the
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment and disposal of their investments than U.K.
investors who may not. That being the case, U.K. investors may invoke the most-
favored-nation clause in the Argentina-U.K. BIT to order to obtain the more favorable

treatment accord to French investors.

58. Argentina contests this interpretation on various grounds. First it argues that the
Contracting States did not intend the most-favored-nation clause in Article IV of the
Argentina-Spain BIT or Article 3 of the Argentina-U.K. BIT to cover dispute settlement.
The Tribunal finds no evidence in the BIT texts or elsewhere to support that conclusion.
The text of the both BITs strongly implies just the opposite. Paragraph 3 of Article IV in
the Argentina-Spain BIT and Article 7 of the Argentina-U.K. BIT contains a definite list
of matters that the Contracting States specifically excluded from the most-favored-nation
clause. Dispute settlement is not among them. The failure to refer among these excluded
items to any matter remotely connected to dispute settlement reinforces the interpretation
that the most-favored-nation clause includes dispute settlement. In negotiating the
Argentina-Spain BIT, the Contracting States considered and decided that certain matters
should be excluded. The fact that dispute settlement was not covered among the
excluded matters must be interpreted to mean that dispute settlement is included within
the term “all matters” in paragraph 2. A similar argument applies to the Argentina-U.K.
BIT which in its provisions excluding certain matters from its most-favored-nation clause
makes no mention of dispute settlement. Moreover subsequent U.K. BITs make clear
through express language that the United Kingdom’s intent is not to exclude dispute
settlement from the coverage of the U.K. BIT’s most-favored-nation clause. United
Kingdom BITs concluded after 1993, for example with Honduras, Albania, and
Venezuela, each add a third paragraph to the two paragraphs (quota above in para 56),

constituting its most-favored-nation clause:

31

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

(3) For the avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment provided in
paragraphs (1) and (2) above shall apply to the provisions of Articles I to 11 of

this Agreement.”

The inference to be drawn from this language is that this new paragraph, by its terms, is
intended to clarify what had been the United Kingdom’s preexisting intention in
negotiating its BITs: that the most-favored-nation clause is to cover all the articles ( i.e.

Articles 1 to 11) of the treaty.

59. After an analysis of the substantive provisions of the BITs in question, the
Tribunal finds no basis for distinguishing dispute settlement matters from any other
matters covered by a bilateral investment treaty. From the point of view of the promotion
and protection of investments, the stated purposes of both the Argentina-Spain BIT and
the Argentina-U.K. BIT, dispute settlement is as important as other matters governed by
the BITs and is an integral part of the investment protection regime that the respective
sovereign states have agreed upon. In this context, the Respondent further argues that
this Tribunal should apply the principle of ejusdem generis in interpreting the BITs so as
to exclude dispute settlement matters from the scope of the most-favored-nation clause,
because the category “dispute settlement” is not of the same genus as the matters
addressed in the clause. The Tribunal finds no basis for applying the ejusdem generis

principle to arrive at that result.

60. Similarly, Argentina contends that the Tribunal should interpret the most-favored-
nation clauses strictly because such an approach would restrict the principle of res inter
alios acta, so as to limit the effects of the treaty to the parties. The Tribunal cannot
follow this argument. The BITs in question contain mutual promises by Argentina and
Spain and Argentina and the United Kingdom to treat each others’ nationals in the same
way that they treat nationals from any third State. The principle of res inter alios acta
has no application, because the Tribunal is not applying the Argentina-France BIT
(presumably the alleged act between third parties) to this case. Rather it is applying the
provisions on equality of treatment of the Argentina-Spain BIT and the Argentina-U.K.

BIT.

32

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

6l. Further, the Respondent seems to argue that the Tribunal should interpret a most-
favored-nation provision strictly. Here too, the Tribunal finds no rule and no reason for
interpreting the most-favored-nation treatment clause any differently from any other
clause in the two BITs. The language of the two treaties is clear. Applying the normal
interpretational methodology to Article IV of the Argentina-Spain BIT, the Tribunal finds
that the ordinary meaning of that provision is that matters relating to dispute settlement
are included within the term “all matters” and that therefore AGBAR may take advantage
of the more favorable treatment provided to investors in the Argentina- France BIT with
respect to dispute settlement. Similarly, in the case of the Argentina-U.K. BIT, rights

with respect to dispute settlement “regard” the management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment and disposal of an investment as stated in Article 3 of the treaty; consequently,
AWG may also take advantage of the more favorable treatment that the Argentina-

France BIT accords to French investors.

62. The Tribunal finds strong support for its conclusions in previous ICSID cases. In
particular, Maffezini v. Spain 35 applied the Argentina-Spain BIT, the very treaty at issue
in the present case, to find that the most favored-nation-clause allowed the Claimant, a
national of Argentina, to take advantage of Spain’s BIT with Chile to avoid the necessity
of having recourse to the local courts in Spain before bringing an ICSID action. The
most relevant passages of Maffezini are worth quoting in full because they well show the

rationale behind the application of the most-favored nation clause to dispute settlement:

"The Tribunal considers that there are good reasons to conclude that today
dispute settlement arrangements are inextricably related to the protection of
foreign investors, as they are also related to the protection of rights of
traders under treaties of commerce. Consular jurisdiction in the past, like
other forms of extraterritorial jurisdiction, were considered essential for the
protection of rights of trader and, hence, were regarded not merely as
procedural devices but as arrangements designed to better protect the rights
of such person abroad. It follows that such arrangements, even if not strictly a

part of the material aspect of the trade and investment policy pursued by

33

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

treaties of commerce and navigation, were essential for the adequate

protection of the rights they sought to guarantee.

International arbitration and other dispute settlement arrangements have
replaced these older and frequently abusive practices of the past. These modern
developments are essential, however, to the protection of the rights envisaged
under the pertinent treaties; they are also closely linked to the material aspects of

the treatment accorded.”*°

These considerations then lead the Maffezini tribunal to conclude with the following
words:
“[I]f a third-party treaty contains provisions for the settlement of disputes that
are more favorable to the protection of the investor's rights and interests than
those in the basic treaty, such provisions may be extended to the beneficiary of the
most favored nation clause as they are fully compatible with the ejusdem generis
principle. 237
63. Other cases that have considered and rejected arguments similar to the ones raised
by Argentina in the present case and found that the most-favored-nation-clause allows a
claimant to take advantage of more favorable dispute resolution provisions found in other
treaties are in particular Siemens A.G. v. the Argentine Republic*and MTD Equity Sdn.
Bhd and MTD Chile SA v. Republic of Chile.”

64. In opposition to this line of cases, the Respondent referred during oral argument
to Plama Consortium Limited v. the Republic of Bulgaria.” In that case, the Claimant, a
Cypriot company, sought to establish ICSID jurisdiction on the basis of the Energy
Charter Treaty and of a BIT between Cyprus and Bulgaria. The tribunal affirmed ICSID
jurisdiction under the Energy Charter Treaty; for various reasons, it also considered
whether it had jurisdiction under the Bulgaria—Cyprus BIT. Such BIT contained a very
limited international dispute settlement offer. In essence, it provided that only the
measure of compensation for expropriation could be submitted to an UNCITRAL

arbitration. It contained no offer for ICSID arbitration. It did, however, embody a most-

34

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

favored-nation clause. Since other BITs concluded by Bulgaria provide for ICSID
arbitration, the Claimant relied upon such most-favored-nation clause to take advantage
of the ICSID dispute settlement mechanism included in the other BITs. The tribunal did
not follow the Claimant and ruled that it lacked jurisdiction under the Bulgaria-Cyprus

BIT.

65. Having duly considered the reasons set forth in the Plama decision, this Tribunal
comes to the conclusion that, whatever their merits, that decision is in any event clearly
distinguishable from the present case on a number of grounds. First, it must be noted that
the most-favored-nation-clause in the Argentina-Spain BIT is much broader in scope than
was the language of the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT in Plama. Whereas the Argentina-Spain
BIT states that “/iJn all matters governed by this Agreement, ...treatment shall be no less
favorable than that accorded by each Party to investment made in its territory by investors
of a third country” (emphasis supplied), the comparable clause in the Bulgaria-Cyprus
BIT stated that “[e]ach Contracting Party shall apply to the investments in its territory by
investors of the other Contracting Party a treatment which is not less favorable than that
accorded to investments by investors of third states.” The use of the expression “in all
matters” when coupled with a list of specific exceptions that does not include dispute
resolution, leaves no doubt that dispute resolution is covered by the most-favored-nation
clause. Similarly, the most-favored-nation clause in the Argentina-U.K. BIT, expressly
enumerating the matters which it covers (i.e. “management, maintenance, use, enjoyment
or disposal of their investments”) also provides greater specificity of coverage than does
the clause being interpreted in Plama. Second, and perhaps more important, the Plama
tribunal was guided by the actual intent of the contracting States. Subsequent
negotiations between Bulgaria and Cyprus showed that the “two Contracting Parties to
the BIT themselves did not consider that the MFN provision extends to the dispute

settlement provisions in other BITs™!,

This was in line with the fact that, at the time of
conclusion of the BIT, “Bulgaria was under a communist regime, which favored bilateral
investment treaties with limited protection for foreign investors and very limited

international dispute resolution provisions. 4

No evidence of any comparable intent has
been suggested in this case. Indeed, in regard to the Argentina-U.K. BIT, the inference to

be drawn from the evidence of subsequent negotiating behavior of the United Kingdom

35

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

Government, discussed in para. 58 above, is just the opposite of that in Plama. Third, as
a further distinguishing factor, one may refer to the effect of the most-favored-nation
provision. In Plama, the Claimant attempted to replace the dispute settlement provisions
in the applicable Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT in toto by a dispute resolution mechanism

incorporated from another treaty.

Without expressing an opinion on whether a most-
favored-nation clause may achieve such a result, this Tribunal distinguishes that radical
effect from the much more limited one caused here, which merely consists in waiving a
preliminary step in accessing a mechanism, i.e., international arbitration, offered in both

the BITs under consideration in these cases.

66. The Plama tribunal also stated, in its reasons, that an arbitration agreement must
be clear and unambiguous, especially where it is incorporated by reference to another
text. This Tribunal does not share this view. As stated above, it believes that dispute
resolution provisions are subject to interpretation like any other provisions of a treaty,

neither more restrictive nor more liberal.

67. Be this as it may, at the end of its reasoning, the Plama tribunal suggested what
could be called a “non-sense exception” to the non-application of the MFN clause.
Addressing the very requirement at issue here, i.e., that the dispute be tried in local courts
during eighteen months, which it called “a curious requirement,” the Plama tribunal said
that it “sympathize[d] with a tribunal that attempts to neutralize such a provision that is
nonsensical from a practical point of view” (emphasis supplied).** It therefore concluded

that “[t]he decision in Maffezini is perhaps understandable.”*°

68. For all these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that AGBAR, relying on Article IV
of the Argentina-Spain BIT, and AWG, relying on Article 3 of the Argentina-U.K. BIT ,
may invoke the more favorable treatment afforded in the Argentina-France BIT and may
therefore bring an international arbitration without the necessity of first having recourse
to the local courts of Argentina. The Respondent’s sixth objection to jurisdiction

therefore fails.

36

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

IV. Decision on Jurisdiction

69. After having considered each and every jurisdictional objection raised by the
Respondent, the Tribunal finds that it must reject them all, except for the fourth objection
based on the status of AASA as an Argentine corporation, which objection has now
become moot because of the discontinuance of the proceedings in the case with respect to
AASA. The Tribunal thus decides that ICSID and this Tribunal have jurisdiction over
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19 and that this Tribunal has jurisdiction over the UNCITRAL
arbitration of AWG and the Argentine Republic. The Tribunal therefore directs that the
former case proceed on the merits in accordance with the ICSID Convention, the ICSID
Rules, and the applicable bilateral investment treaties and that the latter case proceed on
the merits in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and the applicable
bilateral investment treaty. The Tribunal has, accordingly, made the necessary Orders for
the continuation of the procedure pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(4) and Article
21 of the UNCITRAL Rules.

[Signature]

Prof. Jeswald W. Salacuse
President of the Tribunal

[Signature] [Signature]
Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler Prof. Pedro Nikken
Arbitrator Arbitrator

37

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

' On the same date, the Centre received two further requests for arbitration under the ICSID

Convention regarding water concessions in Argentina from (i) Aguas Cordobesas $.A., Suez, and Sociedad
General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A. and (ii) Aguas Provinciales de Santa Fe, Suez, Sociedad General de
Aguas de Barcelona, S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales del Agua, S.A. regarding similar investments
and disputes. As explained below, these requests would later be registered by the Centre and submitted by

agreement of the parties to one same Tribunal.

Accord entre le Gouvernement de la République francaise et le Gouvernement de la République

sur I et la éci des investi (Agreement between the
Argentine Republic and the Republic of France for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of

Investments), signed on 3 July 1991 and in force since 3 March 1993; 1728 UNTS 298.

Acuerdo para la promocién y proteccién reciprocas de inversiones entre el Reino de Espajia y la
Reptiblica Argentina (Agreement on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the
Kingdom of Spain and the Argentine Republic), signed in Buenos Aires on 3 October 1991 and in force
since 28 September 1992; 1699 UNTS 202.

4 Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the Government of the Argentine Republic for the Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed 11
December 1990, and in force since 19 February 1993.

5 As noted in footnote 1 supra, on this same date the Centre registered two further requests for
arbitration regarding water concessions in Argentina: ICSID Case No. ARB/03/18 (Aguas Cordobesas
S.A., Suez, and AGBAR v. Argentine Republic) and ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17 (Aguas Provinciales de
Santa Fe, S.A., Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and Interagua Servicios Integrales del
Agua, S.A. v. Argentine Republic).

° During the session the parties agreed on a series of procedural matters related to the present cases

and ICSID Cases Nos. ARB/03/17 and ARB/03/18. These agreements included a staggered schedule of

 

written and oral submissions. A copy of the minutes of the session is enclosed as Annex. No.1 to this
Decision.

7 A similar request was subsequently filed with the same tribunal by a nongovernmental
organization and three named individuals in ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17. The Tribunal’s Order in
Response to the Petition for Participation as Amicus Curiae of March 17, 2006, in that case is available
online at ICSID’s website www.worldbank.org/icsid.

‘ Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits of 1 January 2005. para. 9 and Exhibit C2.
Law No. 23,696 of 18 August 1989 (the State Reform Law).

» Law No. 23,928 of 27 March 1991.

" Decreto Nro. 2074/1990, Bs. As., 03/10/1990.

9

 

R See, e.g., The “Information Memorandum” issued by OSN, dated November 1991, Claimants’

Exhibit C-19

8 Decree No. 999/92 of 30 June 1992, BS. As. 18/06/1992.

38

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Claimants’ Memorial, paras. 23-24.

Law No. 25,561 (Ley de Emergencia Piblica y de Reforma del Régimen Cambiario) of January 6,

Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 58-62.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 18.

Methanex Corporation v. United States of America. I“ Partial Award, August 7, 2002,
Respondent’s Exhibit AL RA 3.

8 Claimants’ Counter Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 67 with citation.

0 See Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary 114 (2001).
at See Case concerning East Timor, 1995 ICJ Reports 89, 99.
2 CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. The Republic of Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Decision

 

of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (July 17, 2003), 42 ILM 788 (2003); also available online at

 

www.worldbank.org/ics
33 Ibid at para. 33.

ad Ibid at para. 27.
25

; Claimants’ Legal Authorities No. 85.

Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States, 1 ICSID Reports 28; also available online at
www.worldbank.org/icsid.

26 Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary 105 (2001).

7 Contrato de Concesién dated 28 April 1993, between the National State and Aguas Argentinas
S.A. Articulo 15.4 (Jurisdiccién): A los efectos de la interpretacién y ejecucién de este Contrato, las partes
se someten a la jurisdiccién exclusiva de los tribunales en lo contencioso administrativo federal de la
Cuidad de Buenos Aires.

8 Compaiifa de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal (formerly Compagnie Générale des
Eaux) v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment (3 July 2002) paras. 95
and 96. Available online at www.worldbank.org/icsid.

~ E.g., Lanco International Inc. v. The Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/6),
Preliminary Decision on Jurisdiction, at sections 39-40; Salini Costruttori SpA and Italstrade v. Kingdom
of Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision on Jurisdiction, (23 July 2001) at para. 62; Azurix Corp.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Decision on Jurisdiction (8 December 2003), at para.
76.
0 United Nations Treaty Series, volume 1728, p. 298. The official Spanish text of the above-quoted
provisions is as follows:

1. El término “inversiones” designa los activos tales como los bienes, derechos e intereses de

cualquier naturaleza y, en particular, aunque no exclusivamente:

b) las acciones, primas de emisién y otras formas de participacién atin minoritarias o indirectas, en
las sociedades constituidas en el territorio de una de las Partes Contratantes.

39

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

The official French text of the quoted provision is as follows:

  

1. Le terme «investissement» désigne des avoirs tels que les biens, droits, et intéréts de toute nature, et

plus particulitrement mais non exclusivement:

b) Les actions, primes d’émission et autres, formes de participation, méme minoritaires ou
indirectes aux sociétés constituées sur le territoire de lune des Parties contractantes;
* Ibid.

2 Case Concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company (Belgium v. Spain),

Judgment of 5 February 1970, 1970 LJ. 3.
3 Barcelona Traction Company (Belgium v. Spain), 1970 L.C.J. 3, 46-47 (1970).
“ E.g., CMS Gas Transmission Company v. the Republic of Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8).

 

Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (17 July 2003); Enron Corporation & Ponderosa
Assets, LP v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3), Decision on Jurisdiction (14 January
2003); Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic (ICSID No ARB/02/8), Decision on Jurisdiction (3 August
2004).

35 Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. the Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Decision of the
Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (25 January 2000); available online at www.worldbank.org/icsid.

36 Ibid., para. 54-55.

7 Ibid. para. 56.

8 ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3 August 2004, in particular para.102:

“Access to these [dispute settlement] mechanisms is part of the protection offered under the Treaty. It is

 

part of the treatment of foreign investors and investment and of the advantages through the MFN Clause”;

available online at www.worldbank.org/icsid.

* ICSID Case no. ARB/O1/7, Award of 25 May 2004.

40 Plama Consortium Limited (Claimant) and Republic of Bulgaria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24),
Decision on Jurisdiction (8 February 2005), available online at www.worldbank.org/icsid

4 Ibid., para. 195.

2 Ibid., paras. 196.

8 Ibid., para. 210.

“4 Ibid., paras. 198ff.

“5 Ibid., para. 224.

46 Ibid., para. 224.

40

