INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the annulment proceeding between

SUEZ, SOCIEDAD GENERAL DE AGUAS DE BARCELONA S.A.

AND VIVENDI UNIVERSAL S.A.

Claimants

and

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19

 

DECISION ON ARGENTINA’S APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT

 

Members of the Committee
Professor Dr. Klaus Sachs, President
Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno B., Member of the Committee
Sir Trevor Carmichael, Member of the Committee

Secretary of the Committee
Mr. Francisco Grob, ICSID

Date of dispatch to the Parties: May 5, 2017

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Argentine Republic:

Dr. Bernardo Saravia Frias
Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Posadas 1641

CP 1112 Buenos Aires,

Argentine Republic

Representing Suez, Vivendi Universal S.A., and
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A.:

Mr. Nigel Blackaby

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
700 13th St NW,

Washington, DC 20005

USA

Mr. Elliot Friedman

Ms. Noiana Marigo

Mr. Ben Love

Ms. Amanda Lee

Ms. Elizabeth Skeen

Mr. Eric Brandon

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP
601 Lexington Avenue, 31st floor

New York, NY 10022-4664

USA

Til.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1

A. — Procedure on Argentina’s Request for a Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the
Award 3

 

 

B. Procedure on Argentina’s Application for Annulment of the Award

THE DECISION ON JURISDICTION, THE DECISION ON LIABILITY, AND THE
AWARD.

A. Decision on Jurisdiction Dated 3 August 2006
B. Decision on Liability Dated 30 July 2010...
C. Award Dated 9 April 2015

 

 

THE PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS AND RELIEF SOUGHT

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. — Summary of Respondent’s Cc i 6

B. _ Respondent’s Relief Sought 8

C. Summary of Claimants’ Contentions .

D. — Claimants’ Relief Sought 10

GENERAL REMARKS AND SCOPE OF REVIEW IN ANNULMENT PROCEEDINGS
10

A. — Proper Constitution of the Tribunal (Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention).............12

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Summary of Respondent’s Position
2. Summary of Claimants’ Position ....
3. Committee’s Analysis 17
B. Manifest Excess of Powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention) ....
1. Summary of Respondent’s Position
2. Summary of Claimants’ Position
3. Cc ittee’s Analysis
Cc Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure (Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention) 31
1. Summary of Respondent’s Position 31
2. Summary of Claimants’ Position ....
3. Cc ittee’s Analysis 33
D. Failure to State Reasons in the Award (Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention) ........ 35
1. Summary of Respondent’s Position

 

2. Summary of Claimants’ Position ....

3. Cc ittee’s Analysis 40

VI. THE COMMITTEE’S VIEWS 43

A.

First Set of Grounds for Annulment Relating to the Appointment of Prof. Kaufmann-

 

Kohler as Director of UBS and Her Alleged Failure to Inform and Investigate .....

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Summary of Respondent’s Position

2. Summary of Claimants’ Position ....

3. Cc ittee’s Analysis 50
a. The Tribunal’s Finding 53
b. The Committee’s Considerations on the Tribunal’s Findings .....
c. The Committee’s Considerations on Relevant Case Law oe
d.— Conclusi 61

 

Second Set of Grounds for Annulment Relating to the Alleged Failure to Comply with

 

the Requirement to Submit the Case to the Local Courts for 18 Months.....

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Summary of Respondent’s Position
2. Summary of Claimants’ Position....
3. Cc ittee’s Analysis 68
a. The Tribunal’s Finding 69
b. The Committee’s Considerations on the Tribunal’s Findings ..... a
c. Conclusi 73
Third Set of Grounds for Annulment Relating to the State of Necessity under Customary
International Law 73
1. Summary of R dent’s Position 7B
2. Summary of Claimants’ Position... 76
3. Committee’s Analysis 79
a. The Tribunal’s Finding 79
b. The Committee’s Considerations on the Tribunal’s Finding: 82

  

i. The Tribunal’s Alleged Failure to Establish the Legal Standards

ii. The Tribunal’s Alleged Failure to Consider Relevant Evidence........ 84

c. Conclusi 87
Fourth Set of Grounds for Annulment Relating to the Valuation of Damages........

 

1. Summary of R ’s Position 87
a. Compensation for the Effects of a Measure that Did Not Violate the BITs .88

b. Methodology and Calculation of Damages.......

 

c. M: Contract.

 

2. Summary of Claimants’ Position ....

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Calculation of Damages to Provide Full Reparation at the Date of
Respondent’s Breach
b. Construction of the “But For’ Scenario... .
c. Comp ion for M Fee: 97
3. Committee’s Analysis 98
a. Compensation for the Effects of a Measure that Did Not Violate the BITs .99
b. Methodology and Calculation of Damages......
i. Modeling of the But-For Scenario...
ii Interest Rate Applied by the Tribunal
c. M Contract
i. Management Contract as Protected Investment under the BIT........ 116
ii. Damages for Services That Were Never Rendered...
iii. Failure to Assess the Legal Nature of Suez’s Claim .....
4. Conel
E. — Overall Conch
VII. COST DECISION. 120
A. — Argentina’s of Costs 120
B. — Claimants’ of Costs 120
C.  Committee’s Decision 121

VIII. DECISION

 

126

 

AASA
AGBAR
Argentina-France BIT

Argentina-Spain BIT

Argentina’s Application

Argentina’s Memorial

Argentina’s Reply
Award

BITs

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial

Claimants’ Rejoinder

Committee

Decision on Disqualification

Decision on Jurisdiction

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Aguas Argentinas S.A.
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.

Agreement between the Government of the Argentine
Republic and the Government of the French Republic on the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed
on 3 July 1991 and in force since 3 March 1993

Agreement between the Argentine Republic and the
Kingdom of Spain on the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments, signed on 3 October 1991 and in
force since 28 September 1992

Argentina’s Application on Annulment dated 7 August 2015

Argentina’s Memorial on Annulment dated 24 February
2016

Argentina’s Reply on Annulment dated 18 July 2016

Award dated 9 April 2015 rendered in the case of Suez,
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi
Universal S.A. v. the Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/19)

Argentina-France BIT and Argentina-Spain BIT

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Annulment dated 24 May
2016

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Annulment dated 12 September
2016

Ad hoc committee in the case of Suez, Sociedad General de
Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. the
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)

Decision on a Second Proposal for the Disqualification of a
Member of the Arbitral Tribunal dated 12 May 2008
rendered in the case of Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de
Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. the Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)

Decision on Jurisdiction dated 3 August 2006 rendered in
the case of Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona
S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. the Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)

Decision on Liability

ETOSS

FET
IBA Guidelines

Ic]
ICSID
ICSID Arbitration Rules

ICSID Background Paper on
Annulment

ICSID Convention

IDB

ILC Draft Articles

MEN
Resolution 602/99
Tribunal

Vienna Convention

Vivendi

Decision on Liability dated 30 July 2010 rendered in the
case of Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A.
and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. the Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)

Ente Tripartito de Obras y Servicios Sanitario, the
regulatory authority in Argentina

Fair and Equitable Treatment

IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International
Arbitration adopted by resolution of the IBA Council on 22
May 2004

International Court of Justice
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings in
force as of April 10, 2006

Background Paper on Annulment for the
Administrative Council (updated version, May 2016)

ICSID

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States

Inter-American Development Bank

Draft Articles of Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts adopted by the International Law
Commission in 2001

Most Favored Nation
Resolution ETOSS No. 602/99 dated 8 July 1999

Arbitral tribunal in the case of Suez, Sociedad General de
Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. the
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19)

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties signed on 23
May 1969 and entered into force on 27 January 1980

Vivendi Universal, S.A.

IL.

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This annulment proceeding concerns an arbitration submitted to the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) on the basis of the Agreement between the
Government of the Argentine Republic and the Government of the French Republic on the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed on 3 July 1991 and in force
since 3 March 1993 (the “Argentina-France BIT”), and the Agreement between the
Argentine Republic and the Kingdom of Spain on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection
of Investments, signed on 3 October 1991 and in force since 28 September 1992 (the
“Argentina-Spain BIT”), as well as the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (the “ICSID Convention”).

The Parties in this proceeding are Suez, a company incorporated under the laws of France,
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A. (“AGBAR”), a company incorporated
under the laws of Spain, Vivendi Universal, S.A. (“Vivendi”), a company incorporated
under the laws of France (together “Claimants”), and the Argentine Republic
(“Respondent” or “Argentina”), (each a “Party” and together, the “Parties”).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 21 August 2015, pursuant to Rule 50(2) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (the “ICSID Arbitration Rules”), ICSID registered an application from the
Argentina for the annulment of the Award dated 9 April 2015 (the “Award”), as well as the
Decision on Jurisdiction dated 3 August 2006 (the “Decision on Jurisdiction”) and the
Decision on Liability dated 30 July 2010 (the “Decision on Liability”), which form an
integral part of the Award, rendered by the tribunal (the “Tribunal”) in the case of Suez,
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. the Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19 (“Argentina’s Application”).

Argentina’s Application was made within the time period provided in Article 52(2) of the
ICSID Convention.

Inits Application, Argentina seeks annulment of the Award on four grounds set out in Article
52(1) of the ICSID Convention, specifically claiming that:

a) _ the Tribunal was not properly constituted;
b) _ the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

c) _ there has been a serious departure from fundamental rules of procedure; and

d) the Award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

Argentina’s Application also contained a request under Article 52(5) of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules for a stay of enforcement of the
Award until Argentina’s Application is decided.

Upon registering Argentina’s Application, in accordance with Rule 50(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, the Secretary-General of ICSID transmitted a Notice of Registration to
the Parties. The Parties were also notified that, pursuant to Rule 54(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, the enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed.

By letter dated 23 October 2015, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, the Parties were notified that an ad hoc Committee composed of Professor Dr. Klaus
Sachs (a national of Germany), Sir Trevor Carmichael (a national of Barbados), and Mr.
Rodrigo Oreamuno B. (a national of Costa Rica) (the “Committee’”) had been constituted.
On the same date, the Parties were informed that Mr. Francisco Grob, Legal Counsel, ICSID,
would serve as Secretary of the Committee. The Parties were notified in this same letter that
Prof. Dr. Sachs had been designated President of the Committee. Enclosed with the same
letter, the Parties were provided with copies of the Declaration pursuant to Rules 52(2) and
6(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules signed by each member of the Committee.

By letter of 3 November 2015, the Secretary of the Committee asked the Parties whether
they would agree to retain the services of an assistant to the President of the Committee, Ms.
Susanne Hiausler. Argentina and Claimants agreed to Ms. Hiausler’s appointment by
communications of 10 and 11 November 2015, respectively.

The first session of the Committee was held, with the agreement of the Parties, on 24
November 2015, by telephone conference. The Parties agreed that the annulment
proceedings would be conducted in accordance with the ICSID Arbitration Rules in force as
of 10 April 2006. A schedule was set for the Parties’ main submissions on Argentina’s
Application. The Parties were also asked to agree on a date for the hearing on annulment and
on a procedural schedule for the filing of their submissions concerning the
continuation/termination of the stay of enforcement of the Award.

On 7 December 2015, the Parties informed the Committee of their agreement on the schedule
for the filing of written submissions on Argentina’s request for a stay of enforcement of the
Award. On 9 December 2015, the Committee approved the schedule of proceedings agreed
upon by the Parties and fixed a date for a hearing on Argentina’s request for continuation of
the stay of the enforcement of the Award.

By letter of 4 January 2016, the Committee approved the Parties’ joint proposal to schedule
the hearing on annulment for 8 and 9 November 2016.

Procedure on Argentina’s Request for a Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of
the Award

As per the agreed and approved schedule for written pleadings:

a) on 22 December 2015, Argentina submitted its First Brief on Continuation of the Stay
of Enforcement of the Award;

b) on 19 January 2016, Claimants submitted their Response to the Argentine Republic’s
Request to Continue the Stay of Enforcement of the Award;

c) on 10 February 2016, Argentina submitted its Second Brief on Continuation of the
Stay of Enforcement of the Award; and

d) on 3 March 2016, Claimants submitted their Second Submission on the Argentine
Republic’s Request to Continue the Stay of Enforcement of the Award.

On 23 March 2016, the Committee held an oral hearing with the Parties in Washington DC
on Argentina’s request for continuation of the stay of the enforcement of the Award.

On 25 March 2016, Claimants submitted final versions of the slides presented during their
opening presentation and their responses to the Committee’s questions and offered to provide
copies of the legal authorities referenced but not on the record during the hearing. On 28
March 2016, Argentina submitted the slides presented during its opening presentation and
its responses to the questions asked by the Committee at the hearing.

On 1 April 2016, Claimants provided copies of the legal authorities referenced in the slides
presented by them at the hearing.

On 8 April 2016, Argentina submitted its comments about the final versions of the slides
presented by Claimants in response to the Committee’s questions and, upon leave of the
Committee, Claimants submitted a brief response on 12 April 2016.

On 22 April 2016, Claimants submitted copies of two legal authorities, which had not been
available on | April 2016, and upon leave of the Committee, Argentina filed its comments
together with two annexes on 29 April 2016.

On 7 June 2016, the Committee rendered its Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the
Award, by which it dismissed Respondent’s request to continue the stay of enforcement of

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

the Award and ordered that the stay of enforcement of the Award be terminated as of the
date thereof.

Procedure on Argentina’s Application for Annulment of the Award

As per the agreed and approved schedule for written pleadings, as further amended by the
Parties with the approval of the Committee on | July 2016:

a) on 24 February 2016, Respondent filed its Memorial on Annulment (“Argentina’s
Memorial”);

b) on 24 May 2016, Claimants filed their Counter-Memorial on Annulment (““Claimants’
Counter-Memorial”);

c) on 18 July 2016, Respondent filed its Reply on Annulment (“Argentina’s Reply”);
and

d) on 12 September 2016, Claimants filed their Rejoinder on Annulment (“Claimants’
Rejoinder”).

On 3 October 2016, Claimants informed the Committee that they wished to introduce a new
legal authority into the record, i.e., a decision issued by the US District Court for the District
of Columbia on 30 September 2016 in Republic of Argentina v. AWG Group Ltd., Civil
Action No. 15-1057 (BAH) (D.D.C.).

On 7 October 2016, Respondent objected to Claimants’ request to introduce a new legal
authority into the record.

On 12 October 2016, the Committee permitted Claimants to submit the new legal authority
into the record by 14 October 2016 and noted that both sides would have the opportunity to
comment on it as part of their oral submissions during the hearing in November 2016.

On 14 October 2016, Claimants submitted the new legal authority into the record.

On 8 and 9 November 2016, the Committee held an oral hearing with the Parties in
Washington DC on Respondent’s Application for annulment of the Award.

On 10 and 11 November, 2016, Argentina and Claimants, respectively, submitted the
demonstrative exhibits used during the hearing.

By letter dated 18 November 2016, the Committee informed the Parties that it had no further
questions for them to address in post-hearing submissions. The Parties were thus invited to
submit their statements of costs.

28.

29.

30.

31.

Il.

32.

33.

On 30 November 2016, Claimants submitted the Parties’ agreed revised version of the
Spanish and English transcripts, which Argentina confirmed the following day.

On 2 and 3 December 2016, Argentina and Claimants submitted their Statement of Costs,
respectively.

The Committee declared the proceeding closed on 1 May 2017, in accordance with Rules 53
and 38(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

The members of the Committee have deliberated by various means of communication and
have taken into consideration the Parties’ entire written and oral arguments and submissions.

THE DECISION ON JURISDICTION, THE DECISION ON LIABILITY, AND THE
AWARD

Respondent requests annulment of the Award dated 9 April 2015, as well as of the Decision
on Jurisdiction dated 3 August 2006 and the Decision on Liability dated 30 July 2016, which
it describes as an integral part of the Award.!

Decision on Jurisdiction Dated 3 August 2006

In its Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal rejected all of Argentina’s objections, except for
one which had become moot. The Tribunal found that the dispute was of legal nature and
arose directly out of Claimants’ investments in the water distribution and waste water
systems of the city of Buenos Aires and surrounding municipalities. The existence of a
dispute resolution clause in the concession contract concluded by Aguas Argentinas S.A.
(“AASA”), a company incorporated in Argentina in which Claimants were shareholders, and
the Argentine Government for the operation of the water concessions did not preclude
Claimants from bringing this arbitration. In the Tribunal’s view, Claimants had standing to
protect their interest as shareholders on their own right under the Argentina-France and the
Argentina-Spain BITs, as applicable, and AGBAR was entitled to invoke the more favorable
treatment afforded in the Argentina-France BIT to bring an arbitration without the need of
first having recourse to the local courts of Argentina.

' Argentina’s Application, 1.

34.

35.

IV.
36.

37.

Decision on Liability Dated 30 July 2010

The Tribunal determined in its Decision on Liability that Argentina did not expropriate
Claimants’ investment nor did it deny them full protection and security as required by the
applicable investment treaties. It found, however, that Argentina denied Claimants fair and
equitable treatment (“FET”). The Tribunal rejected Argentina’s necessity defense, including
its allegation that Article 5(3) of the Argentina-France BIT, as well as international law,
exempted Argentina from its BIT obligations during times of emergency. Although
Claimants had argued that Argentina’s unilateral termination of the Concession also violated
their rights under the investment treaties, the Tribunal rejected that claim, stating that it had
no jurisdiction to judge whether Argentina’s actions had breached the Concession Contract.

Award Dated 9 April 2015

The Tribunal awarded damages to Claimants in excess of USD 380 million, plus compound
interest. Suez was awarded USD 223,043,289 for losses on guaranteed (sponsored) debt,
equity and management fees. AGBAR was awarded USD 123,276,448 for losses on
guaranteed debt and equity, and Vivendi was awarded USD 37,261,504 for losses on
guaranteed debt and equity. On the issue of costs, the Tribunal determined that each party
should bear its own costs and that the cost of the proceedings shall be divided equally.

THE PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS AND RELIEF SOUGHT

Respondent seeks the annulment of the Award, which is resisted by Claimants.

Summary of Respondent’s Contentions
Respondent requests annulment of the Award invoking the following grounds:

(i) The Tribunal was not properly constituted (Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID
Convention);

(ii) The Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention);

(iii) There has been a serious departure from fundamental rules of procedure (Article
52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention); and

2 Argentina’s Reply, 8; Argentina’s Memorial, { 2; Argentina’s Application, {{ 3.

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

(iv) The Award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based (Article 52(1)(e) of
the ICSID Convention.

In relation to the scope of annulment proceedings, Respondent contends that the remedy of
annulment seeks to preserve the integrity of the ICSID dispute settlement mechanism in all
its facets, including the integrity of the tribunal, the process and the award.*

Respondent invokes four separate sets of reasons that warrant, in its view, the annulment of
the Award in this case.

First, Respondent claims that the appointment of Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler as director of UBS
on 19 April 2006, a Swiss bank which held shares and other interests in two of the Claimants
(Suez and Vivendi), and her alleged failure to disclose such appointment to the Parties to the
arbitration and to properly investigate the connections between UBS and the Parties to this
arbitration created justifiable doubts regarding her ability to act as an impartial and
independent arbitrator under Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention. Consequently, the
Tribunal was no longer properly constituted and a serious departure from fundamental rules
of procedure occurred (Articles 52(1)(a) and (d) of the ICSID Convention).*

Second, Respondent alleges that the Tribunal improperly applied the most-favored-nation
(“MEN”) clause of the Argentina-Spain BIT to a dispute settlement provision, enabling
AGBAR to circumvent the 18-month local court requirement of Article X of the Argentina-
Spain BIT. According to Respondent, in doing so the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers, failed to state the reasons on which its decision was based and seriously departed
from fundamental rules of procedure (Article 52(1)(b), (d) and (e) of the ICSID
Convention).>

Third, Respondent claims that the Tribunal failed to state the legal standards and to consider
the evidence submitted by Respondent in the context of its state of necessity defense and that
the Tribunal did not consider Respondent’s obligation to guarantee the human right to water.
In Respondent’s view, the Tribunal thereby failed to state the reasons on which its decision
was based (Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention).®

Fourth, Respondent invokes reasons relating to the valuation of damages, specifically: (i) the
valuation period because the Tribunal allegedly awarded damages for losses sustained after

3 Argentina’s Reply, 1-7.

+ Argentina’s Application, {| 23-33; Argentina’s Reply, {| 67-105.
5 Argentina’s Application, {{ 34-42; Argentina’s Reply, {| 106-130.
© Argentina’s Application, {{{ 43-47; Argentina’s Reply, {| 131-164.

44.

4S.

46.

the termination of the Concession Contract while finding that such termination did not
amount to a breach of the Treaty; (ii) the construction of the valuation exercise because it
allegedly adopted a series of presumptions for which it gave no reasons and which
contradicted other statements made by the Tribunal; and (iii) the management fees because
the Tribunal awarded losses in relation to the Management Contract without having
previously determined that it was a protected investment under the Treaty. In Respondent’s
view, the Tribunal thereby manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state the reasons for
the Award (Article 52(1)(b) and (e) of the ICSID Convention).’

Respondent’s Relief Sought
Respondent requests:*

(i) _ that, pursuant to Article 52 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 50 of the Arbitration
Rules, the Award, as well as the Decision on Jurisdiction and the Decision on
Liability which are an integral part thereof, be annulled; and

(ii) that Claimants bear all their legal costs and attorneys’ fees arising from this
proceeding.

Summary of Claimants’ Contentions

Claimants take the view that Respondent’s Application is abusive, arguing that it is based
on disagreement with the Tribunal’s findings rather than on annullable errors in the Award,
and emphasize that the ICSID Convention does not allow for the substantive or de novo
review that Respondent is seeking.”

First, Claimants consider that Respondent’s arguments relating to the Tribunal’s decision to
reject Respondent’s challenge to Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler do not satisfy the standards for
annulment under either Article 52(1)(a) or (d) of the ICSID Convention. According to
Claimant, no “egregious violations of basic principles” have been committed; regardless
whether the approach of the Azurix Committee is followed or that of the EDF Committee,
the decision stands because all challenged procedures were observed in this case and the
decision is certainly not so plainly unreasonable that no decision-maker could have come to
the unchallenged members’ conclusion. Claimants emphasize that in their final analysis, all

7 Argentina’s Application, {| 48-59; Argentina’s Reply, {ff 165-219.
* Argentina’s Reply, 235.
° Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, 49{ 1-3; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {ff 1-6.

47.

48.

49.

of the decision-makers who have heard Argentina’s arguments on Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s
appointment to the board of UBS have rejected them.'°

Second, Claimants deny that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by (i) permitting
AGBAR to access arbitration without having recourse to the Argentine courts for 18 months
first; or (ii) when awarding damages to Claimants. In Claimants’ view, Respondent attempts
to re-argue these points because it is not satisfied with the Tribunal’s decision, not because
the Tribunal exceeded its powers. In doing so, Respondent willfully ignores, among others,
that an excess of power must be clear and obvious to be manifest and only a failure to apply
the law in toto can lead to annulment.!!

Third, Claimants submit that the Tribunal did not depart from any fundamental rule of
procedure when (i) deciding on the challenge to Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler; (ii) exercising
jurisdiction over AGBAR’s claims; or (iii) applying an interest rate higher than that allegedly
agreed by the Parties.'!? Claimants argue that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s purported non-
disclosure cannot meet the standard for annulment under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention where, as here, the undisclosed facts would not evidence a conflict of interest or
anything close to it and the applicable procedures were followed.'? Similarly, Argentina
fails to identify what fundamental rules of procedure have presumably been violated by the
Tribunal’s exercise of jurisdiction over AGBAR’s claims. As for the last point, Claimants
argue that the Tribunal did not disregard any alleged agreement concerning the applicable
interest rate because there was none at the time the Tribunal had to render its decision and
the Parties had ample opportunity to comment upon this issue anyhow. '*

Fourth, Claimants consider that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons, arguing that this
annulment ground requires either a total absence of reasons or a lacking in coherence
preventing the reader from following it — contrary to the Tribunal’s detailed reasoning as to
why it (i) exercised jurisdiction over AGBAR’s claims; (ii) rejected Respondent’s necessity
defense; and (iii) chose the valuation date, adopted the but-for scenario and awarded
compensation for the management fees the way it did in its Award.

© Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, | 58, {{f 72-89; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {1 7-24, if 25-39.
4 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {| 106-107, {9 121-122, 135; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {ff 44-81.

 

s’ Counter-Memorial, 9] 142-144; Claimants’ Rejoinder, [ 82-86.
s’ Counter-Memorial, 9] 142-143; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {ff 40-43.

4 Claimants’ Rejoinder, ff 72-74.
5 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{ 158, { 164, {[ 170-177; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {f 87-129.

D.

50.

51.

52.

53.

Claimants’ Relief Sought
Claimants request that the ad hoc Committee: !°
(i) _ reject Argentina’s request for annulment in its entirety; and

(ii) order that Argentina bear all costs and expenses incurred by Claimants in
connection with the present annulment proceedings, including the fees of the
Centre, the costs and fees of the ad hoc Committee, and Claimants’ legal fees and
expenses.

GENERAL REMARKS AND SCOPE OF REVIEW IN ANNULMENT
PROCEEDINGS

At the outset, the Committee wishes to make a few general remarks regarding the purpose
and scope of annulment proceedings under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. As it is
expressly provided in Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention, ICSID awards are not subject
to any appeal, and in line with this provision, it is in fact accepted by both Parties that an
annulment committee does not have the power to review the merits of the Award and/or the
other decisions rendered by the Tribunal. As stated in a leading commentary on the ICSID
Convention, which both Parties cite in various contexts, there are two main elements
distinguishing an annulment proceeding from an appeal:

An appeals body may substitute its own decision on the merits for the

ision that it has found to be deficient. Under the ICSID Convention, an

ad hoc committee only has the power to annul the award. The ad hoc
committee may not amend or replace the award by its own decision,
whether in respect of jurisdiction or the merits. ...

  

As to the second element, annulment is only concerned with the legitimacy

of the process of decision; it is not concerned with its substantive

correctness. Appeal is concerned with both.”'7
It is therefore not for this Committee to make its own assessment of the factual and/or legal
questions of this case or to substitute its own views for the conclusions that the Tribunal has
reached in the course of almost twelve years of proceedings.

The mandate of an ad hoc committee is strictly confined to an assessment of the five grounds
for annulment provided in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention. In interpreting the scope

'6 Claimants’ Rejoinder, | 135.
"ALARA 40, Article 52, $f 10-11.

10

54.

55.

of its review under these five grounds, the Committee will take into account the intention of
the drafters of the ICSID Convention in not providing for an appeal, but rather a very limited
annulment proceeding, which is designed to ensure the fundamental integrity of the arbitral
proceedings but must not be misused to re-litigate the case on the merits. As it has been
stated in the same leading commentary on the ICSID Convention, the annulment proceeding
“is designed to provide emergency relief for egregious violations of a few basic principles
while preserving the finality of the decision in most respects.”'® The ad hoc committee in
Soufraki v. UAE referred to the “control of the fundamental integrity of the ICSID arbitral
proceedings in all its facets,” which includes: (i) the integrity of the tribunal; (ii) the integrity
of the procedure; and (iii) the integrity of the award.'?

In this case, Respondent has invoked four annulment grounds: 7°

(i) The Tribunal was not properly constituted (Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID
Convention);

(ii) The Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention);

(iii) There has been a serious departure from fundamental rules of procedure (Article
52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention); and

(iv) The Award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based (Article 52(1)(e) of
the ICSID Convention.

In order to arrive at this Decision, the Committee reviewed and evaluated all the arguments
of the Parties and the documents submitted by them in this proceeding. The fact that the
Committee does not specifically mention a given argument or reasoning does not mean that
it has not considered the same. In their submissions, the Parties produced and cited numerous
awards and decisions dealing with matters that they consider relevant to this decision on
annulment. The Committee has considered these documents carefully and may take into
account the reasoning and findings of other committees on annulment. However, in coming
to a decision on the matter of annulment raised by Respondent, the Committee must perform,
and in fact has performed, an independent analysis of the ICSID Convention, the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, and the particular facts of this case.

8 AL A RA 40, Article 52, { 15.
ALARA 61, 423.
2 Argentina’s Reply, 18.

56.

58.

59.

Before entering into its analysis of the grounds advanced by Respondent, the Committee will
first determine the scope of its review under the invoked grounds for annulment. In this
regard, it will take into account the recognized principles of interpretation of international
treaties embodied in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
(the “Vienna Convention’), in particular its Article 31(1) pursuant to which “[a] treaty shall
be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms

of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.””!

Proper Constitution of the Tribunal (Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention)

Summary of Respondent’s Position

Respondent submits that the annulment ground in Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention
refers to the provisions on the constitution of the tribunal in Articles 37 to 40 and, via Article
40(2), to the qualities that an arbitrator must have pursuant to Articles 14(1) of the ICSID
Convention.”

Respondent notes that the three authentic versions of Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention
are not identical as the English version refers to persons who “may be relied [upon] to
exercise independent judgment’; the French version provides that arbitrators must “offrir
toute garantie d’indépendence dans I’exercice de leur fonctions”, and the Spanish version
states that arbitrators must “inspirar plena confianza en su imparcialidad de juicio.”
Respondent submits that, in accordance with Article 33(4) of the Vienna Convention, these
diverging texts shall be given a meaning that “best reconciles the texts, having regard to the
object and purpose of the treaty.” In this case, Respondent argues, persons designated as
arbitrators have to meet the requirements in all three versions, i.e., they must be both

independent and impartial.?*

According to Respondent, a manifest lack of these qualities serves not only as a ground for
a proposal for disqualification but also, upon issuance of the award, as a ground for
annulment based on an improper constitution of the tribunal. In particular, Respondent notes
that the text in Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention does not indicate the existence of
any limitation on the powers of review of an ad hoc committee and claims that such

21 ALA RA 49, Article 31(1).
% Argentina’s Memorial, 34; Argentina’s Reply, {| 12.
23 Argentina’s Memorial, {| 36-39.

limitation would be contrary to the meaning and scope of Article 52, when interpreted in
accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention.”*

60. Respondent refers to the tribunal in Soufraki v. UAE, which stated that the “object and
purpose of an ICSID annulment proceeding” consists in “the control of the fundamental
integrity of the ICSID arbitral process in all its facets,” i.e., the integrity of the tribunal, the
integrity of the procedure and the integrity of the award.” According to Respondent, this
purpose would be defeated and it would be “inconsistent with the fundamental integrity of
ICSID arbitration proceedings” if a party were not allowed to invoke “even the most serious
and manifest conflict of interest” in annulment proceedings in a case where it had used the
disqualification mechanism before.”°

61. In addition, Respondent argues that it would be contrary to the principle of effectiveness if
a party were prevented from raising an arbitrator’s manifest lack of the qualities contained
in Article 14(1) as a ground for annulment both in case of a failure to propose the
disqualification of such arbitrator on a timely basis (by means of a waiver under Rule 27 of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules) and, likewise, in case the party did make use of the
disqualification mechanism.””

62. Respondent further points to the travaux préparatoires of the ICSID Convention, which
record that a motion to delete the annulment ground of an improper constitution of the
tribunal as well as a motion to include a requirement to raise such issue already in the
underlying proceeding before the tribunal, were discussed and defeated.”* Respondent also
relies on Prof. Schreuer, who states in his commentary on the ICSID Convention that if a
party has unsuccessfully used the disqualification mechanism, its right to invoke improper
constitution of the tribunal as a ground for annulment “remains unaffected.”

63. With regard to the annulment decision in EDF v. Argentina, Respondent first notes that the
committee concluded that “the fact that an arbitrator does not meet the standard required
under Article 14(1) ... is also a ground on which an award might be annulled under Article
52(1)(a).”*° Respondent notes that the EDF committee rejected the approach taken by the

Memorial, 4 35; Argentina’s Reply, {Mf 11-12 referring to AL A RA 49, Articles 31 and 32.
Reply, {| 13 quoting from AL A RA 61, { 23 (emphasis added by Respondent).

26 Argentina’s Reply, 13.

27 Argentina’s Reply, 14.
28 Argentina’s Reply, | 15 quoting from AL A RA 106, p. 853.

2 ina’s Reply, { 16 quoting from AL A RA 40, Art. 52, 129.
3 Argentina’s Reply, | 17 quoting from AL A RA 70, { 127.

 

64.

65.

66.

Azurix committee as “incompatible with the duty of an ad hoc committee to safeguard the
integrity of the arbitral procedure.”*! As to the limitation imposed by the EDF committee
on its power in case of a prior decision on disqualification, Respondent submits that such
limitation has no basis in Article 52 or any other provision of the ICSID Convention. In
particular, Respondent argues that annulment is not defined in opposition to appeal but rather
in accordance with its object and purpose as determined by an interpretative exercise in
which the EDF committee did not engage.**

Finally, Respondent claims that a distinction has to be made between a tribunal’s decision
on the merits of the dispute and the decision on a proposal for disqualification made by the
unchallenged arbitrators or the Chairman of the Administrative Council; while the former is
not subject to the review of the annulment committee, the latter expressly is — under Article
52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention. Consequently, Respondent argues that the limitations
imposed on an ad hoc committee in relation to the merits of the dispute are not applicable in
the present case.**

In Respondent’s view, “the existence of a decision on disqualification in the original
proceedings may be a factor to be considered by the annulment committee when verifying
whether the tribunal was properly constituted, but such decision is not binding on the
committee, nor does it curtail its powers to determine whether the tribunal was properly
constituted.” Respondent refers to the Vivendi IJ committee, which recognized that
annulment committees have a “grave responsibility in matters of this nature” and “serve ...
to address this concern,” which relates to “the integrity of the ICSID process as a whole,
which is the clear and undisputed concern of Article 52 of the ICSID Convention.”*+

Summary of Claimants’ Position

Claimants submit that Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention refers to a failure to comply
with the provisions in Articles 37 through 40 (relating to the “Constitution of the Tribunal’)
and Articles 56 through 58 (“Replacement and Disqualification of Conciliators and
Arbitrators’), as well as Rules | through 12 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules (“Establishment

3! Argentina’s Memorial, | 92 quoting from AL A RA 70, 141.
* Argentina’s Reply, ff 18-20.

33 Argentina’s Reply, ff 21-22.

+ Argentina’s Reply, 23 quoting from AL A RA 67, {¥{ 206-207.

67.

68.

69.

of the Tribunal”).*> Claimants further agree with Respondent that Article 14(1) is of
relevance to this Committee’s analysis.*°

Claimants argue, however, that Article 14(1) does not set the standard of review to be applied
by the Committee and that there is no provision in the ICSID Convention that would allow
an annulment committee to scrutinize the decision rendered by a tribunal on a challenge “as
though the challenge was a matter of first impression,” taking into account that Article 58
expressly reserves for the tribunal the right to decide on arbitrator challenges.*”

Claimants refer to “two lines of authority” that have emerged on the treatment of arbitrator
challenges in an annulment context; in Claimants’ view, Respondent’s application fails
under both.*® First, Claimants refer to the approach taken by the annulment committee in
Azurix v. Argentina, which held that its powers were limited to assessing whether the
procedures of the ICSID Convention had been complied with. Claimants quote the Azurix
committee’s view that “ifa party proposes a disqualification of an arbitrator under the first
sentence of Article 57 of the ICSID Convention, and if that proposal is rejected in
accordance with the procedure established in Article 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rule 9 for deciding such proposals, then it cannot be said that the tribunal was
‘not properly constituted’ by reason of non-compliance with the first sentence of Article 57.
The Committee considers that Article 52(1)(a) cannot be interpreted as providing the parties
with a de novo opportunity to challenge members of the tribunal after the tribunal has
already given its award.” Claimants further cite the Azurix committee’s finding that if a
committee were to decide for itself whether or not a decision on a disqualification proposal

was correct, “this would be tantamount to an appeal against such a decision.”*®

Claimants note that the Azurix committee considered exclusively the procedure for
constituting a tribunal and for resolving a challenge to an arbitrator — a question distinct from
the question whether an arbitrator manifestly lacked the qualities required by Article 14(1),
which it considered to be reserved for the remaining tribunal members. According to
Claimants, this view is supported by the fact that the travaux préparatoires of the ICSID
Convention record a proposal to include an arbitrator’s lack of the qualities in Article 14(1)

35 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, [ 60.
% Claimants’ Rejoinder, | 11.

57 Claimants

 

” Rejoinder, {1 1-12.

38 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {| 65.
>? Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {[ 66 quoting from A/CLA-69, {Jf 280, 282.

70.

71.

72.

as a ground for annulment — a proposal which was rejected.*? Therefore, Claimants argue,
Respondent’s resort to supplementary means of interpretation is also unsuccessful.*!

Second, Claimants refer to the approach taken by the committee in EDF v. Argentina, where
the committee held that it was empowered to consider the substance of an arbitrator
challenge in certain limited circumstances, albeit noting that in the case of an existing
decision on a challenge to an arbitrator, the committee “does not write on a blank sheet: it is
faced with existing findings of fact and assessment of those facts, as well as with an
application of the law to those facts.” Claimants further quote the EDF committee’s finding
that “[w]hile a committee is not bound to uphold the decision of the remaining members of
the tribunal (or the Chairman of the Administrative Council), nor can it simply disregard
that decision. It is limited to the facts found in the original decision. Moreover,
commensurate with the principle that an ad hoc committee is not an appellate body, it may
not find a ground of annulment exists under either Article 52(1)(a) or 52(1)(d) unless the
decision not to disqualify the arbitrator in question is so plainly unreasonable that no

reasonable decision-maker could have come to such a decision.””

In Claimants’ view, the approach adopted by the EDF committee is fully consistent with
established jurisprudence on the scope of annulment committee review; consequently and
contrary to Respondent’s argument, the committee did not need to engage in any further
interpretative analysis of the ICSID Convention.

By contrast, Claimants consider that Respondent’s interpretation of Article 52(1)(a)
contradicts the object and purpose of annulment in the ICSID Convention, which is not
meant to revisit the merits of any matter that was submitted to the tribunal. Claimants argue
that the responsibility for ensuring that only impartial, independent and expert tribunals hear
the parties’ claims resides within the tribunal or with the Chairman of the Administrative
Council, a framework that serves to resolve challenges as early and efficiently as possible —
rather than years later after the award has been rendered. According to Claimants, this
consideration also applies in the context of annulment proceedings concerning an arbitrator

4° Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {| 67 referring to A/CLA-70, p. 852.

41 Claimants

 

* Rejoinder, { 18.

*2 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, ff 69-70 quoting from A/CLA-61, {| 137, 145 (emphasis added by Claimants).
+3 Claimants’ Rejoinder, 19.

16

723.

74.

75.

76.

# Claimants’
45 Claimants

challenge in that a de novo review of the challenge would deprive the proceedings under
Article 57 and 58 of any useful purpose. **

Claimants take the position that Respondent’s proposed scheme of a de novo review on
annulment would be inconsistent with an ad hoc committee’s role within the ICSID
framework and the purpose of annulment, which is “to provide a limited form of review of
awards in order to safeguard the integrity of ICSID proceedings.”*> Claimants further
emphasize that an annulment committee cannot hear evidence and refer to “settled case law”
pursuant to which an annulment committee may not “substitute its own view of the law and

its own appreciation of the facts for those of the Tribunal.”*°

Claimants reject Respondent’s argument that this interpretation would run counter to the
principle of effectivity and claim that “a pre-award challenge is the opportunity for a party
to present an arbitrator challenge and to have that challenge resolved on a full evidentiary
record.”*’ Likewise, Claimants reject Respondent’s argument that there is a distinction
between the annulment grounds in Article 52(1)(b) through (e) addressing “merits” issues
that are subject to a deferential standard of review and the annulment ground in Article
52(1)(a) addressing the proper constitution of the tribunal that allegedly warrants a different
standard of review. Claimants note that Respondent does not cite any authority for this
distinction, which is in any event not justified because each of the issues addressed by these

grounds is “expressly subject to the decision of an annulment committee.”*8

Claimants note that both the Azurix and EDF committees, i.e., the two committees to have
considered the scenarios presently before this Committee, recognized the limits that the
ICSID framework places on the exercise of a committee’s powers under Article 52(1)(a),
which is why “deference to the tribunal’s decision-making remains an essential aspect of
the governing legal standard.”

Committee’s Analysis

As a preliminary remark, the Committee considers that Respondent is correct in emphasizing
that the starting point of the Committee’s analysis of its scope of review under this ground
for annulment must be the text of Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention, and not

Rejoinder, [ 13-14 referring to A/CLA-61, 142.
Rejoinder, { 17 quoting from A/CLA-90, 41.

 
 

* Claimants’ Rejoinder, [17 quoting from AL A RA 31, { 136.
*7 Claimants’ Rejoinder, ff 15-16 (emphasis in original).

48 Claimants’

 

Rejoinder, {J 20-22.

* Claimants’ Rejoinder, { 23.

77.

78.

jurisprudence on this article as such. Respondent is further correct in pointing out that the
text in Article 52(1)(a) does not contain any express qualifications or limitations as regards
the scope of an ad hoc committee’ s review of whether the Tribunal was properly constituted.
At the same time, the Committee notes, however, that the interpretation exercise does not
stop at the wording of the article but extends to the context as well as the object and purpose
reflecting the intention of the drafters and of the States that signed the Convention. This in
turn has been examined by jurisprudence, and in the interest of consistency and predictability
of ICSID jurisprudence, the Committee will take into account the interpretation of Article
52(1)(a) given by other committees. While the Committee is not bound by any of these
decisions and, as noted above, has to perform its own interpretation exercise, it may refer to
them for guidance.

The Parties agree that the term “properly constituted” in Article 52(1)(a) is a reference to the
requirements in Chapter IV, Section 2 of the ICSID Convention, which includes Article
40(2) referring to the qualities of an arbitrator set out in Article 14(1). Respondent further
correctly pointed out that the English and Spanish texts of Article 14(1) are not identical:
While the English text provides that arbitrators shall be persons who “may be relied upon to
exercise independent judgment,” the Spanish equivalent requires arbitrators to “inspirar
plena confianza en su imparcialidad de juicio.” While the English version thus does not
include an explicit reference to the requirement of impartiality, there is common ground that
Article 14(1) in fact demands that arbitrators be both independent and impartial. In this
regard, the Committee agrees with Respondent that the parties’ confidence in the
independence and impartiality of the arbitrators deciding their case is essential for ensuring
the integrity of the proceedings and the dispute resolution mechanism as such; thus, in
principle, a lack of the qualities in Article 14(1) may serve as ground for annulment under
Article 52(1)(a). This conclusion is in line with the finding made by the ad hoc committee
in EDF v. Argentina and also with the apparent intention of the drafters of the ICSID
Convention.”

As to the applicable standard to be satisfied, the Committee further agrees with the EDF
committee that “Article 14(1) does not require proof of actual dependence or bias; it is
sufficient to establish the appearance of dependence or bias.” However, as the EDF
committee noted, there is an objective test to be satisfied:

°° Cf. AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, {| 126, 128 and A/CLA-70, p. 852.

79.

80.

81.

82.

“\.. [T]he standard to be applied under Article 14(1) is whether a
reasonable third party, with knowledge of all the facts, would consider that
there were reasonable grounds for doubting that an arbitrator possessed
the requisite qualities of independence and impartiality.”*!
This Committee fully agrees with this finding of the EDF committee because to demand the
actual proof of bias would establish an unrealistic burden on the party requesting annulment.

However, the Committee notes that there is an additional, important aspect to be taken into
account in the present case: the fact that the remaining members of the Tribunal have already
taken a decision on Respondent’s allegation that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler manifestly lacked
the qualities in Article 14(1) — in their Decision on Respondent’s Second Disqualification
Proposal dated 12 May 2008 pursuant to Articles 57, 58 of the ICSID Convention (the
“Decision on Disqualification”). There is common ground between the Parties that this
decision must not be ignored by the Committee in its assessment of the annulment ground
advanced by Respondent; however, the Parties are in dispute as to the specific impact it has
on the scope of review of the Committee.

Respondent relies on the leading commentary already quoted above, which provides as
follows:

“... Appointment of an arbitrator who manifestly does not possess these
qualities [in Article 14(1)] may be put forward as a ground for annulment

... [A] party requesting annulment on the ground that the tribunal was not

properly constituted will have to explain why it did not raise this objection

during the arbitration proceedings. If it has done so unsuccessfully its right

to invoke this ground for annulment remains unaffected. ...”°*
According to this authority, the right to request annulment based on an alleged lack of the
qualities in Article 14(1) thus remains “unaffected” by an unsuccessful challenge, and the
standard of review appears to be the same as the one prescribed in Article 57, i.e., limited to
a “manifest” lack of the qualities described in Article 14(1).

Before turning to the existing case law on this issue, the Committee will perform its own
interpretative exercise. At the outset, it has to be noted that, in this case Respondent
acknowledged during the hearing that the existing decision of the co-arbitrators cannot be

>! AL A RA 70/A/CLA-61, {ff 109, 111.
* ALARA 40, Article 52, {¥f 123, 129.

83.

84.

ignored in the Committee’s assessment, but also argued that this decision cannot be binding
in light of the Committee’s function to safeguard the fundamental integrity of ICSID
procedure.** Consequently, it can be considered common ground that the Committee has to

evaluate the decision rendered by the two co-arbitrators. The crucial question is, what is the

 

applicable standard for this evaluation? While Respondent argues that Article 52(1)(a)
empowers the Committee to fully review whether the Tribunal was properly constituted,
Claimants take the position that the scope of the Committee’s review is substantially reduced
and refer to the approaches taken by the Azurix and EDF committees, which will be set out
in detail below.

In support of its position, Respondent argues that the travaux préparatoires of the ICSID
Convention include a motion — which was not accepted — to delete the annulment ground
under Article 52(1)(a) in order to avoid a “double attack on the same grounds.”** Contrary
to Respondent’s position, however, the fact that the drafters of ICSID Convention did not
intend to exclude the possibility of requesting an annulment if a decision had already been
taken in the underlying proceeding does not necessarily imply that they also intended a full
review of the decision. In the Committee’s view, such an interpretation of an ad hoc
committee’s scope of review cannot be assumed lightly given that a full review would be
contrary to the principle in Article 53 that there is no appeal. Therefore and while being
aware that Article 52(1)(a) does not include any qualifiers such as “manifest”, “serious” or
“fundamental” in the text as the grounds in Article 52(1)(b) and (d) do, the Committee does
not consider that there is sufficient evidence to assume that the drafters of the ICSID
Convention intended to confer broader powers on the ad hoc committee under Article
52(1)(a) than under the other grounds for annulment.

The Committee considers that the following aspects have to be taken into account when
assessing the scope of review under Article 52(1)(a) in the context of an existing decision on
a disqualification proposal: (i) the fact that the drafters included a review mechanism in
Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID Convention pursuant to which the decision on a
disqualification proposal is to be taken by the remaining arbitrators or by the Chairman of
the Administrative Council; (ii) the overarching principle of Article 53(1) that decisions

53 Cf. Transcript (Day 2), p. 244 lines 3-10. See also Argentina’s Reply, {{ 23.

4 ALARA 106, p. 853.

55 It is recorded in the travaux préparatoires that “Mr. BROCHES (Chairman) requested the sense of the meeting with
respect to the proposal that (a) of Article 55(1) [currently Article 52(1)] be deleted entirely because the point would
undoubtedly have been raised in the proceedings and there might be grounds for objecting to a double attack on the
same grounds. A vote was then taken and the motion defeated by 18 to 2.” AL A RA 106, p. 853.

20

85.

86.

87.

88.

made within the regime of the ICSID Convention shall not be subject to any appeal but only
to an annulment proceeding (i.e., a proceeding of limited scope, which is again governed by
the ICSID Convention regime and does not include any involvement of national courts); and
(iii) the existing jurisprudence on this issue, which this Committee should not ignore — not
least in the legitimate aim of achieving a certain degree of consistency and legal certainty in
ICSID jurisprudence.

In light of the above, the Committee considers it more plausible that the intended scope for
a review under Article 52(1)(a) was to be subject to the same limitations as the other
annulment grounds, i.e., a scope wide enough to safeguard the integrity of the proceedings
but not so wide as to re-consider the merits of a decision that was already taken in the
underlying proceedings based on the submissions and evidence presented by the Parties.

In the Committee’s view, Respondent’s argument that the proper constitution of the Tribunal
is not a merits issue, and thus a review of the Decision on Disqualification would not be a
review on the merits, is not convincing. For the present purposes, the Committee does not
need to express an opinion on whether a review of the issues resolved in the Decision on
Disqualification is, or involves, a review of the merits. In any case, the same principle
applies: a decision has been made on this issue in the underlying proceedings and in light of
the context as well as the object and purpose of the annulment proceeding, it is not for this
Committee to perform a de novo review of any issues decided in the underlying proceedings
in accordance with the provisions of the ICSID Convention.

However, this does not yet answer the question as to what is the actual role of this Committee
in the present context, i.e., what is the applicable standard to evaluate the Decision on
Disqualification rendered by the two remaining members of the Tribunal.

At this point, the Committee will also consider existing case law on the particular question
of how to deal with the present situation in which the allegations advanced by Respondent
were already subject to a decision of the remaining members of the Tribunal in the arbitration
proceedings. According to the Background Paper on Annulment for the ICSID
Administrative Council (as updated in 2016) (“ICSID Background Paper on
Annulment”), improper constitution of the tribunal under Article 52(1)(a) was raised in five
cases, four of which actually decided on the annulment ground.*° In two cases, i.e., Vivendi

56 A/CLA-91, 79. In Sempra v. Argentina, the tribunal did not decide on this annulment ground because it had
already decided to annul the award in full based on another ground.

89.

90.

91.

II v. Argentina and Transgabonais v. Gabon, the issue was raised only after the award had
already been rendered so that there was no prior decision of the co-arbitrators to be taken
into account by the committee.*”. In the two remaining cases, i.e., Azurix v. Argentina and
EDF v. Argentina, the committees were faced with the same issue as this Committee, i.e., an
existing decision of the remaining two co-arbitrators on a disqualification proposal.**
Therefore, the Committee will take a closer look at these two decisions and the two different
approaches taken by these committees.

The first decision was rendered in Azurix v. Argentina. In that case, the committee considered
that “an ad hoc committee cannot decide for itself whether or not a decision under Article
58 was correct, as this would be tantamount to an appeal against such a decision. All that
an ad hoc committee can consider is whether the provisions and procedures prescribed
under Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9 were
complied with.”* As for the merits, the Azurix committee thereby completely deferred to the
decision of the remaining members of the tribunal.

If the Committee were to follow the approach taken by the Azurix committee, its analysis
would be a fairly short exercise given that neither Party in the present case has claimed that
the Decision on Disqualification was made in violation of the procedure prescribed in
Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID Convention. In the Committee’s view, however, this
approach would not be consistent with the conclusion drawn in the interpretative exercise
above and in particular with the purpose of annulment proceedings and thus the duty of an
ad hoc committee to safeguard the integrity of the arbitration proceedings. The Committee
rather agrees with the committee in EDF v. Argentina and rejects the Azurix approach as too
narrow and formalistic because it prevents an ad hoc committee from playing any role in
ensuring the independence and impartiality of the arbitrators — a matter “which goes to the
very heart of the integrity of the arbitral procedure.”

The second decision was rendered in EDF v. Argentina, where the committee took a broader

approach than the Azurix committee but also noted that it did not write on a blank sheet given
that it was faced with an existing decision of the two co-arbitrators on this matter. The EDF

57 AL A RA 67, { 202; A/CLA-83, p. 13. In Transgabonais, the argument was raised for the first time at the hearing
on annulment and therefore considered by the committee to be time-barred and inadmissible under Article 52(2) of
the ICSID Convention.

°8 AL A RA 84/ A/CLA-69, J 286; AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, {| 147.

°° AL A RA 84/ A/CLA-69, { 282.

© Cf. AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, {J 140-141.

92.

93.

94.

committee therefore held that it may not find a ground for annulment “unless the decision
not to disqualify the arbitrator in question is so plainly unreasonable that no reasonable
decision-maker could have come to such a decision.”®! As a result, the committee therefore
also deferred, in principle, to the decision reached by the remaining members of the tribunal,
subject however to an assessment whether such decision was “plainly unreasonable.”

As stated above, this Committee agrees with the EDF committee that it is for an ad hoc
committee to safeguard the integrity of the arbitral proceedings, as Respondent has
repeatedly emphasized. Having performed the interpretative exercise above, this Committee
further agrees with the finding of the EDF committee that its approach is “commensurate
with the principle that an ad hoc committee is not an appellate body.” In particular, while
being aware and thus agreeing with Respondent that the threshold applied by the EDF
committee for annulling an award cannot be found in the wording of Article 52, the
Committee has assessed above why a scope of review wide enough to safeguard the integrity
of the proceedings but not so wide as to re-consider the merits of a decision that was already
taken in the underlying proceedings is in line with the object and purpose of the annulment
proceeding within the regime of the ICSID Convention and thus also in line with the
interpretation principles of Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention.

In the Committee’s view, the reasons given by the EDF committee for its approach are
convincing because they achieve a reasonable balance between an ad hoc committee’s
important task to safeguard the fundamental integrity of the proceedings on the one hand and
the appropriate respect for its limited role, given the existence of proceedings under Articles
57 and 58 as well as the generally limited nature of annulment proceedings, on the other.
The Committee considers that the threshold of plain unreasonableness leaves sufficient room
for taking up the role that is intended for an ad hoc committee. Therefore, and also in the
interest of achieving a certain consistency in ICSID jurisprudence on this issue, the
Committee concurs with the findings of the EDF committee in its well-reasoned decision on
the question of how to deal with an existing decision rendered by the remaining members of
the tribunal in the underlying proceeding.

In conclusion and for the reasons set out above, the Committee agrees with the approach
taken by the EDF committee and finds that the facts advanced by Respondent can amount
to a ground for annulment only if the decision not to disqualify Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler was

6 ALARA 70/ A/CLA-61, { 145.
® ALARA 70/A/CLA-61, { 145.

96.

97.

“so plainly unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker could have come to such a
decision.”

Manifest Excess of Powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention)

Summary of Respondent’s Position

Respondent submits that, as explained in the ICSID Background Paper on Annulment, the
annulment ground of a manifest excess of powers was intended to apply in the situation
where a decision of the tribunal “went beyond the terms of the parties’ arbitration
agreement.” According to Respondent, this is the case when either: (i) the tribunal lacks
jurisdiction; or (ii) the tribunal fails to apply the applicable law. As regards the former,
Respondent refers to the situation in which there is no consent to arbitration because the
conditions to which such consent was made subject were not met; as regards the latter,
Respondent quotes the ICSID Secretariat’s statement that “[w]here the parties agree on
applicable law, a disregard of this law would likely be equivalent to a derogation from the

mandate conferred on the Tribunal by the parties.”

Respondent agrees with Claimants that the term “manifest” is equal to “obvious” or “self-
evident,” but rejects Claimants’ additional reference to “substantial seriousness” as not being
part of the “manifest” requirement. In this regard, Respondent refers to the finding of the
EDF committee that “[t]he requirement that the excess of powers be ‘manifest’ refers to how
readily apparent the excess is, rather than to its gravity.” At the same time, Respondent
submits that this requirement “does not prevent that in some cases an extensive
argumentation and analysis may be required to prove that such a manifest excess of powers
has in fact occurred.” Likewise, the EDF committee held that “[t]he reasoning in a case
may be so complex that a degree of inquiry and analysis is required before it is clear
precisely what the tribunal has decided. In such a case, the need for such inquiry and

s will not prevent an excess of powers from being ‘manifest’ .”*

 

As to the different categories where an excess of powers may be found, Respondent refers
to the three parameters established by the Soufraki committee, i.e., (i) the scope of the

® Argentina’s Memorial, | 40 quoting from AL A RA 7, 19.

& Argentina’s Memorial, {ff 41-43 quoting from AL A RA 7, 93.

6 Argentina’s Reply, {{ 25 quoting from AL A RA 70, 192.

 Argentina’s Reply, { 28 quoting from AL A RA 30, 84. See also AL A RA 90, 57, 59.
57 Argentina’s Reply, {{ 28 quoting from AL A RA 70, { 193.

98.

99.

100.

101.

tribunal’s jurisdiction; (ii) the applicable law; and (iii) the issues raised by the parties. With
regard to the first category, Respondent refers to the explanation given by the Soufraki
committee that an excess of powers can involve the situation in which a tribunal goes beyond
its jurisdiction ratione personae, ratione materiae or ratione voluntatis but also, vice versa,
the situation in which the tribunal does not exercise its jurisdiction over a person, or a matter,
or a question that does fall within the ambit of its jurisdiction.

Respondent emphasizes that, contrary to Claimants’ submission, it does recognize the
compétence-compétence principle but asks this Committee to decide on the existence of a
manifest excess of jurisdictional powers on the part of the Tribunal, in accordance with
Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

As to the second category of excess of powers, Respondent refers to the committee’s
statement in Enron v. Argentina that the ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(b)
“extends to the situation where a tribunal disregards the applicable law, or bases the award
on a law other than the applicable law.”’® Respondent emphasizes that, contrary to

Claimants’ argument, it does not invoke an “erroneous application of the law,” but rather
the failure to apply the law; in any event, an error of law can effectively be equivalent to a
failure to apply the applicable law and thus also constitute a ground for annulment under

Article 52(1)(b).7!

In response to Claimants’ submission that only a failure to apply the law in toto can justify
an annulment, Respondent refers to the fact that the committee in Sempra v. Argentina found
an excess of powers in respect of a failure to apply Article XI of the applicable BIT and thus
annulled the award.’”

As to the third category of excess of powers, Respondent claims that it applies in the situation
where a tribunal either decides on issues that the parties did not submit to it for resolution or
fails to decide on issues that the parties did place before it.’*

6 Argentina’s Reply, {31 quoting from AL A RA 61, { 42. See also AL A RA 90, {[ 49-50 and AL A RA 107, {if

47-48.
© Argentina’
7 Argentina
7! Argentina
” Argentina

Reply. 135.

Reply, | 37 quoting from AL A RA 33, { 218.
Reply, 438.

Reply, 1 40 quoting from AL A RA 32, if 159, 165.

 

73 Argentina’s Reply, 4 41.

2.

102.

103.

10.

105.

a

&

an

Summary of Claimants’ Position

Claimants emphasize that under Articles 41 and 42 of the ICSID Convention, an ICSID
tribunal is empowered to determine its own competence and to decide the dispute in
accordance with the applicable law. According to Claimants, the requirement of a “manifest”
excess of powers was included to safeguard the finality of awards and to limit the review of
an annulment committee. Claimants further refer to the statement of the Jmpregilo committee
that “manifest” means that “the excess of powers has to be obvious, self-evident, clear,
flagrant and substantially serious.”"* While acknowledging that there is some debate as to
whether the term “manifest” includes an inquiry into the gravity of the alleged excess of
power, Claimants argue that in any event, any Article 52(1) ground requires a finding that

the annullable error “actually had a material impact on the outcome of a case.”

Claimants submit that annulment committees repeatedly confirm that any excess of power
must be obvious from a simple reading of the award in question and note that Argentina
itself argued in the Daimler proceeding that an excess of powers cannot be “manifest” if it
can be discerned only through “elaborate interpretation” of the tribunal’s reasoning.”°

In Claimants’ view, an excess of powers may not involve the review of evidence before the
tribunal because Rule 34 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules entrusts the assessment of the
evidence to the tribunal — without any corresponding power being given to annulment
committees under the ICSID Convention.’’ Claimants argue that any suggestion to the
contrary would be an invitation to conduct an appellate review and thus be inconsistent with
the limited scope of annulment under the ICSID Convention.”

As to the first category of excess of powers invoked by Respondent, Claimants submit that
just like an alleged excess relating to the merits, an alleged excess of jurisdiction “must be
obvious on its face and not susceptible to more than one interpretation’, neither allegation
can be subject to a de novo review. Claimants rely on the finding made by the committee in
SGS v. Paraguay that “nothing in the ICSID Convention indicates that a different standard
shall be applied to issues of jurisdiction, and therefore an award can only be annulled if the

lack of excess of jurisdiction is manifest.”

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {| 91-92 quoting from A/CLA-42/ AL A RA 34, J 128.

7 Claimants

Rejoinder, | 46.

 

7 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {| 93 quoting from A/CLA-43, { 158.
7 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, { 94.

78 Claimants

 

” Rejoinder, 47.

79 Claimants’ Memorial, {{{ 96-97; Claimants’ Rejoinder, 49 quoting from A/CLA-46, | 114.

26

106.

107.

108.

109.

Claimants emphasize that pursuant to Articles 41(1) and 42(2) of the ICSID Convention, a
tribunal’s ruling on its own jurisdiction is conclusive and must stand where it has reached a
reasonable decision. Claimants refer to the statement of the Azurix committee that “even if it
is subsequently seen to be arguable whether or not the tribunal’s decision under Article 41
was correct, it cannot be said that the tribunal manifestly lacked jurisdiction, and there is
no basis for an ad hoc committee in purported exercise of its power under Article 52(1)(b)
to substitute its own decision for that of the tribunal.”*°

As to the second category of excess of powers invoked by Respondent, Claimants submit
that an erroneous application of the law is not a ground for annulment and refer to the finding
of the Impregilo committee that “it is necessary to differentiate between a failure to apply
the proper law and an error in applying the law. The first is a ground for annulment under
Article 52, the second is not.” The Impregilo committee further held that a review of whether
the tribunal misapplied or misinterpreted the law would necessarily entail a review resulting
in the committee acting as a court of appeal rather than an annulment committee.*!

In response to Respondent’s reference to an alleged failure to apply specific provisions or
rules of law, Claimants further rely on Prof. Schreuer who stated in his commentary that
“[p]artial non-application and erroneous application are indistinguishable” — and neither
qualifies as a ground for annulment.*? Claimants submit that a failure to apply the applicable
law qualifies as an excess of power only if there has been a failure to apply the law in toto;
by contrast, a tribunal’s decision not to apply a particular legal provision does not constitute
a failure to apply the applicable law but falls within the remit of the tribunal to determine the
relevance of each provision of the chosen law.*?

With regard to Respondent’s reference to the positions taken by the Soufraki and Sempra
committees, Claimants contend that these are outliers, which are not in line with the
“extensive jurisprudence” rejecting the proposition that nothing less than a failure to apply
the law in toto can justify an annulment. Claimants further note that the Sempra decision
was criticized by commentators for conflating the concepts of legal error and manifest excess
of powers.*#

8 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {[ 98 quoting from A/CLA-69, [ 69.
8! Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, { 100 quoting from A/CLA-42/ AL A RA 34, 131.

 

s’ Counter-Memorial, {| 101 quoting from A/CLA-97, p. 964.
's’ Counter-Memorial, J] 102-103.

* Claimants’ Rejoinder, | 48.

11

111.

11

S

N

Committee’s Analysis

As stated by the committee in Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, “[t]he notion of manifest
excess of power implies that a tribunal has stepped entirely outside the scope of its
authority.” The Committee further agrees with the Soufraki committee that “the structure
within which an ICSID tribunal has to remain is defined by three elements: the imperative
jurisdictional requirements, the rules on applicable law, and the issues submitted to the
arbitral tribunal.”**

It is undisputed between the Parties that the meaning of the term “manifest” is equal to
“obvious” or “evident.” However, there is a dispute as to whether it is possible within that
meaning that a certain amount of argumentation and/or analysis may be required to
determine the existence of a “manifest” excess of powers. According to the leading
commentary, which both Parties cite in different contexts and that was also cited with
approval by the committee in AES v. Hungary, “[a]n excess of powers is manifest if it can be
discerned with little effort and without deeper analysis.”*© Claimants further refer to the
committee’s finding in Wena Hotels v. Egypt that “[t]he excess of power must be self-evident
rather than the product of elaborate interpretations one way or the other. When the latter

happens the excess of power is no longer manifest.”*"

Respondent on the other hand refers to Caratube v. Kazakhstan where the committee held
that it “agrees with Respondent that the term ‘manifest’ basically corresponds to ‘obvious’
or ‘evident’. However, this does not prevent that in some cases an extensive argumentation
and analysis may be required to prove that such a manifest excess of powers has in fact
occurred.”*® A similar finding was made by the committee in Occidental v. Ecuador.*? The
EDF committee further held:

“While the Committee agrees that an excess of powers will be manifest only

if it can be readily discerned, it considers that this does not mean that the

excess must, as it were, leap out of the page on the first reading of the

Award. The reasoning in a case may be so complex that a degree of inquiry

and analysis is required before it is clear precisely what the tribunal has

85 AL A RA 61, 9 37.

8° AL A RA 40, Article 52, | 135; A/CLA-35, 31.
87 A/CLA-30, J 25.

88 AL A RA 30, 1 84.

8 AL A RA 90,959.

113.

114.

115.

116.

decided. In such a case, the need for such inquiry and analysis will not

prevent an excess of powers from being ‘manifest’.

The Committee takes the view that the question of whether a certain degree of argumentation
and/or analysis may be required in a specific case to determine whether a tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers cannot be answered in the abstract but only taking into account the
circumstances of the individual case. To the extent it will become relevant, this question will
therefore be discussed below in the Committee’s analysis of whether Respondent has in fact
established that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

However, as stated by the committee in Rumeli Telekom v. Kazakhstan, such an analysis
“should not require the Committee to reconsider the evidence put before the Tribunal. An
ad hoc committee will not annul an award if the tribunal’s approach is reasonable or
tenable, even if the committee might have taken a different view on a debatable point of
law.”°! The committee in Duke Energy v. Peru noted that pursuant to Rule 34 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, ““‘[t]he Tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility of any evidence
adduced and of its probative value,” and held that “[i]t would not be proper for an

annulment committee to re-evaluate that evidence, and nor is it in a position to do so."

The Parties are further in dispute as to whether the term “manifest” also implies a certain
gravity or result-determinativeness of the excess of powers. The committee in SGS v.
Paraguay held that the excess of powers has to be “textually obvious and substantively
serious.”> The committee in El Paso v. Argentina also found that “[p]ursuant to the plain
meaning of the word ‘manifest’ in the context of Article 52 of the ICSID Convention and
considering the finality and binding nature of awards, features set forth in Article 53 of said
Convention, for this Committee, the excess of powers should be obvious, evident, clear, self-
evident and extremely serious.”** A similar finding can be found in Impregilo v. Argentina
where the committee stated that the excess of powers has to be, inter alia, “substantially

serious.”

As implied by the terms “substantively serious” and “extremely serious,” the Committee
considers that for an excess of powers to be “manifest,” it has to have had a certain

°° ALARA 70/ A/CLA-61, J 193.

°! AJCLA-32, 96.

® A/CLA-31, { 214 (quoting from A/CLA-32, { 96).
3 A/CLA-46, J 122.

* AL A RA 35, { 142.

° AL A RA 34, { 128.

significance for the decision or award that was rendered. This is in line with the committee’s
finding in Libananco v. Turkey that “annulment should not occur unless a tribunal has
exceeded its power in a clear manner and with serious consequences.”°° In the context of an
excess through a non-exercise of power, the committee in AES v. Hungary also held that the
term “manifest” implies that the non-exercise was “somehow significant or consequential.”

In that case, the parties agreed that the non-exercise had to be “result-determinative.”””

117. Finally, Respondent has advanced the argument that an excess of powers in the context of
jurisdiction always qualifies as “manifest” and thus is an annulment ground under Article
52(1)(b). However, the Committee agrees with Claimant that there is no indication in either
the text of Article 52(1)(b), its context or in the object and purpose of the annulment
proceeding within the regime of the ICSID Convention that would support the position that
the standard of review to be applied to jurisdiction decisions is different from that applied to
merits decisions. To the contrary, Article 41 of the ICSID Convention provides that “[t]he
Tribunal shall be the judge of its own competence” and Respondent acknowledges that this
provision reflects the compétence-compétence principle. As stated by the committee in SGS
v. Paraguay, it follows from Article 41 that “[a tribunal’s] decision on the scope of its
jurisdiction cannot be reviewed de novo by an Annulment Committee” and that in the absence
of any indication to the contrary, “an award can only be annulled if the lack or excess of
jurisdiction was manifest.”** Similar findings were made by the committees in Azurix v.
Argentina” and Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates.'°

118. Inline with previous jurisprudence, the Committee therefore finds that the standard of review
is the same for all three elements that define the boundaries of the Tribunal’s power under
the ICSID Convention: an excess of powers can amount to a ground for annulment only if it
qualifies as “manifest,” which means that such excess of powers has to be obvious, evident
and substantially serious.

% A/CLA-95, 1 102.

9” AICLA-35, { 30.

°8 A/CLA-46, J 114.

® ALARA 84/ A/CLA-69, {1 66, 69.

10 AL A RA 61, fl 118-119. See also Occidental v. Ecuador where the parties agreed that “this important limitation
[of the term ‘manifest’] applies both to a jurisdictional excess of powers and to a failure to apply the proper law. This
conclusion, shared by this Committee, has been confirmed by previous committees.” AL A RA 90,158.

30

11

12

121.

©

S

Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure (Article 52(1)(d) of the
ICSID Convention)

Summary of Respondent’s Position

Respondent submits that this ground for annulment is designed to “safeguard the substantive
fairness and integrity of the arbitral process” and is not limited to the rules provided for in
the ICSID Arbitration Rules but rather refers to “a set of minimal standards of procedure to
be respected as a matter of international law.”'°' According to Respondent, these standards
include, inter alia, “the right to be heard and to be given a suitable opportunity for rebuttal,
the guarantee of due process of law, the right of defence, the principle of equality between
the parties, deliberation among the members of the tribunal, the independence and
impartiality of the members of the tribunal and the consideration of evidence and the burden
of proof.”'°? Respondent further refers to “an arbitrators’ duty of investigation, disclosure
and notification in the treatment and management of existing or potential conflicts of

interest.” 1°

Specifically with regard to the right to be heard by an independent and impartial tribunal,
Respondent claims that a violation of this right amounts to a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure and refers to the committee in Kléckner I, which stated that
“[ilmpartiality of an arbitrator is a fundamental and essential requirement. Any shortcoming
in this regard, that is any sign of partiality, must be considered to constitute, within the
meaning of Article 52(1)(d), a ‘serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure’ in
the broad sense of the term ‘procedure,’ i.e., a serious departure from a fundamental rule of

arbitration in general, and of ICSID arbitration in particular.” '!*

Respondent further contends that, contrary to Claimants’ submission, nothing in Article
52(1)(d) provides for a limitation of the powers of an ad hoc committee to verifying the
existence of any “procedural irregularity” — rather than an analysis whether an arbitrator
manifestly lacked the requirements in Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention. Respondent
emphasizes that the EDF committee recognized that “the fact that there is reasonable doubt
about whether an arbitrator possessed the qualities of independence and impartiality

‘01 Argentina’s Memorial, {ff 51-52; Argentina’s Reply, { 43 quoting from AL A RA 63, 157.

‘02 Argentina’s Memorial, 53.

03 Argentina’s Reply, { 44 citing AL A RA 67, | 204.

104 Argentina’s Memorial, [54 quoting from AL A RA 56, 195 (albeit without explicit reference).

122.

123.

2.
124.

125.

required by Article 14(1) is a ground on which an award might be annulled under Article
52(1)(d).?"5

With regard to the limitation imposed by the EDF Committee on its review under Article
52(1)(a), Respondent reiterates that this limitation has no basis in the ICSID convention and
claims that, in any event, it should not restrict an annulment committee’s power to verify a
serious departure from other fundamental rules of procedure, such as an arbitrator’s duties
relating to the investigation, disclosure and notification of conflicts of interest. !°°

Finally, Respondent rejects Claimants’ submission that the term “serious” implies that the
procedural irregularity must have caused the tribunal to reach a “substantially different”
result and refers to the committee in Pey Casado v. Chile, which held that “the applicant
must demonstrate ‘the impact the issue may have had on the award’.”!°’ Respondent also
cites the decision in Tulip v. Turkey, which found that “the applicant must demonstrate that
the observance of the rule had the potential of causing the tribunal to render an award
substantially different from what it actually decided.” '°

Summary of Claimants’ Position

Claimants submit that the requirement “fundamental” requires that the violated rule relates
to an element of due process and agrees with Respondent that this includes “the equal
treatment of parties, the right to be heard, the right to respond, or the right to an independent
and impartial tribunal.” Claimants further contend that the requirement “serious” requires
that the procedural irregularity caused the tribunal to reach a result “substantially different”
from the result it would have reached in the absence of said irregularity!

Insofar as Respondent invokes this annulment ground as a second basis in the context of the
challenge to Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler, Claimants note that Respondent does not invoke any
procedural irregularity in the procedure for hearing and deciding an arbitrator challenge, but
rather argues on the erroneous basis that this Committee is empowered to perform a de novo
review of the challenge and the question of whether Prof. Kaufmann Kohler manifestly
lacked the qualities in Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention.!!°

105 Argentina’s Reply, {| 48-50 quoting from AL A RA 70, 125.

106 Argentina’s Reply, ff 51-53.

‘07 Argentina’s Reply, {ff 45-46 quoting from AL A RA 65, 78.

108 Argentina’s Reply, {{{ 45, 47 quoting from A/CLA-90, { 78 (emphasis in original).
‘© Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, 49{ 61, 140.

410 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, #9 64, 143.

126.

127.

3.
128.

129.

130.

Claimants further point out that the standard established by the EDF committee was applied
to both Articles 52(1)(a) and (d) — in line with “‘settled law that annulment can never be a

vehicle for unfettered review of the merits of a Tribunal’s decision.” '"'

In respect of Respondent’s reliance on an arbitrator’s duty to investigate and disclose
conflicts, Claimants emphasize that the Vivendi IJ committee referred to by Respondent was
not faced with an existing decision on an arbitrator challenge and did no more than to
recognize that there is a duty to disclose conflicts of interests. Claimants argue, however,
that this duty is not in itself a fundamental rule of procedure but rather a reflection of the
requirement that arbitrators must be independent and impartial; consequently, non-
disclosure cannot be a ground for disqualification where the non-disclosed facts do not result
in a conflict of interest.!!”

Committee’s Analysis

The Parties agree that the annulment ground in Article 52(1)(d) is intended to ensure that a
set of minimal standards of procedure is observed in the arbitral proceedings. As stated by
the committee in Wena Hotels v. Egypt, this set of standards is “to be respected as a matter
of international law” and includes that “each party is given the right to be heard before an
independent and impartial tribunal,” which in turn includes “the right to state its claim or

its defense and to produce all arguments and evidence in support of it.”'*

As pointed out by Claimants, the Wena Hotels committee further held that “[i]n order to be
a ‘serious’ departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, the violation of such a rule must
have caused the Tribunal to reach a result substantially different from what it would have
awarded had such a rule been observed.”''* However, as noted with approval by the
committee in Victor Pey Casado v. Chile, the Wena Hotels committee denied a serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure because the applicant had failed to

demonstrate “the impact that the issue may have had on the award.”''°

The same standard was applied by the committee in Caratube v. Kazakhstan, which held
that:

‘1 Claimants’ Rejoinder, 4 41.

‘2 Claimants’ Rejoinder, 4 42.

43 AL A RA 63/ A/CLA-30, { 57.

4 AL A RA 63/ A/CLA-30, 58.

45 AL A RA 65, {78 quoting from AL A RA 63/ A/CLA-30, 61.

“A departure is serious if the violation of the fundamental rule of procedure
produced a material impact on the award. The applicant however is not
required to prove that the violation of the rule of procedure was decisive
for the outcome, or that the applicant would have won the case if the rule
had been applied. As the Wena committee stated, what the applicant must
simply demonstrate is ‘the impact that the issue may have had on the
Award’.”!!6

131. This Committee agrees that the Caratube approach is reasonable because, as stated by the
committee in Tulip v. Turkey, “[t]o require an applicant to prove that the award would
actually have been different, had the rule of procedure been observed, may impose an
unrealistically high burden of proof.”'""

13

N

Finally and specifically with regard to the question of whether the alleged lack of the
qualities of independence and impartiality of an arbitrator as required by Article 14(1) can
give rise to a ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(d), the Committee agrees with the
convincing reasons given by the EDF committee in this regard:

“\.. [I]t is important to recall that it is only an award which can be the
subject of annulment and not any previous decision of a tribunal ... . There
can, therefore, be no question of an ad hoc committee annulling the
decision taken by the remaining members of a tribunal under Article 58 to
reject a proposal for disqualification. The only way in which that decision
can be called into question in annulment proceedings is if it is considered
to taint the award which is subsequently adopted. Any consideration of the
role of Article 52(1)(d) must take that into account. If an award may be
tainted by the fact that a decision whether or not to disqualify an arbitrator
was taken in a manner which was procedurally deficient, a fortiori an
award may be tainted by the fact that the award itself was adopted by a
tribunal one or more of whose members did not meet the requisite standard
of impartiality and independence.” ''®

133. However, the Committee notes that the considerations expressed above in the context of the
scope of review under Article 52(1)(a) apply also in connection with the review of whether
there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. In particular, the
Committee recalls that it is faced with an existing decision rendered by the remaining
members of the Tribunal and that it is not for this Committee to perform a de novo review
of the factual and legal questions that have already been assessed in this decision. For the

16 AL A RA 30, 999.
17 A/CLA-90, 78.
8 AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, { 124.

1.
134.

135.

an

136.

same reasons that have been detailed above, the Committee therefore again agrees with the
EDF committee that “it may not find a ground of annulment exists under either Article
52(1)(a) or 52(1)(d) unless the decision not to disqualify the arbitrator in question is so
plainly unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker could have come to such a

decision.”'"”

Failure to State Reasons in the Award (Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention)

Summary of Respondent’s Position

Respondent notes that, unlike other grounds for annulment, the ground “failure to state
reasons” is not qualified by a phrase such as “manifestly” or “serious” and argues that this
results from the fact that the requirement to provide reasons is “an essential aspect of ICSID
arbitration.” Respondent points out that a proposal to include in the ICSID Convention an
option for the parties to waive the statement of reasons in the award was rejected and refers
to Aron Broches, then chairman of a regional meeting of experts, who opined that this
decision “underscores the importance attached by the drafters to the statement of reasons,

and is a factor which may be taken into account by ad hoc committees.” !?°

Respondent refers to the four forms of a failure to state reasons established by the Soufraki
committee: (i) “a total absence of reasons for the award, including the giving of mere
frivolous reasons”; (ii) “a total failure to state reasons for a particular point, which is
material for the solution’, (iii) “contradictory reasons”; and (iv) “insufficient or inadequate
reasons, which are insufficient to bring about the solution or inadequate to explain the result
arrived at by the tribunal.” '?' Respondent further refers to the annulment committee in Pey
Casado v. Chile, which held that “as long as there is no express rationale for the conclusions
with respect to a pivotal or outcome-determinative point, an annulment must follow, whether
the lack of rationale is due to a complete absence of reasons or the result of frivolous or

contradictory explanations.” '?*

In Respondent’s view, there should be no speculation about any potential reasons that might
justify the conclusion reached by the tribunal, but the factors leading to the decision must be
expressed “with a minimum of coherence and consistency (regardless of whether they are

49 AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, { 145.

20 Argentina’s Memorial, {ff 45-47 quoting from AL A RA 55, p. 331.

2! Argentina’s Memorial, | 48; Argentina’s Reply, 55 quoting from AL A RA 61, { 126.
22 Argentina’s Reply, [55 quoting from AL A RA 65, 1 86.

13

13

13

123
124
125
126
127

correct or not).” 123 Respondent refers to the annulment committee in MINE v. Guinea, which
stated that one must be able to “follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A to Point B

and eventually to its conclusion.” '*

7. In response to Claimants’ argument that contradictory reasons are often better dealt with
under the remedies of rectification or interpretation of awards rather than in annulment
proceedings, Respondent takes the view that such remedies are not suitable to verify the
tribunal’s duty to state non-contradictory reasons, given that the scope of rectification under
Article 49(2) is limited to “rectify[ing] clerical, arithmetical or similar error” and the scope
of interpretation under Article 50 does not extend beyond clarifying “the meaning or scope
of an award.” Respondent further refers to the ICSID Background Paper on Annulment,
which records that “a majority of ad hoc Committees have concluded that ‘frivolous’ and

‘contradictory’ reasons are equivalent to no reasons and could justify an annulment.” '?°

~

Specifically in relation to the rectification remedy, Respondent refers to Prof. Schreuer who
states in his commentary that “the procedure of self-correction under Art. 49(2) will be useful
only in the case of inadvertent omissions of a technical character but not in the case of a
considered omission affecting a fundamental aspect of the tribunal’s reasoning ... . The
grounds for annulment of failure to state reasons (Art. 52(1)(e)), departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure (Art. 52(1)(d)) and manifest excess of powers (Art. 52(1)(b))
may be available in case of a failure to decide an essential question.” Respondent submits
that in line with this commentary, annulment committees have found that a tribunal’s failure
to address a question submitted to it (contrary to Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention),
“which may affect the final decision of that tribunal,” may amount to any of the three above
mentioned annulment grounds. '2”

©

Specifically with regard to the failure to address certain evidence in the damages phase,
Respondent quotes from the finding of the annulment committee in TECO v. Guatemala that
“[w]hile the Committee accepts that a tribunal cannot be required to address within its
award each and every piece of evidence in the record, that cannot be construed to mean that
a tribunal can simply gloss over evidence upon which the Parties have placed significant
emphasis, without any analysis and without explaining why it found that evidence

Argentina’s Memorial, 1 49.

Argentina’s Reply, 1 54 quoting from AL A RA 62, 5.09.
Argentina’s Reply, {ff 56-58 quoting from A/CLA-91, { 107.
Argentina’s Reply, 1 59 quoting from AL A RA 92, p. 864.
Argentina’s Reply, {40 citing A/CLA-91, {| 104.

140.

141.

142.

143.

insufficient, unpersuasive or otherwise unsatisfactory. A tribunal is duty bound to the parties
to at least address those pieces of evidence that the parties deem to be highly relevant to
their case and, if it finds them to be of no assistance, to set out the reasons for this

conclusion.” 8

Respondent points out that the TECO committee considered it relevant that the tribunal had
failed to address expert reports directly pertaining to the loss of value claim and thus “failed
to observe evidence which at least had the potential to be relevant to the final outcome of
the case”; it thus partially annulled the award, stating that the tribunal’s failure to address
these expert reports “despite the parties’ strong emphasis on expert evidence” rendered the
tribunal’s reasoning “difficult to understand” and, in the eyes of the committee, not
satisfactory under the reasoning requirements of Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention. !2

In relation to Claimants’ argument that the Committee should “actively seek to get inside the
skin of the tribunal,” Respondent takes the view that this would be “well beyond the scope”
of the Committee’s powers and, in fact contrary “to the very essence” of the ground for
annulment in Article 52(1)(e). Respondent refers to the finding of the Kléckner I committee
that “it is not for the Committee to imagine what might or should have been the arbitrators’
reasons, any more than it should substitute ‘correct’ reasons for possible ‘incorrect’ reasons,
or deal ‘ex post facto’ with questions submitted to the Tribunal which the Award left

unanswered.” °°

Summary of Claimants’ Position

Claimants emphasize that, while “in highly limited circumstances,” a violation of the duty
to provide a reasoned award under Article 48(3) may amount to a ground for annulment
under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention, an ad hoc committee is not authorized to
review the quality or persuasiveness of a tribunal’s reasoning. Claimants quote from the
ICSID Background Paper of Annulment stating that “[t]he correctness of the reasoning or

whether it is convincing is not relevant” to a committee’s inquiry.'*!

Claimants take the view that, despite recognizing that a failure to state reasons requires a
total absence of reasons, genuinely contradictory reasons (which result in an effective

28 Argentina’s Reply, 61 quoting from AL A RA 89, 131.

'29 Argentina’s Reply, [62 quoting from AL A RA 89, {ff 135, 138.

'30 Argentina’s Reply, {ff 63-64 quoting from AL A RA 56, { 151.

5! Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{{ 146-147 quoting from A/CLA-91, 1 105.

37

absence of reasons) or reasons “‘so lacking in coherence that a reader cannot follow” them,
Respondent does not allege that the Tribunal’s reasoning in the Award is unintelligible or
absent of reasons but rather attacks the quality of the reasoning. Claimants submit that as
long as it is possible to follow the reasoning through to the tribunal’s conclusion, there can
be no annulment, and refer to the finding of the Vivendi I committee that “Article 52(1)(e)
concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an award, not the failure
to state correct or convincing reasons. It bears reiterating that an ad hoc committee is not a
court of appeal. Provided that the reasons given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to
the issue that were before the tribunal, their correctness is beside the point in terms of Article
52(1)(e).” 3?

144. In response to Respondent’s argument that an ad hoc committee may not fill any gaps in the
tribunal’s reasoning, Claimants contend, apart from claiming that there are no such gaps in
the present case, that a tribunal’s reasons “may be implicit so long as they are
understandable.” Claimants argue that the committee should assess whether such reasons
are implicit in the considerations and conclusions contained in the award and refer to Prof.
Reisman’s statement that annulment committees must “actively seek to get inside the skin of
the tribunal whose award is under review and to track its explicit and implicit ratiocination
before concluding that its reasoning is insufficient.” '** In this context, Claimants refer to the
committee in TECO v. Guatemala, which stated that “not all of a tribunal’s reasons need to

be set out explicitly, as long as they can be understood from the rest of the award.” 4

145. Claimants further submit that a failure to state reasons must relate to an essential point in the
tribunal’s decision and claim that where a tribunal fails to address a discrete question not
relevant to the final decision, the appropriate remedy would be a request for supplementary
decision under Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention. While acknowledging that
contradictory reasons “may exceptionally constitute a failure to state reasons where they
prevent the reader from understanding the tribunal’s motives,” Claimants take the position
that in many cases, contradictions “are more appropriately dealt with” under the remedies
of rectification and interpretation of awards provided in Articles 49(2) and 50 of the ICSID
Convention rather than in annulment proceedings.'?> Claimants reject Respondent’s

'52 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {| 148-149 quoting from AL A RA 57, { 64 (emphasis in original); Claimants’
Rejoinder, | 87.

33 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{ 151-152 quoting from A/CLA-110, p. 795.

'54 Claimants’ Rejoinder, | 93 quoting from AL A RA 89, { 88.

85 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{ 153-154.

146.

147.

148.

149.

argument that these remedies are insufficient to address allegedly contradictory reasoning
and refer to the Impregilo committee, which confirmed that Articles 49 and 50 provide the
parties with an opportunity to address “omissions, rectify material errors, and clarify the
interpretation of an award.”'*°

In addition, Claimants quote from the ICSID Background Paper of Annulment, which states
that “[w]hile a Tribunal must deal with every question submitted to it, the drafting history
indicates that a failure to do so should not result in annulment. Instead, the ICSID
Convention provides another remedy where a Tribunal fails to address a question: the
dissatisfied party may request that the same Tribunal issue a supplementary decision
concerning the question not addressed. In addition, if there is a dispute between the parties
as to the meaning or scope of the award, either party may request interpretation of the award

by the original Tribunal.” 77

In this context, Claimants refer to the Daimler committee, which held that “[t]wo tests must
be satisfied before an ad hoc committee can annul an award based on contradictory reasons.
First, the reasons must be genuinely contradictory in that they cancel each other out so as
to amount to no reasons at all. Second, the point with regard to which these reasons are

given is necessary for the tribunal’s decision.” 8

In response to Respondent’s reliance on the findings of the TECO committee leading to a
partial annulment of the award, Claimants note that this committee was faced with a
complete failure of the tribunal to consider any evidence on an issue central to its decision.
In Claimants’ view, nothing in this decision suggests that the TECO committee considered
annulment appropriate anytime a tribunal failed to address evidence on a particular point,

which it in fact explicitly denied in line with settled case law.'*?

Finally, Claimants argue that tribunals should be afforded a certain degree of discretion over
the manner in which they express their reasoning, which may differ depending on the legal
tradition, and conclude that “[c]ommittees should therefore favor an interpretation of the
Tribunal’s reasoning that confirms the consistency of its decision, rather than engage in a

hunt for contradictions.” *°

'36 Claimants’ Rejoinder, {{ 89 quoting from A/CLA-42/ AL A RA 34, J 214.
'57 Claimants’ Rejoinder, [91 quoting from A/CLA-91, { 103.

89 Claimants’ Rejoinder, J 92 referring to AL A RA 89, fff 130-138.
40 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, { 156.

i
i
laimants’ Counter-Memorial, | 155 quoting from A/CLA-43, {[ 77.
i
i

3.
150.

151.

152.

153.

Committee’s Analysis

Respondent submits that a failure to state reasons exists in the four cases identified by the
committee in Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates: (i) “a total absence of reasons for the award,
including the giving of merely frivolous reasons”, (ii) “a total failure to state reasons for a
particular point, which is material for the solution’; (iii) “contradictory reasons’; and (iv)
“insufficient or inadequate reasons, which are insufficient to bring about the solution or
inadequate to explain the result arrived at by the Tribunal.” +!

Claimants agree that a failure to state reasons arises: (i) “where there has been a total
absence of reasons”; (ii) “where a tribunal’s reasoning is genuinely contradictory”; and (iii)

“where the reasoning is so lacking in coherence that a reader cannot follow it.”'*

While emphasizing that this ground for annulment is not qualified by a term such as
“manifest” or “serious,” Respondent apparently accepts that a failure to state reasons must
relate to a “material” or, as put by the committee in Pey Casado v. Chile that Respondent
quotes in this regard, to a “pivotal or outcome-determinative point.”'** Claimants, for their
part, do not explicitly dispute that a failure to state reasons may relate to only part of the
award but rather emphasize that such failure must result in the inability to follow the
tribunal’s reasons through to its conclusion. In the Committee’s view, this is not in
contradiction with the statement of the Pey Casado committee that “dés lors qu’il n’existe
aucun fondement expres pour étayer les conclusions sur un point crucial ou déterminant

pour le résultat, l'annulation doit étre prononcée ... .”'** If there were no express rationale

 

with respect to a pivotal or outcome-determinative point of the Tribunal’s decision, its
reasons could not be followed through to its conclusion. Such finding could warrant
annulment of the Award.

It further appears that Respondent does not dispute the statement of the committee in Vivendi
v. Argentina I that “it is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that Article 52(1)(e)
concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an award, not the failure
to state correct and convincing reasons.”'* In line with the Vivendi I committee’s further
finding that there can be no annulment under Article 52(1)(e) if the reasons given by the

41 AL A RA 61, 126.

‘2 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, [ 148.

43 Argentina’s Reply, [55 quoting from AL A RA 65, {1 86.
4 AL A RA 65, 1 86.

45 AL A RA 57,1 64.

40

154.

155.

156.

157.

tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues before it, the committee in MINE v. Guinea
that Respondent quotes in this context held that “the requirement to state reasons is satisfied
as long as the award enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to

Point B. and eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of law.”'*6

In light of the above, the Committee considers it common ground that the issue before this
Committee is not to assess the accuracy or quality of the reasons given by the Tribunal but
rather to review whether these reasons enable the reader to understand why the Tribunal
reached the conclusions that were determinative for its decision(s).

The dispute between the Parties primarily focuses on: (i) the role in this context of the
remedies of rectification and interpretation of the award under Articles 49(2) and 50 of the
ICSID Convention; and (ii) the efforts an ad hoc committee should undertake to extract the
reasons given by the tribunal from the decision it has rendered and to follow those reasons
through to the tribunal’s conclusion before finding that a ground for annulment exists.

As to the first issue, the Committee agrees with Claimants that to the extent it would have
been open to Respondent to correct any alleged flaw in the Award by means of an application
for rectification or interpretation under Articles 49(2) or 50, such flaw does not qualify as a
ground for annulment. At the same time, however, the Committee notes that the scope of the
rectification remedy is expressly limited to “clerical, arithmetical or similar error,’ i.e.,
errors that would not justify an annulment in any event. The interpretation remedy is meant
to clarify disputes as to “the meaning or scope of an award” but it does not apply in case the
meaning and scope of the decision are clear but not supported by reasons that enable the
reader to understand how the tribunal reached the underlying conclusions.

As for the second issue, the Committee is aware that Claimants cite the statement of a leading
authority that annulment committees must “actively seek to get inside the skin of the tribunal
whose award is under review and to track its explicit and implicit ratiocination before
concluding that its reasoning is insufficient.”'*” Respondent on the other hand refers to the
committee in Kléckner v. Cameroon I, which held that “it is not for the Committee to imagine
what might or should have been the arbitrators’ reasons, any more than it should substitute
‘correct’ reasons for possibly ‘incorrect’ reasons, or deal ‘ex post facto’ with questions
submitted to the Tribunal which the Award left unanswered.” '**

46 AL A RA 62, 15.09.
147 A/CLA-110, p. 795.
M8 AL A RA 56,7151.

4

158.

159.

160.

161.

In the Committee’s view, these statements do not necessarily contradict each other but they
rather reflect the difficulty of finding a reasonable and balanced standard of review. While
an ad hoc committee certainly may not speculate on possible reasons or even replace given
reasons by reasons of its own making, it must be borne in mind that an annulment proceeding
is meant to safeguard the fundamental integrity of the arbitration proceedings but not to be
mistaken for a detailed scrutiny of whether each and every conclusion is supported by fully
comprehensible reasons. Consequently, the Committee considers that it can be expected
from an ad hoc committee to undertake reasonable efforts to follow the reasons given by the
tribunal, the extent of which cannot be answered in the abstract but must be determined in
the individual circumstances of the case.

Finally and specifically with regard to Respondent’s allegation that the Tribunal has failed
to give reasons addressing certain evidence relevant to Respondent’s necessity defense, the
Committee generally agrees with the EJ Paso committee that “[t]he assessment of the
evidence and interpretation of the applicable law must be performed only by the Tribunal,
not by the Committee" and that an ad hoc committee "cannot or should not decide whether

evidence was well or ill-considered or not considered at all by the Tribunal.” °

The Committee further agrees with the finding of the EDF committee that “[s]o long as the
reader can follow the reasoning in the Award, the fact that it does not deal with each
authority or every item of evidence is immaterial.” Albeit in the context of Article 52(1)(d),
the EDF committee then held that the tribunal is not required “‘to discuss any particular item
of evidence in detail, or at all, where it is not necessary to do so in order to decide the

questions before it.”'>°

The Committee is aware that Respondent places particular reliance on a finding made by the
committee in TECO v. Guatemala that “[w]hile the Committee accepts that a tribunal cannot
be required to address within its award each and every piece of evidence in the record, that
cannot be construed to mean that a tribunal can simply gloss over evidence upon which the
Parties have placed significant emphasis, without any analysis and without explaining why
it found that evidence insufficient, unpersuasive or otherwise unsatisfactory. A tribunal is
duty bound to the parties to at least address those pieces of evidence that the parties deem

49 AL A RA 35, ff 191, 196.
150 AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, {ff 349, 350.

162.

163.

VI.

164.

165.

to be highly relevant to their case and, if it finds them to be of no assistance, to set out the

reasons for this conclusion.” >!

However, as the TECO committee clarified immediately before the passage quoted by
Respondent, “[i]f was within the Tribunal’s discretion to assess whether [the expert]
testimony was relevant or not, material or not, and that view is not censorable on annulment.
However, that is not what is at stake here. The Committee takes issue with the complete
absence of any discussion of the Parties’ expert reports within the Tribunal’s analysis of the

loss of value claim.” >

Consequently, this decision cannot be deemed to allow for a re-
evaluation of the evidence put before the tribunal but it rather concerned the exceptional case
in which a total failure to address “highly relevant” evidence amounted to a failure to state

reasons under Article 52(1)(e) and justified a partial annulment of the award.

In conclusion, the Committee therefore maintains the view that as held by previous ICSID
jurisprudence, it is not for this Committee to re-consider the evidence put before the
Tribunal. Annulment for a failure to state reasons could be warranted only if there was a
total failure to address evidence that would have been “highly relevant” to the Tribunal’s
decision, i.e., evidence whose consideration could have had a significant impact on the
Award.

THE COMMITTEE’S VIEWS

Respondent has invoked four sets of grounds that, in its view, fulfill different grounds for
annulment under Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention. In order to thoroughly address each
set of grounds, the Committee will follow the same structure that Respondent applied in its
written pleadings and assess the individual grounds of annulment advanced by Respondent.

First Set of Grounds for Annulment Relating to the Appointment of Prof. Kaufmann-
Kohler as Director of UBS and Her Alleged Failure to Inform and Investigate

Summary of Respondent’s Position

Respondent submits that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s appointment in April 2006 as a member
of the Board of Directors of UBS AG, which in turn held shares and other interests in two
of the Claimants, i.e., Suez and Vivendi, created a “serious conflict of interest,’ which made

Sl AL A RA 89, 7131.
'2 AL A RA 89, 7131.

43

166.

167.

168.

it “manifestly impossible” for her to be relied upon to exercise independent judgment as
required under Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention. Respondent further claims that
Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler breached the ‘fundamental duty to disclose that situation in the
arbitrations in which she was involved and to properly investigate the connections between
UBS and the parties to those proceedings.” According to Respondent, from the moment of
Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s appointment to the Board of Directors, the Tribunal was therefore
no longer properly constituted (Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention) and there was a
serious departure from fundamental rules of procedure (Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention).!?

Respondent emphasizes that, while Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler did provide UBS with a list of
her ongoing arbitrations, she did not ask UBS to identify any relationship it had with any of
the parties to those arbitrations, nor did she make any independent inquiries of her own in
this regard. Respondent refers to the expert report of Prof. Wolfram, who identified both a
“loyalty” interest and an “economic” self-interest in Claimants’ favor that each generated a
conflict of interest, given that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler had a responsibility to support UBS’s
business interests and was financially tied to UBS’s financial success, which was in turn
connected to Claimants’ success in this arbitration.'**

As to the interest of loyalty, Respondent again refers to Prof. Wolfram’s report, which
pointed out two relevant forms of interest: (i) UBS held stock in Suez and Vivendi on its
own account and as wealth-management custodian for its bank clients; and (ii) UBS had
publicly recommended to its clients to invest in Claimants’ business sector or specifically in
their stock. As to the economic self-interest, Respondent notes that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler

received at least 50% and up to 100% of her compensation in UBS stock.!°>

Respondent submits that, in its Decision on Respondent’s Second Proposal for
Disqualification, the Tribunal failed to address Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s “fiduciary duty to
protect the economic interests of UBS in the Claimants, her natural inclination to do so, her
institutional loyalty to advance such interests, or the justifiable doubts this created regarding
her ability to act as an impartial arbitrator.” In addition, Respondent takes the view that the
Tribunal downplayed the value of UBS’s investments in Suez and Vivendi, valued at over

53 Argentina’s Application, {{{ 23, 33; Argentina’s Memorial, ][ 58-59, 98; Argentina’s Reply, 111 67, 98.
'S4 Argentina’s Memorial, {f 65, 70; Argentina’s Reply, {81 referring to Exhibit A RA 66, {ff 11-15.
5 Argentina’s Memorial, {{f 71-72; Argentina’s Reply, 111 80, 82 referring to Exhibit A RA 66, 1118, 15.

169.

170.

171.

USD 2 billion, and incorrectly stated that UBS’s shareholdings in Claimants “in no way
affect the compensation that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler earns as a director of UBS.”'*

As to the four criteria examined by the Tribunal members to evaluate the connection between
Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler and Claimants, i.e., proximity, intensity, dependence, and
materiality, Respondent notes that they are not based on any authority and in any event, the
Tribunal erroneously assessed the facts against them and in addition referred to links
between strangers around the world and even aliens — as a result of which the Decision on
Respondent’s Second Proposal for Disqualification was “completely lacking in
reasonableness.”'*7 In addition to the facts known to Respondent when it filed its Second
Proposal for Disqualification, Respondent submits that it learned in May 2008 that
Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler had become even more influential at UBS because she had been
appointed as chair of the UBS’s Nominating Committee, which is in charge of proposing

nominations and evaluating the effectiveness of Board Members. '**

Respondent submits that, contrary to the remaining members of the Tribunal, the Vivendi IT
committee recognized the conflicts of interest that affected Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler and
stated that “[s]ince a major international bank has connections with or an interest in virtually
any major international company (which companies are also the most likely to end up in
international arbitrations), this suggests that the positions of a director of such bank, and
that of an international arbitrator, may not be compatible, and should not be, or in a modern
international arbitration environment, should no longer be combined.” The committee
added that “[a]s a minimum, the ad hoc Committee sees here reason for extreme caution,
especially in ICSID cases where the public interest is often strongly engaged.” !°°

Respondent further refers to the Vivendi IT committee’s analysis of how an arbitrator should
handle such a conflict of interest in terms of: (i) investigating any connections between the
bank and the parties to the arbitrations; (ii) disclosing any such connections to the parties;
and (iii) notifying the parties of the appointment regardless of any connections found.
According to the Vivendi IT committee, such a situation further imposes a “continuous duty
of investigation” on the arbitrator, which it considered not fulfilled by merely providing the
bank with a list of current arbitrations together with a request to find out whether there were

56 Argentina’s Memorial, {ff 75, 76 quoting from Decision on Disqualification, { 40.

'57 Argentina’s Reply, {ff 90-94, 97.

'58 Argentina’s Memorial, [ 74; Argentina’s Reply, 96.

59 Argentina’s Memorial, ff 81-83 quoting from AL A RA 67, {if 218-219 (emphasis added by Respondent).

45

172.

173.

any conflicts on interests. Respondent submits that, in the committee’s view, the bank was
not in a position to decide whether there were conflicts of interests from the perspective of
the parties to the arbitrations but it would have been for the arbitrator personally to consider
any connection between the bank and the parties and to disclose such connection to the
parties. '©°

Respondent points out that based on these considerations, the Vivendi IJ committee
understood the argument that the tribunal was no longer properly constituted and there was
a serious departure from fundamental rules of procedure, which “could lead to annulment
whenever justified within the context of the case under consideration.” Respondent submits
that the committee ultimately decided not to annul the award because it did not have
sufficient reason to believe that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler knew about the connection between
UBS and the claims in that case until after the award was rendered and therefore found that
this connection did not have any material effect on the final decision of the tribunal.'*!
Respondent points out that, by contrast, the Decision on Liability in the present case was
issued long after Respondent’s Proposal for Disqualification, and Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s

opinion was decisive in light of Prof. Nikken’s dissenting opinion. '*

As to Claimants’ reliance on the decision in EDF v. Argentina, Respondent notes that the
underlying facts and thus the conflict of interest were not the same in that case because
UBS’s participation in the claimant there was only indirect (via its parent company) and with
1.5% substantially less than the direct shareholdings in the present case. Respondent also
refers to the EDF committee quoting from a statement made by the Vivendi IT committee
that “a larger or smaller participation of UBS in the one or in the other company may have
relevance in this connection.” In Respondent's view, the reasoning of the EDF committee
actually supports its claim that the Award must be annulled on the basis of the facts
underlying the present case. '*

160 Argentina’s Memorial, {{[ 84-87 quoting from AL A RA 67, {ff 204, 222-226.

11 Argentina’s Memorial, {§[ 88-89 quoting from AL A RA 67, J 232 and citing §{f 234-235.

162 Argentina’s Memorial, 90; Argentina’s Reply, {| 98.

163 Argentina’s Memorial, § 93; Argentina’s Reply, {{{ 99-103 quoting from AL A RA 70, {| 155. The EDF committee
noted in the same paragraph that, while in the case before it, the investment in question consisted of a 1.5%
shareholding in EDF, the parent company of the claimant EDFI, which was held by the UBS Foundation for the benefit
of various Swiss pension funds, it appeared that, by contrast, in Vivendi IT UBS was the largest shareholder in the
claimant itself.

164 Argentina’s Reply, {J 104-105.

174.

175.

176.

177.

According to Respondent, the fact that UBS was the largest shareholder in Vivendi with
2.38% of its shares and a major shareholder in Suez with 2.13% of its shares, valued together
at over USD 2 billion, must be considered a “fairly significant percentage in terms of value,”
which arose both from direct investments by UBS and from its purchase of shares for its
clients’ accounts and cannot be considered de minimis as alleged by Claimants. Respondent
further emphasizes that UBS also actively promoted and marketed investments in the water

sector, which includes the two Claimants. !%

In Respondent’s view, these two aspects created direct interests on the part of UBS in the
outcome of the arbitration and thus an “extremely serious situation” in disregard of
“fundamental aspects of the right to a fair trial,” i.e., the right to an independent and
impartial tribunal. As these conflicts of interests for Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler had a “material
impact” on the Decision on Liability as well as on the Award, Respondent claims that an
annulment of the Award is warranted. '®°

“TA]s an aggravating factor,” Respondent invokes the fact that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler did
not disclose her appointment as a member of the UBS Board to the parties to the arbitration
—in contrast with her approach to inform UBS about her ongoing arbitrations, indicating that
she knew that her appointment could lead in certain cases to a conflict.'*’ Respondent refers
to its expert Prof. Wolfram who concluded that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s failure to
investigate or disclose her appointment was an independent cause for disqualification. '*

As to the assessment of the two remaining members of the Tribunal that it was “perfectly
possible for a person to be unaware of the links that connect him or her to others,”
Respondent argues that this does not account for the specific duty of investigation, disclosure
and notification on the part of the arbitrators within the context of an ICSID arbitration,
under which Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler would have been required to ask UBS for the necessary
information and to inform the parties to these proceedings of the circumstances at hand. !©

165 Argentina’s Memorial, | 94; Argentina’s Reply, {1 70, 73, 76-77.

166 Argentina’s Memorial, {| 94-97. Respondent argues that the only two cases in which Argentina was held liable to
pay compensation on account of a financial debt were Vivendi and the present case — in both of which Prof. Kaufmann-
Kohler was acting as arbitrator and UBS held a shareholding in Vivendi. Respondent further claims that her
involvement led to additional amounts on account of guaranteed debt, which are not insignificant or marginal and
would create additional revenues for Suez and Vivendi. Argentina’s Reply, { 78.

167 Argentina’s Reply, {| 71-72.

168 Argentina’s Reply, { 83 referring to Exhibit A RA 66, {{ 13.

1 Argentina’s Reply, | 89 quoting from Decision on Disqualification, { 33.

47

2.
178.

179.

180.

Summary of Claimants’ Position

Claimants submit that Respondent argues based on its erroneous assumption that the
Committee is empowered to perform a de novo review of the arbitrator challenge and refuses
to engage with the approaches taken by the Azurix and EDF committees. Claimants reiterate
their view that, even if the substance of that challenge were indeed to be considered by this
Committee, this consideration would be limited, in line with the EDF committee’s approach,
to whether the Tribunal’s decision on Respondent’s Proposal for Disqualification was “so
plainly unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker could have come to such a
decision.” '” According to Claimants, this means that the Committee “is not tasked with
determining whether Argentina’s challenge was correctly decided, but rather if the

 

Tribunal’s Second Chall. Decision c ii 1 such an egregious violation of certain
basic principles that it cannot stand.”'”'

Claimants contend that the findings made by the Tribunal in its Decision on Respondent’s
Second Proposal for Disqualification are binding in this annulment phase. Specifically,
Claimants recall that the Tribunal, in its 28-page decision, qualitatively analyzed the
situation and identified four criteria to guide its assessment: proximity, intensity,
dependence, and materiality. Based on these criteria, the Tribunal found that
Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s connections to Suez and Vivendi were remote and immaterial,
given in particular the nature of UBS’s “passive, portfolio” investments in Suez and Vivendi
that amounted to only 0.056% of UBS’s total investments during the relevant period. In
addition, it found that Respondent had not been able to prove any impact of the arbitration
on the share price of Suez and Vivendi, let alone any effect on UBS or Prof. Kaufmann-
Kohler’s interests. !7*

According to Claimants, the Tribunal’s findings were “firmly grounded in the factual record
and cannot be revisited on annulment,” even if there were any factual or legal errors in the
Tribunal’s assessment. In particular, Claimants note that the expert report of Prof. Wolfram
was considered and rejected by the Tribunal and therefore cannot be considered de novo by
this Committee. In any event, Claimants emphasize that Prof. Wolfram’s “extreme opinions”
were rejected not only by the Tribunal in the present case but also by the EDF tribunal and
the EDF annulment committee.!”

79 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{ 73-74 quoting from A/CLA-61, { 145; Claimants’ Rejoinder, { 26.
"7! Claimants’ Rejoinder, 4 25.

Im

BE

I
I

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{ 76-78; Claimants’ Rejoinder, ff 27-32.

jaimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{{ 80-81; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {{[ 33-34.

48

181.

182.

183.

184.

As to the fiduciary duty that Respondent heavily relies on in its Application, Claimants argue
that Respondent did not establish how Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler would have been under a duty
to corrupt an international arbitration proceeding involving a sovereign state, which could
have endangered UBS’s reputation. In any event, Claimants submit that any fiduciary duty
ended when Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler resigned from the UBS Board in 2009, i.e., before both
the Decision on Liability and the Award were rendered. !”4

With regard to Respondent’s reliance on the criticism of Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s handling
of the issue voiced by the Vivendi IJ committee, Claimants argue that this decision was
rendered in a “very different context,” as there was no prior challenge decision in that case
and the committee thus had to consider the question “as a matter of first impression at the
annulment stage.” Claimants further emphasize that, despite its criticism, the Vivendi IT
committee nevertheless concluded that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s independence and
impartiality were not impaired by her relationship with UBS and did not justify an annulment
of the Award. By contrast, Claimants reiterate that the only permissible question before this
Committee is whether the Tribunal’s decision on Respondent’s Proposal for Disqualification
was “so plainly unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker could have come to such a

decision.” '7°

As to Respondent’s additional argument that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler failed to investigate
and disclose potential conflicts of interests arising out of her appointment, Claimants submit
that the failure to disclose a fact in itself cannot give rise to a lack of independence and
impartiality. In any event, Claimants emphasize that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler did not know
about UBS’s minor shareholdings in Suez and Vivendi and thus could not be under a duty
to disclose a fact of which she was unaware. In addition, Claimants note that the Tribunal
considered any such duty satisfied by Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s approach to provide a list of
her ongoing arbitrations to UBS in order for the bank to, inter alia, perform a conflict check,
and concluded that it was reasonable for her to rely on the investigation results provided by
UBS. !76

Finally, Claimants note that the Tribunal’s allegedly “so plainly unreasonable” decision was
in fact consistent with the decision of the EDF tribunal — endorsed by the EDF committee —

"74 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, ¥ 82.
"5 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, #{{ 83-84 quoting from A/CLA-61, | 145.
"76 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{ 85-87; Claimants’ Rejoinder, { 35 referring to Decision on Disqualification, 1

48.

49

185.

186.

187.

188.

refusing to disqualify Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler in “virtually identical circumstances.”!” In
Claimants’ view, the “fundamental similarity” between the two cases is that UBS’s interests
in the respective claims were de minimis. Claimants acknowledge that the EDF committee
did take note of the differences between the relative size of UBS’s interests in the respective
claimants, but argue that the EDF committee did not engage in any analysis about whether
UBS’s holding in Suez and Vivendi were greater than de minimis — contrary to the Tribunal
in the present case, whose finding that they were “not material to UBS’s financial
performance, profitability, or share price” was thus in line with the findings of the EDF
tribunal.!78

In Claimants’ view, the fact that both tribunals, as recognized by the EDF committee,
“reached the same decision” based on a common factual premise is conclusive evidence that
the Tribunal’s decision “was, at the very least, reasonable” and Respondent’s Application

must therefore be rejected. !”

Committee’s Analysis

In relation to Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s appointment to the Board of Directors of UBS,
Respondent advances two grounds for annulment: (i) that the Tribunal was no longer
properly constituted (Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention); and (ii) that there was a
serious departure from fundamental rules of procedure (Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention).

In its Proposal for Disqualification and again in this annulment proceeding, Respondent has
raised two separate arguments on the basis of which it considers that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler
lacked impartiality and independence of judgment as required under Article 14(1): (i) the
fact of her directorship in UBS, which is a shareholder in two of the Claimants (Suez and
Vivendi) and engages in certain activities relating to the water sector, as of April 2006 (and
until April 2009); and (ii) her failure to disclose the fact of her UBS directorship to the Parties
and the Tribunal as required under the ICSID regime.

The Committee recalls that in order to find that a ground for annulment exists under the
standard of review of Articles 52(1)(a) and 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, the Decision
on Disqualification rendered by the two remaining members of the Tribunal would have to

"77 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, 74 referring to A/CLA-33 and A/CLA-61.
"8 Claimants’ Rejoinder, {{{ 36-37 quoting from Decision on Disqualification, {| 40.
"79 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{ 88-89; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {ff 38-39.

50

189.

190.

191.

be “‘so plainly unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker could have come to such a

 

decision.” '®° In assessing whether this is the case, the Committee will further bear in mind
that the underlying purpose of this standard is to safeguard the fundamental integrity of

ICSID arbitration proceedings.

In the Committee’s view, there are circumstances in which a decision could be considered
“plainly unreasonable,” e.g., if a disqualification proposal was dismissed even though the
challenged arbitrator was appointed to the Board of Directors of one of the parties, or was
previously consulted by one of the parties on the subject-matter of the case. The seriousness
of these examples is corroborated by the fact that they are also captured on the Non-waivable
or Waivable Red List of the IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International
Arbitration (“IBA Guidelines”). There may even be circumstances in which a failure of the
challenged arbitrator to disclose substantial circumstances to the Parties could render the

decision of the remaining arbitrators “plainly unreasonable,” e.g., if a disqualification
proposal was dismissed even though the challenged arbitrator failed to disclose that he or
she recently served as counsel for one of the parties. Thus, even situations captured in the
Orange List of the IBA Guidelines could, in certain circumstances, be of such a seriousness
that it could compromise the fundamental integrity of the proceedings and thus would

warrant annulment of the award.

It will be for this Committee to assess whether the circumstances of the present case give
rise to a conflict of interest that is of a comparable seriousness and threat to the fundamental
integrity of ICSID arbitration proceedings, which renders the Tribunal’s decision “plainly
unreasonable.”

As a preliminary remark, the Committee wishes to emphasize that, contrary to Respondent’s

'81 Decision on

182

allegation, it cannot detect a lack of seriousness in the Tribunal’s
Disqualification. The Committee rather considers that the language used in the Decision
reflects the attempt to circumscribe the difficulties of assessing conflicts of interest in today’s
globalized world where it would be impossible to expect from arbitrators to either not have,

180 Cf AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, { 145.

18! For ease of reference, the Committee will refer to “the Tribunal” and its findings in the Decision on Disqualification
but it is of course aware that the Decision on Disqualification was rendered by the two remaining members of the
Tribunal, i.e., excluding Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler.

182 The lat

 

nguage Respondent refers to reads: “Arbitrators are not disembodied spirits dwelling on Mars, who descend

to earth to arbitrate a case and then immediately return to their Martian retreat to await inertly the call to arbitrate
another. Like other professionals living and working in the world, arbitrators have a variety of complex connections
with all sorts of persons and institutions.” Decision on Disqualification, J 32.

or to always be aware of, each and every connection to a business on whose disputes they
may be called to decide. The Tribunal used this description as a basis for its finding that the
simple existence of just any connection between an arbitrator and a party cannot be sufficient
for a successful challenge but that the “alleged connection must be evaluated

qualitatively.” !*°

192. The Committee further notes that the facts underlying the Decision on Disqualification are

undisputed between the Parties and considers that these have not significantly changed since
the Decision was rendered in May 2008. While Respondent raised two additional facts, i.e.,
that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler: (i) “had come to have an even greater influence in the Board
of Directors of UBS” when she was appointed chair of UBS’s Nominating Committee in
May 2008;'** and (ii) decided to end her role at UBS after the expiration of her three-year
term in April 2009, it must be noted that Respondent itself, when it became aware of these
facts, apparently did not consider them sufficiently severe to file a further proposal for
disqualification.

193. In addition, the Committee does not view Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s decision to step down

from the Board as an admission of a conflict of interest but rather as a decision made on the
basis of the ongoing agitations her role had caused in the arbitrations she was involved in. If
anything, the Committee considers that this additional fact reduces the significance of any
potential conflict of interest because her role at UBS persisted only for three out of a total of
12 years of proceedings and, while this time period included the unanimous Decision on
Jurisdiction, as well as pleadings and the hearing on the merits, Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler
resigned from the UBS board more than a year before the Decision on Liability was issued
and approximately six years before the Award was rendered.

194. Consequently, the Committee is of the view that the factual basis underlying the Decision

on Disqualification has not changed in a manner that would justify a re-consideration of the

 

facts, i.e., a review beyond the scope identified above.

195. In their submissions, both Parties heavily relied on decisions of previous committees that

183
184

considered challenges to Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler similar to the one raised in the present case.
However, while the Committee does consider the findings made by other committees and
tribunals relevant and will turn to them in due course, it will first perform its own analysis

Decision on Disqualification, {{ 32-33 (emphasis in original).
Argentina’s Memorial, 74.

196.

197.

of whether the Decision on Disqualification rendered by the two remaining members of the
Tribunal is “so plainly unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker could have come to

such a decision.” '*

a. The Tribunal’s Findings

In its qualitative assessment of the connection between Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler and two of
the Claimants, the Tribunal noted that neither the ICSID Convention, the ICSID Arbitration
Rules nor Respondent in its submissions provided any guidance for evaluating the
connection and its effect on Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s independence and impartiality. The
Tribunal therefore identified four criteria that it considered particularly important:
(i) proximity of the connection between the challenged arbitrator and the party; (ii) intensity
and frequency of the interactions between the challenged arbitrator and the party;
(iii) dependence of the challenged arbitrator on the party; and (iv) materiality of the benefits
accruing to the challenged arbitrator as a result of the alleged connection.!*° The Tribunal
then established the facts underlying Respondent’s challenge, i.e., in particular regarding the
significance of the shares that UBS held in Suez and Vivendi, as well as the role
Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler had as an independent director at UBS. In the context of the former,
the Tribunal made, inter alia, the following findings:

“While the market value of [UBS’s] shareholdings may seem large in

absolute terms, they are not significant in relative terms, bearing in mind

that UBS manages hundred of billions of dollars in assets. ... Despite the

size of its holdings, UBS is a passive, portfolio investor in both companies.

... While a part of such shares are held for UBS’s own account, a large

portion is managed on behalf of clients. ... [T]he Respondent ... offered no

quantitative evidence at all as to the potential effect of an award in favor

of the Claimants on the price of their shares or the nature of their dividend

distributions. ... [I]t is more likely that this arbitration, whatever its

outcome, will have a negligible effect on the share price of Vivendi and

Suez and certainly on the financial fortunes of UBS.”'*"

 

As regards Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s role as an independent director of UBS, the Tribunal
held that pursuant to Swiss law and UBS Articles of Association:

“The directors are not full-time employees of the corporations, are not in
continuous session, and exercise largely a supervisory function over the

'85 Cf AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, { 145.
'86 Decision on Disqualification, [ 35.
'87 Decision on Disqualification, {[ 36.

198.

199.

activities of the corporation. As a result, Professor Kaufmann-Kohler is not
involved in the day-to-day management of the corporation, such as
selecting investments or preparing research reports, does not have
responsibilities over the investment and management of corporate or client
assets, and in fact was unaware until reading the Respondent’s Second
Proposal for her disqualification that UBS owned shares in Vivendi or
Suez. ... Respondent offered no evidence to the contrary with regard to
Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s specific duties and responsibilities as a member
of the UBS board of directors.” '**

  

Finally, it applied these facts to the four criteria it had identified and found that:

(i) “any connection between Professor Kaufmann-Kohler and the Claimants Vivendi and
Suez is remote and certainly not direct’;

(ii) “there is no interaction at all between Professor Kaufmann-Kohler and the Claimants
by virtue of her UBS directorship”;

(iii) “Professor Kaufmann-Kohler derives no benefits or advantages from and is inno way
dependent on the Claimants as a result of the alleged connection”, and

(iv) “UBS shareholdings in Claimant Vivendi and Suez are not material to UBS financial
performance, profitability, or share price and in no way affect the compensation that
Professor Kaufmann-Kohler earns as a director of UBS.”

The Tribunal thus concluded that the alleged connection between Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler
and the Claimants did not create a manifest lack of independence and impartiality of

judgment.!®°

In its assessment of whether Prof. Kaufmann Kohler’s failure to disclose the fact of her UBS
directorship to the Parties and the Tribunal indicated a manifest lack of the qualities in Article
14(1), the Tribunal held that while Rule 6 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, as applicable when
the arbitration was commenced, did not specifically address the disclosure of facts arising
after the constitution of the Tribunal, this provision should be interpreted to impose a
continuing obligation of disclosure on the arbitrators.'°° The Tribunal noted, however, that
Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler had not been aware of the fact that UBS held shares in Suez and
Vivendi prior to Respondent’s Proposal for Disqualification and considered that she could
thus not have been required to disclose such fact.'?! As regards Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s

'88 Decision on Disqualification, { 39.
'89 Decision on Disqualification, { 40.
'% Decision on Disqualification, ff 42-43.
9! Decision on Disqualification, 46.

200.

201.

192

approach to provide a list of her ongoing arbitrations to UBS to determine, inter alia, whether
any of them conflicted with her future responsibilities at UBS, the Tribunal held:
“We believe that she had reason to rely on the UBS examination of this
question since UBS, under Swiss banking law and the corporate and stock
exchange rules to which it is subject, had a strong incentive to ascertain
her independence because the company would have encountered legal and
regulatory difficulties should it represent her as an independent director
and later find that a court, regulatory agency, or stock exchange had
determined her to be non-independent director of the UBS board of
directors. It was therefore reasonable to rely on the investigation by UBS
that no conflict existed between Professor Kaufmann-Kohler and the
parties in any of her arbitrations (with the exception of the America cup)
as a result of becoming a UBS director. Consequently, we do not believe
that she had a duty to inquire further. Moreover, even if it were established
that she did have such an obligation (which we do not believe is the case),
her failure to do was in our opinion the result of an honest exercise of
judgment and was not part of a pattern of circumstances raising doubts
about impartiality.”
The Tribunal thus concluded that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler had no duty to inquire further and
thus did not act in violation of Rule 6 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. !°”

b. The Committee’s Considerations on the Tribunal’s Findings

Contrary to Respondent’s allegation and in particular taking into account the absence of any
evaluation criteria provided in the applicable rules, by the Parties or by ICSID jurisprudence,
the Committee considers that it was within the Tribunal’s reasonable discretion to perform
a qualitative assessment of whether there was a “manifest” lack of the qualities in Article
14(1) as required by Article 57 and to identify certain criteria it considered particularly
relevant to its assessment.

As for the Tribunal’s understanding of the underlying facts as well as the application of these
facts to the criteria it had identified, it has to be reiterated that it is not for this Committee to
substitute its own views for the conclusions drawn by the Tribunal in this regard. The review
of this Committee under Article 52(1)(a) and (d) of the ICSID Convention is rather limited
to an assessment of whether the conclusions reached by the Tribunal were “plainly
unreasonable.” Therefore, the fact that the Committee may not share all of the views
expressed by the Tribunal and in fact agree with some of the criticism expressed by the

Decision on Disqualification, {] 48.

committee in Vivendi II v. Argentina, as further set out below, is not decisive. Contrary to
the Vivendi IT committee, this Committee is not called upon to make a first-time assessment
of the matters at hand; it is faced with an existing decision, which shall stand unless it is

“plainly unreasonable.

202. Respondent criticizes in particular that while its expert Prof. Wolfram identified at least two

forms of interest that UBS had in Suez and Vivendi, i.e., an “economic” self-interest in
Claimants’ favor and a “Joyalty” interest, the Tribunal failed to address in its Decision on
Disqualification the fiduciary duty and institutional loyalty of Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler to
protect and advance UBS’s interests in Claimants. In addition, Respondent argues that it was
incorrect for the Tribunal to state that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s compensation as a UBS
director was “in no way affect[ed]” by UBS’s shareholdings in Claimants because she in fact
received between 50% and 100% of her compensation in UBS stock.

203. As noted above, there are circumstances in which a decision not to disqualify a challenged

arbitrator could be considered “plainly unreasonable,” in particular circumstances such as
those captured on the Non-waivable and Waivable Red List of the IBA Guidelines. In the
Committee’s view, the undisputed fact that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler received a certain
amount of her compensation in UBS stock does not indicate a conflict of interest that is of a
comparably serious nature and thus a threat to the fundamental integrity of the arbitration
proceedings. As found by the Tribunal and not to be re-considered by this Committee, UBS’s
shareholdings in Suez and Vivendi are “not material to UBS financial performance,
profitability, or share price.” In addition, the Tribunal noted that it had not been presented
with evidence that a favorable award would have more than a “negligible effect” on
Claimants’ share price and “certainly on the financial fortunes of UBS.”'%*

204. As to the alleged “Joyalty” interest raised by Prof. Wolfram, which was not addressed by the

193
194
195

Tribunal, the Committee recalls its agreement with the finding of the EDF committee that
Article 52(1)(d) “does not ... require a tribunal to discuss in detail any particular item of
evidence in detail, or at all, where it is not necessary to do so in order to decide the questions
before it.”!°> It is apparent from the Tribunal’s reasoning that in light of the negligible
significance of UBS’s shareholdings compared to its total investments as well as its role as
a passive portfolio investor that held a large portion of such shares on behalf of its clients,
the Tribunal considered that there was no significant link between an award in Claimants’

Decision on Disqualification, {[ 40.
Decision on Disqualification, {[ 36.
AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, { 350.

205.

206.

207.

favor and UBS’s interests. As a result, there was no need from the Tribunal’s perspective to
discuss particular forms of interest, none of which would have been affected in a significant

manner.

In this context, the Committee notes that the IBA Guidelines, on which both Parties relied
in their written and oral submissions, include in their Green List of situations in which
disclosure is not required when “[t]he arbitrator holds an insignificant amount of shares in
one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties, which is publicly listed.”'°° If it can be
considered that UBS’s shareholdings in the Claimants are “insignificant” and would not
constitute a relevant conflict of interest between those parties, the same must apply, a
fortiori, to the even more remote connection between Claimants and Prof. Kaufmann-
Kohler, who herself did not hold any shares in any of the Claimants but only served as an
independent director of the corporation that held such shares. This classification within the
ranking of circumstances within the IBA Guidelines, while not being dispositive in itself,
corroborates the Committee’s finding that the circumstances relied on by Respondent are not
comparable to those that can give rise to a “plainly unreasonable” decision.

As to the second limb of Respondent’s allegation, i.e., the fact that Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler
failed to disclose her directorship in UBS to the parties to the arbitration, the Committee’s
review is again limited to assessing whether the Tribunal’s assessment that Prof. Kaufmann-
Kohler had no duty to disclose her directorship in UBS because she was not aware of UBS’s
shareholdings in Suez and Vivendi and could reasonably rely on the investigation conducted
by UBS is “plainly unreasonable.” While the Committee again may not share all of the views
expressed by the Tribunal and understands the criticism expressed by the Vivendi IT
committee as regards her reliance on the UBS investigation rather than evaluating potential
connections herself, and her decision to notify the bank but not the parties to the arbitration,
this does not entail that the Tribunal reached a “plainly unreasonable” decision.

In this regard, the Committee notes that the Tribunal gave detailed reasons as to why it
considered it reasonable for Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler to rely on the outcome of the UBS
investigation. In particular, it assessed the applicable Swiss banking law as well as the
corporate and stock exchange rules that UBS is subject to and concluded that it was in the
interest of the bank to ascertain her independence before appointing her as director. While
one may take a different view as to the question of whether Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler could

196 Exhibit A RA 59, {[ 4.5.2. The Committee observes that a revised version of the IBA Guidelines was adopted in
2014. However, as far as the examples referred to in this section are concerned, no substantive changes have been
introduced.

208.

209.

210.

reasonably defer to the bank as regards the assessment of whether any possible connections
between UBS and any of the parties to her ongoing arbitrations amounted to a conflict of
interest, this circumstance alone is not of a seriousness comparable to the examples set out
above, that would compromise the fundamental integrity of the arbitration proceedings.
Bearing this underlying purpose of the Committee’s standard of review in mind, the
Tribunal’s assessment of the scope of Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s duties cannot be considered
“plainly unreasonable,” and consequently, does not constitute a manifest excess of powers
nor a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

c. The Committee’s Considerations on Relevant Case Law

Finally, the Committee will turn to the case law invoked by the Parties, in particular to the
decisions rendered in Vivendi IT v. Argentina, relied on by Respondent, and in EDF v.
Argentina, relied on by Claimants.

The Vivendi II committee considered that a director’s “fiduciary duty vis-a-vis the
shareholders of the bank to further the interests of the bank and therefore postpone
conflicting interests ... is fundamentally at variance with his or her duty as independent
arbitrators in an arbitration involving a party in which the bank has a shareholding or other

interest, however small it may be.” Given the various connections between international
banks and international companies, the committee considered that the positions of director
and arbitrator should either no longer be combined or, “[a]s a minimum,” the arbitrator
should approach this with “extreme caution” and “make a special effort that the conflicts
that may so arise are managed properly and handled with the greatest care.” The committee
further held that the continuous duty of investigation prompted thereby “cannot be
considered fulfilled by simply providing the bank at the time of the appointment with a list
of current arbitrations accompanied by a request to see whether there may be any conflicts
of interests.” Rather, it would have been “for the arbitrator personally first to consider such
a connection in terms of a voluntary resignation as arbitrator. Such connection must
otherwise be properly disclosed to the parties through an adequate amendment of earlier
declarations under Rule 6.”'°"

In addition, the Vivendi IT committee considered it “difficult to understand why the bank was
notified by Professor Kaufmann-Kohler of her existing arbitrations but not the arbitrating

parties of her (impending) directorship of the bank at the same time.” The committee thus

17 AL A RA 67, 217-226.

211.

21

213.

2.

w

“underst[ood] the argument that the Second Tribunal was no longer properly constituted
after the board appointment of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler, and that there was a serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure and consider{ed] that this could lead to
annulment whenever justified within the context of the case under consideration.” It

  

ultimately decided that there was not sufficient ground to annul the award, however, because
Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler had become aware of the connection between UBS and the claims
only after the award was rendered and such connection thus “had no material effect on the

final deci. 77198

 

ion of the Tribunal, which was in any event unanimous.

It has to be reiterated that the Vivendi II committee was in a situation different from the one
this Committee is faced with because in Vivendi II, there was no existing decision of the
remaining members of the tribunal to be evaluated but the committee rather had to evaluate
the facts underlying Argentina’s allegation for the first time in those proceedings.

The EDF committee on the other hand had to evaluate a situation similar to the present one
because it was not only faced with an existing decision and apparently also with similar
evidence, but the underlying facts were also quite similar. In particular, the Committee is not
convinced that, as alleged by Respondent, it makes a considerable difference that UBS held
no direct shares in the claimant in that case but rather in its parent company. The same applies
to the fact that UBS’s shares in EDF’s parent company amounted to 1.5% rather than to
2.13% and 2.38%, respectively, as in this case.

While the EDF committee had to evaluate a decision rendered by two different arbitrators,
it also expressed an opinion on the Decision on Disqualification rendered in the present case
and held that both decisions “are carefully reasoned and comprehensive in their
consideration of the issues.”!°? Said committee noted that the fact that at least one other
tribunal, i.e., the Tribunal in the present case, had reached the same conclusion as the EDF
tribunal, supported the conclusion that there were grounds “on which any reasonable
decision-maker could, and would be likely to, conclude that there was no basis for holding
that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler manifestly lacked the requisite independence and
impartiality.” These grounds included the following considerations: (i) UBS held the
shares in the claimants’ parent company for the benefit of a third party (which is the case for
part of the shares in the present case as well); (ii) the investment was relatively insignificant

198 AL A RA 67, {{] 229-235.
9 AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, { 161.
2 AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, {| 162.

214.

215.

when seen in the context of the overall size of UBS’s investments; and (iii) Prof. Kaufmann-
Kohler was not responsible for, and not even involved in, the management of this investment.

As Claimants correctly pointed out, three different bodies, i.e., the Tribunal in the present
case, the EDF tribunal and the EDF committee, have reached the same conclusions and
decision on very similar facts. While the Committee considers that this fact alone would not
be sufficient in itself to deny Respondent’s application for annulment on this ground, it does
serve as a strong indication supporting the Committee’s conclusion that the Tribunal’s
decision was not “so plainly unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker could have

come to such a decision.”

In addition, Claimants pointed to the decision rendered by the United States District Court
for the District of Columbia in Argentina v. AWG Group Ltd., i.e., the vacatur proceeding
that was initiated against the Award rendered by the Tribunal, to the extent it concerned the
claims of the fourth claimant whose case was decided under the UNCITRAL Rules.”*! The
US District Court considered Argentina’s application under the FAA Act and the vacatur
grounds of “evident partiality” in its Section 10.7°? While noting that UBS did not hold any
shares in AWG Group, it also described the shareholdings in Suez and Vivendi as “trivial”
and “tangential.”?°? The Court decided that the evidence submitted by Argentina was
“wholly insufficient” to establish its claim of “evident partiality” because: (i) UBS’s “fairly
small, if not fractional” interests in Suez and Vivendi as well as Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler’s
role and compensation in UBS stock were “inconsequential” in light of the size of UBS’s
worldwide financial dealings; (ii) Argentina’s claim that UBS conducted research in and
developed financial products related to the water sector “contributes little” to its claim; and
(iii) Prof. Kaufmann-Kohler had no duty to disclose “marginally disclosable” facts to the
Parties as it was “eminently reasonable” for her to rely on UBS informing her of “meaningful
conflicts.”?°* The Court concluded that “[t]he record here does not objectively suggest that
the challenged arbitrator had any reason to be biased against Argentina” and thus agreed
with the conclusion reached in the Decision on Disqualification in respect of AWG Group.?°>

201 AWG Group Ltd. for its part filed a cross-petition seeking confirmation, recognition and enforcement of the Award.
A/CLA-118, pp. 1, 10.

202

The Court also considered the vacatur ground that the “arbitrators exceeded their powers” in respect of the

Tribunal’s computation of damages and its evaluation of the necessity defense. A/CLA-118, p. 31.
23 A/CLA-118, pp. 16, 26.
24 A/CLA-118, pp. 24-29.
205 A/CLA-118, pp. 30-31.

60

216.

217.

218.

219.

Respondent correctly pointed out that the decision of the US District Court was not rendered
within the context of the annulment grounds to be assessed under Article 52 of the ICSID
Convention. However, the Committee does not agree that the decision thus lacks any
relevance for the present assessment of whether the Tribunal’s conclusion was “plainly
unreasonable.” Even though rendered under a different standard, i.e., the standard of
“evident partiality” under Section 10(2) of the FAA, the Court assessed the same facts and,

 

more importantly, the same Decision on Disqualification that is now before this Committee.
Moreover, the Court fully agreed with the Tribunal’s conclusion that “[a]n objective analysis
... does not ... lead a reasonable, informed person to conclude that a justifiable doubt exists
as to Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s impartiality or independence” with respect to AWG
Group.?°°

Even though the Court only had to decide on the Award to the extent it concerned AWG
Group, it also opined on UBS’s interests in Suez and Vivendi and made it clear in its
reasoning that it would not have come to a different conclusion with respect to these two
Claimants. While the Committee again may not agree with all of the findings made by the
US Court, the decision further supports this Committee’s conclusion that the decision

reached by the Tribunal in its Decision on Disqualification was not “plainly unreasonable.

d. Conclusion

In conclusion, the Committee again emphasizes that it is not its task to re-consider the facts
as presented to the Tribunal and perform a de novo assessment of whether Prof. Kaufmann-
Kohler “manifestly” lacked the qualities of impartiality and independence of judgment.
Having carefully examined the Tribunal’s Decision on Disqualification and having also
taken into account the case law relied on by the Parties, the Committee has not identified
any circumstances, which could give rise to a conflict of interest of such a seriousness that
it would render the Decision “plainly unreasonable” in terms of compromising the
fundamental integrity of the arbitration proceedings and that, thus, would warrant annulment
of the Award.

The Committee therefore finds that the Tribunal was neither improperly constituted nor was
there a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. Consequently, the first
ground for annulment advanced by Respondent is dismissed.

206 A/CLA-118, pp. 30-31 quoting from Decision on Disqualification, {{ 24.

61

221

221.

222.

207 Argenti

S

Nv

Second Set of Grounds for Annulment Relating to the Alleged Failure to Comply with
the Requirement to Submit the Case to the Local Courts for 18 Months

Summary of Respondent’s Position

Respondent submits that, by ruling in its Decision on Jurisdiction that the Spanish national
AGBAR could benefit from the dispute settlement provisions contained in the Argentina-
France BIT by virtue of the MFN clause, the Tribunal exerted jurisdiction without the
requirements of Argentina’s consent under Article X of the Argentina-Spain BIT being met.
According to Respondent, the Tribunal thereby manifestly exceeded its powers (Article
52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention), failed to state the reasons on which its decision was
based (Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention) and seriously departed from fundamental
rules of procedure (Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention).?””

Respondent claims that the Tribunal’s interpretation that the MFN clause contained in the
Argentina-Spain BIT applied to dispute settlement provisions and thus exempted AGBAR
from complying with the local-court requirement in Article X(3) amounts to a manifest
excess of powers. In Respondent’s view, an arbitral tribunal cannot set aside this express
requirement of consent, which was voluntarily agreed on by the Contracting States, “under
the unfounded pretext that this situation is unfavourable to the foreign investor.”?°
Respondent argues that by replacing the express terms of consent, an “essential requirement
for international tribunals” that must be “clear and unambiguous,” with inferences and
assumptions, the Tribunal acted without Argentina’s consent and thus exceeded the limits of
its jurisdiction.2%

According to Respondent, the Tribunal’s excess of power is “manifest,” in terms of
“apparent on a mere reading of the Award,” given that the Tribunal recognized the local-
court requirement as a mandatory condition with which AGBAR had not complied. In
addition, Respondent claims that, ex abundanti cautela, a tribunal’s failure to act within its
jurisdiction always amounts to a manifest excess of powers.?!°

 

s Application, {[ 38; Argentina’s Memorial, 44] 102-103; Argentina’s Reply, 106.

208 Argentina’s Application, #1 39-40.

29 Argentil
210 Argentin:

  

Memorial, {ff 111, 113; Argentina’s Reply, {| 107.
Memorial, J 115; Argentina’s Reply, { 120.

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

In addition, Respondent claims that the Tribunal’s disregard for a mandatory requirement
amounts to a failure to apply the applicable law, which also qualifies as a manifest excess of
powers warranting the annulment of the Award.?!!

In Respondent’s view, the excess of powers also relates to the Tribunal’s failure to state
reasons in support of its jurisdiction, given that it expressly recognized the local-court
requirement in Article X of the Argentina-Spain BIT, i.e., the only provision under which an
ICSID tribunal has jurisdiction. Respondent argues that this failure is not remedied by the
Tribunal’s reference to the MFN clause in Article IV, which is not part of the offer to
arbitrate contained in the Treaty. According to Respondent, there has to be a clear,
unequivocal intent of the Contracting State that an MEN clause should extend to dispute
settlement provisions, which is not present here.”!”

Respondent argues that the Tribunal “never explained how or where the term ‘all matters’ in
connection with the term ‘treatment’ in Article IV may be applied to jurisdictional matters,
which can be clearly distinguished from ‘substantive matters’.” In particular, Respondent
takes the view that the Tribunal’s finding that “dispute settlement is as important as other
matters governed by the BITs and is an integral part of the investment protection regime that
the respective sovereign states have agreed upon” does not provide such explanation and

fails to apply the interpretation principle of Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention."

Likewise, Respondent considers that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for rejecting
Respondent’s argument based on the ejusdem generis principle, given that it simply
concluded, without giving any reasons, that it “finds no basis for applying the ejusdem

generis principle to arrive at that result.”>'*

Respondent further submits that, while considering the subsequent practice of the United
Kingdom to support its finding, the Tribunal did not give any consideration to subsequent
practice of Argentina. Respondent refers to several BITs it concluded with third-party States
that contained the same local-court requirement as Article X(3) and only one BIT with Chile
that did not contain this requirement; in Respondent’s view, the Tribunal’s failure to discuss
this practice and the essential nature of the dispute settlement clause warrants annulment of
the Award.?!5

2! Argentina’s Memorial, { 117.
212 Argentina’s Memorial, {ff 104, 114, 116; Argentina’s Reply, {| 108-109, 129.

213,

Argentina’s Memorial, {ff 105-106; Argentina’s Reply, 4 110-111 quoting from Decision on Jurisdiction, 59.

214 Argentina’s Memorial, { 112 quoting from Decision on Jurisdiction, 4 59.

215

Argentina’s Memorial, {[{] 108-110 referring to Decision on Jurisdiction, { 58.

63

228. In response to Claimants’ submission that Respondent never raised its subsequent practice

229.

230.

231.

before the Tribunal, Respondent refers to its Memorial on Jurisdiction where it stated that
“[c]onsidering that Argentina, Spain and the United Kingdom have signed Bilateral Treaties
of Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments previous to the BIT under analysis,
in which they dispensed the 18-month period provided by Article X of the BIT with Spain
and Article 8 of the BIT with UK, the application of the MFN CLAUSE principle to this case
implies a violation of this basic principle of interpretation implied in the regulations
provided for in Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention.” Evidently, Respondent argues,
when negotiating this clause, the Parties must have given it an intended meaning which is
submitting the case to local bodies before making any international claims.?!° Respondent
submits that the Tribunal should have addressed this practice and not only the practice of the
UK before disregarding the “clear and express terms of the fundamental dispute settlement
provision” of the Argentina-Spain BIT.?!”

Respondent further contends that the Tribunal failed to take into account the arguments
Respondent presented in its written and oral submissions, in particular the interpretation of
the other Contracting State, Spain, in the Maffezini case, according to which the MFN clause

does not apply to dispute settlement provisions.”!®

Finally, with regard to a serious departure from fundamental rules of procedure, Respondent
argues that by failing to respect Argentina’s consent to the Treaty, the Tribunal departed
from a rule of procedure. In Respondent’s view, this departure is “serious” because the
outcome of the arbitration would otherwise have been substantially different, which again

warrants annulment of the Award.”!°

Respondent rejects Claimants’ argument that it intends to have its jurisdictional arguments
revisited and states that “[r]ather, it seeks to demonstrate how, had they been considered by
applying the proper law and had procedural rules been complied with, the outcome would
have been radically different.” While acknowledging that Claimants cited precedents, which
considered that a tribunal’s decision to allow an invocation of the MFN clause to circumvent
a local-court requirement is not an annullable error, Respondent argues that these precedents
do not justify the rejecting of the arguments it has put forward. In this context, Respondent

216 Argentina’s Reply, { 113 quoting from Exhibit A RA 74, { 142 (emphasis added by Respondent).
217 Argentina’s Reply, { 114.

218 Argentina’s Application, 4 41.

219 Argentina’s Memorial, { 118.

64

232.

233.

234.

refers in particular to its argument that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in
exercising jurisdiction over the case without Respondent’s consent.”

Respondent claims that its position has been recently affirmed by the tribunal in /CS v.
Argentina and, within the annulment context, by the decision of the Swedish Court of Appeal
rendered in Quasar de Valores et al. v. Russia, which annulled the award on the grounds that
the MEN clause had been used in excess of jurisdiction. Respondent submits that the Court
placed emphasis on the importance of the Parties’ consent and found that the dispute
settlement provision did not extend to the claimants’ claim. In respect of the MFN clause
invoked by the claimants, the Court held that “the determining factor is the wording of the
MEN clause in the relevant case,” as a result of which it then analyzed the content and scope
of the MFN clause. Respondent further points to the Court’s finding that the term
“treatment” included in the MEN clause referred to the FET standard in the treaty, which
“cannot be deemed to include an unconditional right for investors to have their cases decided
by an international arbitral tribunal’, it therefore concluded that the tribunal could not base

its jurisdiction on the dispute resolution clause of a different treaty.27!

Summary of Claimants’ Position

Claimants submit that Respondent seeks to reargue its jurisdictional arguments; it never
suggests that the Tribunal lacked the power to reach a decision on these arguments but rather
claims that it reached the wrong decision. Claimants emphasize that the correctness of the
Tribunal’s decision is not to be assessed by this Committee, because a legal error, even if

one had been committed, would not amount to an excess of power.”

In response to Respondent’s submission that an “excess of powers is always manifest where
a tribunal does not act within the scope of its jurisdiction,” Claimants argue that, if this
formula were applied, it would convert annulment under Article 52(1)(b) into a de novo
review of all jurisdictional decisions, would thereby remove all content from the “manifest”
requirement and would contradict “extensive authority’ pursuant to which not every
jurisdictional error amounts to an annullable error.???

220 Argentina’s Reply, {i 115-121.

221 Argentina’s Reply, {| 122-128 quoting from AL A RA 99, p. 9.

222 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {| 105-107, 114; Claimants’ Rejoinder, #{{ 51-53.
223 Claimants’ Rejoinder, 4 54.

235.

236.

23

23

23

204
225

an

Claimants refer to the committee in Jmpregilo v. Argentina, which stated that “[n]either
applying an MFN clause to jurisdictional issues nor refusing to apply it to assume
jurisdiction may be considered, per se, as a manifest excess of powers.” It added that “[t]he
analysis required to reach a conclusion other than the majority’s would imply a new and
complex analysis of the issues at stake, a review that is far from the responsibility of this
Committee according to Article 52.”?*4

a

Claimants also refer to the Daimler committee, which concluded on the subject of applying
an MEN clause to dispute resolution provisions — which the tribunal there had refused to do
— that “when more than one interpretation is possible, an award cannot be annulled on the
ground that it suffers from an exercise of excess of powers, much less a manifest excess of

powers.”

n

In addition, Claimants quote from the ICSID Background Paper on Annulment, which
records that “in light of [the principle specifically provided by the Convention that the
Tribunal is the judge of its own competence], the drafting history suggests — and most ad
hoc Committees have reasoned — that in order to annul an award based on a Tribunal’s
determination of the scope of its own jurisdiction, the excess of powers must be

‘manifest’ .”?7

8. In response to Respondent’s reliance on the decision of the Swedish Court of Appeal in
Quasar de Valores et al. v. Russia, Claimants argue that Respondent fails to explain why the
interpretation of a different treaty by a national court should be relevant — taking into account
that every ICSID tribunal to have considered the exact same provision at issue in the present
case has reached the same conclusion as the Tribunal. In any event, Claimants emphasize
that, contrary to annulment committees, Swedish courts are permitted to review a tribunal’s
jurisdictional decision de novo.?2”

9. As to Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law, Claimants
point out that the Tribunal did in fact examine the local-court requirement but concluded that
the MEN clause — which is also part of the applicable law — granted AGBAR access to
arbitration without having observed the local-court requirement. In Claimants’ view,

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {| 108 quoting from A/CLA-42 / AL A RA 34, { 140.
Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, { 110 quoting from A/CLA-43, { 187. Claimants further note that, as the party

opposing the annulment application in that case, Respondent itself had advanced this position, which the Daimler
committee then adopted. See also Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 56.

226
227

Claimants’ Rejoinder, {[ 54 quoting from A/CLA-91, J 88.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, 55.

66

240.

241.

242.

Respondent therefore does not actually argue that the Tribunal did not apply the law but
rather expresses its disagreement with the interpretation and conclusion reached by the
Tribunal concerning the scope of the MFN clause, which is, not for this Committee to
review.?”* In any event, Claimants submit that “[e]xtensive case law” supports the Tribunal’s
interpretation, including the unanimous decisions of every one of the five tribunals that up
to date decided on the scope of the MFN clause in the Argentina-Spain BIT.”

With regard to Respondent’s claim that the Tribunal seriously departed from fundamental
rules of procedure because it failed to respect the consent of Argentina to the Treaty,
Claimants note that Respondent does not identify any fundamental rule of procedure at issue,
much less establish how the Tribunal seriously departed from it. Consequently, Claimants
submit that Argentina’s Application under this ground should be rejected summarily.?°°

As to Respondent’s claim that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for its decision, Claimants
note that the Tribunal dedicated an entire chapter of its Decision on Jurisdiction to explaining
why AGBAR could overcome the local-court requirement, including a careful textual
analysis of the relevant Treaty provisions and a discussion of jurisprudence addressing
comparable issues as well as the Parties’ respective arguments. In Claimants’ view,
Respondent’s arguments are again an attempt to reargue the merits of the Tribunal’s decision

because it disagrees with the Tribunal’s conclusion.”*!

Claimants emphasize that the Tribunal did analyze the term “all matters” and the term
“treatment”, it found that dispute resolution was a “matter” covered under the Argentina-
Spain BIT and that “treatment,” pursuant to its ordinary meaning, referred to all rights and
obligations conferred upon investors, which includes dispute settlement. Claimants submit
that, besides its textual analysis, the Tribunal took into account that there are certain matters
to which the MEN clause in Article IV expressly does not apply — but that dispute resolution
is not one of them -; it considered that applying Article IV to treatment in Article X was
consistent with the Treaty’s object and purpose; and it noted that other tribunals had
interpreted the MFN clause in the Treaty and other treaties in the same manner. In Claimants’

28 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, | 112.

29 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {113 referring to Teinver v. Argentina (A/CLA-36), { 186; Telefonica v. Argentina
(A/CLA-37, If 102-105); Suez, AGBAR and InterAguas v. Argentina (AICLA-38), | 66; Gas Natural v. Argentina
(A/CLA-39), 49] 30-31; Maffezini v. Spain (AICLA-40), 1 64.

230 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, | 144.

231 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{ 157-160; Claimants’ Rejoinder, 19 95-96.

243.

244.

3.
245.

246.

247.

view, Respondent may disagree with these reasons, but they nevertheless qualify as
“coherent reasons” for the Tribunal’s decision.?*”

Finally, with regard to Respondent’s reference to its subsequent treaty practice that the
Tribunal allegedly failed to take into account, Claimants submit that Respondent never raised
such practice before the Tribunal.?*? As to the passage from Respondent’s Memorial on
Jurisdiction to which it refers, Claimants emphasize that this passage concerned previous,
rather than subsequent, treaty practice.?*4

Claimants conclude that Respondent’s real complaint is stated in its Reply where is submits
that “[t]here are no reasons to allow an MFN Clause to be used to exclude the provision
where the Argentine Republic expressly stated the terms of consent.” In Claimants’ view,
this is an argument on the merits and thus inadmissible in an annulment proceeding.***

Committee’s Analysis

In the context of the Tribunal’s decision to allow the Claimant AGBAR, i.e., a Spanish
national, to invoke the MFN clause in the Argentina-Spain BIT to benefit from the dispute
settlement provisions in the Argentina-France BIT, Respondent advances three annulment
grounds: (i) the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers (Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID
Convention); (ii) it failed to state the reasons on which its decision was based (Article
52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention); and (iii) it seriously departed from fundamental rules of
procedure (Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention).

The Committee agrees with the statement quoted by Respondent from the Report of the
Executive Directors on the ICSID Convention that “[c]onsent of the parties is the
cornerstone of the jurisdiction of the Centre.”° The Committee further agrees with the
statement of the International Court of Justice (“ICJ”) that “[w]hen that consent is expressed
in a compromissory clause in an international agreement, any conditions to which such

consent is subject must be regarded as constituting the limits thereon.”?"

It is undisputed between the Parties that Respondent’s consent to arbitrate in respect of the
Claimant AGBAR is given in Article X(3) of the Argentina-Spain BIT, which as recognized

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {| 161-162; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 97.
23.

1
laimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{ 163.
1

234 Claimants’ Rejoinder, J 98.

235 Claimants’ Rejoinder, J 99 quoting from Argentina’s Reply, { 129.
26 AL A RA 50, 23.

37 AL A RA 72, 188.

248.

249.

by the Tribunal provides for a requirement to bring a judicial proceeding in the host State’s
local courts and allows the investor to have recourse to arbitration only after a period of 18
months in those courts. It is further common ground that this requirement qualifies as a
condition of Respondent’s consent to arbitrate disputes with Spanish investors. However,
AGBAR has invoked the MFN clause in Article IV(2) of the Argentina-Spain BIT in order
to benefit from the more favorable treatment provided in the Argentina-France BIT, which
does not include a comparable condition of consent. Article IV reads as follows:

“TREATMENT

1. Each Party shall guarantee in its territory fair and equitable treatment

of investments made by investors of the other Party.

2. In all matters governed by this Agreement, such treatment shall be no
less favorable than that accorded by each Party to investments made in its
territory by investors of a third country.

3. Such treatment shall not, however, extend to the privileges which either
Party may grant to investors of a third State by virtue of its participation
in:

- A free trade area;

A customs union:

A common market;
- A regional integration agreement; or
- An organization of mutual economic assistance by virtue of an agreement

concluded prior to the entry into force of this Agreement, containing terms
similar to those accorded by that Party to participants of said organization.”

a. The Tribunal’s Findings

The Tribunal interpreted the MFN clause and in particular the term “[i]n all matters” to mean
that “treatment” within the meaning of Article IV(2) includes dispute settlement and
therefore that AGBAR is entitled to invoke international arbitration against Argentina on the
same terms as the holders of French investments, i.e., without the need to bring the dispute

to local courts of Argentina for a period of 18 months.?**

The Tribunal acknowledged that this interpretation was contested by Respondent and
addressed the arguments Respondent had advanced in support of its position that the MFN
clause does not extend to dispute settlement provisions. The Tribunal first found that there

238 Decision on Jurisdiction, {| 55.

250.

251.

252.

was no evidence that the Contracting States did not intend Article IV to cover dispute
settlement, as alleged by Respondent, and noted in particular that dispute settlement is not
among the matters listed in Article [V(3), which are explicitly excluded from the scope of
the MEN clause.**? The Tribunal further held that there was no basis for a distinction
between dispute settlement matters and any other matters covered by a bilateral investment
treaty and thus no basis for applying the ejusdem generis principle advanced by Respondent
in this regard.*“?

Finally, the Tribunal addressed Respondent’s claim that the MFN clause should be
interpreted strictly and held that there was no reason for interpreting it more strictly than
other Treaty provisions; in this context, the Tribunal analyzed the case law relied on by the
Parties and found that its conclusion was supported by previous ICSID cases and in particular
Maffezini v. Spain, which concerned the same Treaty. The Tribunal also discussed the
decision in Plama v. Bulgaria relied on by Respondent, in which the tribunal had reached a
different conclusion, and distinguished that case from the case before it for a number of

reasons.74!

In this annulment proceeding, Claimant further pointed out that up to date there are four
other cases in which the tribunals had to decide on the scope of Article IV(2) of the

2 which the Tribunal discussed in detail in its

Argentina-Spain BIT: Maffezini v. Spain,
Decision on Jurisdiction, Teinver v. Argentina,” Telefonica v. Argentina,”* and Gas
Natural v. Argentina. In all four cases, the tribunals analyzed the scope of the MEN clause
in detail and reached the conclusion that it also applied to dispute resolution clauses and

permitted the investor to circumvent the local-court requirement in Article X(3).4°

b. The Committee’s Considerations on the Tribunal’s Findings

The Committee is aware that, contrary to what a recital of the above suggests and as
recognized by the tribunals in the above mentioned cases as well as by other tribunals dealing
with the same question, ICSID jurisprudence is far from unanimous on the question whether
MEN clauses can be invoked by investors to benefit from more favorable dispute settlement

29 Decision on Jurisdiction, {| 58.

40 Decision on Ju

 

ction, | 59.

*41 Decision on Jurisdiction, {{f 61-67.
42 A/CLA-40.

 

/CLA-36.

4 A/CLA-37.
45 A/CLA-39.
46 A/CLA-40, | 64; A/CLA-36, {| 186; A/CLA-37, J 114; A/CLA-39, J 49.

70

253.

254.

255.

provisions in third-State treaties. However, while the MFN clause in Article IV(2) of the
Treaty may well be susceptible to an interpretation that is different from that given by the
Tribunal in the present case, it is not for this Committee to re-decide the case but rather to
assess whether the Tribunal’s decision fulfills any of the annulment grounds advanced by
Respondent.

As to the alleged manifest excess of powers, the Tribunal did not, as Respondent appears to
suggest, simply disregard the condition for consent in Article X(3) of Argentina-Spain BIT
but it rather gave detailed reasons as to why it considers that AGBAR was permitted to
invoke the MFN clause to overcome this requirement. In this regard, this Committee agrees
with the committee in Jmpregilo v. Argentina, which found that, as the application of an
MEN clause to dispute settlement provisions is a complex and debated issue, “[n]either
applying an MFN clause to jurisdictional issues nor refusing to apply it to assume
jurisdiction may be considered, per se, as a manifest excess of powers.” As further stated by
the Impregilo committee, it cannot be the task of the Committee under Article 52 of the
ICSID Convention to conduct a new and detailed analysis of the arguments advanced by the
Parties in the jurisdictional phase.?*’ The committee in Daimler v. Argentina stated that
“when more than one interpretation is possible, an award cannot be annulled on the ground
that it suffers from an exercise of excess of powers, much less a manifest excess of
powers.”**8 The Committee agrees with this statement — except perhaps in extreme
circumstances, of which there is no indication in the present case.

The same applies to the alleged serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.
While the Committee agrees with Respondent that observance of the Parties’ consent does
qualify as a fundamental rule of procedure, the Committee cannot follow Respondent’s
argument that the Tribunal’s decision to permit AGBAR to overcome this condition by
invoking the MEN clause, which coincides with the interpretation adopted by several other
tribunals, amounts to a serious departure from such rule.

The Committee further finds that there is no failure to state reasons in the Decision on
Jurisdiction because the Tribunal gave comprehensive reasons for its interpretation of the
MEN clause and also addressed the arguments advanced by Respondent. While its reasoning
may not be as detailed as that given by tribunals in other mentioned cases, this is not
sufficient to amount to a failure to state reasons because there is no difficulty in following
the Tribunal’s reasoning through to its conclusion. In any event, it strongly appears from

47 A/CLA-42 /AL A RA 34, {| 140.
48 A/CLA-43, {| 187.

256.

257.

258.

Respondent’s submission that it does not really disagree with the detail of the reasoning but
rather with its contents. However, even if Respondent may not be satisfied with the
Tribunal’s findings on Respondent’s arguments, any such disagreement is irrelevant at this
point and does not permit Respondent to seek annulment of the Tribunal’s decision.

As regards Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal failed to consider evidence on
Argentina’s subsequent treaty practice, it appears to the Committee that such evidence was
apparently not put before the Tribunal by the Parties. In particular, the submission in the
jurisdictional phase of the arbitration that Respondent now invokes explicitly referred to

treaties signed by Argentina and Spain “previous to the BIT under analysis.”?*°

In respect of subsequent treaty practice, the Committee is aware that in its Memorial on
Jurisdiction, Respondent also relied on the submissions made by Spain in its role as
respondent in Maffezini v. Spain where it took the same position as Argentina in the present
case, i.e., that the MFN clause in Article IV(2) does not apply to dispute settlement.
Respondent argued that its own interventions in Siemens v. Argentina and the present case
as well as Spain’s interventions in Maffezini, which coincided in their interpretation of the
18-months requirement, “constitute the subsequent acts of the Parties that guide the Tribunal

concerning the will of the Sovereigns on signing this Treaty.”?°

The Committee notes that the tribunal in Telefonica v. Argentina, which was faced with the
same argument, held that the States’ conduct in ICSID proceedings qualified neither as a
“subsequent agreement” between the Contracting States within the meaning of Article
31(3)(a) of the Vienna Convention nor as “subsequent practice” in applying the Treaty under
Article 31(3)(b) of the same Convention. In particular as regards the latter, the Telefonica
tribunal was “not convinced that positions on interpretation of a treaty provision, expressed
by a Contracting State in its defensive brief in an international direct arbitration initiated
against it by an investor of her other Contracting State, amounts to ‘practice’ of that State,
as this requirement is understood in public international law, nor does it appear relevant in
order to ascertain ‘how the treaty has been interpreted in practice’ by the parties thereto.”>'
The Committee agrees with this finding and, while the Tribunal in the present case may not
have explicitly explained why it considered the submissions made by Spain and Argentina
in the mentioned ICSID cases not to be relevant, this does not amount to a failure to consider

49 Exhibit A RA 74, { 142.
250 Exhibit A RA 74, { 161.
251 A/CLA-37, { 112.

259.

260.

261.

1.
262.

relevant evidence and thus cannot be qualified as a failure to state reasons on an outcome-
determinative point.

Apart from Respondent’s reference to the positions taken by the two States as respondents
in ICSID proceedings, Respondent has not pointed to any evidence it submitted regarding
the intentions of the States in entering the Treaty nor regarding their subsequent practice in
the context of other bilateral investment treaties.

It is not entirely clear to the Committee whether Respondent suggests that the Tribunal
should have investigated on its own motion subsequent treaties entered into by Argentina;
in any event, the Committee agrees with Claimants that it cannot be for the Tribunal to
investigate evidence not placed before it by the Parties. In line with the generally accepted
principle of “who asserts must prove,” which is reflected in several provisions of the ICSID
Convention, it is for the parties to present their case, including evidence to prove what they
assert.2>* Consequently, it would have been for Respondent to prove its assertion that
subsequent treaty practice confirms its interpretation of Article X(3). In the absence of any
evidence submitted in respect of such subsequent practice, there was no failure on the part
of the Tribunal to consider such evidence and to state the reasons for its conclusions.

ce. Conclusion

In conclusion, the Committee finds that the Tribunal’s decision to allow the Claimant
AGBAR to override the procedural requirement in Article X(3) of the Argentina-Spain BIT
by virtue of the MFN clause in Article [V(2) does not amount to either a manifest excess of
powers, a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure or a failure to state reasons.
Consequently, the second annulment ground advanced by Respondent is dismissed.

Third Set of Grounds for Annulment Relating to the State of Necessity under
Customary International Law

Summary of Respondent’s Position

Respondent submits that, by rejecting Argentina’s state of necessity defense without stating
the legal standards to be met under the “only way” and the “non-contribution” requirements
that it considered not fulfilled and by not taking into account the evidence presented by
Respondent in this regard, the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for its decision (Article

252 Cf. AL A RA 84/ A/CLA-69, J 215.

263.

264.

265.

266.

52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention). Respondent notes that this, together with a finding of an
excess of powers, was precisely the grounds on which the Enron committee decided to annul
the award.”°

Respondent argues that, contrary to Claimants’ submission, the Tribunal should have
established the legal standards applicable to both the “only way” and the “non-contribution”
requirements before concluding that these requirements had not been met, but failed to do

so in its Decision on Liability.2>*

Respondent refers to the finding of the Enron committee that the non-contribution
requirement “is potentially capable of more than one interpretation” and that the tribunal in
that case “was necessarily required, either expressly or sub silentio, to decide or assume the
correct interpretation in order to apply the provision to the facts of the case.” More
specifically, the Enron committee considered that the tribunal should have asked the

question whether the conduct of the State would have had to be “deliberate,” “reckless or
negligent” or “some even lesser degree of fault” in order to qualify as a contribution to the
situation.*°> Respondent notes that it submitted to the Tribunal the question to be assessed,

e., “whether Argentina has contributed to (thereby provoking) the crisis in such a way so
as to make it unjust to invoke the doctrine of necessity’; however, the Tribunal did not

address this concern or the legal standard that it would later apply to the facts.>°°

Similarly, Respondent argues that the “only way” requirement is capable of differing
interpretations and therefore had to be addressed by the Tribunal before applying the facts
to it. Respondent refers to its submission on the possible interpretations before the Tribunal
as well as to the questions raised by the Enron committee relating to: (i) the legal definition;
(ii) the relevance of the relative effectiveness of alternative measures; and (iii) who was to

make a decision on relevant alternatives and in accordance with what test.?5”

Respondent further refers to the findings of the Enron committee that the tribunal in that
case had not in fact applied the legal elements of the requirement in Article 25(2)(b) of the
Draft Articles of Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts adopted by the

283 Argentina’s Application, {{{ 43-47; Argentina’s Memorial, {123 referring to AL A RA 33, {{ 385-395; Argentina’s
Reply, (9 131-132, 146-147.

284 Argentina’s Reply, {l 136-139.

285 Argentina’s Memorial, | 124; Argentina’s Reply, {| 142 quoting from AL A RA 33, {{{ 386, 389.

286 Argentina’s Memorial, f[ 125-126 quoting from its Post-Hearing Memorial, { 777; Argentina’s Reply, {if 143-144.
257 Argentina’s Memorial, {| 127 quoting from its Post-Hearing Memorial, | 764; Argentina’s Reply, | 140 quoting
from AL A RA 33, {¥{ 369-372.

26

26)

258
259
260
261
23;
262

263

International Law Commission (the “ILC Draft Articles”) to the facts but had rather applied
an expert opinion on this issue and therefore had failed to apply the applicable law, which
constituted a ground for annulment.?** In Respondent’s view, the Tribunal’s failure in the
present case is even more serious because it failed to follow the first two of the three steps
of reasoning indicated by the Enron committee (finding the relevant facts; applying the legal
elements to the facts; concluding whether or not the requirements under Article 25 were met)
and went directly to the third — making it impossible to follow the Tribunal to its
conclusion.?%?

n

Respondent further notes that the Tribunal did recognize the influence of external forces on
the Argentine economy and intended to “show that Argentina itself contributed to its
situation of emergency.” Nevertheless, Respondent claims that the Tribunal ignored the
evidence submitted by Argentina in support of its submissions on the origins of the crisis
and in response to Claimants’ arguments: a witness statement, three expert reports (and two
rebuttal/supplemental reports) as well as documentary evidence. Claimants, on the other
hand, did not provide any economic or social export report. Respondent further refers to the
amicus curiae brief filed by five non-governmental organization in relation the human right

to water that Respondent had raised in this context.?°!

oe

Specifically with regard to the “only way” requirement, Respondent invokes an “absolute
failure” on the part of the Tribunal to address Respondent’s evidence that the measures
Argentina adopted during the crisis were, as described by Prof. Roubini, “unavoidable” —
without any analysis or justification. Instead, Respondent contends that the Tribunal directly

accepted Claimants’ submissions “almost copying their submissions word for word” even

262

though such submissions were not supported by any evidence.~°~ According to Respondent,

the same applies to the Tribunal’s conclusions on the “non-contribution” requirement where

the Tribunal “virtually copied and pasted the statements made by the Claimants,” while

disregarding the evidence presented by Respondent, without making any reference to it.?°

Argentina’s Memorial, J 128 quoting from AL A RA 33, { 392.

Argentina’s Memorial, J 129; Argentina’s Reply, (91 133-134, 159-160.

Argentina’s Memorial, { 130.

Argentina’s Memorial, {{ 121-122 referring to Exhibits R TE-6, R TE-7, R TE-8, R-TE 21, R-TE 22 and R-TE
Argentina’s Reply, 149.

Argentina’s Memorial, 4 132 quoting from Exhibit R-TE 22, {[ 28-29; Argentina’s Reply, if 150-152.
Argentina’s Reply, {| 154-156 quoting from Decision on Liability, | 264 and Claimants’ Reply on the Merits

(Exhibit A RA 76), 1505.

269. Respondent submits that, in line with the finding of the TECO committee that a tribunal

“cannot simply gloss over evidence upon which the Parties have placed significant emphasis,
without any analysis and without explaining why it found that evidence insufficient,
unpersuasive or otherwise unsatisfactory,” the Tribunal’s decision on the state of necessity
defense does not satisfy the requirement to state reasons under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention.7

270. Finally, as to the invoked priority of the human right to water over investment treaties,

2.

Respondent argues that the Tribunal did not state reasons for its conclusion that “Argentina
could have respected both types of obligations,” which in its view were not “inconsistent,

contradictory, or mutually exclusive.”?©

Summary of Claimants’ Position

271. Claimants submit that the Tribunal stated its reasons for rejecting Respondent’s state of

necessity defense, and did so “comprehensively and in full consideration of the elements of
the defense” under Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles. Claimants emphasize that this
defense is exceptional under international law because it excuses a State from conduct that
would otherwise be breaching its international obligations and may therefore be invoked
“under only the most strict conditions.” According to Claimants, the findings of fact that the
Tribunal made with regard to the “only way” and “non-contribution” requirements precluded

a successful necessity defense.

272. Claimants reject Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal failed to establish the legal

standards to be applied to the facts, given that it is “evident from the decision’ that the
Tribunal interpreted the “only way” requirement “at face value,” i.e., as a measure that is
“the sole available response for addressing a situation of necessity,’ which made any further

elaboration unnecessary.?°”

273. As to the “non-contribution” requirement, Claimants submit that the Tribunal did explicitly

264
265
266
267

state its reasons and interpreted this requirement, when it referred to the Commentary on the
ILC Draft Articles pursuant to which a contribution must be “sufficiently substantial and not
merely incidental or peripheral” and considered it “an important question ... whether

Argentina’s Reply, ff 157-158 quoting from AL A RA 89, J 131

Argentina’s Memorial, J 133; Argentina’s Reply, {¥ 161, 163 quoting from Decision on Liability, { 262.
Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{ 164-165.

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{ 166; Claimants’ Rejoinder, { 102.

Argentina contributed to the crisis of 2001-2003 to an extent sufficiently substantial to rule

out a necessity defense in compliance with international law.”

274. In response to Respondent’s reliance on the decision of the Enron committee, Claimants
points out that this decision was “widely criticized” and moreover did not annul the award
on the basis of a failure to state reasons but rather based on “the questionable theory that the
tribunal had exceeded its power by not applying what the committee in Enron considered to
be the correct interpretation of Article 25 of the ILC Articles.”

275. Claimants argue that Respondent’s real objective to reargue the merits is displayed in a
passage from its Memorial where it stated that “the Tribunal did not follow the reasoning
indicated by the annulment committee in Enron, so the Award in this case should be
[annulled] along the same lines as that of Enron.” In Claimants’ view, declining to follow
the reasoning of the Enron committee cannot be considered a failure to state reasons under
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.?”

276. As to Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal disregarded the evidence presented by
Argentina, Claimants refer to the Tribunal’s finding that it was “not persuaded’ by
Argentina’s claim that “there was nothing else it could have done.”?”' Claimants submit that
the El Paso committee rejected “virtually identical arguments” from Argentina when stating
that “[t]he assessment of the evidence and interpretation of the applicable law must be

performed only by the Tribunal, not by the Committee.” The committee further held that “it
is not an appeal tribunal and therefore cannot or should not decide whether evidence was
well or ill-considered or not considered at all by the Tribunal. Rule 34(1) of the Arbitration
Rules is clear when it indicates that the tribunal alone is empowered to decide on two
fundamental issues related to the allegation of Argentina: the admissibility of evidence and

its probative value.”?"”

277. In any event, Claimants contend that the Tribunal did weigh the evidence submitted in
relation to the “only way” requirement, as evidenced by its finding that “[t]here is strong

aimants’ Rejoinder, 4 103-104 quoting from Decision on Liability, | 263.

aimants’ Counter-Memorial, {167 referring to AL A RA 33, 393; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 105.
jaimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{[ 168-169 quoting from Argentina’s Memorial, {{ 129.

aimants’ Rejoinder, { 107 quoting from Decision on Liability, {| 235.

aimants’ Rejoinder, { 107 quoting from AL A RA 35, {ff 191, 196.

2n1¢
2nNE

aeagg

evidence that Argentina might have employed more flexible means that would have protected

both its interests and those of the Claimants.”?”

278. In Claimants’ view, this and other similar findings show that the Tribunal considered and

rejected Respondent’s suggestion that there were “no alternative measures” it could have
taken; as the Tribunal reached a reasoned conclusion that can be followed through by the
reader, it was not required under the ICSID Convention to review and discuss every exhibit
and argument presented in the pleadings.?’+

279. Claimants reject Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal copied the submissions made in

Claimants’ Reply on the Merits and add that their submissions were in fact supported by
“extensive evidence” relating to the contribution of Argentina to the economic crisis. In
addition, Claimants note that the Tribunal found that “a combination of endogenous and
exogenous factors contributed to the Argentine crisis,’ which demonstrates that it did

consider the evidence before it.?”°

280. In response to Respondent’s reliance on the approach applied by the TECO committee,

Claimants argue that this decision is “clearly distinguishable” from the case at hand because
the committee there “struggled to understand the Tribunal’s line of reasoning,” given the
tribunal’s finding that there was no evidence on certain points even though the parties had
in fact placed such evidence on the record. By contrast, Claimants consider the reasoning of

the Tribunal in the present case “straightforward and easy to follow” and, in addition,
emphasize that Respondent itself acknowledged its own contribution to the crisis when
stating that the situation was “mainly” generated by external factors. In Claimants’ view, this
concession meant that Respondent simply could not satisfy the “non-contribution”

requirement as interpreted by the Tribunal.”

281. Similarly, Claimants contend that in the underlying arbitration Respondent made purely legal

 

arguments in relation to the “only way” requirement and did not present evidence that would
have satisfied the legal standard ultimately adopted by the Tribunal; thus, when the Tribunal
decided not to follow Respondent’s legal argument, there was no relevant evidence from
Respondent to be considered by the Tribunal.?””

laimants’ Rejoinder, | 109 quoting from Decision on Liability, | 235.
laimants’ Rejoinder, {{ 110.
laimants’ Rejoinder, #{ 111-112.

a

26 Claimants’ Rejoinder, {ff 113-115 quoting from AL A RA 89, {128 and Argentina’s Rejoinder Memorial (Exhibit
AIC-47), 4 1101.
27 Claimants’ Rejoinder, {ff 117-118.

282.

283.

284.

285.

Finally, Claimants reject Respondent’s submission that the Tribunal rejected its invocation
of the human right to water without giving reasons for its decision. Claimants refer to the
findings of the Tribunal that Respondent could not invoke one obligation as an excuse for
not fulfilling the other and, in addition, that Respondent could have respected both
obligations. As to the second conclusion, Claimants contend that the Tribunal’s reasons are
“implicit in the Tribunal’s finding that Argentina had alternative means to address the
alleged situation of necessity (and thus protect the human right to water) without violating

the Claimants’ treaty rights.”?7

Committee’s Analysis

As regards the Tribunal’s decision to reject Respondent’s necessity defense, Respondent
advances one annulment ground, i.e., that the Tribunal failed to state the reasons on which
its decision is based (Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention). In this context, Respondent
argues that: (i) the Tribunal failed to establish the applicable legal standards to be met in
order to satisfy the requirements of Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles, in particular the
“only way” and “non-contribution” requirements; and (ii) the Tribunal failed to address the
evidence submitted by Respondent in support of its submissions. In addition, Respondent
claims that the Tribunal has failed to state reasons for its conclusion that Argentina could
have complied with both the BIT and its human rights obligations.

a. The Tribunal’s Findings

In its Decision on Liability, the Tribunal acknowledged that Argentina was facing “one of
the most severe [crises] in its history” at the time it adopted the measures the Tribunal found
to be in violation of the Treaty but emphasized that this fact alone did not allow the State to
invoke the plea of necessity. The Tribunal noted that in line with the exceptional nature of
this defense, additional strict conditions were imposed by Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles
in order to avoid the possibility that the State can simply escape from its treaty obligations
whenever a crisis occurs.”

The Tribunal then analyzed each of the four requirements set out in Article 25. As to the first
requirement in Article 25(1)(a), i.e., that the measures adopted by Argentina were “the only
way for the State to safeguard an essential interest against a grave and imminent peril,” the
Tribunal was not satisfied that this requirement was met. It held:

278 Claimants’ Rejoinder, J 119.
29 Decision on Liability, {[ 257-258.

286.

287.

280 Decision on Liability, {[ 260. It was established during the hearing that the phrase “[als discussed above” refers to

of invoking necessity”, and found that these requirements were both met

“The provision of water and sewage services to the metropolitan area of
Buenos Aires certainly was vital to the health and well-being of nearly ten
million people and was therefore an essential interest of the Argentine
State. On the other hand, the Tribunal is not convinced that the only way
that Argentina could satisfy that essential interest was by adopting
measures that would subsequently violate the treaty rights of the
Claimants’ investments to fair and equitable treatment. As discussed
above, Argentina could have attempted to apply more flexible means to
assure the continuation of the water and sewage services to the people of
Buenos Aires and at the same time respected its obligations of fair and
equitable treatment. The two were by no means mutually exclusive. Thus
the Tribunal finds that Argentina has not satisfied the first condition for the
defense of necessity.”?®°

The Tribunal then analyzed the second and third requirements under Articles 25(1)(b) and
25(2)(a), i.e., that the adopted measure did “not seriously impair an essential interest of the
State or States towards which the obligation exists, or of the international community as a
whole” and that “[t]he international obligation in question [does not] exclude the possibility

1,281

Finally, the Tribunal assessed the fourth requirement under Article 25(2)(b), i.e., that “[t]he
State has [not] contributed to the situation of necessity’ and concluded that it was not
satisfied in the present case. It reasoned:

paragraph 235, which reads:

“Moreover, there is strong evidence that Argentina might have employed more flexible
means that would have protected both its interests and those of the Claimants. For
example, if Argentina’s concern was to avoid an increase in tariffs during a time of crisis,
it might have relieved AASA, at least temporarily, of investment commitments that were
placing a crippling burden on the Concession so long as tariffs did not increase. If
Argentina’s concern was to protect the poor from increased tariffs, it might have allowed
tariff increases for other consumers while applying a social tariff or a subsidy to the poor,
a solution clearly permitted by the regulatory framework. There is evidence that
governmental agencies were among the consumers with the largest unpaid invoices owing
to AASA. Argentina might have taken measures to assure that its own governmental
organizations paid their legitimate debts to AASA. All of these options were suggested to
the Argentine authorities and all were rejected. In short, there appears to have been very
little desire or effort after the outbreak of the crisis for Argentina to ‘work together’ with
AASA and the Claimants. Once the crisis had ended and economic growth returned to the
Argentine economy, the government showed no greater willingness to find a way to work
together with AASA and the Claimants. While Argentina seems to suggest that there was
nothing else that it could have done in its relationship with AASA and the Claimants, the
Tribunal is not persuaded that an amicable solution could not have been reached.”

 

28! Decision on Liability, {| 259-262.

“To invoke the defense of necessity, a state must not have contributed to its
situation of necessity. The operative word of this condition is ‘contribute’,
not ‘cause’ or ‘create.’ Thus, the fact that other actors, besides the state in
question, may have contributed to that state’s situation of necessity does
not automatically mean that such state has not contributed to it. The
Commentary to the ILC Articles makes it clear that such contribution must
‘...be sufficiently substantial and not merely incidental or peripheral.’
Thus, an important question is whether Argentina contributed to the crisis
of 2001-2003 to an extent sufficiently substantial to rule out a necessity
defense in compliance with international law. This being said, the
Claimants in their pleadings viewed the crisis as created primarily by
endogamous factors, primarily the economic policies of various Argentine
governments. The Respondent, on the other hand, portrayed the crisis as
caused by exogenous factors, primarily the various global crises, such as
the one which struck Russia in 1999.

The Tribunal finds that a combination of endogenous and exogenous
factors contributed to the Argentine crisis at the beginning of this century.
Among Argentina’s contributing factors to the crisis were excessive public
spending, inefficient tax collection, delays in responding to the early signs
of the crisis, insufficient efforts at developing an export market, and
internal political dissension and problems inhibiting effective policy
making. In listing these factors, the Tribunal does not by any means intend
to minimize the substantial external forces that were buffeting the
Argentine economy. Its intent is to show that Argentina itself contributed
to its situation of emergency. In this regard, this Tribunal must agree with
the tribunal in CMS v. Argentina, which stated that ‘[t]he issue, however,
is whether the contribution to the crisis by Argentina has or has not been
sufficiently substantial. The Tribunal, when reviewing the circumstances
of present dispute, must conclude that this was the case. The crisis was not
of the making of one particular administration and found its roots in the
earlier crisis of the 1980s and evolving governmental policies of the 1990s
that reached a zenith in 2002 and thereafter. Therefore, the Tribunal
observes that government policies and their shortcomings significantly
contributed to the crisis and the emergency and while exogenous factors
did fuel additional difficulties they do not exempt the Respondent from its
responsibility in the matter.’ One might also suggest if external, global
factors alone had created Argentina’s crisis, it is surprising that other
countries did not experience a crisis of equal magnitude at the time.”?>”

288. Based on its findings that two out of the four requirements under Article 25 of the ILC Draft
Articles were not met because: (i) the measures adopted by Argentina were not the “only

282 Decision on Liability, | 263-264.

289.

290.

291.

way” to satisfy its essential interests; and (ii) Argentina itself “contributed” to the emergency
situation it was facing in 2001 to 2003, the Tribunal denied Respondent’s necessity
defense.”

b. The Committee’s Considerations on the Tribunal’s Findings

At the outset, the Committee notes that there is agreement between the Parties regarding the
applicability of Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles to the Tribunal’s assessment of
Respondent’s necessity defense.** It is disputed, however, whether the Tribunal would have
been required to: (i) interpret the requirements of Article 25 in terms of establishing more
concrete legal standards, in particular as regards the “only way” and “contribution”
requirements; and (ii) address the evidence advanced by Respondent in support of its
position, before concluding that these requirements were not met.

i. The Tribunal’s Alleged Failure to Establish the Legal Standards

As to Respondent’s first argument that the Tribunal in this case failed to identify the legal
standards to be met in order to satisfy both the “only way” and the “non-contribution”
requirements under Article 25, the Committee agrees with Respondent and with the
committee in Enron v. Argentina on whose decision Respondent relies, that both
requirements are indeed susceptible to a certain degree of interpretation.

It is further true that the Tribunal did not explicitly identify the interpretation it adopted.
However, the Committee notes that Respondent has not pointed to any submissions made by
the Parties on this point in the underlying proceedings. In this regard, it is not entirely clear
to the Committee whether the Enron committee considered similar circumstances a ground
for annulment, as suggested by Respondent,”*° and thus took the position that a tribunal fails
to apply the applicable law and to state sufficient reasons for its decision if it fails to address
possible different interpretations of a legal provision even when such interpretation was not
subject to a debate between the parties.”*° In any event, this Committee firmly confirms its

283 Decision on Liability, {| 265.
°84 There was a slight doubt as to this continuing agreement as Respondent stated during the hearing “...that doesn’t
mean that this draft Article is binding in its entirety as drafted.” However, Respondent made no further submissions

in this regard and, immediately following

 

s statement, returned to its argument that the Tribunal would have been

required to determine “what was the legal standard applicable under customary international law in respect to each
of these requirements {under Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles].” Transcript (Day 1), p. 70 lines 20 -22, p. 71 lines

285 Cf Argentina’s Reply, | 141
286 Cf, AL A RA 33, {ff 375-376.

292.

293.

294.

295.

296.

view that it is not for a tribunal to establish the issues to be decided, and that an interpretation
issue that was not raised by the Parties cannot be considered “outcome-determinative” with
the consequence that a failure to address such issue would amount to a manifest excess of
powers under Article 52(1)(b) or to a failure to state reasons under Article 52(1)(e).

The Committee further agrees with the committee in Impregilo v. Argentina that “the failure
to fully conceptualize the content of a standard is not a ground for annulment of an
award.””®’ Tn addition, the Committee recalls its finding above that an ad hoc committee
should undertake reasonable efforts to follow the reasons given by the tribunal. In the present
context, this means that it is sufficient if the Committee can reasonably infer the
interpretation adopted by the Tribunal from its reasoning.

As to the “only way” requirement, the Tribunal found that “Argentina could have attempted
to apply more flexible means” to satisfy the essential interest in question and “at the same
time respected its obligations of fair and equitable treatment.” The Tribunal further referred
to a discussion in the context of its analysis on whether Respondent accorded fair and
equitable treatment to Claimants, where it stated, inter alia, that such flexible means could
have “protected both its interests and those of the Claimants” and that contrary to
Respondent’s allegation, it was not persuaded that an amicable solution could not have been

reached.7*8

As to the “non-contribution” requirement, the Tribunal first noted that the term
“contributed” does not automatically exclude the possibility that more than one actor
contributed to the state of necessity. It then referred to the Commentary to the ILC Draft
Articles pursuant to which the contribution of the State must “be sufficiently substantial and
not merely incidental or peripheral.” The Tribunal thus held that it had to assess “whether
Argentina contributed to the crisis of 2001-2003 to an extent sufficiently substantial to rule

out a necessity defense in compliance with international law.”?®°

Regardless of the merits of the interpretation adopted by the Tribunal, which is not for this
Committee to re-consider, the Committee is of the view that the Tribunal thereby sufficiently
established the standard it was going to apply to the facts of the case.

Consequently, Respondent’s first argument that the Tribunal failed to state the legal
standards it was going to apply to assess Respondent’s necessity defense is dismissed.

287 A/CLA-42/ AL A RA 34, 158.
288 Decision on Liability, {{{ 260, 235.
28 Decision on Liability, | 263.

297.

298.

299.

300.

ii, The Tribunal’s Alleged Failure to Consider Relevant Evidence

With regard to Respondent’s second argument that the Tribunal failed to address relevant
evidence Respondent filed in support of its submissions, the Committee notes that
Respondent heavily relied on what the Enron committee considered to be the requirements
for a proper analysis of Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles. However, while the Enron
committee placed great emphasis on its finding that the tribunal had directly accepted the
conclusions of an economic expert opinion rather than applying the legal requirements of
Article 25 to the facts of the case,?°° Respondent’s argument in the present case is a different
one.

Specifically with regard to the consideration of evidence, Respondent further relies on the
finding made by the TECO committee that a tribunal cannot “simply gloss over evidence
upon which the Parties have placed significant emphasis, without any analysis and without
explaining why it found that evidence insufficient, unpersuasive or otherwise
unsatisfactory.””°' According to Respondent, the Tribunal did exactly that because it did not
even refer to any of the five expert reports (including two rebuttal/supplemental reports), the
witness statement or the documentary evidence submitted by Respondent in support of its
submissions on the origins of the crisis and the unavoidability of the measures it adopted;
likewise, the Tribunal failed to consider the amicus curiae brief filed by five non-
governmental organizations.

At this point, the Committee first wishes to reiterate that it is not for an ad hoc committee to
re-consider the evidence put before the Tribunal nor to determine whether the Tribunal
assessed each and every piece of evidence that the Parties considered relevant to their case.
As noted above, the TECO committee did not call this general principle into question but
rather had to deal with an exceptional case, i.e., “the complete absence of any discussion of

the Parties’ expert reports within the Tribunal’s analysis of the loss of value claim.”?°”

Contrary to the TECO case, the Tribunal in the present case did not consider that there was
“no sufficient evidence” for a certain issue, without specifying why the expert reports
submitted by the parties did not qualify as such evidence.” It can rather be reasonably
inferred from the Tribunal’s reasoning that it did consider the evidence before it and reached

20 AL A RA 33, 1 376-377, 1 393.
21 AL A RA 89, 131.

22 ALA RA 89, 131.

23 Cf AL A RA 89, { 130.

301.

302.

303.

304.

its conclusions on that evidentiary basis, albeit without discussing in detail any particular
item filed by either Party.

Claimants correctly pointed out that in its discussion about the “only way” requirement, the
Tribunal made reference to an earlier discussion in the context of the FET standard on
possible alternative means that Argentina could have employed without violating its
obligations under the Treaty. In that context, the Tribunal referred to “strong evidence” that
Respondent could have applied more flexible means that would have protected the interests
of both sides.?** The Tribunal’s subsequent discussion of possible alternative means that
Respondent could have employed demonstrates that the Tribunal did take the contents of the
evidence as well as of the amicus curiae brief into account. Its subsequent finding that
Argentina’s measures were not the “only way” in which Respondent could have acted
complemented its earlier finding on the FET violation.

In the context of the “non-contribution” requirement, the Tribunal further held that “a
combination of endogenous and exogenous factors contributed to the Argentine crisis” and
explicitly acknowledged the “substantial external forces that were buffeting the Argentine
economy” at the time.?°> This demonstrates that the Tribunal did not, as alleged by
Respondent, simply adopt Claimants’ submissions but rather took the arguments advanced
by Respondent and its experts into account.

In addition, the Committee concurs with the finding of the TECO committee that a tribunal
can be required to address certain pieces of evidence only to the extent that they are deemed
“highly relevant.” In the Committee’s view, this means that such evidence must have the
potential to have an impact on the outcome of the Award. This is not the case here to the
extent that Respondent and its experts acknowledged that the Argentine State contributed to

 

the cris’

 

. In this regard, Claimants correctly pointed to Argentina’s Rejoinder on the Merits
where it stated:

“Claimants state that Argentina describes the crisis suffered as a purely
external fact. That is not true. Argentina argues, on the other hand, that
this is a situation generated mainly by external factors, which was followed
by an impossibility to maintain the prevailing economic policy in a new
macroeconomic scenario.””

Respondent’s experts Profs. Mario Damill and Roberto Frenkel stated in their expert report:

2°4 Decision on Liability, {| 260 referring to { 235.
285 Decision on Liability, | 264.
296 Exhibit A/C-47, J 1101.

305.

306.

307.

“The successive fiscal efforts made allowed for a significant improvement
in the primary result of public accounts (that is, an improvement in the
result, without taking into account the payments of interest on the public
debt.) Even so, those efforts were partly unsuccessful and partly
counterproductive. They were unsuccessful because the rise in interest
rates on public debt associated with the adverse change in the external
financial scenario substantially ‘absorbed’ income obtained on account of
successive measures designed to reduce primary public expenditure
(without taking interest into account) and increase taxes. They were
counterproductive because, in reducing the aggregate demand, such
actions contributed to the consolidation of the recession, and thus fed the
adverse expectations of economic agents regarding the future course of the
economy. This, in turn, fed again the perception of risk and, as a
consequence, the rises in interest rates. This clear vicious circle rendered
fiscal policy useless and led to a worsening situation.”?””
During the hearing on the merits, Respondent’s witness Mr. Eduardo A. Ratti was presented
with a list of endogenous causes of the crisis in Argentina as alleged by Claimants and was
asked whether he agreed that “amongst other things, they were causes of the Argentine
crisis.” Mr. Ratti responded: “Causes and effects? Yes, yes, I share that point of view. I think

it’s not just that, but I think that—those are among them.”?°8

In light of these statements, it is apparent to the Committee that the question for the Tribunal
to assess was whether the acknowledged endogenous factors amounted to a “significant”
contribution within the meaning of Article 25(2)(b) and thus excluded the state of necessity
defense. This, however, is a legal assessment on which neither of the economic expert reports
could opine. In fact, if the Tribunal had looked for guidance on this legal question in any of
the expert reports, it could have been found to have committed the same annullable error that
the Enron committee found, i.e., deference to an economic expert report where the tribunal
should have made its own legal assessment of a requirement under international law.

Consequently, the Committee cannot follow Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal
committed the same, or even a more serious, error that the Enron tribunal was found to have
made. To the contrary, the Tribunal made its own assessment of the evidence put before it,
which is not to be re-evaluated by this Committee, and applied the legal requirements of
Article 25 to the facts as found by it.

297 Exhibit R-TE-21, { 28.
28 Respondent’s opening presentation, slide 104 reproducing a quote of the hearing transcript in Argentina’s Post-
Hearing Brief on the Merits, 775.

308.

309.

310.

1.
311.

312.

Finally, the Committee does not agree with Respondent that the Tribunal failed to state
reasons for its conclusion that Argentina could have respected both its Treaty and its human
rights obligations and in that context failed to give sufficient weight to the amicus curiae
brief filed by five non-governmental organizations in 2007. Besides explicitly mentioning
the amicus curiae brief and its contents in its reasoning on the requirements of Article 25,7
the Tribunal referred in its reasoning to more flexible means that either did not include a
tariff increase at all or at least for the poor part of the population, i.e., it addressed the
concerns raised in the amicus curiae brief.*”° In addition, the Tribunal expressly considered
and dismissed the suggestion made in Respondent’s submissions and the amicus curiae brief
that Argentina’s human rights obligations somehow trumped its obligations under the
BIT.

Consequently, Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal failed to make its own assessment
of the facts based on the evidence presented by the Parties and to apply the legal elements
of Article 25 of the ILC Draft Articles to these facts is dismissed.

ce. Conclusion

In conclusion, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did not fail to state the reasons for its
decision to deny Respondent’s necessity defense and therefore Respondent’s third ground
for annulment is dismissed.

Fourth Set of Grounds for Annulment Relating to the Valuation of Damages

Summary of Respondent’s Position

Respondent submits that in determining Claimants’ alleged losses pursuant to its Decision
on Liability, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention) and failed to state the reasons for its decision (Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention) in connection with: (i) the valuation period; (ii) the construction of the valuation
exercise; and (iii) the management fees.*””

Respondent claims that the contradictions in the Tribunal’s reasoning render it “impossible
for any reader to understand or even find the rationale of the Award” in connection with a
“pivotal or outcome-determinative point.” According to Respondent, the two elements

2 Decision on Liability, {| 256, 262.
300 Cf. Decision on Liability, {[ 235.

301 Cf. Decis
Argentina’s Application, | 48; Argentina’s Memorial, {{ 136.

302

n on Liability, | 262.

 

87

justifying the annulment of the Award for a failure to state reasons, i.e., (i) a lack of rationale
for a particular point of the decision, which is (ii) necessary to the tribunal’s decision, are
therefore fulfilled. In addition, Respondent contends that annulment is also warranted based
on the Tribunal’s application of legislation that was inapplicable to this case and its ruling
on issues over which it did not have jurisdiction, which amounts to a manifest excess of
powers.2%3

a. Compensation for the Effects of a Measure that Did Not Violate the BITs

313. As to the valuation period, Respondent claims that the Tribunal held that the damages
awarded to Claimants should include losses that were allegedly incurred after the termination
of the Concession Contract in 2006 up to the end of the concession period in 2023 — despite
the fact that it had ruled in its Decision on Liability that the record was insufficient to
establish that the termination amounted to a violation of the FET standard.** According to
Respondent, the Tribunal’s finding, together with its statement that damages may only be
awarded for harm caused by internationally wrongful acts, would have necessarily resulted
in the valuation period ending together with the termination of the Concession Contract, i.
in 2006.7°5

 

314. Respondent argues that the contradiction lies in the fact that the Tribunal removed the
termination of the Concession Contract from the “without measures” scenario, by which it
intended to determine “the value of the investment in the hypothetical situation where
Argentina did not take measures that violated its treaty obligations.” In Respondent’s view,
however, the Tribunal should have taken into account the termination in both the actual and
the “without measures” scenario and thereby should have assessed the damages until 2006
rather than until 2023.*° Respondent emphasizes that the Tribunal even recognized that the
risk of termination was always present in the concession and claims that this makes the

contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning “even more evident.”?°”

315. Respondent refers to the example given by the Tribunal in this context, i.e., that one would
value a house lost in a fire based on the market value just before the fire’s occurrence rather

303 Argentina’s Memorial, ‘{{| 139-140; Argentina’s Reply, | 172.

304 Argentina’s Application, {¥{ 49-51 referring to Decision on Liability, | 246 and Award, 197; Argentina’s Memorial,
4 142; Argentina’s Reply, {{{ 168-169 quoting from Decision on Liability, 246.

*°5 Argentina’s Application, { 52 referring to Award, { 26; Argentina’s Memorial, | 149; Argentina’s Reply, {i 170-
171.

306 Argentina’s Memorial, {| 144-146 quoting from Award, { 28; Argentina’s Reply, | 176.

307 Argentina’s Reply, { 171.

316.

317.

318.

319.

than after the fire, and its conclusion that, likewise, the Tribunal had to start its valuation of
Claimants’ losses at a point before Respondent’s Treaty breaches took place. According to
Respondent, this demonstrates the Tribunal’s excess of power because, in the example, there
was a link between the measure giving rise to liability, i.e., the fire, and the injury sustained,
i.e., the loss of value of the house; in the present case, however, the termination was not
found to be a measure giving rise to liability under the BIT but the Tribunal nevertheless

placed the burden of bearing the consequences of the termination on Respondent.*°

Respondent emphasizes that it does not disagree with the valuation date or the valuation
methodology as Claimants allege but rather with the fact that Respondent is requested to pay
compensation for a period during which there was no longer a contract in force — without
the termination having been found to violate the BIT.°

In Respondent’s view, by awarding damages for the time period after the termination, the
Tribunal exceeded the framework of its Decisions on Jurisdiction and on Liability, under
which it was to assess the damages, and awarded damages for a lawful act. Respondent
claims that this constitutes a manifest excess of powers and a failure to state reasons — in the

form of stating contradictory reasons.*!?

In addition, Respondent takes the view that all cash flows, both prior to and after the
termination, belong to AASA rather than its shareholders and should therefore be subject to
discussion in the Argentine courts, in accordance with the forum selection clause agreed
upon in the Concession Contract, given the Tribunal’s finding that the termination took place
in accordance with the Concession Contract; that it did not have jurisdiction over that matter;
and that there was no evidence that the termination amounted to a violation of the BIT.*!! In
this regard, Respondent emphasizes that Claimants have also brought an action in the

Argentine courts for “the same items that they claim in this dispute.”?'?

b. Methodology and Calculation of Damages

As to the construction of the valuation exercise, Respondent claims that the Tribunal:
(i) based its calculation of damages on Resolution ETOSS No. 602/99 dated 8 July 1999
(“Resolution 602/99”) — a rule it had earlier deemed not to be part of the applicable

308 Argentina’s Reply, {| 173-175 quoting from Award, { 36.

3 Argentina’s Reply, {{{ 178-179.

50 Argentina’s Application, 54; Argentina’s Memorial, ff 151-154; Argentina’s Reply, $1 181-182.
31 Argentina’s Application, {{{ 52-53; Argentina’s Reply, (11 169, 176.

312

Argentina’s Memorial, {] 148.

320.

321.

322.

323.

regulatory framework; and (ii) applied a series of regulatory/legal presumptions, which are
not even based on Resolution 602/99 nor on the applicable legal framework — without

providing any reasons and in contradiction to other statements it had made.*!?

Respondent refers in particular to the Tribunal’s assumption of a liquidity relief, i.e., an
interest-free loan of Argentina to AASA in the amount of ARS 132 million, which
Respondent considers to be incompatible with the applicable legal framework and which
was not considered or suggested by the Parties. Respondent argues that it was under no
obligation to grant such a loan to AASA and considers this assumption contradictory, in
particular taking into account that Argentina was experiencing one of the most severe crises

in its history.*!4

Respondent further considers it contradictory that the Tribunal assumed in its Award that:
(i) profits were guaranteed allowing for a continuous repayment of debt; and (ii) AASA had
a guarantee ensuring the achievement of financial equilibrium, even though the Tribunal had
held in its Decision on Liability that the expression “equilibrium principle” was nowhere to
be found in the Water Decree and that “[t]he Concession is based on the principle of business
risk,” expressly including financial risk.*!>

According to Respondent, by assuming as a premise that AASA should be a viable company,
the Tribunal ignored the law that it deemed applicable, i.e., the Concession Contract, and
applied legislation that it did not mention as part of the applicable legal framework in its
Decision on Liability, i.e., Resolution 602/99, and thereby manifestly exceeded its powers
and failed to state the reasons for its decision.*!° As regards the Tribunal’s statement referred
to by Claimants that Resolution 602/99 best reflected Argentina’s obligation in a but-for
scenario, Respondent argues that even the discretion of the Tribunal “could never entitle [it]

to calculate damages based on a rule that it expressly excluded from the applicable law."

Respondent argues that the difference between the legal framework identified by the
Tribunal in its Decision on Liability and Resolution 602/99 applied in its Award “is essential,
since it is directly linked to the risk and responsibilities assumed by the Concessionaire”;
while the former is based on the principle of business risk, the latter is based on the

313 Argentina’s Reply, {| 183; Argentina’s Application, 155.

314 Argentina’s Application, 11 55-56; Argentina’s Memorial, { 170.

315 Argentina’s Application, { 56 quoting from Decision on Liability, {125 and 106.
36 Argentina’s Application, 4 57; Argentina’s Memorial, {4 136, 155-157.

37 Argentina’s Reply, { 186.

90

324.

325.

326.

“Equilibrium Principle” invoked by Claimants, which guarantees a certain rate of return over
the unamortized investments. Despite finding in its Decision on Liability that “the term
‘Equilibrium Principle’ appears nowhere in the text of the Water Decree,” which rather
adopted a more flexible standard, Respondent claims that the Tribunal implemented the
above mentioned “Equilibrium Principle” in its Award as part of the “without measures”

scenario and thereby contradicted its earlier finding.*'*

Respondent submits that, as a result of the assumptions it applied, the Tribunal assumed a
“guarantee over the projected flows repaying the total amount of the substantial debt
sponsored by AASA’s main shareholders,” which would not have been in place if the
applicable legal framework had been applied. In this context, Respondent notes that, only in
its Award did the Tribunal determine that the secured debt was a protected investment under
the Treaty — simply by concluding that there was no evidence to the contrary. As a result,
Respondent claims that the risks assumed by Claimants through their “policy of high
indebtedness” were allocated in their entirety to Argentina, contrary to the Tribunal’s finding
that the risks should be apportioned between the private investors and the State based on the
principle of “mutual sacrifice.”*!? In Respondent’s view, this amounts to an “abusive
exercise of the Tribunal’s powers” as well as a failure to state reasons in the form of
contradictory reasons.*?°

Respondent claims that, contrary to its expressed intention, the Tribunal did not conceive a
scenario based on “mutual sacrifice” and ignored its earlier finding that the Concessionaire
had to assume the Concession at its own economic and financial risk, given that the
assumptions applied by the Independent Expert and adopted by the Tribunal resulted in a
“guarantee, from a mathematical perspective, [of] the company’s viability” and the entire
amount of the guaranteed debt being paid by the Argentine State.*?!

Respondent further argues that by building a scenario where the guaranteed debt was a
protected investment under the BIT and thus intangible, the Tribunal ignored the Parties’
discussions and the Independent Expert’s projections on whether a potential tariff review
would have made it possible to repay the total amount of guaranteed debt and rather built a

32

scenario in which such debt was always fully covered.*”According to Respondent, the

318 Argentina’s Memorial, {| 158-163 quoting from Decision on Liability, | 125; Argentina’s Reply, {ff 187-191.
319 Argentina’s Memorial, {| 164-168, 171; Argentina’s Reply, {if 192-194, 197.

320 Argentina’s Memorial, { 174.

%21 Argentina’s Reply, {fl 196, 198.

32 Argentina’s Reply, {| 199-200.

327.

328.

329.

assumption that the sponsored debt would be repaid entirely contradicts not only the
applicable legal framework but even Resolution 602/99 because this resolution provides for
a temporary tariff increase but makes no mention to an interest-free loan to cover the liquidity
deficit — removing the risk of delinquency and uncollectability arising from a tariff increase
— as assumed by the Tribunal.*”° Respondent emphasizes that this total coverage was not
even requested by Claimants and therefore manifestly exceeds the Tribunal’s powers.”

In addition, Respondent considers it contradictory that the Tribunal awarded compensation
to AASA’s shareholders as sponsors of the guaranteed debt but did not consider according
the same treatment to the Argentine State, in relation to the payments it made in its capacity
as guarantor of a debt incurred by AASA to the Inter-American Development Bank (“IDB”).
Respondent emphasizes that the Tribunal did not distinguish between the shareholder-
sponsors and the National State-guarantor; thus, the situations were identical but the Tribunal
nevertheless “applied opposing principles and conclusions” by placing the burden of

repayment and enforcement on Respondent but not on Claimants.*?°

Finally, Respondent claims that pursuant to a proposal made by the Independent Expert,
Dr.Akash Deep, the Tribunal adopted an interest rate that was “slightly” higher than the rate
proposed by Claimants’ experts. Respondent rejects Claimants’ submission that the choice
of interest rate is subject to the Tribunal’s discretion and emphasizes that the Tribunal did
not even refer to the rate that the Parties had agreed upon to apply as from the termination
of the Concession Contract, i.e., the 6-month US Treasury bill rate. Respondent claims that
the Tribunal therefore acted ultra petita and, thus, exceeded its powers; it also seriously
departed from a fundamental rule of procedure because it did not submit the rate to the
Parties for comments.*°

c. Management Contract

As to the management fees, Respondent claims that the Tribunal awarded to Suez alleged
losses incurred in relation to the Management Contract, even though it had not previously
determined that this Contract was a protected investment in relation to which Respondent
had violated the BIT. According to Respondent, the Tribunal would have had to state in its
Decision on Jurisdiction what the protected investment is, given that this definition would

3 Argentina’s Memorial, {| 169-171; Argentina’s Reply, {| 201.
%4 Argentina’s Reply, { 201.

5 Argentina’s Memorial, | 172; Argentina’s Reply, { 203.

26 Argentina’s Memorial, {| 173; Argentina’s Reply, {| 204-207.

330.

331.

then form the basis for the discussion on the merits and damages. Respondent further
emphasizes that the Tribunal recognized Claimants’ standing based on their shareholdings
rather than on the basis of a contract for the provision of services, which was unrelated to
Claimants’ shareholdings.*?”

In addition, Respondent claims that the Tribunal’s decision to award compensation for
unpaid management fees not only between 2002 and 2006, i.e., until the termination of the
Concession Contract, but rather until 2023 — for services that were never provided — amounts
to an abuse of the Tribunal’s powers and a failure to state reasons for such conclusion, which
warrants the annulment of the Award.*?* Respondent argues that the Tribunal had no powers
to award damages in the absence of injury, given that the management fees were found to be
consideration to be given in exchange for the transfer of “essential, intangible assets,’ —a
transfer that no longer took place after the termination in 2006.*”?

In addition, Respondent notes that the Tribunal acknowledged in its Award that “Dr. Deep
was unsure of the legal status of the claim for Management fees” and argues that,
nevertheless, the Tribunal did not specify such legal status and thus acted outside its
jurisdiction when awarding compensation for a claim of uncertain legal status.*° In
Respondent’s view, Dr. Deep’s report demonstrates that it would have been essential to
classify the claim for management fees either as an “expected return” or as a “compensation
for management services” because a classification as the former would have required
amending the parameters applied in his valuation.**! Even though Dr. Deep’s valuation was
thus valid only for a classification as compensation for services, Respondent contends that
the Tribunal, while not clearly stating its position, addressed the management fees as an
expected return, given that it considered them as “an integral part of [Claimants’] principal
claim.” According to Respondent, the Tribunal did not explain why it nevertheless applied
Dr. Deep’s parameters and contradicted its own statement that the management fees were
paid “in consideration for the [management-related] obligations” of Suez under the

Concession Contract.3*?

327 Argentina’s Application, 4 58; Argentina’s Memorial, {{f 136, 185; Argentina’s Reply, ff 209-211.

8 Argentina’s Memorial, {| 136, 175, 186.

9 Argentina’s Reply, {| 212-213 quoting from Award, {71

330 Argentina’s Memorial, { 176 quoting from Award, {| 74; Argentina’s Reply, | 216.

331 Argentina’s Memorial, {f 177-178; Argentina’s Reply, | 215 quoting from Exhibits A/C-34 and A RA 55, [ 429.
332 Argentina’s Memorial, {| 179-184 quoting from Award, {{{ 72, 75; Argentina’s Reply, {{ 209, 217-218.

332.

333.

334.

335.

333. C|
3MC

360
37¢

Summary of Claimants’ Position

Claimants submit that Respondent’s arguments are “nothing more than quarrels with the
way the Tribunal assessed the evidence and applied the law” and a “disagreement with the
Tribunal’s findings”; they do not amount to an excess of powers nor to a failure to state
reasons for the Award.**3

a. Calculation of Damages to Provide Full Reparation at the Date of Respondent’s
Breach

In Claimants’ view, Respondent’s claim that the Tribunal awarded damages for a measure
that it did not find to be a Treaty breach is a mischaracterization of how the Tribunal assessed
Claimants’ losses and, “in reality, an effort to appeal the Tribunal’s decision with respect to
the period over which damages should be assessed.”*** Claimants argue that Respondent
does not claim that the Tribunal failed to apply the proper law, but rather that it applied such

law incorrectly, which is not a basis for annulment. 335

Claimants argue that the Tribunal did not contradictorily award damages for termination of
the Concession Contract but rather for Respondent’s two Treaty breaches on the dates they
occurred, which preceded the termination and resulted in full reparation from that date
onwards. According to Claimants, Respondent disagrees with the fact that the Tribunal’s
calculation did not account for events that post-dated the Treaty breaches and were thus
unknown at the valuation date, such as the termination of the Concession Contract that
occurred in 2006. Claimants emphasize that this point was discussed by the Parties and dealt
with by the Tribunal “after comprehensive analysis.”**° In Claimants’ view, the reasons
supporting the Tribunal’s findings are equally “clear and comprehensive” and do not contain
any contradictions that would result in the reasons “‘cancel[ing] each other out so as to

amount to no reasons at all.”*3"

Claimants refer to the Tribunal’s finding that it “must begin its valuation of what the
Claimants have lost as a result of Argentina’s illegal actions at a point in time before those
actions took place,” which meant that the Tribunal valued the investment in January 2002,

e., the date immediately before the first Treaty valuation. Claimants note that, as of that

laimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{ 115, 170.
laimants’ Counter-Memorial, { 117.

laimants’ Rejoinder, 4 57.

laimants’ Counter-Memorial, #9 118-119, 172; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {1 59, 121.

laimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{{ 170-171 quoting from A/CLA-43, 77; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {{ 123.

33

33

338.

6.

n

oo

date, the Concession Contract had another 21 years to run, and again refer to the Tribunal’s
finding that “[t]o limit the valuation period to five instead of twenty-one years would, of
course, seriously undervalue the investments lost as a consequence of Argentina’s treaty
violations. ... The termination of the Concession Contract, even if not illegal under the BITs,
cannot exonerate it from its obligation to repair the consequences of its wrongful act in

denying fair and equitable treatment to the Claimants’ investments.”°8

In response to Respondent’s additional argument that the Tribunal recognized that the risk
of termination always existed but refused to take such risk into account, Claimants
emphasize that the Tribunal in fact did refer to this risk and stated that it “would be accounted
for in the rate applied to discount to present value the remaining twenty-one years of
projected cash flows.” According to Claimants, it is irrelevant whether the Tribunal did so
correctly, as long as the reasoning is clearly set out in its Award.**?

In Claimants’ view, Respondent disagrees with the Tribunal’s findings on the valuation date
and the valuation methodology; however, these fall solely within the Tribunal’s powers to
determine the compensation due for Respondent’s breaches and cannot properly be at issue
in an annulment proceeding.*“°

b. Construction of the “But For” Scenario

Claimants submit that Respondent’s arguments on the but-for scenario again amount to a
disagreement with the Tribunal’s findings on the factual and legal arguments presented by
the Parties. Claimants note that Respondent argued in the arbitration that Resolution 602/99
should not be applied in the “but for” scenario — an argument that was rejected by the
Tribunal, which found instead that the application of Resolution 602/99 as assumed by Dr.
Deep best reflected what fair and equitable treatment from the regulator would have looked
like.*#! Claimants quote the Tribunal’s statement that “while Resolution 602/99 may or may
not have been legally binding, it was nonetheless, as the product of an agency of the
Argentine government, strong evidence of how a reasonable regulator would act in the

situation that AASA and the regulators faced at the time of the Argentine crisis.”*

388 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, | 120 quoting from Award, 4 36 (emphasis added by Claimants).
5 Claimants’ Rejoinder, | 122 quoting from Award, | 36.

$4 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, 123 referring to Award, {{[ 51-56; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {[ 61-64.
2 Claimants’ Rejoinder, {64 quoting from Award, 55.

1
r
laimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{ 121.
1
1

339. Claimants refer to the Tribunal’s statement that the construction of a “but for” scenario
“necessarily requires the Tribunal to enter into the realm of the hypothetical,” i.e., a scenario
in which “both Argentina and the AASA’s investors would share the burden of assisting
AASA through its liquidity crisi:
through a partial and temporary increase in tariffs, the shareholders would contribute

 

”; while Respondent would provide some liquidity relief

additional capital, thus amounting to “mutual sacrifice.” Claimants argue that in the “but
for’ scenario, the Tribunal was not bound to apply the conditions prevailing in Argentina at
the time but had to determine the conditions that would reasonably have prevailed if there

had been a “productive and cooperative working relationship between the parties.”*+

340.

So

According to Claimants, the Tribunal’s approach to resort to the principles underlying
Resolution 602/99 was “fully justified’ and supported by “extensive reasoning” that was
“explicit, straightforward, and discernable on the face of the Award” but, in any event,
Respondent is not entitled to a de novo review of the assessment of the evidence and the
interpretation of the law performed by the Tribunal; its disagreement with the Tribunal’s
findings does not amount to an excess of powers nor to a failure to state reasons on the part
of the Tribunal.*45

341.

Claimants further submit that Respondent’s arguments relating to the secured debt were also
argued before and decided by the Tribunal; however, Respondent never argued that the
Tribunal did not have power to award damages in this regard but rather that any potential
damages resulted from the riskiness of Claimants’ investment and not from Respondent’s
Treaty breaches — an argument that the Tribunal rejected. Claimants emphasize that they
always contended that the secured debt constituted protected investments and specifically
identified their debt participation as an investment in their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction
—a characterization Respondent never objected to.*#°

342. In response to Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal contradicted itself by awarding
Claimants compensation for extinguishing AASA’s secured debt but not providing
Respondent with similar relief for various sums it claims to have paid, Claimants consider

aimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{] 124-125; Claimants’ Rejoinder, | 65 quoting from Award, (91 52-53, 55.
aimants’ Rejoinder, { 66 quoting from Award, { 43.

aimants’ Counter-Memorial, {{{ 126, 173; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 67-68.

aimants’ Counter-Memorial, {ff 127-128 referring to Exhibit A/C-33, {| 8(b)(iii); Claimants’ Rejoinder, {| 70.

3B
a
as
346

qaaqaaa

I
I
I
I

343.

344.

345.

346.

350 CY
351 Cy

this again to be disagreement with the Tribunal’s decision to reject Respondent’s claim, the
reasons for which the Tribunal gave in its Award.*47

Finally, as to Respondent’s ultra petita claim, Claimants contend that the interest rate
proposed by the Independent Expert, i.e., the 6-month Eurodollar rate, in fact yielded an
interest amount lower than that sought by Claimants. In addition, Claimants submit that both
Parties presented arguments on the appropriate interest rate and commented on the
Independent Expert’s proposal, which the Tribunal ultimately determined to more accurately
place Claimants “in the position they would have been if no such loss had occurred.”** In
any event, Claimants submit that while the Parties initially agreed on the US Treasury bill
rate, Claimants later accepted Dr. Deep’s proposal to apply the Eurodollar rate so that there
was no longer any agreement on the risk-free rate when the Tribunal rendered its Award.*#?

Claimants further argue that the choice of the applicable interest rate “falls squarely within
the discretion of the Tribunal,” just as the choice of applicable discount rate or any other

“damages input or even final damages figures,” and does not amount to an excess of

powers.>?

c. Compensation for Management Fees

Claimants submit that Respondent again disagrees with the Tribunal’s finding on the
valuation date, which resulted in a valuation of Claimants’ investment, including the
management fees, as of 2002, on what Claimants consider to be a “reasonable assumption
that, had Argentina provided fair and equitable treatment to the Claimants’ investment, the
Concession would have continued through 2023.” Claimants argue that on this but-for
assumption, Suez would also have continued to receive management fees through 2023 and

was thus entitled to damages in that amount.**!

As to Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal determined only in its Award that the claim
for management fees was a protected investment, Claimants note that the Parties exchanged
arguments on this issue, leading to the Tribunal accepting Claimants’ argument that the
Management Contract was “‘an integral part of the Claimants’ investment.” Claimants argue
that Respondent’s suggestion that a failure to define the management fees as part of

aimants’ Counter-Memorial, {174 referring to Award, 1{{ 69-70.

aimants’ Counter-Memorial, {129 quoting from Award, 64; Claimants’ Rejoinder, | 74.
aimants’ Rejoinder, J 72.

aimants’ Counter-Memorial, { 129; Claimants’ Rejoinder, 73.

aimants’ Counter-Memorial, { 131; Claimants’ Rejoinder, 79.

Claimants’ investment in the Decision on Jurisdiction would have deprived the Parties of an
opportunity to fully brief the damages owed in this regard is disproven by the fact that both
Parties did in fact “extensively” brief such damages in the quantum phase of the arbitration.
Therefore, Claimants argue that it is irrelevant whether the Tribunal made the decision on a
characterization of the management fees only in the damages phase.*>*

347. Finally, Claimants reject Respondent’ argument that the Tribunal did not assign a “legal

348.

status” to the management fees, referring to the Tribunal’s finding that the fees were earned
though a Management Contract, which was part of Claimants’ protected investment.
Claimants further deny that the Tribunal misapplied Dr. Deep’s alleged conclusion and note
that in the paragraphs following the one quoted by Respondent, Dr. Deep in fact assumed
that the management fees were a payment for services rather than a return on investment,
which was “the precise conclusion that the Tribunal adopted when it follows Dr. Deep’s

approach to this issue.”?>

oo

Specifically, Claimants reject Respondent’s submission that the Tribunal classified the
management fees as an “expected return” and contend that it rather considered them to be
compensation for services rendered and gave “detailed reasons” for its decision to: (i) grant
Claimants’ request for future management fees, albeit without interest; and (ii) reject their
request for accrued but unpaid management fees.**+ In addition, Claimants submit that the
Tribunal followed Dr. Deep’s “middle ground” approach because it agreed with the order in
which creditors were being paid under this assumption.*°°

349. In any event, Claimants contend that these arguments are irrelevant because the Committee

3.

is not tasked with reviewing whether the Tribunal awarded compensation for the
management fees in a correct manner but rather whether it manifestly exceeded its powers

in doing so — for which Respondent’s arguments provide no basis.*°°

  

Committee’s Analysis

350. In the context of the Tribunal’s evaluation of Claimants’ alleged damages, Respondent

5

5

52

advances two annulment grounds: (i) that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers

laimants” Counter-Memorial, J 133; Claimants’ Rejoinder, {{ 77-78.
laimants’ Counter-Memorial, {ff 134-136.

laimants’ Rejoinder, {{ 129.
laimants” Counter-Memorial, {{ 137; Claimants’ Rejoinder, { 129.

cl
xe
“4 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, ff 176-177 referring to Award, {f 71-83 and {{ 84-86; Claimants’ Rejoinder, J
28.
SC
te

98

351.

352.

353.

354.

(Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention); and (ii) that the Tribunal failed to state the
reasons for its decision (Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention).

The Committee makes reference to the general considerations above on the scope of its
review under these two annulment grounds and agrees with the committee’s finding in
Impregilo v. Argentina, made specifically in relation to the assessment of damages:

“The Committee cannot review de novo the facts, evidence and criteria
used by the Tribunal in assessing the damages nor the amount of
compensation awarded to [the claimant]. ... Of course, the assessment of
damages cannot be arbitrary, but a Tribunal’s determination of the amount
of compensation allows for a high level of discretion and a disagreement
with the criteria used by the Tribunal cannot be a ground for annulment of
an award.”>"

 

Bearing this in mind, the Committee will assess the three elements of the Tribunal’s
evaluation that Respondent claims to be tainted with annullable errors: (i) the valuation
period; (ii) the construction of the valuation exercise; and (iii) the management fees.

a. Compensation for the Effects of a Measure that Did Not Violate the BITs

First, Respondent alleges that the Tribunal’s decision in its Award to adopt a valuation period
up to the regular end of the concession period in 2023, and thus to award damages for alleged
losses incurred after the termination of the Concession Contract by Argentina in 2006,
contradicts its earlier finding in the Decision on Liability that such termination did not violate
the BITs and that it did not have jurisdiction to judge whether it violated the Concession
Contract.*°* Respondent takes the position that any losses incurred after the termination are
to be assessed by the Argentine courts, which is the competent forum to assess whether the
termination amounts to a breach of the Concession Contract.

The Committee notes that Respondent has raised the same objection before the Tribunal,
which thoroughly dealt with it in its Award. Specifically, it held:

“The Tribunal does not agree with Argentina on this point. Under
international law, as noted above, the Claimants’ [sic] are entitled to full
compensation for what they have lost as a consequence of Argentina’s
treaty violations. Just as one would not value the loss of a house in a fire
based on the market value of the burned structure after the fire, but rather
would value the house just before the fire’s occurrence, this Tribunal must

37 A/CLA-42/ AL A RA 34, { 160.
358 Decision on Liability, 246.

355.

356.

begin its valuation of what the Claimants have lost as a result of

Argentina’s illegal actions at a point in time just before those actions took

place. In its Decision on Liability, the Tribunal determined that the first

breach of the treaties took place on January 6, 2002. Just before that point

in time, AASA, and therefore the Claimants, had the right to a revenue

stream which would continue for another 21 years until the year 2023, not

just for another five years until the year 2006 when, unknown to them in

2002, Argentina would terminate the Concession. To limit the valuation

period to five instead of twenty-one years would, of course, seriously

undervalue the investments lost as a consequence of Argentina’s treaty

violations. It is true that the risk of termination was always present in the

Concession; however, that risk, along with other risks, would be accounted

for in the rate applied to discount to present value the remaining twenty-

one years of projected cash flows. The termination of the Concession

Contract by Argentina, even if not illegal under the BITs, cannot exonerate

it from its obligation to repair the consequences of its wrongful act in

denying fair and equitable treatment to the Claimants’ investments.”
In the above quoted paragraph, the Tribunal explained its approach to value the investment
from the perspective of a potential buyer in January 2002, i.e., the date of the first Treaty
breach. At that time, a potential buyer would not have known that the Concession Contract
would be terminated five years later by Argentina but would have accounted for such risk
only as part of the discount rate it would have applied to the projected future cash flows. In
light of this explanation, the Committee does not agree with Respondent that the Tribunal
exceeded its jurisdiction by awarding damages for a measure it had not found to be in
violation of the BIT. Likewise, the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons for its decision to
adopt a valuation period up to the regular end of the concession period.

During the hearing, Respondent appeared to modify its initial argument by placing more
emphasis on the question of whether the risk of termination, which the Tribunal
acknowledged was always present in the Concession Contract, was actually taken into
account in the discount rate applied by the Tribunal-appointed expert Dr. Deep. The Tribunal
stated in its Award that “that risk, along with other risks, would be accounted for in the rate
applied to discount to present value the remaining twenty-one years of projected cash flows.”
It did not, however, explicitly state whether the risk was actually and specifically
incorporated into Dr. Deep’s calculation.

35° Award, { 36.

100

357.

358.

359.

360.

360
361
362

363,

From the Parties’ responses to an explicit question from the Committee in this regard, it
appears that the risk of early termination was not considered as an individual factor but rather

  

as part of the systematic risk coefficient, the beta, that Dr. Deep included to account for “the
riskiness of a regulated water and sewerage utility such as AASA.”>® Claimants argued that
in the present case, “the contractual termination risk is inherent in industry risk ... reflected

in the beta” because “[t]his is an industry in which investors sign contracts with the State.”*>!

Respondent, however, took issue with the sources used by Dr. Deep to compile such beta,
i.e., (i) beta values used by the UK water regulator to set water tariffs in the UK for 2000-
2005; and (ii) the (general) unlevered beta for developing countries surveyed by
Prof. Damodaran.*™ Specifically, Respondent argued that the average beta of UK water
companies (0.5) and emerging markets in general (0.44) did not adequately reflect the risk
of water companies operating in emerging markets, including any specific termination
risk. 3%

Based on the arguments presented by the Parties, it is indeed not entirely clear to the
Committee whether the discount rate applied by Dr. Deep, and specifically the systematic
risk coefficient beta, adequately reflected the risk that Argentina might at some point in the
future terminate the Concession Contract. However, the Committee recalls its agreement
with the finding of the Jmpregilo committee above that the Tribunal has “a high level of
discretion’ as to the criteria it applies in its assessment of damages and that “a disagreement
with the criteria used by the Tribunal cannot be a ground for annulment of an award.”?™ In
line with this consideration, it is not for this Committee to re-consider the view taken by the
Tribunal that the criteria applied by Dr. Deep to compile the beta sufficiently accounted for
the termination risk that later materialized in 2006.

In the same context, Respondent also criticized that the “without-measures” scenario applied
by Dr. Deep, i.e., the but-for scenario by which the Tribunal intended to determine how the
value of Claimants’ investment would have evolved in the absence of Respondent’s Treaty
violations, excluded not only the two measures that the Tribunal had found to be in violation

Exhibit A/C-34, J 221.

Transcript (Day 2), p. 342 lines 8-11.

Cf. Exhibit A/C-34, {| 375 and Table 25.

Respondent argued that “[t]he beta considered by Deep for the water sector in the UK, where termination risk is

supposed to be lower than in emerging markets, is higher. This proves that the beta considered in the discount rate
applied to AASA does not include the termination risk.” Argentina’s Rebuttal Statement dated 9 November 2016, slide

56.

364

See also Transcript (Day 2), p. 276 line 18 - p. 277 line 2.
A/CLA-42/ AL A RA 34, { 160.

101

361.

362.

of the BITs but also the termination of the Concession Contract. During the hearing,
Respondent further pointed out that the “with-measures” scenario, i.e., the scenario to which
the Tribunal compared the hypothetical but-for scenario, likewise excluded the termination
event and thus did not reflect the actual or real scenario examined by the Parties’ experts but
rather a second hypothetical scenario.

According to Dr. Deep’s explanation, this “with-measures” scenario was intended to capture
how AASA would have evolved after 2002, this time in the presence of the unlawful
measures and, correspondingly, the absence of the measures re-establishing the financial
equilibrium; contrary to the actual or real scenario, however this “with-measures” scenario
again excluded measures “that were not necessarily found to be in breach of the BITs,
including the termination of the Concession Contract in 2006.”*° Dr. Deep clarified:

“TOJur objective in defining the with-Measures scenario is to be able to

estimate the damages suffered by the Claimants due to the Measures

relative to the but-for scenario. The simplest way to do this is to maintain

all of the assumptions of the but-for scenario except for the tariff-related

regulatory interventions whose absence is what constitutes the Measures

that have been considered a breach of the Bilateral Investment Treaties by

the Tribunal.”°°
The Committee notes that while the Tribunal referred to the “with-measures” scenario in its
Award,*67 it did not discuss the fact that it did not simply reflect the “as-is” situation but
rather a second hypothetical scenario, nor did it discuss why both scenarios excluded
measures that were not found to be in violation of the BITs and, most importantly, the
termination of the Concession Contract. However, in light of the Tribunal’s finding that
“[t]he starting point of the Valuation Period is connected with the date of first breach of fair
and equitable treatment by Argentina, in January 2002,”** it can reasonably be inferred that
the Tribunal intended to compare two scenarios, both from the perspective of January 2002,
of how Claimants’ investment would have evolved in the presence and in the absence of the
two Treaty breaches. While the Tribunal did not provide explicit reasons why both scenarios
excluded the termination of the Concession Contract, this naturally follows from adopting
the perspective of January 2002. At that time, it was not known that the termination would

365 Exhibit A/C-34, 94.

366 Exhibit A/C-34, 95. See also ff 3-4 and 61.
361 Cf, Award, J 28.

368 Award, 37.

102

363.

364.

365.

occur in 2006 and the risk of such termination was reflected in both scenarios in the same
way, i.e., in the industry-specific beta.

It is therefore consistent with the Tribunal’s approach to disregard the termination event
itself from both scenarios in order to account exclusively for the difference resulting from
the two Treaty breaches. While Respondent may disagree with the approach adopted by the
Tribunal, this does not constitute either a manifest excess of powers, given that the Tribunal
did not award damages for a measure it did not find to be in violation of the BITs, nor a
failure to state reasons, given that an informed reader can reasonably follow the Tribunal’s
reasoning to its conclusion.

Finally, Respondent argued during the hearing that there was a contradiction between the
Tribunal’s finding in its Decision on Liability that there was no expropriation of Claimants’
investment and its evaluation of damages in the Award where Dr. Deep allegedly valued the
investment as if an expropriation had taken place. The Committee notes that Respondent
raised the same objection already before the Tribunal, which clarified in its Award:

“... [Clontrary to Argentina’s objection, Dr. Deep was not engaged in

making an expropriation valuation. The construction of a without measures

scenario was only the first step in his proposed methodology. He then had

to value the Claimants’ investments in a ‘with measures’ scenario and

finally to subtract the value of the latter from the value of the former in

order to arrive at a value of the loss sustained. Dr. Deep correctly

determined that the ‘with measures’ scenario resulted in a complete loss of

the Claimants’ investments. Their value was therefore zero. That amount

would then be subtracted from the value to be attributed to the various

elements of the Claimants’ investment had Argentina accorded them fair

and equitable treatment. Thus the conceptual framework for the valuation

process in a case of denial of equitable treatment is quite different from

that of an expropriation case.”*?
Following a detailed discussion of Dr. Deep’s calculation of the value of Claimants’
investments in both scenarios, the Tribunal ultimately agreed that in the “with-measures”
scenario, “the measures Argentina did take during the crisis would have resulted in a
negative cash flow to AASA’s equity holders in 2002 and it would have remained negative
throughout the life of the Concession. In short, the Claimants’ equity would have been

worthless.”3”°

3 Award, 156.
3 Award, | 102.

103

366.

367.

368.

369.

Consequently, the Committee cannot agree with Respondent’s argument that Dr. Deep
valued Claimants’ investment as if an expropriation had taken place; rather, the Tribunal
agreed with Dr. Deep that the value to be subtracted from the hypothetical value of
Claimants’ investment in the but-for scenario was zero. Therefore, the Committee finds that
there is no contradiction in this regard between the findings made in the Tribunal’s Decision
on Liability and in its Award.

b. Methodology and Calculation of Damages

As to the methodology and calculation of damages, Respondent advances two arguments:
(i) the Tribunal did not base the but-for scenario on the applicable legal framework and
contradicted its earlier findings because it modeled the but-for scenario on the basis of
achieving financial equilibrium pursuant to Resolution 602/99 dated 8 July 1999 despite the
fact that this Resolution was never adopted, and it even went beyond the measures prescribed
in Resolution 602/99 by assuming a liquidity relief in the form of a one-year interest-free
loan and the total repayment of sponsored debt; and (ii) the Tribunal applied pre-award
interest at a rate higher than that agreed upon by the Parties’ experts.

i. Modeling of the But-For Scenario

(a) Aim to Achieve Financial Equilibrium

Respondent alleges that the Tribunal did not correctly take into account the legal framework
it had deemed applicable in its Decision on Liability when modeling the but-for scenario in
its Award. Specifically, Respondent claims that the Tribunal’s assumption in its Award that
the but-for scenario would involve a tariff adjustment to ensure the Concession Contract was
in financial equilibrium contradicted its earlier finding that the term “Equilibrium Principle”
did not appear in the Water Decree and that Article 44(d) of the Water Decree adopted a
more flexible standard that sought to apportion the risks between the private investors and
the Argentine State.

In its Decision on Liability, the Tribunal found that “the legal framework of the Concession
sought to achieve and balance two basic objectives.” The first objective was to attract private
and foreign capital and know-how, as a result of which the framework needed to ensure that
potential investors would earn “a reasonable profit” through the tariff system and that
changes affecting the profitability of their enterprise would be dealt with by virtue of the

104,

  

f.37! The second objective was to ensure that water and
sewage services could be provided efficiently and at low cost, which is why the framework

mechanism for revising the tari

 

provided the Argentine authorities with “a certain degree of regulatory discretion in setting
tariffs and in determining other important matters relating to AASA’s activities.”
Specifically with regard to the disputed term “Equilibrium Principle,” the Tribunal found:

“Although the Claimants assert that the tariff regime of the Water Decree
was based on the ‘Equilibrium Principle’ guaranteeing the Concessionaire
a recovery of all costs plus a return on invested capital, it is important to
note three features of the legal framework at this point: 1) the term
‘Equilibrium Principle’ appears nowhere in the text of the Water Decree;
2) the Water Decree conditions tariffs on the attainment of service
efficiency by the Concessionaire; and 3) the Concessionaire was to assume
the business risks of the operation.
... [I]nstead of specifically mandating that the tariff was to provide for all
costs and a reasonable return to the investor, Article 44 (d) of the Water
Decree adopted a more flexible standard in stating, as noted above:

‘The prices and tariffs shall tend (tenderdn) to reflect the

economic cost of the water and wastewater services, including

a margin of profit for the Concessionaire and include all costs

arising from the approved expansion plans.’ (emphasis
added).”*”

370. On the other hand, the Tribunal found that the legal framework did seek to protect the
Concessionaire from certain of the risks involved with the operation of a water and sewage
system of Buenos Aires and held that “[t]he Concession’s legal framework sought to

apportion those risks between the private investors and the Argentine State.”*"

371. There is a dispute between the Parties as to whether there is a contradiction between the
findings of the Tribunal in its Decision on Liability and its adoption in the Award of the but-
for scenario modeled by Dr. Deep, which included, inter alia, “a full review of the economics
of the Concession Contract ... in 2003.” Respondent points in particular to the Tribunal’s
statement that “[t]he aim of such a review was to ensure that the Concession achieved

financial equilibrium as prescribed by the Water Decree.”*"

31 Decision on Liability, | 124.

522 Decision on Liability, {| 125-126.
573 Decision on Liability, | 126.

34 Award, 41.45, 46.

105

372.

373.

374.

375 Exhibit A/C-34, {
376 Exhibit A/C-34, {
377 Exhibit A/C-34, {
378 Exhibit A/C-34, {

The Committee notes that Dr. Deep explicitly quoted the Tribunal’s finding regarding the
absence of the term “Equilibrium Principle” from the text of the Water Decree in his Final
Report and then stated that “[t]hus the regulator had significant discretion in implementing
the mechanism that would establish the financial equilibrium of the Concession Contract in
accordance with the principles of the Water Decree.”*” This statement demonstrates that
Dr. Deep did not consider there to be a contradiction between stating on the one hand that
the term “Equilibrium Principle” was absent from the Water Decree, and finding on the other
hand that the Water Decree nevertheless aimed to achieve financial equilibrium of the
Concession. To the contrary, Dr. Deep opined that “[t]he determination of financial

equilibrium would reflect the principles outlined in Article 44(d) of the Water Decree.”*”®

Dr. Deep further considered that the so-called “EFNQ mechanism,” which ETOSS (Ente
Tripartito de Obras y Servicios Sanitarios, the regulatory authority in Argentina) used in
1998 to determine the then-required tariff adjustment and which was described in Resolution
602/99 of July 1999, “was intended to serve as a guide toward establishing the long-run
financial equilibrium of the Concession.”*" In response to Respondent’s objection to his
reliance on Resolution 602/99, which was undisputedly never adopted, Dr. Deep
acknowledged that it was not for him to determine its applicability in the but-for scenario
but noted that “Resolution 602/99 is the only document at our disposal that describes an
example of the implementation of the equilibrium principle. We [have relied on this
document] because we feel that this is better than devising a hypothetical scenario from
seratch.”3"8

In its Award, the Tribunal noted, inter alia, that neither Party had provided it with “another
equally detailed and convincing scenario of how a reasonable regulator intent on according
fair and equitable treatment to AASA would have behaved.” In the absence of any competing
scenario, it further considered that “it need only find that Dr. Deep’s scenarios [sic] is a
reasonable hypothesis of what a reasonable regulator, intent on fair and equitable treatment
of AASA, would do in a comparable situation.” It then explained why it considered
Dr. Deep’s hypothetical but-for scenario, including the application of Resolution 602/99,
indeed reasonable. In particular, it stated that “while Resolution 602/99 may or may not be
legally binding, it was nonetheless, as the product of an agency of the Argentine

185.

74.

[| 185, 121. See also {{ 67-68 and {{]] 176-177.
453.

106

375.

376.

377.

Government, strong evidence of how a reasonable regulator would act in the situation that
AASA and the regulators faced at the time of the Argentine crisis.” In addition, the Tribunal
considered it “significant that ETOSS applied Resolution 602/99 in its dealings with AASA
before 2002” and therefore found that it was justified for Dr. Deep to use this resolution to

  

build his but-for scenario.*”

In light of the above, the Committee finds that there is no contradiction between the
Tribunal’s findings regarding the applicable legal framework in its Decision on Liability on
the one hand, and regarding the reasonableness of the but-for scenario modeled by Dr. Deep
in its Award on the other. In particular, the Committee cannot agree with Respondent’s
argument that the absence of the term “Equilibrium Principle” from the Water Decree
excluded a finding that this Decree nevertheless aimed to achieve financial equilibrium for
the Concession. To the contrary, the Tribunal made it reasonably clear that there was no
strict equilibrium in terms of a guarantee implemented by an automatic adjustment of the
tariffs in fixed intervals and/or according to fixed indices but that the regulator rather
possessed a certain degree of discretion in how it sought to achieve the aims of the legal
framework — one of which was to ensure that private investors enjoyed a reasonable profit.

The Committee further considers that the application of Resolution 602/99 in the but-for
scenario does not amount to an excess of powers nor to a failure to state reasons. The
Tribunal explicitly addressed Respondent’s objection that it was not part of the applicable
framework and gave convincing reasons why it nevertheless considered it to be a reasonable
indication of how a reasonable regulator would have behaved in the but-for scenario built by
Dr. Deep. Any disagreement with these reasons cannot give rise to a ground for annulment
under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention.

(b) Liquidity Relief in the Form of a One-Year Interest-Free Loan

Respondent further claims that the but-for scenario also included measures that were not
even provided for in Resolution 602/99 and, specifically, that there is no basis for the one-
year interest-free loan that Dr. Deep assumed Argentina would have granted to AASA in
2002. While Claimants do not dispute that this concrete measure cannot be found in the
applicable legal framework nor in Resolution 602/99, they point out that this assumption has
to be viewed together with Dr. Deep’s further assumption, i.e., an additional capital infusion

by the investors, described by the Tribunal as “mutual sacrifice.

3 Award, 4953-55.

107

378.

379.

380.

381.

The Committee notes that, initially, both Parties objected to Dr. Deep’s assumptions before
the Tribunal. While Claimants sought to assume an “outright subsidy or other type of
permanent capital infusion by Argentina” and objected to an additional capital infusion to
be made by the investors, Respondent protested against the assumption that it would have

provided an interest-free loan while “facing the worst crisis in the country’s history.”>*°

The Tribunal noted these objections and thoroughly addressed them in its Award. It
acknowledged that these concrete measures were imposed neither by the applicable
framework nor by Resolution 602/99, but noted that the Parties would have had to work
together to solve the liquidity crisis faced by AASA in 2002. It further considered that both
Parties would have had “strong reasons” to adopt the measures suggested by Dr. Deep or
similar measures in order to ensure AASA’s continued existence.**! In the Tribunal’s view,
these measures were in line with the three principles it identified “that would guide a
reasonable regulator intent on according fair and equitable treatment to AASA”: (i) the
short-term and long-term continuation of the important public service provided by AASA;
(ii) the preservation of the entity providing such service; and (iii) the principles of

cooperation and of shared sacrifice as embodied in the Concession Contract.**”

In particular with regard to the third principle, the Tribunal noted in its Decision on Liability
that Article 5.1 of the Concession Contract required the parties to “use all means at their
lis} lto blish and maintain a fluid relationship that facilitates the performance of this
Concession Contract" and found that contrary to this obligation, “the Argentine authorities

 

demonstrated extreme rigidity in their dealings with AASA and the Claimants.”>* In its
Award, the Tribunal then found that the but-for scenario modeled by Dr. Deep was in
accordance with these principles and in particular “reflect{ed] a partnership relationship
between AASA and the Argentine government in that the ultimate solution requires mutual

sacrifice by both sides.”***

Consequently, it is apparent to the Committee that the Tribunal adopted the but-for scenario
modeled by Dr. Deep, including the one-year interest-free loan to AASA, in order to achieve
a balanced solution and a middle-ground position between the positions of the Parties. While
this may not have been the only possible solution the Tribunal could have adopted, it does

380 Cf, Award, MH 49-50.

381 A.
382

  

384 4.

ward, Wf 51-53.

ward, 1 54.

ecision on Liability, 233.
ward, 55. See also ff 42-44.

108,

382.

383.

constitute a reasonable and balanced hypothesis based on the submissions and evidence
presented by the Parties as well as the considerations of Dr. Deep, applying the concept of
“shared sacrifice.”**> The Tribunal further gave detailed reasons for its decision, consistent
with its earlier findings on the necessary cooperation between the Parties, in accordance with
the Concession Contract and the general principle of good faith that would, in the but-for
scenario, “in all probability,” have led to a set of agreements ensuring the viability of the
Concession.*%°

In addition, the Committee does not agree with Respondent that a one-year interest-free loan
contradicted the Tribunal’s findings in its Decision on Liability that, under the applicable
legal framework the business risk of the Concession had to be assumed by the
Concessionaire, because this assumption would allegedly have shifted the financing risk of
the Concession to the State. In this regard, the Committee notes that Dr. Deep set out the
features of immediate liquidity relief as envisaged in Resolution 602/99, which include the
following: “[T]he intention of liquidity relief is the provision of short-term relief to help the
Concessionaire surmount the adverse short-term impact of the change in the Convertibility
law. The long-term impact of the change in parity is a financing risk that would remain with
the Concessionaire.”**’ Dr. Deep then explained why he considered a one-year interest-free
loan to be in line with this feature. Specifically with regard to the financing risk; he stated:
“Financing risk is a business risk that should remain with the Concessionaire in the longer
term. Therefore we have postulated that the amount of liquidity relief provided to AASA in
2002 in the but-for scenario would be paid back by AASA in 2003.”?°*

In its Award, the Tribunal found that Dr. Deep’s proposal of a one-year interest-free loan
appeared to be “a reasonable and constructive device within the spirit and intent to the
Resolution 602/99 to enable AASA to avoid defaulting on its debt obligations at least cost to
Argentina.” It then gave detailed reasons for its finding, including the ones summarized at
paragraph 379 above, and concluded that “the fulfillment by Argentina of its obligation of
fair and equitable treatment would in all probability have fostered cooperation between the
parties to achieve a solution of the kind suggested by Dr. Deep’s Model.”**°

385 Cf, Award, 1 54.

386 Award, (31.

387 Exhibit A/C-34, 79 lit. b.
388 Exhibit A/C-34, J 82.

38 Award, (9 47-53.

109

384.

385.

386.

387.

The Committee again finds that, while the concrete form of immediate liquidity relief
assumed by Dr. Deep may not have been the only possible solution the Tribunal could have
adopted in its but-for scenario, it does appear to be a reasonable and balanced scenario for
all the reasons given by the Tribunal in its Award. Consequently, the Committee finds that
by adopting these concrete assumptions, the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers
nor make contradictory findings.

(c) Total Repayment of Sponsored Debt

Respondent further alleges that the Tribunal exceeded its powers and contradicted its earlier
findings when it decided in its Award that AASA’s guaranteed debt: (i) was a protected
investment under the BITs; and (ii) would have been repaid (entirely) in the but-for scenario.

(i) Sponsored Debt as Protected Investment under the BITs

First, there is a dispute as to whether the Tribunal would have had to (expressly) determine
in its Decision on Jurisdiction that the sponsored debt was an investment protected by the
BIT, which it did not, or whether it was sufficient to make such a finding in its Award.”
Claimants point out that in the underlying proceedings Respondent never objected to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction in this regard, even though Claimants argued as early as in their
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction that “shares and other forms of participation in the
Concession” formed part of their investments under the BITs. They specifically argued that,
inter alia, their “other forms of participation in AASA, i.e. as lenders, guarantors in support
of AASA’s financial obligations (Debt Supporter), and Suez’s participation also as
operator, are all ‘investments’ under the terms of the French Treaty” or in the case of
AGBAR, “‘investments’ under the terms of the Spanish Treaty.”*?! Claimants further note
that they consistently sought damages in respect of this investment and that Respondent
never argued that the Tribunal did not have power to award such damages but rather that
Argentina did not owe anything because these losses resulted from the alleged riskiness of
Claimants’ investment.

Respondent does not dispute that it never raised an objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
on Claimants’ claims for damages regarding AASA’s secured debt. However, it claims that
if the Tribunal considered that the sponsored debt formed part of Claimants’ investment, it
would have had to take an affirmative decision on its own motion on this aspect of its

30 Cf Award, 1 67.
391 Exhibit A/C-33, {] 6(b), 8(b)(ii) and (iii) (emphasis in original).

110

388.

389.

390.

391.

jurisdiction in order to enable the Parties to align their arguments in the subsequent phases
of the proceedings with the scope of Claimants’ investment as found by the Tribunal.

The Committee notes that, while it generally agrees with the statement of the tribunal in
Wintershall v. Argentina quoting the ICJ that a court or tribunal “must always examine

proprio motu the question of its own jurisdiction,”**?

there is no requirement in the ICSID
Convention that such decision be taken in a preliminary decision on jurisdiction. It is clear
from both the structure and the contents of the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction that its
findings therein were limited to the six objections to jurisdiction that Respondent had raised
before the Tribunal. It did not, however, state that it thereby explicitly confine the scope of

its jurisdiction to the items discussed in this Decision.

In addition, Rule 41(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides that an objection to
jurisdiction shall be made “as early as possible” but in any event “no later than the
expiration of the time limit fixed for the filing of the counter-memorial, or, if the objection
relates to an ancillary claim, for the filing of the rejoinder.” As pointed out by Claimants,
they argued already in their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction that AASA’s sponsored debt
formed part of their investment. Therefore, it would have been for Respondent to raise any
objection it may have had on this point in its subsequent submission. As it undisputedly
failed to do so, Respondent cannot now be heard with its belated argument that the Tribunal
did not have power to award damages for AASA’s sponsored debt.

In any event, Respondent does not dispute that the merits of Claimants’ claim for losses
incurred in connection with the sponsored debt were extensively argued before the Tribunal,
again without Respondent raising the argument that the Tribunal did not have power to do
so. Thus, Respondent’s suggestion that the lack of an express affirmation in the Decision on
Jurisdiction prevented it from making submissions on this matter has no merit.

(ii) (Full) Repayment of Sponsored Debt

There is a further dispute between the Parties as to whether the Tribunal’s finding in its
Award that Respondent had to pay damages for the costs Claimants incurred to extinguish
their debt guarantee obligations contradicted its earlier findings that: (i) pursuant to the

32 AL A RA 95, {67-68 (emphasis in original).

id

392.

393.

394.

Concession Contract, the financial risk was assumed by the Concessionaire;>”? and (ii) loans
payable in US dollars presented a financial risk to AASA.*%*

The Committee notes that Respondent advanced the argument that the risk of dollar-
denominated loans was for AASA and Claimants to bear before the Tribunal, which dealt
with this argument in its Award. First, the Tribunal found that the alleged high riskiness of
financing AASA’s operations with US-dollar denominated loans despite the fact that its
revenues were entirely in Argentine pesos did not exclude sponsored debt from the
protection of the BITs. While acknowledging that it is “totally appropriate and is standard
practice in finance and in law” to take into account risk in valuing the loss of an investment,
the Tribunal emphasized:

“[With respect to the payments on guaranteed debts, the Tribunal is not

seeking to value an investment in AASA made by the Claimants in the past

but rather it is seeking to actualize to the present time the amount of known,
liquidated, actual losses sustained by each Claimant in the past.”

The Tribunal thus concluded that, as Claimants would not have been required to make any
guarantee payments if Respondent had accorded fair and equitable treatment to Claimants’

investments, their losses were “a direct consequence of Argentina’s treaty violations.”**>

In light of this explanation, the Committee finds that there is no contradiction between the
Tribunal’s finding on the allocation of financial risk to AASA and its investors on the one
hand, and its decision to award damages for the costs incurred by Claimants in connection
with sponsored debt on the other. By doing the latter, the Tribunal did not shift the financial
risk to the Argentine State, as alleged by Respondent, but it rather compensated Claimants
for losses they would not have incurred if Respondent had observed its Treaty obligations.
In other words, Respondent’s Treaty violations do not represent a materialization of any
financial risk to be borne by the Concessionaire but rather a breach of international law
whose consequences were to be compensated by the award of damages rendered by the
Tribunal.

The Committee is aware of the additional argument raised by Respondent that the
assumption of a total repayment of the sponsored debt in the but-for scenario ignored the
Parties’ submissions and Dr. Deep’s projections on whether a potential tariff review would
have made such repayment possible. As the assumption that AASA would have been able to

383 Decision on Liability, {{[ 106, 113.
34 Award, 160.
385 Award, {1 66-67.

112

395.

396.

fully repay its sponsored debt is based on the further assumption discussed above that it
would have been granted liquidity relief in the form of a one-year interest-free loan by
Respondent, the Committee refers to its conclusion above that this concrete form of liquidity
relief as assumed by the Tribunal appears to be a reasonable and balanced scenario under the
circumstances. The same must then apply to the consequential assumption that this relief
would have enabled AASA to fully repay its sponsored debt and, thus, that Claimants would
not have incurred any costs in having to make repayments in their capacity as guarantors of
such debt in the but-for scenario.

Finally, the Committee notes Respondent’s argument that it was contradictory for the
Tribunal to award compensation to Claimants for the losses they incurred but not to afford
the same treatment to Argentina in relation to payments it made, allegedly in an identical
capacity, as a guarantor of a debt incurred by AASA, to the IDB. The Committee notes,
however, that Respondent raised the argument that the payments it made should be deducted
from Claimants’ damages before the Tribunal, which dealt with this argument in its Award.
Specifically, the Tribunal noted that the loan in question had been made to Argentina in 1989
and while AASA, as part of the privatization process of the Buenos Aires water and sewage
systems, had agreed to reimburse such payments to Argentina, the State remained liable on
that loan obligation to the IDB. As Respondent had not advanced any principle of
international law supporting its contention, the Tribunal “reject[ed] Argentina’s claim that
the amounts that it paid on a pre-existing IDB loan for which it was primarily liable should
be deducted from any compensation that the Tribunal might award to the Claimants.” It
further added that if Respondent had observed its Treaty obligations, AASA would also have
been able to service the IDB loan repayments; thus, “to reduce the amount of the
compensation awarded to the Claimants for their losses on sponsored debt would amount to
denying the Claimants full compensation, as required by international law, and amount to

allowing Argentina to benefit from the violation of its treaty obligations.”*°°

In the Committee’s view, it is apparent that, contrary to what Respondent suggests,
Argentina did not make the payments to the IDB in a capacity identical to that of the
shareholders in AASA on the sponsored debt because, in that case, the State was rather the
primary debtor that remained liable to the IDB even after the privatization process.
Therefore, the Committee sees no contradiction in making a distinction between the two
situations. In addition, the Tribunal held that AASA’s non-ability to service the
reimbursements to Respondent was a direct consequence of Respondent’s Treaty

396 Award, (91 69-70.

113

397.

398.

399.

400.

401.

obligations, which was a further reason for not awarding Respondent any compensation for
the payments it had incurred without being reimbursed by AASA.

Consequently, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers
and did not fail to state reasons for its decision to award damages for the losses Claimants
incurred by having to repay AASA’s sponsored debt.

(d) Conclusion on the Modeling of the But-For Scenario

In conclusion, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did not formulate the but-for scenario
in an obvious contradiction to the applicable legal framework or Resolution 602/99 and
therefore did not manifestly exceed its powers nor did it fail to state reasons for its decision.

ii. Interest Rate Applied by the Tribunal

Respondent claims that the Tribunal acted ultra petita and thus exceeded its powers because
it applied interest at a rate that was, allegedly, higher than the interest rate agreed by the

Parties’ experts during the proceedings.*””

Claimants do not dispute that the Parties agreed “at an earlier stage of the proceedings” on
the use of the US Treasury Bill rate but note that they later accepted Dr. Deep’s proposal to
use the Eurodollar rate that was ultimately applied by the Tribunal.*** Specifically,
Claimants point to their Comments on the Preliminary Report of the Financial Expert to the
Tribunal where they stated that “[a]/though Dr. Deep’s interest rates are, on average, lower,
the Claimants do not object to their application.”*? Claimants further emphasize that
Respondent also commented on the Eurodollar rate in its Comments on the Final Report of
Dr. Deep and requested that the Tribunal redirect him to use the US Treasury Bill rate.4°° In
addition, Claimants argue that the determination of the interest rate was in any event within
the scope of the Tribunal’s “/arge margin of discretion” on this point.*°!

In any event, Claimants dispute that the Eurodollar rate applied by the Tribunal results, on
average, in a higher interest amount than the US Treasury Bill rate requested by Respondent.
During the hearing, Respondent presented a calculation pursuant to which the interest rate
proposed by Dr. Deep yielded an average of 2.47% between 2006 and 2012, while the

391 Cf. Transcript (Day 2), p. 280 lines 17-22.
38 Claimants’ Rejoinder, 72.

3 Exhibit A/C-32, { 8.

400 Exhibit A/C-31, ] 83.

401 Cf, AICLA-30, 1.96.

114

402.

403.

404.

interest rate proposed by the Parties’ experts yielded an average of 1.77% during the same
time period.* Claimants claimed, however, that Respondent’s calculation is “inaccurate,
and it misrepresents what Dr. Deep actually did, and it misrepresents what the U.S. T-bill
rate actually is.”* They further presented a calculation pursuant to which Claimants’ losses
as of November 2014 were in fact lower when updated using the Eurodollar rate (USD 404.5
million) than when updated using the US Treasury Bill rate (USD 419.1 million).4%

In light of the above, the Committee cannot agree with Respondent’s argument that the
Tribunal acted ultra petita. First, the Committee considers that Respondent has not
sufficiently established that the amount of interest awarded by the Tribunal was indeed
higher than that sought by Claimants. Second, the Committee considers that in light of
Claimants’ acceptance of the Eurodollar rate in their comments on Dr. Deep’s Preliminary
Report, they included a request for interest calculated by using the Eurodollar rate in their
request for relief, which in any event excluded an act of ultra petita on the part of the
Tribunal in this regard.

Therefore, the Committee does not have to express an opinion on the more general question
whether a tribunal could be considered to have acted ultra petita, and thus have manifestly
exceeded its powers, by awarding interest at a rate that ultimately yielded an amount higher
than that sought by the claimant.

c. Management Contract

Finally, Respondent alleges that the Tribunal exceeded its powers and failed to state reasons
for its decision to award to Suez damages for unpaid management fees from 2002 up to the
regular end of the concession period in 2023. Respondent argues that: (i) the Tribunal failed
to determine in its Decision on Jurisdiction that such fees were a protected investment under
the BITs; (ii) the Tribunal awarded damages for services that were never rendered, given
that Respondent terminated the Concession Contract in 2006; and (iii) the Tribunal failed to
assess the legal nature of Suez’s claim, even though a classification would have been
essential for the calculation of such claim.

42 Argentina’s Rebuttal Statement dated 9 November 2016, slide 68.
493 Transcript (Day 2), p. 348 line 22 - p. 349 line 2.
404 Claimants’ Responses to the Committee’s Questions, slide 33.

115

405.

406.

407.

i. Management Contract as Protected Investment under the BIT

As to Respondent’s first argument, it is undisputed that the Tribunal did not determine in its
Decision on Jurisdiction that the Management Contract or Suez’s services rendered under
this Contract formed part of Suez’s investment protected by the BIT. The Committee further
notes that Respondent raised the argument that the Management Contract was not an
investment protected by the BIT and that the damages phase was in any event not the
appropriate stage to make such determination already before the Tribunal, which dealt with
this argument in its Award. It held that Suez’s claim for unpaid management fees was
justified because “the management Contract ... was an integral part of Suez’s investment in
AASA as covered by the BIT and the ICSID Convention.” The Tribunal noted that the
applicable legal framework required that at least one substantial shareholder be designated
as the Concession’s Operator and, thus, “[a] management contract was a sine qua non for
any group seeking to invest in AASA.”*°> Based on this finding, the Tribunal held:

“The Management Contract being an integral part of the Claimants’

investment, there is no need to review whether the Management Contract

in and of itself constitutes an investment for the purposes of the ICSID

Convention and the France-Argentina BIT. For the sake of completeness,

the Tribunal nevertheless notes that the Management Contract falls within

the definitions given to that word by the applicable BIT in this case and by

tribunals interpreting the ICSID Convention ...”4°°
In light of this explanation given by the Tribunal, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did
not exceed its powers by finding in the Award that the Management Contract formed part of
Suez’s investment. While it appears that Claimants did not present the Management Contract
as part of Suez’s investment in the jurisdictional phase, Suez did raise its claim for unpaid
fees in Claimants’ first Memorial and Respondent apparently did not raise a jurisdictional
objection in this regard. Consequently, the Tribunal did not deal with this issue in its
Decision on Jurisdiction nor in its Decision on Liability but only later in the damages phase,
when the Parties also debated the merits of Suez’s claim.

ii. Damages for Services That Were Never Rendered

As to Respondent’s second argument that the Tribunal awarded damages for services that
were never rendered, i.e., fees that Suez would have received after 2006, the Committee
notes that this argument again relates to the construction of the but-for scenario and in

405 Award, | 75.
406 Award, | 76.

116

408.

409.

410.

411.

particular the Tribunal’s decision to exclude the termination of the Concession Contract from
both valuation scenarios. In this regard, the Committee refers to its considerations above as
to why the Tribunal did not commit an annullable error in constructing the valuation
scenarios in this manner.

For the same reasons and also taking into account that the legal framework of the Concession
required that the services be provided by a substantial shareholder of the Concessionaire, it
was reasonable to assume from a perspective of 2002 that Suez would have continued to
render its services to AASA and to be remunerated by AASA for these services up to the
regular end of the concession period in 2023. Consequently, it was consistent for the Tribunal
to award damages for Suez’s lost profits over the entire remaining concession period.

iii. Failure to Assess the Legal Nature of Suez’s Claim

With regard to Respondent’s third argument that the Tribunal failed to determine the legal
nature of Suez’s claim even though this would have been essential for its calculation, the
Committee notes that Dr. Deep in his Final Report indeed posed the question whether the
management fees should be considered a return on investment or a payment for services
under a management contract.*” He further noted that “[i]f Management Fees are indeed
viewed as a component of the expected return on the investors’ equity investment, that would
distort the benchmarks related to risk and return (such as leverage, beta, cost of debt) that
are used to arrive at an estimate of a fair rate of return for AASA.”4°8

Dr. Deep then stated that if the management fees were considered compensation for services
provided by Suez, they “ought to be considered similar to fees payable to any other service
provider’ and “could represent (perhaps performance-linked) compensation for the
intangible assets that Suez’s expertise is bringing to AASA.” Dr. Deep concluded:

“[U]nder this perspective, we find the claim for lost Management Fees to

be distinct from those related to the equity and debt sponsorship stakes of

the Claimants in AASA. We find the claim to be more akin to the claims of

any other service providers for lost revenues from the provision of services

that it expected to provide in the future.”*°

In its Award, the Tribunal acknowledged that “Dr. Deep was unsure of the legal status of
the claim for management fees and therefore computed them on a contingent basis in his

407 Exhibit A/C-34, 427 lit. b and lit. c.
408 Exhibit A/C-34, | 429.
40 Exhibit A/C-34, | 430.

117

412.

Final Report.”*!° The Tribunal then held that “the management Contract was not a separate
transaction ... but was an integral part of Suez’s investment in AASA as covered by the BIT
and the ICSID Convention” given that the legal framework required that a substantial
investor serve as Technical Operator of the Concession. As noted by the Tribunal, this
requirement was intended to ensure Argentina that the Concessionaire “would not only invest
the necessary financial resources, but would also provide [the] essential, intangible assets”
associated with the management of the water and sewage systems.*!! Having noted this
particular nature of the Management Contract, the Tribunal further found:

“... [G]iven the nature of [the] responsibilities [of the Operator] and the

importance of the Concession and to the future of the water and sewage

systems of Buenos Arise of the transfer of modern management and

technology, things that the system clearly lacked in the past, it was natural

and appropriate that Suez be compensated for what it was to provide and

that such compensation be additional to the profits it would make as an

AASA shareholder. The Tribunal therefore concludes that the loss on

management fees is an appropriate item to be considered in awarding

compensation to Suez on account of Argentina’s failure to accord it the

promised treatment under the France-Argentina BIT. ...”*'*

The Tribunal then considered the quantum of Suez’s loss, in particular in terms of priority
in AASA’s income stream, applicability of the contractual penalty interest rate, and timing
of the conversion of the payments in Argentine pesos into US dollars. Except for one
assumption in the context of actualizing Suez’s claim, the Tribunal followed the calculation
presented by Dr. Deep in his Final Report.*!*

In the Committee’s view, the Tribunal’s finding that the Management Contract constituted
“an integral part of Suez’s investment” does not necessarily indicate that the Tribunal
considered the fees a return on investment, as claimed by Respondent. More specifically, the
Committee considers that this finding did not relate to the classification of the management
fees as questioned by Dr. Deep but rather to Respondent’s jurisdictional argument discussed
above, i.e., that the Management Contract was not a protected investment under the BIT and
that the Tribunal would have had to make such determination at an earlier stage.

410 Award, 174.
44 Award, M75, 71.
422 Award, 1 78.
413 Award, I 79-83.

118,

413.

414.

Als.

416.

It is also important to recall that the determination of the legal nature of the fees was not an
end in itself and that this issue gained relevance only by virtue of Dr. Deep’s statement that
aclassification as a return on investment would “compromise the logic of using benchmarks”
to arrive at a fair rate of return of AASA and thus the calculation he had provided on
Claimants’ equity stakes.*'+ Consequently, the Committee does not consider it decisive that
the Tribunal did not explicitly answer the questions raised by Dr. Deep in his Final Report
and, in particular, failed to make an express determination on the fees’ legal nature. The
Tribunal explicitly recognized that Dr. Deep had been “unsure of the legal status” of Suez’s
claim and had therefore computed it “on a contingent basis.’*'> As the Tribunal then
expressly adopted Dr. Deep’s calculation made on this basis (except for one assumption in
the context of actualizing the claim with which it disagreed), it can reasonably be inferred
that the Tribunal (implicitly) also followed Dr. Deep’s “contingent” classification as a
payment for services.

Consequently, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers
nor did it fail to state reasons for its decision to award to Suez separate damages for unpaid
management fees as of 2002 up to the end of the concession period in 2023.

Conclusion

In conclusion, the Committee finds that Respondent did not establish that the Tribunal
committed an annullable error in its assessment of damages, more specifically, that it
manifestly exceeded its powers or failed to state reasons for its decision. Consequently,
Respondent’s fourth annulment ground is dismissed.

Overall Conclusion

The Committee has found that Respondent has failed to establish either of the four annulment
grounds it advanced in its Application for Annulment. Consequently, Respondent’s request
for annulment of the Award as well as the Decision on Jurisdiction and the Decision on
Liability, which are an integral part thereof, is denied.

414 Of Exhibit A/C-34, 1 429.
415 Award, 74.

119

VII.

417.

B.
418.

COST DECISION

Argentina’s Statement of Costs

Pursuant to its Statement of Costs dated 2 December 2016, Respondent has incurred the
following costs in connection with this annulment proceeding:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

DESCRIPTION DOLLARS (USD)
ICSID Costs 525,000.00
Treasury Attorney-General’s Office personnel costs 552,322.51
Airline tickets, hotel and travel expenses 60,661.00
Experts 12,015.34
Translations 6,626.10
Courier 2,742.00
Stationery 2,100.00
Communication expenses 150.00
TOTAL USD 1,161,616.95

 

 

 

 

Claimants’ Statement of Costs

Pursuant to Annex A of their Statement of Costs dated 3 December 2016, Claimants have
incurred the following total costs in connection with this annulment proceeding:

 

 

 

 

 

Legal Fees and Disbursements Totals
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer USD 1,769,602.96
Claimants In-House USD 816.00
EUR 2,614.84
Total USD 1,770,418.96
EUR 2,614.84

 

 

 

120

419.

c.

420.

421.

422.

Pursuant to Annex B of Claimants’ Statement of Costs, the total amount of USD 1,769,602.96
representing the fees and disbursements of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP includes the
following disbursements:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Expenses Totals

Travel USD 12,116.34
Legal Research USD 413.83
Courier USD 6,730.16
Translations USD 16,582.99
Printing USD 18,776.56
Total USD 54,619.88

 

 

 

 

Committee’s Decision

Pursuant to Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention, Chapter VI of the Convention, including
its Article 61(2), shall apply mutatis mutandis to the proceedings before this Committee.
Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

“In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the
parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in
connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those
expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the
charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. ...”

Regulation 14(3)(e) of the ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations further provides

that in annulment proceedings:

. the applicant shall be solely responsible for making the advance
payments requested by the Secretary-General to cover expenses following
the constitution of the Committee, and without prejudice to the right of the
Committee in accordance with Article 52(4) of the Convention to decide
how and by whom expenses incurred in connection with the annulment
proceeding shall be paid.”

In accordance with these provisions, Respondent, as the Party seeking annulment of the
Award, has up to date been responsible for making all the advance payments to cover the
costs of the Committee and the Centre. However, the Committee has discretion to decide on

121

423.

424,

425.

426.

the final allocation of these costs of the proceeding, as well as of the costs incurred by the
Parties in respect of their legal representation in this annulment proceeding.

Claimants request that the Committee order Respondent to bear the costs of the proceeding
as well as Claimants’ legal costs and expenses in full based on the following arguments: (i)
costs should presumptively follow the event in annulment proceedings — a presumption that
has frequently been applied by annulment committees in the past; and (ii) Respondent should

be discouraged from filing future “abusive” requests for annulment.*!°

Respondent, on the other hand, requests that each Party should bear the costs incurred by
them in relation to the proceeding and that the costs of the proceeding, including the fees
payable to the members of the Committee, should be borne by both sides equally.
Respondent presents the following arguments: (i) the present case “involves issues of
undeniable complexity,” and in such cases, ICSID tribunals and committees that have heard
disputes involving Argentina “have generally concluded” as requested by Respondent; and
(ii) in filing its Application for Annulment, Respondent has exercised its legitimate right
granted by the ICSID Convention, which is “far from constituting an act carried out in bad

faith or an abusive conduct.”*"7

In respect of the allocation of costs, the Committee notes that the ICSID Background Paper
on Annulment records the following development in recent ICSID jurisprudence:

“\.. While ad hoc Committees in the past usually divided the Costs of

Proceeding equally between the parties and ruled that each party bear its

own legal fees and expenses, in recent years, a majority of Committees

have decided that the Applicant should bear all or a majority of the Costs

of Proceeding when the application for annulment was unsuccessful. Some

ad hoc Committees have also ruled that the losing party should bear the

legal fees and expenses of the successful party, in most instances the

defending party.”*"8
The Committee further notes that both Parties refer in their submissions to the annulment
decision in CDC Group v. Seychelles, where the committee held that it was appropriate to
order the respondent as the unsuccessful applicant to bear the costs of the proceeding as well
as the legal fees and expenses incurred by the claimant in connection with the annulment
proceeding based on the following reasons:

416 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, {| 178-184; Claimants’ Rejoinder, ${]130-134.
417 Argentina’s Reply, $1 221-226.
418 A/CLA-91, 4 65.

122

427.

428.

429.

“\..[W]e must be mindful of our determination, founded upon careful
consideration of all arguments advanced by the parties in this proceeding,
that the Republic’s case before this Committee was fundamentally lacking
in merit. While we refrain from going so far as to say that it was frivolous,
we can state unequivocally that, taking into account the presumption of
finality in ICSID arbitration and the restrictive grounds of challenge
available in annulment process, the Republic’s case was, to any reasonable
and impartial observer, most unlikely to succeed.”*!°

The CDC committee’s finding and the corresponding threshold for a cost order, i.e., a case
that is “fundamentally lacking in merit” and is, “to any reasonable and impartial observer,
most unlikely to succeed,” was also referred to, e.g., by the committees in EDF v. Argentina
and Daimler v. Argentina.*”° At the same time, however, it has to be noted that both the EDF
committee and the Daimler committee concluded, respectively, that, while this threshold
was not met in the case they had to decide and each side thus was to bear the legal costs it
incurred, Argentina was to bear the entire costs of the proceeding it had advanced because
each of its annulment grounds was rejected.*?!

The same conclusion, distinguishing between costs of the proceeding and legal costs
incurred by the parties, was reached by the committees in Impregilo v. Argentina and El
Paso v. Argentina based on the consideration that, on the one hand, Argentina’s application
was rejected in its entirety but, on the other hand, its application could not be considered
“frivolous” and in El Paso, the committee even considered that it was “entirely legitimate
for Argentina to raise some of the issues in which it based its request for annulment of the
Award.”4?

The Committee is aware that Respondent referred to four annulment decisions involving
Argentina that ordered each side to bear its own legal costs and half of the costs of the
proceeding, as requested by Respondent. In two of those cases, however, i.e., Enron and
CMS Gas, the committees decided to partially annul the award, respectively.*”? In a third
case, i.e., Continental Casualty, the committee had to decide on applications for annulment
from both sides and rejected both of them.*** Finally, the committee in Vivendi IJ indeed

419 AL A RA 53,789.

20 AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, {J 389-390; A/CLA-43, J 309.
#1 AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, { 391; A/CLA-43, {]] 306-307.
2 A/CLA-42/ AL A RA 34, { 221; AL A RA 35, 290.

#3 AL A RA 33; ALA RA 31.

4 AL A RA 82, J 285.

123

430.

431.

432.

rejected Argentina’s application and decided as requested by Respondent, albeit without

giving any reasons for its decision on costs.*?>

Having reviewed additional cases involving Argentina, the Committee notes that two other
committees that heard annulment applications filed by Argentina and fully rejected them
ordered Argentina to bear the entire costs of the proceeding, with each side bearing their own
legal costs. Specifically, this was the case in Total and Azurix.*”® In addition, as noted in the
ICSID Background Paper of Annulment, this approach has been applied more frequently in
recent ICSID jurisprudence, including several cases that were discussed in this annulment
proceeding, such as: Tulip v. Turkey, Caratube v. Kazakhstan, SGS v. Paraguay, Libananco
v. Turkey and Duke Energy v. Peru.*?’ At the same time, there are also cases in which the
committees decided as requested by Respondent in the present case, in particular: Occidental
v. Ecuador, Rumeli v. Karakhstan and Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates.*8

Taking into account the not yet settled ICSID jurisprudence on this issue, the Committee
will now exercise its discretion under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention to decide on
an appropriate allocation of costs in the present proceedings. In this regard, the Committee
cannot agree with Claimants that Respondent’s Application for Annulment “Jacks even the
slightest merits” and has to be considered “tactical” and “abusive.”*”° In the Committee’s
view, such a conclusion cannot be drawn simply because Argentina has also filed annulment
applications in other ICSID cases in which it has been involved. Considering that the ICSID
Convention explicitly provides for the right to seek annulment and also taking into account
that some of Argentina’s applications have been (partially) successful, the Committee is not
convinced that there is any illegitimacy in Respondent’s motives to seek annulment in the
present case and, specifically, that Respondent has advanced its Application for Annulment
in bad faith or based on tactical, abusive considerations.

In particular as regards the annulment ground advanced by Respondent in connection with
the appointment of Prof. Kaufmann Kohler to the UBS Board of Directors, the Committee
agrees with the cost consideration of the EDF committee, which had to decide on the same
ground and based on very similar arguments, that Argentina’s application was “advanced in

good faith and ... based on arguments that were generally plausible.” Likewise, the

25 AL A RA 67, fff 268-269.

26 A/CLA-68, 324; AL A RA 84/ A/CLA-69, ff 379-380.

27 A/CLA-90, 19 230-231; AL A RA 30, { 307; A/CLA-46, {| 153; A/CLA-95, 19] 225-226; A/CLA-31, 1 265, 268.
28 AL A RA 90, { 589; A/CLA-32, | 184; AL A RA 61, 1 138.

“29 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial, ff 178, 182; Claimants’ Rejoinder, { 130.

124

433.

434.

Committee considers that the following consideration of the EDF committee is also justified
in the present case: “[T]he fact that the Committee has dealt with Argentina’s arguments at
such length is an indication that it does not consider that they were doomed to failure from
the outset.”**° The Committee also considers it noteworthy that the committee in Vivendi II
v. Argentina expressed very specific concerns regarding the conduct of Prof. Kaufmann-
Kohler that formed the basis of an annulment ground on which it had to decide.

As indicated above, this Committee shares some of the concerns voiced by the Vivendi IT
committee and therefore concludes that Argentina’s Application for Annulment cannot be
considered to be “fundamentally lacking in merit” or, “to any reasonable and impartial
observer, most unlikely to succeed.” Exercising its discretion, the Committee thus sees no
justification for ordering Respondent to bear the legal costs and expenses Claimants have
incurred in connection with this annulment proceeding.

As regards the costs of the proceeding, the Committee agrees with the recent trend in ICSID
jurisprudence that it is generally reasonable for a party whose application has been rejected
in its entirety to bear the costs of the proceeding in full. In the Committee’s view, there are
no special circumstances that would warrant a different conclusion in the present case.
Therefore, the Committee decides that Respondent shall bear all costs of the proceeding,
consisting of the fees and expenses of the members of the Committee and the charges for the
use of the facilities of the Centre. As Respondent has advanced the entire amount of the costs
of the proceeding pursuant to Regulation 14(3)(e) of the ICSID Administrative and Financial

Regulations, no reimbursement order is required.**!

430 AL A RA 70/ A/CLA-61, { 390.
43! The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed Financial Statement of the case account once all
invoices are received and the account is final.

125

VIII. DECISION
435. For the reasons referred to above, the Committee issues the following decision:

1. Respondent’s request for annulment of the Award rendered on 9 April 2015,
in ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19, Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de
Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. The Argentine Republic is
denied.

2. Each Party shall bear its own legal costs and expenses incurred in connection
with this annulment proceeding.

3. Respondent shall bear the total costs of the proceeding, consisting of the fees
and expenses of the members of the Committee and the charges for the use of
the ICSID facilities.

4. All other requests by the Parties are dismissed.

126

[Signed] [Signed]

Sir Trevor A. Carmichael Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno B.
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee
April 18, 2017 April 24, 2017
[Signed]

Prof. Dr. Klaus Sachs
President of the ad hoc Committee

May 2, 2017

127

