International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Washington, D.C.

In the proceedings between
Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and InterAguas Servicios Integrales
del Agua S.A.
(Claimants)
and

The Argentine Republic
(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Jeswald W. Salacuse, President
Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Arbitrator
Professor Pedro Nikken, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Representing the Claimants Representing the Respondent
Messrs. Nigel Blackaby and Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino
Lluis Paradell and Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacion Argentina
Ms. Noiana Marigo Dr. Jorge Barraguirre
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP Dr. Ignacio Torterola

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina
Buenos Aires
Reptiblica Argentina

Date of Decision: May 16, 2006

lad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

  
 

L Procedure

1. On April 17, 2003, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or “the Centre”) received a Request for Arbitration (“the Request”) against the
Argentine Republic (“the Respondent” or “Argentina”) from Aguas Provinciales de Santa
Fe S.A. (“APSF”), Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. (“AGBAR”) and
InterAguas Servicios Integrales del Agua S.A. (“InterAguas” together, “the Claimants”).
APSF is a company incorporated in Argentina. Suez, incorporated in France, and
AGBAR and InterAguas, both incorporated in Spain, were major shareholders in APSF.
The Request concerned the Claimants’ investments in a concession for water distribution
and waste water treatment in the Argentine Province of Santa Fe and a series of alleged
acts and omissions by Argentina, including Argentina’s alleged failure or refusal to apply

previously agreed adjustments to the tariff calculation and adjustment mechanisms. !

2. In the Request, the Claimants invoked Argentina’s consent to dispute settlement
through ICSID arbitration provided in the 1991 Bilateral Investment Treaty between
France and the Argentine Republic (the “Argentina—France BIT”)? and in the 1991
Bilateral Investment Treaty between the Argentine Republic and the Kingdom of Spain

(the “Argentina-Spain BIT”).>

3. On April 17, 2003, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (Institution
Rules), acknowledged receipt and transmitted a copy of the Request to the Argentine

Republic and to the Argentine Embassy in Washington D.C.

4. On July 17, 2003, the Acting Secretary-General of the Centre registered the
Request, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (the “ICSID Convention” or “the
Convention”). The case was registered as ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17 with the formal
heading of Aguas Provinciales de Santa Fe S.A., Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de

Barcelona S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales del Agua S.A. v. Argentine Republic.*

lad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

  
 

On that same date, the Acting Secretary-General, in accordance with Institution Rule 7,
notified the parties of the registration of the Request and invited them to proceed, as soon

as possible, to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal.

5. The parties could not reach an agreement on the number of arbitrators to comprise
the arbitral tribunal nor on the method for their appointment. Accordingly, on 22
September 2003, the Claimants requested the Tribunal to be constituted in accordance
with the formula set forth in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention; i.e. one arbitrator
appointed by each party, and the third arbitrator, who would serve as president of the
tribunal, to be appointed by agreement of the parties. The Claimants appointed Professor
Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, a Swiss national, as arbitrator. The Argentine Republic in

turn appointed as arbitrator Professor Pedro Nikken, a national of Venezuela.

6. In the absence of an agreement between the parties on the name of the presiding
arbitrator, on October 21, 2003 the Claimants, invoking Article 38 of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 4 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
(Arbitration Rules), requested the Centre to make this appointment. With the agreement
of both parties, the Centre appointed Professor Jeswald W. Salacuse, a national of the

United States of America, as the President of the Tribunal.

7. On February 17, 2004, the Deputy Secretary-General of ICSID, in accordance
with ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1), notified the parties that all three arbitrators had
accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to be constituted
and the proceedings to have begun on that date.> On the same date, pursuant to ICSID
Administrative and Financial Regulation 25, the parties were informed that Mr. Gonzalo

Flores, Senior Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal.

8. Under ICSID Arbitration Rule 13, the Tribunal shall hold its first session within
60 days after its constitution or such other period as the parties may agree. The parties

could not agree on a suitable date for the first session within the prescribed time limits.

lad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

epublic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 
  

The Tribunal accordingly held its first session without the parties via telephone

conference on April 19, 2004.

9. On June 7, 2004, the Tribunal held a session with the parties at the seat of the
Centre in Washington, D.C. During the session the parties confirmed their agreement
that the Tribunal had been properly constituted in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules and that they did not have any

objections in this respect.

10. During the session the parties also agreed on a number of procedural matters
reflected in written minutes signed by the President and the Secretary of the Tribunal.®
The Tribunal, after consultation with the parties, fixed the following timetable for the

written and oral pleadings in this case:
(1) Merits (in the event Argentina raised no objections to jurisdiction):

a. The Claimants would file a memorial on the merits within one hundred and
five (105) days from the date of the session, i.e., no later than September 20,
2004;

b. The Respondent would file a counter-memorial on the merits within one
hundred and twenty (120) days from its receipt of the Claimants’ memorial;

c. The Claimants would file a reply on the merits within sixty (60) days from
their receipt of the Respondent’s counter-memorial;

d. The Respondent would file its rejoinder on the merits within sixty (60) days
from its receipt of the Claimants’ reply; and

e. The Tribunal would thereafter hold a hearing on the merits. The Tribunal
envisaged holding this hearing on July 11-20, 2005, which dates the parties

agreed to reserve for this purpose.

(2

Jurisdiction (in the event Argentina raised objections to jurisdiction):

a. If the Respondent decides to file objections to jurisdiction, it would do so
within sixty (60) days from its receipt of the Claimants’ memorial on the
merits;

lad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

  
 

b. Thereafter the proceedings on the merits would be suspended in accordance
with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(3);

c. The Claimants would file their counter-memorial on jurisdiction within sixty
(60) days from their receipt of the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction;
and

d. The Tribunal would thereafter hold a hearing on jurisdiction. The Tribunal
envisaged holding this hearing on May 9, 2005, which date the parties agreed
to reserve for this purpose.

(3) Tf the Tribunal decides that it has jurisdiction or to join the question of jurisdiction
to the merits of the dispute, the proceedings on the merits would be resumed and:

a. The Respondent would have for the filing of its counter-memorial on the
merits the number of days equal to the original one hundred and twenty
(120) less the number of days used for the filing of its objections to
jurisdiction;

b. The Claimants would then file their reply on the merits within sixty (60)

days from their receipt of the Respondent’s counter-memorial;

c. The Respondent would file its rejoinder on the merits within sixty (60) days
from its receipt of the Claimants’ reply; and

d. The Tribunal would then, in consultation with the parties as far as possible,
fix a date for a hearing.

11. In accordance with the agreed timetable, on September 20, 2004, the Claimants
filed their Memorial on the Merits with accompanying documentation. On November 26,

2004 Argentina filed its Memorial with objections to jurisdiction.

12. By letter of December 3, 2004, the Tribunal confirmed the suspension of the
proceedings on the merits in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(3). On

February 1, 2005, the Claimants filed their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction.

13. As agreed upon during the June 7, 2004 session, a hearing on jurisdiction was
held at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. on May 9, 2005. Messrs. Nigel
Blackaby and Lluis Paradell and Ms. Noiana Marigo, from the law firm of Freshfields

Bruckhaus Deringer LLP, Mr. Bernardo Iriberri, from the Buenos Aires-based law firm

lad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

  
 

of Estudio Cardenas Cassagne y Asociados, Messrs. Jean-Paul Minette and Patrice
Herbert from Suez Environment and Mr. Miquel Grifio, from AGBAR, attended the
hearing on behalf of the Claimants. Messrs. Jorge Barraguirre and Ignacio Torterola
from the Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, attended the hearing on behalf
of the Respondent. Also present on behalf of the Respondent were Ms. Liliana
Campomanes from CEARINSA (Comisi6n de Estudio de Arbitrajes Internacionales de la
Provincia de Santa Fe), Mr. Carlos Reyna from the Ente Regulador de Servicios
Sanitarios de la Provincia de Santa Fe and Mr. Félix Lopez Amaya, of the Fiscalia de
Estado of the Province of Cordoba. During the hearing Messrs. Blackaby and Paradell
addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Claimants. Messrs. Barraguirre and Torterola
addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Argentine Republic. The Tribunal posed

questions to the parties, as provided in Rule 32(3) of the Arbitration Rules.

14. On June 22, 2005, a Peticién de Participacién como Amicus Curiae (Petition for
Participation as Amicus Curiae) was submitted to the Tribunal by Fundacidn para el
Desarrollo Sustentable, a Santa Fe-based non-governmental organization, and three
individuals. Following the filing of the Peticidn, the Tribunal invited the parties to file
any observations they may have in this regard, and both parties submitted their views on
this matter. On March 17, 2006, the Tribunal issued an Order in Response to a Petition
for Participation as Amicus Curiae (available online at ICSID’s web site at
www.worldbank.org/icsid) setting out the conditions under which the Tribunal would

consider amicus curiae submissions.’

15. Following the hearing on jurisdiction, the Respondent at various times filed
unsolicited documents and arguments further contesting the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. On
each occasion, the Tribunal requested the Claimants views on these arguments and
documents, and the Claimants totally rejected them each time. Finding that the
Respondent had a full and complete opportunity to present their objections to jurisdiction
in their memorial and oral arguments at the hearing on jurisdiction and finding further
that the arguments presented in these unsolicited filing duplicated those that the

Respondents had submitted in their oral arguments and memorial, the Tribunal by letter

lad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

  
 

of March 24, 2006 requested the parties to refrain from making any new unsolicited

submissions.

16. By letter of January 11, 2006, counsel for the Claimants informed the Tribunal
that APSF “in compliance with a condition imposed by the province of Santa Fe for its
approval of the sale of Claimant Shareholders’ interest in APSF to Alberdi Aguas S.A. ...
has decided to withdraw its claim in the above-referenced arbitration” but that such
withdrawal was expressly without prejudice to the Claimant Shareholders’ claims in this
proceeding. Upon invitation of the Tribunal, the Respondent filed its observations to this
withdrawal by letter of February 8, 2006. The Respondent did not object to the
withdrawal of APSF but requested that APSF provide copies of the minutes of the
shareholders’ meeting (Asamblea de Accionistas de APSF) with respect to the decision
authorizing such withdrawal. At the same time, Respondent advanced further arguments
objecting to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and claiming that APSF’s decision to withdraw
extinguished the claims of the other claimants in this case. At the invitation of the
Tribunal, counsel for APSF provided copies of the minutes of the APSF’s shareholders’
meeting of May 4, 2005 and of the APSF’s board of directors’ meeting of January 10,
2006, authorizing the discontinuance of its claim before this Tribunal. At the same time,
counsel for the Claimants rejected each of the Respondent’s arguments challenging the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction with respect to the other Claimants. The Tribunal provided copies
of these documents to the Respondent and requested its observation concerning APSF’s
withdrawal. By letter of March 31, 2006, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that “...
the Argentine Republic does not oppose the proposed cessation by the Concessionaire...
APSF...” in ICSID arbitration ARB/03/17 (“... la Reptiblica Argentina no se opone al
desistimiento planteado por la[s] Concesionaria[s] APSF...”), (para. 9) but argued that
such withdrawal had legal consequences with respect to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over

the Shareholder Claimants and their claims.

17. In its deliberations on this request, the Tribunal found that neither the ICSID
Convention nor the Rules specifically provide for the withdrawal of one party from an

arbitration proceeding that is to continue thereafter. ICSID Arbitration Rule 44, the

lad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

  
 

provision of closest relevance to the action requested by the Claimant APSF, allows the
discontinuation of an arbitration proceeding at the request of a party when the other party
does not object. But Arbitration Rule 44 by a strict reading of its terms does not apply to
the withdrawal of a single party. Nonetheless, the Tribunal, relying on Article 44 of the
ICSID Convention, which grants ICSID tribunals the power to decide procedural
questions not covered by the Convention or the Rules, concluded that it had the power to
order the discontinuance of proceedings with respect to one party at its request when the
other party did not object. The Tribunal found that permitting such discontinuance in the
conditions presented by this case was in accordance with the basic objective of the ICSID
Convention of facilitating the settlement of investment disputes, of which ICSID
Arbitration Rule 44 is a specific manifestation. It also was of the view that the continued
participation of APSF in this proceeding would serve no useful purpose in bringing about

a fair and correct resolution of the present arbitration.

18. On April 14, 2006, the Tribunal therefore entered Procedural Order No. 1
Concerning the Discontinuance of Proceedings with Respect to Aguas Provinciales de
Santa Fe S.A. (available online at www.worldbank.org/icsid), directing that: (i) the
proceedings in ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17 with respect to the Claimant Aguas
Provinciales de Santa Fe S.A. be discontinued and that the said Claimant Aguas
Provinciales de Santa Fe cease to be a party with effect from April 14, 2006; and (ii) that
the proceedings in ICSID Case No ARB/03/17 continue in all other respects. With
respect to the Respondents arguments that the withdrawal of APSF from the case had
implications for the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the Shareholder Claimants and their
claims, the Tribunal concluded that these objections were more appropriately addressed
in its decision on jurisdiction. They are in fact considered in subsequent sections of the

present decision.

19. The Tribunal has deliberated on the parties’ written submissions on the question
of jurisdiction and on the oral arguments delivered in the course of the May 9, 2005
hearing. Having considered the relevant facts and evidence, the ICSID Convention, the

Argentina-France BIT, the Argentina-Spain BIT, as well as the written and oral

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

submissions of the parties’ representatives, the Tribunal has reached the following

decision on the question of jurisdiction.

IL. Factual Background

20. The Respondent is a federal republic consisting of the autonomous city of Buenos
Aires and twenty-three provinces, one of which is the Province of Santa Fe, located in the
north of the country. From 1980 until 1995, the Province of Santa Fe, through its
Direccién Provincial de Obras Sanitarios (DIPOS), had the responsibility of providing

water and waste water services to the principal urban areas in the Province.*

21. In 1989, Argentina enacted the State Reform Law? that launched a broad program
of privatization by which the Argentine government proposed to transfer to private and
primarily foreign investors the assets, operations, and functions of various designated
State-owned companies and entities. The State Reform Law also invited the country’s
provinces to participate in the privatization process. Subsequently, Argentina took
certain other measures to encourage private and foreign investment. Less than two years
after the State Reform Law, Argentina adopted the Convertibility Law’? by which it tied
or “pegged” the value of the Argentine Peso to the United States Dollar and established a
currency board requiring that the amount of Argentine currency in circulation be
equivalent to the foreign currency reserves held by the State. Starting in 1990, it also
began to conclude bilateral treaties “for the reciprocal promotion and protection of
investments” with various countries. By the year 2000, it had concluded 57 such bilateral
investment treaties, commonly known as BITs, including the July 1991 Argentine-France

BIT and the October 1991 Argentina-Spain BIT.

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

22. Beginning in 1989, almost immediately after the federal government had
launched its privatization program, the Province of Santa Fe took a series of measures to
facilitate the privatization of certain provincial services and entities. Accordingly, Santa
Fe adopted its own Emergency and State Reform Law'! which designated the specific
services and entities to be privatized and defined the rules by which the privatization
would be conducted. The general approach was to enact specific laws for each entity to
be privatized. The Santa Fe Emergency and State Reform Law listed DIPOS as one of
the provincial entities to be privatized, and in 1994 Law No. 11,220 was enacted to
govern the privatization of the water distribution and waste water services in the Province
of Santa Fe. This law provided for an international bidding procedure to enable private
investors to obtain a thirty-year concession for the operation and development of

specified water and waste water systems in the province. A model contract, annexed to

 

the bidding rules, specified certain provisions governing the financial aspects of the
proposed concession, including investment commitments, tariff adjustments, and the
equilibrium to be maintained between the costs of operation and the financial returns to
the eventual successful concessionaire. The Province, in cooperation with the federal
authorities, actively publicized its desire to privatize these systems, preparing and

distributing a prospectus aimed at private investors, both foreign and national.’

23. In response to these measures, Suez (then known as Lyonnaise des Eaux) and
AGBAR, together with Argentine companies Banco de Galicia y Buenos Aires S. A.,
Sociedad Comercial del Plata S. A., and Meller S. A., formed a consortium in January

1995 to participate in the bidding for the concession to operate specified water

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

distribution and waste water systems in the Province of Santa Fe. On August 30, 1995,
this consortium was awarded the concession. Pursuant to the bidding rules, the
consortium on November 8, 1995 formed an Argentine company, Aguas Provinciales de
Santa Fe S.A, (APSF) to hold and operate the concession. On November 27, 1995, APSF
formally concluded a thirty-year concession contract and on December 5, 1995 it
assumed control and management of the water distribution and waste water systems in
the fifteen most important urban areas in the Province of Santa Fe. According to the
Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, by December 31, 2001 APSF had invested a total of
US$ 257.7 million in the concession, consisting of US$60 million in APSF’s initial
capital, US$67.3 million of cash flows generated by APSF, and US$130.4 million

primarily from the international financial market. 8

24. In 1999, the Argentine Republic began to experience a severe economic and
financial crisis that had serious consequences for the country, its people, and its investors,
both foreign and national. In response to this continuing crisis, the government adopted a
variety of measures to deal with its effects in the following years. In 2002, it enacted a
law" that abolished the currency board that had linked the Argentine Peso to the U.S.
dollar, resulting in a significant depreciation of the Argentine Peso. Claiming that these
measures injured their investments in violation of the commitments made to them in
securing the concession, the Claimants sought to obtain from the provincial government
adjustments in the tariffs that APSF could charge for water distribution and waste water

services, as well as modifications of other operating conditions.

lad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

  
 

25. After a fruitless period of negotiations, the Claimants in April 2003 submitted
their dispute with the Argentine Republic for settlement by arbitration to ICSID under the
ICSID Convention pursuant to the Argentina-France and the Argentina-Spain BITs. In
their Memorial, the Claimants allege that the Argentine Republic is legally responsible
under the above-mentioned BITs for the Province of Santa Fe’s wrongful actions, which
expropriated Claimants’ investment in violation of Article 5(2) of the Argentina-France
BIT and Article V of the Argentina-Spain BIT and which failed to treat Claimants’
investment fairly and equitably in breach of Article 3 and 5(1) of the Argentina-France
BIT and Article IV(1) of the Argentina-Spain BIT. As a result, pursuant to both BITs,
Claimants seek compensation for their alleged loss. The Claimants at the initiation of
this proceeding consisted of APFS (now withdrawn), the concession company, and three
of its non-Argentine shareholders: Suez, a French company holding 51.69% of APSF
shares; AGBAR, a Spanish Company holding 10.89% of APSF shares, and InterAguas, a

Spanish company holding 14.92% of APSF shares. '°

26. In response to the Claimants’ Memorial, the Respondent submitted a Memorial
with objections to jurisdiction on November 26, 2004, alleging six specific grounds as to
why ICSID and the present Tribunal are without jurisdiction to hear and decide
Claimants’ claim for damages. The purpose of the present decision is to consider and
decide upon each of the objections to jurisdiction raised by the Respondent. In
undertaking this task, the Tribunal is mindful of the fact that other ICSID tribunals in

other cases involving the Respondent have decided similar, if not identical jurisdictional

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

issues. While these decisions are not binding upon the present Tribunal, they are

nonetheless instructive.

Ill. Consideration of Jurisdictional Objections

First Jurisdictional Objection: The Dispute Does Not Arise Directly Out of an

Investment

27. Article 25 (1) of the ICSID Convention provides:
“The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision
or agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a
national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in
writing to submit to the Centre” (emphasis supplied).
The Respondent challenges ICSID’s and this Tribunal’s jurisdiction on the ground that
the underlying dispute between the Claimants and the Respondent does not arise directly
out of an investment, as the ICSID Convention requires. The Respondent argues that in
reality this dispute is about the wisdom of general economic measures taken by the
government of Argentina to deal with the economic and financial crisis it was facing. In
that light, according to the Respondent, the dispute in this case does not arise directly out
of an investment, but rather out of the general measures adopted by the government.
Further, Respondent argues that the word “directly” could also be “translated” as
meaning “specifically” and that since none of the measures complained of were directed

specifically at the Claimants’ investments, but rather were measures of general

applicability, it cannot be said that the dispute in the present case arises “directly” out of

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

the Claimants’ investment.'® In support of its position, the Respondent cites certain
language from the NAFTA/UNCITRAL case of Methanex Corporation v. United States

17
of America.

28. The Claimants assert that the Respondent errs when it states that they complain of
general economic measures and that, in these circumstances, the dispute cannot arise
directly out of investments as required by Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.
Indeed, the Claimants complain that Argentine measures specifically, concretely and
directly violated commitments made to them as foreign investors in the privatized water
industry, in particular Argentina’s failure to reestablish the concession’s financial
equilibrium and to adjust tariffs. The Claimants further argue that Methanex, though not
directly relevant to this case, actually supports their position in that the words “relating
to” in Article 1101(1) of the NAFTA were interpreted to mean that “there must be a
legally significant connection between the measure and the claimant investor or its
investment”. Moreover, this holding should be interpreted in conjunction with the
rejection in Pope & Talbot v. Canada, another NAFTA case, of Canada’s submission that
“a measure can only relate to an investment if it is primarily directed at that investment
and that a measure aimed at trade in goods ipso facto cannot be addressed as well under

Chapter 1's

29. The Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s interpretation of Article 25(1) of
the ICSID Convention. Article 25(1) requires a connection of a sufficient degree of

directness between a dispute submitted to ICSID and a claimant’s investment.'? The

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

International Court of Justice has defined the word “dispute” to mean “‘a disagreement on
a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal views or interests between parties.””° That a
disagreement exists between the Claimants and the Respondent about law, facts, and
legal views is beyond doubt. It is also beyond doubt (which the Respondent does not
contest) that the Claimants have made an investment in certain water distribution and
waste water systems in the Province of Santa Fe. The disagreement between Claimants
and the Respondent arises directly out of Claimants’ investments in the water distribution
and waste water systems in the Province of Santa Fe, since the disagreement is
specifically about the legality under international law of the treatment accorded to those
investments by the measures taken by the Respondent and its subdivisions. The
Claimants allege that the treatment they have received violates Argentina’s treaty
obligations towards those investments, while the Respondent takes a different view. That
disagreement arises directly out of the investment impacted by governmental measures,
not out of the measures themselves. The Tribunal is not concerned with the wisdom,
legality, or soundness of the policy measures taken by Argentina to deal with the
economic crisis. Rather, the Tribunal’s task is to judge, at the merits stage of this case,
whether the effect of Respondent’s actions on the Claimants’ investments violates the
Respondent’s international legal obligations contained in the Argentina-France and the
Argentina-Spain BITs. In short, the core of the dispute centers on a basic question: Did
the Respondent by its actions violate the rights granted to the Claimants and their

investment under international law?

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

30. The Respondent’s proposed interpretation of the ICSID treaty that jurisdiction
only exists if the measure in question was aimed or directed “specifically” at the
investment finds no basis in the plain language of the treaty. First, the jurisdictional
element demanded by the ICSID Convention is a dispute arising directly out of an
investment. The Convention makes no reference to governmental measures as a
jurisdictional element. To infer that requirement without justification in the face of the
plain meaning of Article 25 of the Convention would do violence to the arbitral regime
that was carefully put in place by its founders. Second, it would lead to results that were
clearly not intended by the drafters of the Convention. For example, such an
interpretation would exclude from ICSID jurisdiction disputes caused by a governmental
act of general expropriation while a governmental act expropriating a specific investment
would be within the jurisdiction of the Centre. The Respondent cites language from
Methanex v. United States of America in support of its position. In the Methanex case,
the tribunal was interpreting Article 1101(1) of the NAFTA whose fundamental
jurisdictional requirement, unlike Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, applies the dispute
settlement provisions of Chapter 11 to “measures adopted or maintained by a Party
relating to: (a) investors of another Party [or] investments of investors of another party in
the territory of a Party” (emphasis supplied). An interpretation of that provision requires
quite a different analysis from that required by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.
Whereas NAFTA requires by its terms a connection between the investments and
contested governmental measures, Article 25 of the ICSID Convention requires a direct

connection between the investment and the dispute. As a result, the language from the

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Methanex case advanced by the Respondent is not relevant to an interpretation of Article

25.

31. The Tribunal finds support for its conclusion that the dispute in the present case is
directly related to an investment in the ICSID case of CMS v. Argentina”! which also
addressed the question of whether the dispute in question arose directly out of an
investment. In that case, the claimant, which had invested in the context of Argentina’s
privatization program in a gas distribution system, brought a claim in ICSID arbitration
under the Argentina-U.S. bilateral investment treaty on the grounds that various
economic measures taken by the government violated its rights under that BIT. In that
case, as in the present dispute, Argentina challenged the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and
ICSID on grounds, inter alia, that the dispute did not arise directly out of an investment
and that the claimant was asking the tribunal to judge the validity of general economic
measures. The tribunal in CMS v. Argentina rejected that objection to jurisdiction, stating
that while it does “not have jurisdiction over measures of general economic policy and
could not pass judgment on whether they were right or wrong”, it did have jurisdiction
“*’,.to examine whether specific measures affecting Claimant’s investments or measures
of general economic policy having a direct bearing on such investment have been
adopted in violation of legally binding commitments given to the investor in treaties,

9922

legislation or contracts It further clarified its position by stating: “[w]hat is brought

under the jurisdiction of the Centre is not the general measures in themselves but the

extent to which they may violate those specific commitments.”

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

32. On the basis of its foregoing analysis, the Tribunal holds that the dispute between
the Claimants and the Respondent arises directly out of the Claimants’ investment in the
water distribution and waste water systems of the Province of Santa Fe and that therefore

the Respondent’s first objection to jurisdiction must fail.

Second Jurisdictional Objection: The Dispute is not a Legal Dispute

33. Article 25 not only requires as a jurisdictional element that a dispute arise directly
out of an investment but it also requires that the dispute be a “legal” dispute. The
Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of ICSID and of the Tribunal on the grounds that
the dispute which the Claimants have submitted to arbitration is not “legal” in nature. It
supports this position by pointing out that the Claimants’ case is based upon Argentina’s
failure to adjust the tariff regime and to respect the equilibrium principle whereby
Claimants would be assured a fair return on their investment, but that neither Argentine
law nor the Respondent’s contract with the Claimants imposes a legal obligation to do so.
Consequently, the Respondent asserts that the dispute between the Claimants and the
Respondent is a business or commercial dispute rather than a “legal” dispute required to
establish ICSID jurisdiction. The Respondent further alleges that the dispute over the
effects of the devaluation measures on the concession is one over policy and fairness
(“una cuestién de politica ptiblica y de equidad”, Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 46),

hence not legal in nature.

34. A legal dispute, in the ordinary meaning of the term, is a disagreement about legal

rights or obligations. In its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, the Claimants assert that

18

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

their claim is indeed based on legal rights — the legal rights granted to them under the
Argentina-France and the Argentina-Spain BITs. They allege that, by failing to make
tariff adjustments and to respect the equilibrium principle, the Respondent violated its
legal obligations under the Argentina-France BIT to accord “just and equitable treatment,
in accordance with the principles of international law” to the Claimants and their
investments and “ not [to] take, directly or indirectly, any expropriation or nationalization
measures or any other equivalent measures having a similar effect of dispossession”
without payment of prompt and adequate compensation (Art. 3, 5(1), and 5(2)). They
further allege that the Respondent also violated its legal obligations under the Argentina-
Spain BIT to guarantee “fair and equitable treatment of investments made” by the
Claimants and to pay compensation for “the nationalization, expropriation or any other
measures having similar characteristics or effects” taken by Respondent (Art. IV(1) and

V).

35. At this stage of the proceedings, the task of the Tribunal is not to judge the merits
of these claims but to determine whether the claims made by the Claimants are legal in
nature and therefore constitute a basis for establishing ICSID jurisdiction. Furthermore,
although the ICSID Convention itself does not define the meaning of “legal” dispute, the
accompanying Report of the Executive Directors of the World Bank gives some
clarification:

"The expression “legal dispute” has been used to make clear that while conflicts

of rights are within the jurisdiction of the Centre, mere conflicts of interests are

not. The dispute must concern the existence or scope of a legal right or

obligation, or the nature or extent of the reparation to be made for breach of a
legal obligation.”

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Juris

 

36. In his commentary on the ICSID Convention, Professor Schreuer characterizes
legal disputes as follows:
“The dispute will only qualify as legal if legal remedies such as restitution or
damages are sought and if legal rights based on, for example, treaties or
legislation are claimed. Consequently, it is largely in the hands of the claimant to
present the dispute in legal terms.”
37. In the present case, the Claimants clearly base their case on legal rights which
they allege have been granted to them under the bilateral investment treaties that
Argentina has concluded with France and Spain. In their written pleadings and oral
arguments, the Claimants have consistently presented their case in legal terms. Bilateral
investment treaties are not mere statements of good will or declarations of benevolent
intent toward the investors and investments of the two countries concerned. They are
international legal instruments by which sovereign states make firm commitments under
international law concerning the treatment they will accord to investors and investments
from the other state. A basic purpose of the Argentina-France BIT and the Argentina-
Spain BIT, as their titles indicate, is the “protection of investments.” They seek to
achieve this goal by granting investors and investments from the treaty partner certain
legal rights and to provide a legal means for their enforcement. In the present case, the
Claimants have invoked both BITs as a basis for their claim and have based their claims
on the specific legal rights enumerated in specific treaty provisions, which they allege
have been granted to them by the treaties in question. Whether they will prevail in
establishing their legal rights and the Respondent’s violation thereof remains to be seen

and is for a subsequent stage of this proceeding. What is certain at this stage, however, is

20

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

that the dispute as presented by the Claimants is legal in nature. As a result, the Tribunal

concludes that Respondent’s second objection to jurisdiction must also fail.

Third Objection to Jurisdiction (now moot): APSF does not qualify as a foreign
investor under the applicable treaty and, in any event, has not consented to the

Jurisdiction of ICSID and of the Tribunal

38. APSF, one of the original Claimants in this dispute, is an Argentine corporation
which formally holds the concession for water distribution and waste water treatment in
the Province of Santa Fe and through which the other Claimants made their investments.
Since APSF is not a foreign entity, but a national entity, the Respondent asserted that

APSF is not entitled to bring a case to ICSID.

39. In response, the Claimants argued that APSF must be deemed a French investor,
as Suez, a French company, holds 51.69% of its shares, majority shareholding being
evidence of control, the relevant test, under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and

Article (1)(2)(c) of the Argentina-France BIT.

40. Since the Tribunal, at the request of APSF and without opposition from the
Respondent, has ordered the discontinuance of the proceedings in this case with respect
to APSF in Procedural Order No. 1, discussed above, and since this third objection to
jurisdiction relates to and affects only APSF and none of the other claimants, the Tribunal

has concluded that it need not consider and decide upon this objection to jurisdiction.

21

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

Fourth Jurisdictional Objection: Claimants’ Right to Bring an Action in Arbitration is
Precluded by the Dispute Resolution Clause in the Concession Contract Concluded by

APSF

Al. The contract granting APSF a concession to operate the water distribution and
waste water systems in specified urban areas in the Santa Fe Province contained a dispute
resolution clause whereby the parties to the contract agreed to submit all disputes relating
to its interpretation and execution to the local courts of the Province of Santa Fe. From
this fact, the Respondent draws two implications challenging ICSID and the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. First, the dispute resolution clause, according to the Respondent, shows that
APSF did not agree to ICSID jurisdiction, thus vitiating a fundamental element of ICSID
jurisdiction: consent. Second, by agreeing to settle all disputes arising out of their
transaction, including those that are the basis for the present arbitration, in the courts of
Argentina, not before an ICSID tribunal, both the Claimants and the Respondent agreed

to settle their disputes in a manner which necessarily excludes recourse to ICSID.

42. The Claimants object that arbitral tribunals have consistently rejected arguments
relating to the preclusive effect of contractual dispute resolution clauses providing for the
jurisdiction of local courts where breaches of the BITs were alleged, and that they do not
claim any contractual right or assert any cause of action under the concession contract. In
support of their first objection, the Claimants rely in particular on decisions in other
ICSID cases involving Argentina, namely CMS v. Argentina, Enron v. Argentina, Azurix

v. Argentina, Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Compagnie Générale des Eaux

22

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

v. Argentina, as well as on other decisions such as Salini v. Morocco and CME Czech
Republic B.V. v. The Czech Republic. As regards their second argument, the Claimants
specify that their claims are for breach of the treaty protection and not for breach of
contract. In this respect, they gave particulars of the principles and provisions of the
concession contract solely to explain the investment regime that Santa Fe established in

order to attract foreign investments.

43. In order to assess the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections on this point, one
must consider the nature and implications of the dispute settlement clause concluded by
APSF and the Province of Santa Fe. By its terms, the dispute resolution clause covers all
controversies arising out of the concession contract. The dispute resolution clause makes
no mention of Claimants’ rights under the Argentina-France BIT, the Argentina-Spain
BIT, or their right to seek recourse in arbitration for violation of those rights. In the
present case, the Claimants, as they rightly point out, do not allege any violation of their
rights under the concession contract. Rather, the basis of their claim is that the
Respondent has violated the Claimants’ rights under the BITs. BIT claims and
contractual claims are two different things. As the ICSID Annulment Committee stated

in Vivendi, which involved one of the BITs at the center of the present dispute:

“A state may breach a treaty without breaching a contract, and vice versa [...]”;

“[...] whether there has been a breach of the BIT and whether there has been a
breach of contract are different questions. Each of these claims will be
determined by reference to its own proper or applicable law — in the case of the
BIT, by international law; in the case of the Concession Contract by the proper
law of the contract [...] 2

23

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

44. Many other international arbitral tribunals have taken the position that a dispute
resolution clause in an underlying contract whereby contractual disputes are within the
exclusive jurisdiction of local courts or arbitrations does not preclude an investor who is a
party to such contract from bringing an arbitration proceeding to enforce its rights under a

bilateral investment treaty.”

45. It follows from the above discussion that, contrary to Argentina’s argument, the
execution of a dispute resolution clause in the concession agreement does not mean that
the parties have waived ICSID jurisdiction. Certainly, the execution of a dispute
settlement clause, like the one in the Santa Fe concession contract, which makes no
reference to the BIT or to the treatment that the BIT guarantees investors, cannot support
any inference that such dispute resolution clause is a waiver of the investors’ rights under
a BIT. The Tribunal concludes that the existence of the dispute resolution clause in the
concession contract does not preclude the Claimants from bringing the present action.
Consequently, Respondent’s fourth objection to the ICSID’s and this Tribunal’s

jurisdiction must fail.

Fifth Jurisdictional Objection: Suez, AGBAR, and InterAguas, as mere shareholders
of APSF are not legally qualified to bring claims in ICSID arbitration for alleged

injuries done to APSF

46. The Respondent contends that the three shareholders in APSF, Suez, AGBAR,

and InterAguas, have no standing to bring a claim in arbitration for alleged injuries done

24

lad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

  
 

to APSF. In support of this position, the Respondent, drawing analogies to domestic
corporation law, argues that any injury to the shareholders is derivative of the alleged
injury to the company in which they hold shares, as opposed to a direct injury to the
shareholders themselves. The alleged injury is done to the corporation, not to the
shareholders whose shares, because of an alleged wrongful action done to the
corporation, may have diminished in value. Thus, the shareholders have no right to bring
an action on grounds that they have sustained a direct injury by virtue of the alleged
wrongful actions of the Respondent. The right to bring an action for any alleged injury
lies with the corporation itself, not its shareholders. The Respondent further pointed out
that to award a monetary recovery to the Claimants in their capacity as shareholders, as
well as to APSF as the entity directly wronged, would result in an unjust double recovery
and moreover would grant a recovery to specific shareholders, thus prejudicing other
APSF shareholders as well as its creditors. The Respondent also reiterated this argument
at the time that the Tribunal, at the request of APSF to withdraw from this case and
without objection from the Respondent, ordered the discontinuance of the proceedings
with respect to APSF. In its submissions of March 31, 2006, the Respondent argued that
the Shareholder Claimants’ claims were dependent or derivative of APSF’s claim and
that since APSF was no longer a party, the Claimant Shareholders had no right to bring a

claim in ICSID arbitration in the absence of APSF.

47. In response, the Claimants argue that the basis for a shareholder having standing
to bring a case because of an alleged injury is to be found in international law, not

domestic law. Specifically, it is to be found in the Argentina-France and Argentina-Spain

25

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

BITs which were concluded by the countries concerned to protect the investors and
investments of one State in the territory of another State. Suez is a French national under
the Argentina-France BIT and as such falls within the definition of the term “investor” in
Article 1(2)(b). Under Article 8 of the Argentina-France BIT, an “investor” may have
recourse to ICSID arbitration with respect to “... any disputes relating to an investment
under this Treaty.” Article 1(1) contains a quite detailed definition of investment. It
provides in part:

1. The term “investment” shall apply to assets such as property, rights and
interests in any category, and particularly but not exclusively to.

 

b) Shares, issue premiums and other forms of participation, albeit
minority or indirect, in companies constituted in the territory of either
Contracting Party...” *

48. The Claimants likewise refer to Article I(2) of the Argentina-Spain BIT which
defines investments as “any kind of assets, such as property and rights of every kind

[...]”, including “shares and other forms of participations in companies.””

49. Accordingly, under the plain language of these BITs, the Tribunal finds that
Suez’s as well as AGBAR’s and InterAguas’ shares in APSF are “investments” under the
Argentina-France and Argentina-Spain BITs. These shareholders thus benefit from the
treatment promised by Argentina to investments made by French and Spanish nationals in
its territory. Consequently, under Article 8 of the French treaty and Article X of the
Spanish treaty, these shareholder Claimants are entitled to have recourse to ICSID
arbitration to enforce their treaty rights. Neither the Argentina-France BIT, the
Argentina-Spain BIT, nor the ICSID Convention limit the rights of shareholders to bring

actions for direct, as opposed to derivative claims. This distinction, present in domestic

26

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

corporate law of many countries, does not exist in any of the treaties applicable to this

case.

50. During the oral arguments, the Respondent relied heavily on the International
Court of Justice case Barcelona Traction,*' in which Belgium sought damages against
Spain for injuries done to Belgian shareholders in a Canadian corporation that was
operating an electricity distribution system in Barcelona. The Court held that Belgium
lacked jus standi to exercise diplomatic protection of shareholders in a Canadian
company with respect to measures taken against that company in Spain. In this
Tribunal’s opinion, Barcelona Traction is not controlling in the present case. That
decision, which has been criticized by scholars over the years, concerned diplomatic
protection of its nationals by a State, an issue that is in no way relevant to the current
case. Unlike the present case, Barcelona Traction did not involve a bilateral treaty which
specifically provides that shareholders are investors and as such are entitled to have
recourse to international arbitration to protect their shares from host country actions that
violate the treaty. In this regard, it is interesting to note the ICJ’s commentary on the
underdeveloped state of international investment law in 1970, the year of the Barcelona

Traction decision:

“Considering the important developments of the last half-century, the growth of
foreign investments and the expansion of international activities of corporations,
in particular of holding companies, which are often multinational, and
considering the way in which the economic interests of states have proliferated, it
may at first sight appear surprising that the evolution of the law has not gone
further and that no generally accepted rules in the matter have crystallized on the
international plane. ns

27

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

At that time, the movement to conclude bilateral investment treaties was in its infancy.
Today, over 2200 bilateral investment treaties exist in the world, and Argentina alone has
concluded fifty seven. Moreover, there exists today a growing jurisprudence of arbitral
decisions interpreting treaty provisions, something which hardly existed in 1970. The
applicable international law on investment between Argentina and France and Argentina
and Spain found in the relevant BITs is much more specific and far reaching than was the

case in 1970.

51. Relying on the specific language of the Argentina-France BIT, as well as that of
the Argentina-Spain BIT which also gives shareholders standing to have recourse to
arbitration to protect their shares, the Tribunal finds that Suez, AGBAR, and InterAguas
have standing to bring this arbitration. Many other decisions in ICSID cases, including a
good number involving Argentina, have made similar holdings.** While the
Respondent’s concern about the danger of double recovery to the corporation and to the
shareholders for the same injury is to be noted, the Tribunal’s decision at this point
relates only to jurisdiction. Moreover, the Tribunal believed that any eventual award in
this case could be fashioned in such a way as to prevent double recovery. In any event,
the withdrawal of APSF from the case vitiates any concerns about a possible double
recovery to the shareholders and the corporation for the same injury. Finally, the Tribunal
believes that the discontinuance of these proceedings with respect to APSF does not
affect the rights of the Shareholder Claimants to bring a claim in ICSID arbitration under
the two BITs in question. The Claimant Shareholders would have had a right to bring

such claims independently without the participation of APSF in first instance. The initial

28

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

participation of APSF and its subsequent withdrawal do not alter the Claimant
Shareholders’ rights. According to Art. 1(1)(b) of the Argentina-France BIT and I(2) of
the Argentina-Spain BIT (quoted above, para. 47,48), shares fall within the definition of
investments protected by the BITs. APSF’s withdrawal cannot erase the legal effects of
the shareholders’ investment nor affect their ius standi under the BITs. As a
consequence, the Tribunal concludes that the Respondent’s fifth objection to jurisdiction

fails.

Sixth Jurisdictional Objection: Since Claimants InterAguas and AGBAR have not
complied with the provisions of the Argentina-Spain BIT requiring submission of an
investment dispute to local courts before invoking international arbitration, they have

no standing to have recourse to ICSID arbitration at this time

52. Claimants InterAguas and AGBAR, both nationals of Spain, seek to assert their
claims under the Argentina-Spain BIT. Unlike Article 8(2) of the Argentina-France BIT,
which allows an investor to have recourse to international arbitration after a period of six
months of negotiation from the time it asserts its claim, Article X of the Argentina-Spain
BIT requires the investor, at the end of the same six month period, to bring a judicial
proceeding in the local courts and allows it to have recourse to arbitration only after a
further period of eighteen months in the local courts. InterAguas and AGBAR have not
pursued their claims by litigation in Argentina’s courts. As a result, the Respondent
argues that these two Claimants have no standing at the present time to pursue this case

before an ICSID tribunal. In response, the Claimants argue that by virtue of the most-

29

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

favored-nation clause in the Argentina-Spain BIT they may take advantage of the more
favorable treatment provided in the Argentina-France BIT with respect to dispute
resolution and that therefore they may bring their action to ICSID without first pursuing
their claims in the local courts of Argentina. The Respondent opposes this interpretation
of the Argentina-Spain BIT, arguing that the most-favored-nation clause does not include

matters relating to investment dispute settlement.

53. A decision on this objection requires the Tribunal, as with Respondent’s other
objections, to begin with an interpretation and analysis of the relevant BIT provisions.
Article IV of the Argentina-Spain BIT, entitled “Tratamiento” (Treatment) is relied upon
by the Claimants InterAguas and AGBAR as obviating the need to have recourse to
Argentine courts before bringing an international arbitration. The first three paragraphs
of Article IV provide as follows:

1. Cada Parte garantizard en su territorio un tratamiento justo y equitativo a

las inversiones por inversores de la otra Parte.

2. En todas las materias regidas por el presente Acuerdo, este tratamiento

no serd menos favorable que el otorgado por cada Parte a las inversiones
realizadas en su territorio por inversores de un tercer pais.

3. Este tratamiento no se extenderd, sin embargo, a los privilegios que una
Parte conceda a los inversores de un tercer Estado en virtud de su participacién
en:

* Una zona de libre cambio

* Una unién aduanera

* Un mercado comin

* Un acuerdo de integracion regional, o

*

Una organizacion de asistencia econémica mutual en virtud de un
acuerdo firmado antes de la entrada en vigor del presente Acuerdo
que prevea disposiciones andlogas a aquellas que son otorgadas
por esa Parte a los participantes de dicha organizacion.”

30

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Juris

 

The English translation of this provision in the United Nations Treaty Series is as
follows:

1. Each Party shall guarantee in its territory fair and equitable treatment of
investments made by investors of the other Party.

2. In all matters governed by this Agreement, such treatment shall be no less
favorable than that accorded by each Party to investment made in its territory by

investors of a third country.

3. Such treatment shall not, however, extend to the privileges which either
Party may grant to investors of a third State by virtue of its participation in:

- A free trade area;
- A customs union:
- A common market;
- A regional integration agreement; or
- An organization of mutual economic assistance by virtue of an
agreement concluded prior to the entry into force of this
Agreement, containing terms similar to those accorded by that
Party to participants of said organization.”
54. In interpreting these provisions, the Tribunal is guided by established principles of
treaty interpretation as provided by Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, pursuant to which treaty language is to be interpreted in accordance with its
“ordinary meaning.” In that respect, the text of the treaty is presumed to be the authentic

expression of the parties’ intentions. The starting place for any exercise in interpretation

is therefore the treaty text itself.

55. The text quoted above clearly states that “in all matters” (en todas las materias) a
Contracting party is to give a treatment no less favorable than that which it grants to
investments made in its territory by investors from any third country. Article X of the

Argentina-Spain BIT specifies in detail the processes for the “Settlement of Disputes

31

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

between a Party and Investors of the other Party.” Consequently, dispute settlement is
certainly a “matter” governed by the Argentina-Spain BIT. The word “treatment” is not
defined in the treaty text. However, the ordinary meaning of that term within the context
of investment includes the rights and privileges granted and the obligations and burdens
imposed by a Contracting State on investments made by investors covered by the treaty.
In the present situation, Argentina concluded a BIT with France which permits aggrieved
investors, after six months’ of attempting to resolve their disputes to have recourse to
international arbitration without the necessity of first bringing a case in the local courts of
a contracting State. Consequently, French investors in Argentina, as a result of the
Argentina-France BIT, receive a more favorable treatment than do Spanish investors in
Argentina under the Argentina-Spain BIT. That being the case, by virtue of Article IV,
para. 2, Spanish investors are entitled to a treatment with respect to dispute settlement no
less favorable than the one accorded to French investors. In specific terms, granting a
treatment to Spanish investors that is no less favorable than that granted to French
investors would mean that Spanish investors would be able to invoke international
arbitration against Argentina on the same terms as French investors. That is to say,
Spanish investors, like French investors, may have recourse to international arbitration,
provided they comply with the six months negotiation period but without the need to

proceed before the local courts of Argentina for a period of eighteen months.

56. Argentina contests this interpretation on various grounds. First it argues that the
Contracting States did not intend the most-favored-nation clause in Article IV of the

Argentina-Spain BIT to cover dispute settlement. The Tribunal finds no evidence in the

32

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

text or elsewhere to support that conclusion. The text of the Argentina-Spain BIT
strongly implies just the opposite. Paragraph 3 of Article IV contains a definite list of
“matters” that the Contracting States specifically excluded from the most-favored-nation
clause in paragraph 2. Dispute settlement is not among them. The failure to refer among
these excluded items to any matter remotely connected to dispute settlement reinforces
the interpretation that the term “all matters” in paragraph 2 includes dispute settlement
matters. In negotiating the Argentina-Spain BIT, the Contracting States considered and
decided that certain matters should be excluded. The fact that dispute settlement was not
covered among the excluded matters must be interpreted to mean that dispute settlement

is included within the term “all matters” in paragraph 2.

57. Moreover, after an analysis of the substantive provisions of the BITs in question,
the Tribunal finds no basis for distinguishing dispute settlement matters from any other
matters covered by a bilateral investment treaty. From the point of view of the promotion
and protection of investments, the stated purposes of the Argentina-Spain BIT, dispute
settlement is as important as other matters governed by the BIT and is an integral part of
the investment protection regime that two sovereign states, Argentina and Spain, have
agreed upon. In this context, the Respondent further argues that this Tribunal should
apply the principle of ejusdem generis in interpreting the Argentina-Spain BIT so as to
exclude dispute settlement matters from the scope of the most-favored-nation clause,
because the category “dispute settlement” is not of the same genus as the matters
addressed in the clause. The Tribunal finds no basis for applying the ejusdem generis

principle to arrive at that result.

33

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Juris

 

58. Similarly, Argentina contends that the Tribunal should interpret the most-favored-
nation clause strictly because such an approach would restrict the principle of res inter
alios acta, so as to limit the effects of the treaty to the parties. The Tribunal cannot
follow this argument. The BIT in question contains mutual promises by Argentina and
Spain to treat each others’ nationals in the same way that they treat nationals from any
third State. The principle of res inter alios acta has no application, because the Tribunal
is not applying the Argentina-France BIT (presumably the alleged act between third
parties) to this case. Rather it is applying the Argentina-Spain BIT’s provisions on

equality of treatment.

59. Further, the Respondent seems to argue that the Tribunal should interpret a most-
favored-nation provision strictly. Here too, the Tribunal finds no rule and no reason for
interpreting the most-favored-nation treatment clause any differently from any other
clause in the Argentina-Spain BIT. The language of the treaty is clear. Applying the
normal interpretational methodology to Article ITV of the Argentina-Spain BIT, the
Tribunal finds that the ordinary meaning of that provision is that matters relating to
dispute settlement are included within the term “all matters” and that therefore
InterAguas and AGBAR may take advantage of the more favorable treatment provided to

investors in the Argentina- France BIT with respect to dispute settlement.

60. The Tribunal finds strong support for this conclusion in previous ICSID cases. In

particular, Maffezini v. Spain M applied the Argentina-Spain BIT, the very treaty at issue

34

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)

Decision on Juris

 

on

in the present case, to find that the most favored-nation-clause allowed the Claimant, a

national of Argentina, to take advantage of Spain’s BIT with Chile to avoid the necessity

of having recourse to the local courts in Spain before bringing an ICSID action. The most

relevant passages of Maffezini are worth quoting in full because they well show the

rationale behind the application of the most-favored nation clause to dispute settlement:

"The Tribunal considers that there are good reasons to conclude that today dispute
settlement arrangements are inextricably related to the protection of foreign
investors, as they are also related to the protection of rights of traders under
treaties of commerce. Consular jurisdiction in the past, like other forms of
extraterritorial jurisdiction, were considered essential for the protection of rights
of trader and, hence, were regarded not merely as procedural devices but as
arrangements designed to better protect the rights of such person abroad. It
follows that such arrangements, even if not strictly a part of the material aspect
of the trade and investment policy pursued by treaties of commerce and
navigation, were essential for the adequate protection of the rights they
sought to guarantee.

International arbitration and other dispute settlement arrangements have replaced
these older and frequently abusive practices of the past. These modern
developments are essential, however, to the protection of the rights envisaged
under the pertinent treaties; they are also closely linked to the material aspects of
the treatment accorded. ”*°

These considerations then lead the Maffezini tribunal to conclude with the following

words:

61.

“[I]f a third-party treaty contains provisions for the settlement of disputes that are
more favorable to the protection of the investor's rights and interests than those in
the basic treaty, such provisions may be extended to the beneficiary of the most
favored nation clause as they are fully compatible with the ejusdem generis
principle.”**

Other cases that have considered and rejected arguments similar to the ones raised

by Argentina in the present case and which found that the most-favored-nation-clause

allows

a claimant to take advantage of more favorable dispute resolution provisions

35

lad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

epublic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 
  

found in other treaties are in particular Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic*’ and

MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd and MTD Chile SA v. Republic of Chile. 38

62. In opposition to this line of cases, the Respondent referred during oral argument
to Plama Consortium Limited v. the Republic of Bulgaria.” In that case, the Claimant, a
Cypriot company, sought to establish ICSID jurisdiction on the basis of the Energy
Charter Treaty and of a BIT between Cyprus and Bulgaria. The tribunal affirmed ICSID
jurisdiction under the Energy Charter Treaty; for various reasons, it also considered
whether it had jurisdiction under the Bulgaria—Cyprus BIT. Such BIT contained a very
limited international dispute settlement offer. In essence, it provided that only the
measure of compensation for expropriation could be submitted to an UNCITRAL
arbitration. It contained no offer for ICSID arbitration. It did, however, embody an MFN
clause. Since other BITs concluded by Bulgaria provide for ICSID arbitration, the
Claimant relied upon such MEN clause to take advantage of the ICSID dispute settlement
mechanism included in the other BITs. The tribunal did not follow the Claimant and

tuled that it lacked jurisdiction under the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT.

63. Having duly considered the reasons set forth in the Plama decision, this Tribunal
comes to the conclusion that, whatever its merits, it is in any event clearly distinguishable
from the present case on a number of grounds. First, at a basic level, it must be noted that
the most-favored-nation-clause in the Argentina-Spain BIT is much broader in scope than
was the language of the Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT in Plama. Whereas the Argentina-Spain

BIT states that “Jn all matters governed by this Agreement, ...treatment shall be no less

36

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

favorable than that accorded by each Party to investment made in its territory by investors
of a third country” (emphasis supplied), the comparable clause in the Bulgaria-Cyprus
BIT stated “Each Contracting Party shall apply to the investments in its territory by
investors of the other Contracting Party a treatment which is not less favorable than that
accorded to investments by investors of third states.” As noted above, the use of the
expression “in all matters” when coupled with a list of specific exceptions that does not
include dispute resolution, leaves no doubt that dispute resolution is covered by the MFN
clause. Second, and perhaps more important, the Plama tribunal was guided by the
actual intent of the contracting States. Indeed, subsequent negotiations between Bulgaria
and Cyprus showed the “two Contracting Parties to the BIT themselves did not consider
that the MEN provision extends to the dispute settlement provisions in other BITs”*°,
This was in line with the fact that, at the time of conclusion of the BIT, “Bulgaria was
under a communist regime, which favored bilateral investment treaties with limited
protection for foreign investors and very limited international dispute resolution

provisions mat

No evidence of any comparable intent has been suggested in this case.
Third, as a further distinguishing factor, one may refer to the effect of the MFN
provision. In Plama, the Claimant attempted to replace the dispute settlement provisions
in the applicable Bulgaria-Cyprus BIT in toto by a dispute resolution mechanism
“incorporated” from another treaty.” Without expressing an opinion on whether an MFN
clause may achieve such a result, this Tribunal distinguishes that radical effect from the
much more limited one caused here, which merely consists in waiving a preliminary step

in accessing a mechanism, i.e., ICSID arbitration, offered in both the Spanish and the

French treaties.

37

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Juris

 

64. The Plama tribunal also stated, in its reasons, that an arbitration agreement must
be clear and unambiguous, especially where it is incorporated by reference to another
text.? This Tribunal does not share this statement. As stated above, it believes that
dispute resolution provisions are subject to interpretation like any other provisions of a

treaty, neither more restrictive nor more liberal.

65. Be this as it may, at the end of its reasoning, the Plama tribunal suggested what
could be called a “non-sense exception to the non application of the MFN clause.”
Addressing the very requirement at issue here, i.e., that the dispute be tried in local courts
during eighteen months, which it called “a curious requirement,” the Plama tribunal said
that it “sympathize[d] with a tribunal that attempts to neutralize such a provision that is
nonsensical from a practical point of view”. It therefore concluded that “[t]he decision

in Maffezini is perhaps understandable.”*°

66. For all these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that Claimants InterAguas and
AGBAR, relying on Article IV of the Argentina-Spain BIT, may invoke the more
favorable treatment afforded in the Argentina-France BIT and may therefore bring an
ICSID arbitration without the necessity of first having recourse to the local courts of

Argentina. The Respondent’s sixth objection to jurisdiction therefore fails.

38

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

IV. Decision on Jurisdiction

67. After having considered each and every jurisdictional objection raised by the
Respondent, the Tribunal finds that it must reject them all, except for the fourth objection
based on the status of APSF as an Argentine corporation, which objection has now
become moot because of the discontinuance of the proceedings in the case with respect to
APSF. The Tribunal thus decides that ICSID and this Tribunal have jurisdiction over this
case, and it therefore directs that the case proceed on the merits in accordance with the
ICSID Convention, the ICSID Rules, and the applicable bilateral investment treaties.
The Tribunal has, accordingly, made the necessary Order for the continuation of the

procedure pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41(4).

[signature]
Prof. Jeswald W. Salacuse
President of the Tribunal

[signature] [signature]
Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler Prof. Pedro Nikken
Arbitrator Arbitrator

39

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

' On the same date, the Centre received two further requests for arbitration under the ICSID

Convention regarding water concessions in Argentina from (i) Aguas Cordobesas $.A., Suez, and Sociedad
General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and (ii) Aguas Argentinas S.A., Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de
Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. regarding similar investments and disputes. As explained
below, these requests would later be registered by the Centre and submitted by agreement of the parties to

one same Tribunal.

Accord entre le Gouvernement de la République frangaise et le Gouvernement de la République

sur I et la éci des investi (Agreement between the
Argentine Republic and the Republic of France for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of

Investments), signed on July 3, 1991 and in force since March 3, 1993; 1728 UNTS 298.

Acuerdo para la promocién y proteccién reciprocas de inversiones entre el Reino de Espajia y la
Reptiblica Argentina (Agreement on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the
Kingdom of Spain and the Argentine Republic), signed in Buenos Aires on October 3, 1991 and in force
since September 28, 1992; 1699 UNTS 202.

4 As noted in footnote 1 supra, on this same date the Centre registered two further requests for
arbitration regarding water concessions in Argentina: ICSID Case No. ARB/03/18 (Aguas Cordobesas
S.A., Suez, and AGBAR v. Argentine Republic) and ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19 (Aguas Argentinas S.A.,
Suez, AGBAR and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic).

5 The parties agreed that this same Tribunal would decide ICSID Cases Nos. ARB/03/18 and
ARB/03/19. The parties also agreed that this

 

same Tribunal would decide the dispute between AWG
Group Ple., a company incorporated in the United Kingdom, and the Argentine Republic. The proceedings
in this last case, instituted under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, are also being administered by ICSID
following the parties’ agreement and the Tribunal’s consent.

° During the session the parties agreed on a series of procedural matters related to the present case,
ICSID Cases Nos. ARB/03/18 and ARB/03/19 and the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules instituted by AWG
Group Plc. These agreements included a staggered schedule of written and oral submissions. A copy of
the minutes of the session is enclosed as Annex. No.1 to this Decision.

7 This request follows a similar request filed by four non-governmental organization in ICSID Case

No.ARB/03/19. The Tribunal’s Order of May 19, 2005, is available online at ICSID’s website
www.worldbank.org/icsid.

‘ Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits of September 20, 2004. para. 9 and Exhibit C2.

Law No. 23,696 of 18 August 1989 (the State Reform Law).

» Law No. 23,928 of March 27, 1991.

u Law No. 10,472, as amended by Law No. 10,798 of January 22, 1990.

9

The “Information Memorandum,” Claimants’ Exhibit C-28.

Claimants’ Memorial, para. 161.

40

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Law No. 25,561 (Ley de Emergencia Ptiblica y de Reforma del Régimen Cambiario) of 6 January

2002.

1s Claimant’s Memorial, para. 41.

te Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 18.

" Methanex Corporation v. United States of America. 1° Partial Award, August 7, 2002,
Respondent's Exhibit AL RA 3.

8 Claimants’ Counter Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 51 with citation.
8 See Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary 114 (2001).

20

See Case concerning East Timor, 1995 ICJ Reports 89, 99.
CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. The Republic of Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Decision
of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (July 17, 2003), 42 ILM 788 (2003); also available online at

21

 

 

www.worldbank.org/icsid;
2 Ibid at para. 33.

2 Ibid at para. 27.
a

Claimants’ Legal Authorities No. 85.

Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States, 1 ICSID Reports 28; also available online at
www.worldbank.org/icsid.

35 Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary 105 (2001).

*6 Contrato de Concesién, dated November 27, 1995, between the Province of Santa Fe and APSF.
Articulo 15.4 (Jurisdiccién): Sin perjuicio de lo establecido en el articulo 115 de la Ley 11.220, en caso de
cualquier controversia relativa a la interpretacién y ejecucién del Contrato, las partes se someten a la

jurisdicci6n local de la Provincia de Santa Fe, con renuncia expresa a cualquier otro fuero o jurisdiccién

 

que pudiera corresponder por cualquier cau!
7 Compaiifa de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal (formerly Compagnie Générale des
Eaux) v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment (July 3, 2002) paras. 95
and 96. Available online at www.worldbank.org/icsid.
8 E.g., Lanco International Inc. v. The Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/6),
Preliminary Decision on Jurisdiction, at sections 39-40; Salini Costruttori SpA and Italstrade v. Kingdom
of Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision on Jurisdiction, (July 23, 2001) at para. 62; Azurix Corp.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Decision on Jurisdiction (December 8, 2003), at para.
76.
~ United Nations Treaty Series, volume 1728, p. 298. The official Spanish text of the above-quoted
provisions is as follows:

1. El término “inversiones” designa los activos tales como los bienes, derechos ¢ intereses de

cualquier naturaleza y, en particular, aunque no exclusivamente:

4l

Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona, S.A.
and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.

v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17)
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

b) las acciones, primas de emisién y otras formas de participacién atin minoritarias o indirectas, en

las sociedades constituidas en el territorio de una de las Partes Contratantes.

The official French text of the quoted provision is as follows:

 

 

1. Le terme «investissement» désigne des avoirs tels que les biens, droits, et intéréts de toute nature, et

plus particulitrement mais non exclusivement:

b) Les actions, primes d’emission et autres, formes de participation, méme minoritaires ou
indirectes aux sociétés constituées sur le territoire de lune des Parties contractantes;
* Ibid.
Case Concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company (Belgium v. Spain),
Judgment of February 5, 1970, 1970 LC.J. 3.
2 Barcelona Traction Company (Belgium v. Spain), 1970 1.C.J. 3, 46-47 (1970).
3B

E.g.

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Republic of Argentina (ICSID Case No.
ARB/O01/8). Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (July 17, 2003); Enron Corporation &
Ponderosa Assets, LP v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3), Decision on Jurisdiction
(January 14, 2003); Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic (ICSID No ARB/02/8), Decision on
Jurisdiction (August 3, 2004).

“ Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Decision of the
Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction January 25, 2000); available online at www.worldbank.org/icsid.

35 Ibid., para. 54-55.

36 Ibid. para. 56.

7 ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction, August 3, 2004, in particular para.102:

“Access to these [dispute settlement] mechanisms is part of the protection offered under the Treaty. It is

 

part of the treatment of foreign investors and investment and of the advantages through the MFN Clause”;

available online at www.worldbank.org/icsid.

8 ICSID Case no. ARB/O1/7, Award of May 25, 2004.

* Plama Consortium Limited (Claimant) and Republic of Bulgaria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24),
Decision on Jurisdiction (February 8, 2005), available online at www.worldbank.org/icsid

40 Ibid., para. 195.

4 Ibid., paras. 196.

2 Ibid., para. 210.

8 Ibid., paras. 198ff.

“4 Ibid., para. 224.

“5 Ibid., para. 224.

42

