MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

Neutral Citation Number: [2005] EWHC 2437 (Comm:
Case No: 2004 Folio 272
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
COMMERCIAL COURT

Royal Courts of Justice
Strand, London, WC2A 2LL

 

Date: 4 November 2005
Before :

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE

  

Between:

 

M Bools Esq (instructed by Messrs Norton Rose) for the Claimant
S Shackleton Esq & D Holloway Esq (instructed by Messrs Eversheds) for the Defendant

Hearing dates: 4'"-6" July 2005; 11'" & 12 July 2005
Further submissions and materials received: 27 July; during August; and 26" September 2005.

Judgment

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

Mrs Justice Gloster, DBE:

Introduction

1.

On 28 April 1993, the Claimant, Svenska Petroleum Exploration AB (‘Svenska’), the
First Defendant, the Government of the Republic of Lithuania (“Lithuania” or “the
State”), and the Second Defendant, AB Geonafta (“Geonafta’”) (collectively “the
Defendants”), signed a Joint Venture Agreement (the “JVA”) in relation to the
planned exploitation of various oil fields in Lithuania.

Svenska, as its name suggests, is a Swedish company employed in the business of oil
exploration and extraction. Geonafta, previously known as Gargzdai State Petroleum
Geology Enterprise and sometimes referred to in the relevant documents as “EPG”,
was formerly a Lithuanian State enterprise. It was privatised on 16 June 2000 and has
since then been privately owned.

In June 2000, a dispute arose between the parties as to who was entitled to exploit
certain specific oil fields. Svenska brought a claim against both Geonafta and the
State before an ICC arbitral panel sitting in Denmark (‘the Tribunal”). The State took
the preliminary objection that it was not a party to the arbitration agreement contained
in Article 9 of the JVA. On 16 and 17 October 2001 there was a two day hearing
before the three-member Tribunal in Copenhagen at which all parties were fully
represented in relation to the issues of jurisdiction and arbitrability. In a 69 page
interim award (‘the Interim Award”), issued on 21 December 2001, the Tribunal,
(having considered all the various arguments which have been deployed before me on
this hearing) unanimously held that the State was a party to the arbitration agreement.
The State made no challenge to that finding in the Danish courts, although it was
common ground that it was open to it to have done so. It is relevant to quote the
following passage from the Interim Award at page 68:

“Tt is undisputed that no provisions of any Lithuanian law
prevented GOVERNMENT from signing an arbitration
agreement at the time when the JVC was signed in 1993. The
issue of arbitrability only arises due to subsequent Lithuanian
laws, i.e. article 29 of the underground law from 1995 and
article 11 in the Law of Commercial Arbitration from 1996.

The JVC is a commercial contract regarding the exploration
and exploitation of oil fields within Lithuania. The dispute
between SVENSKA and GOVERNMENT is a dispute which
relates to an alleged breach of contract by GOVERNMENT.
Such a dispute is clearly arbitrable. The claims of SVENSKA,
i.e. the relief sought from this Tribunal are divided into three
different claims, a request for a declaratory award sentence, a
request for damages and a request for a specific performance
award ordering GOVERNMENT to abrogate an existing
licence and to issue a new licence. The alleged non-
arbitrability can in the opinion of the Arbitral Tribunal at most

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

be applicable to that part of SVENSKA’s claim, which relates
to the revocation and issuance of licences. It follows that
GOVERNMENT is obliged to answer to the remainder of the
claims in any event.

Under these circumstances, the Arbitral Tribunal has not found
it appropriate — at this stage of the case — to make a final
decision whether the claim for revocation and issuance of
licences is arbitrable, or whether the relief sought would be an
appropriate relief in this matter.

Accordingly, the parties are invited to elaborate further on this
issue in the course of the dealing with the merits of the case.”

4. Following a substantial hearing, in which the State fully participated, the Tribunal
issued a final Award on 30 October 2003 (“the Final Award”). By that Award (which
ran to 280 pages), the Tribunal held that the State and Geonafta were jointly and
severally liable to pay the Claimant the sum of US$12,579,000 by way of damages
plus costs. That Award also determined the question of arbitrability, in relation to
which the Tribunal (by a majority) held as follows:

“Arbitrability

“In his dissenting opinion, Mr Gytis Kaminskas has addressed
the issue of arbitrability, and has concluded that the dispute
related to the Principal Claim is not arbitrable under Lithuanian
law by virtue of Article 29 of the Underground Law and
Articles 2 and 11 of the Law on Commercial Arbitration of
1995.

We do not agree with Mr Kaminska’s position, and we believe
that this issue was already decided upon in our Interim Award,
dated 21 December 2001, in which Award the unanimous
finding of the Arbitral Tribunal was stated as follows ... [Here
the Tribunal set out the passage that I have already quoted
above].

The Claimant has after the Interim Award withdrawn its claim
for a specific performance award ordering First Respondent to
abrogate an existing license and issue a new license.
Claimant’s requested remedy is now limited to a claim for
damages. This claim is in the view of the majority clearly
arbitrable under Lithuanian law. The parties have not
previously nor after the Interim Award argued that the claim for
damages is not arbitrable or that the Arbitral Tribunal otherwise
lacks jurisdiction with respect to this claim.

Article 29 of the Underground Law and Article 11 of the Law
on Commercial Arbitration governs the administrative legal

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

5.

relations, which disputes are decided by the Administrative
Court of Lithuania. These provisions are not applicable to
disputes originating from a commercial contract, where relief
sought is a claim for damages.

The claim for damages is a claim for breach of contract and
does not depend on or relate to the validity of any
administrative or Governmental act, including the grant or
revocation of any rights in relation to the underground either to
the Claimant, the Second Respondent or the JV-Company.”

The State made no challenge to that Final Award in the Danish courts. On the
contrary, by resolution dated 11 February 2004 it resolved that:

“1 ... It is not expedient to apply to a court for annulment
of the award of the Arbitration Tribunal of the
International Chamber of Commerce in the case
considered in Copenhagen on 30 October 2003.

2. ... to commission the state enterprise State Property
Fund to notify [Svenska] or its representatives of the
position of the [State] or its representatives of the
position of the [State] on the award referred to in
Clause 1.”

Neither Geonafta nor the State has honoured the Final Award.

On 2 April 2004, Svenska issued an arbitration claim form seeking permission to
enforce the Final Award in England pursuant to section 101 of the Arbitration Act
1996. On 7 April 2004 Morison J gave Svenska permission to enforce the Final
Award in England. Since the application had, in the usual way, been made without
notice, the Defendants were given a period of time in which to apply to set aside the
order. Geonafta’s challenge to the recognition and enforcement of the Final Award
was dismissed by Cooke J. on 24 August 2004. The State acknowledged service of
the claim form on 31 August 2004, indicating in that acknowledgement that it
intended to contest the Court’s jurisdiction. On the same day, the State issued an
Application Notice pursuant to Part 11 of the CPR disputing the jurisdiction of the
English Court, and applied for an order that the claim form, the order of Morison J
and the service of the enforcement proceedings on it be set aside on the grounds that,
as an independent sovereign state, the State is immune from the jurisdiction of the
English court, by virtue of section | of the State Immunity Act 1978 (“the Act’). This
provides:

“A State is immune from the jurisdiction of the courts of the
United Kingdom except as provided in the following provisions
of this Part of this Act.”

Summary of the parties’ contentions

7.

Shortly stated, the State’s argument is that none of the various exceptions contained in
Part I of the Act apply. In particular, the State contends that it has not submitted to

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

the jurisdiction of the English Court (section 2); that the proceedings do not relate to
a commercial agreement (section 3); and that the State has not agreed in writing to
submit a dispute which has arisen to arbitration (section 9).

8. On the other hand, Svenska contends that:

i) the State has expressly waived any entitlement to rely on State Immunity and
has agreed to submit to the Court’s jurisdiction; accordingly it falls within the
exception contained in section 2 of the Act;

ii) it was party to a commercial transaction and the present proceedings relate to
that transaction; accordingly it falls within the exception contained in section
3 of the Act;

iii) it was a party to the arbitration agreement contained in Article 9 of the JVA,
alternatively is estopped from denying that fact by virtue of the Interim Award;
accordingly it falls within the exception contained in section 9 of the Act.

Factual Background

9. It is necessary to set out the factual background to the JVA and the arbitration
proceedings in some greater detail than the brief summary which I have already given.

10. In 1989, Swedish and Lithuanian parties commenced discussions concerning the

exploitation of certain of Lithuania’s oil reserves. Discussions were initially
conducted between Svenska, on the one hand, and the Soviet Corporation of
Geological Works (“LG”) on the other. On 31 January 1991, Svenska and LG signed
a Letter of Intent, outlining a framework for the development and exploration of
Lithuanian oilfields. The parties to the letter of intent were defined as Svenska and
LG only. In March of 1990 the Republic of Lithuania declared its independence.
After independence, LG had to be liquidated. The liquidation of Soviet style
companies was a common occurrence in all newly independent States following the
collapse of the Soviet Union and the gradual replacement of Socialist law with legal
systems more consistent with market economies. Geonafta succeeded to LG as the
State Enterprise having a right to explore and develop oilfields in Lithuania. All
rights and obligations under the Letter of Intent were transferred to Geonafta. This
was confirmed by agreement between Svenska and Geonafta dated 13 June 1991.
The parties to this agreement were Svenska and Geonafta only. Negotiations
continued as I describe in greater detail below in relation to the concluding of an
agreement for the development and exploration of the oilfields. Geonafta held the
legal licence to exploit the oil reserves which were the subject matter of negotiations.
The project would require State approval. In addition, petroleum exploration and
exploitation were a priority in view of the trade embargo imposed by the Soviet Union
in response to Lithuania’s declaration of independence. Lithuania had been the very
first of the Soviet States to restore its independence. Accordingly, the State
Geological Survey (“SGS”) participated in discussions and reported to the State on
progress. Various drafts of the JVA were prepared by Svenska between 1991 and
1993. Some early versions of the arbitration agreements mentioned the State and it
was proposed that the State should agree to an ICSID arbitration clause. As I shall
describe below in greater detail, the final version of the JVA did not include such a
provision.

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

11.

It was eventually decided to create a joint venture company as the vehicle for
cooperation between Svenska and Geonafta. This was reflected in the text of the draft
JVA dated March 1992. This draft also introduces the concept of the “Founders” of
the joint venture company. The term, “Founder,” has a legal meaning under
Lithuanian law corresponding to that of an incorporating shareholder. All drafts of
the JVA subsequent to March 1992 define Svenska and Geonafta as the “Founders.”
They also provide that Svenska and Geonafta are to be the incorporating shareholders
of the joint venture company, each holding 50% of the shares.

References to both the State and ICSID arbitration were removed from subsequent
drafts of the arbitration clause which on its face refers only to arbitration between the
two “Founders” of the JVA, Svenska and Geonafta, pursuant to ICC Rules.

By Government Resolution dated 27 March 1993, the State approved the terms of the
JVA and the issuing of licences in relation to the Gencai oilfield. This resolution also
specifically authorised Dr Gediminas Motuza, Head of SGS, to approve the JVA. On
28 April 1993, Svenska and Geonafta signed the JVA. The JVA provided for
signature by each founder. The State also signed the last page of the JVA, but
separately from the signatures of the Founders and under the following rubric in the
English version:

“The Government of the Republic of Lithuania hereby
approves the above agreement and acknowledges itself to be
legally and contractually bound as if the Government were a
signatory to the Agreement.”

The Lithuanian text of the expression accompanying Lithuania’s signature is slightly
different. It states:

“the Government of the Republic of Lithuania approves this
agreement and undertakes the obligations as a signatory
thereto.”

As the JVA was executed in both Lithuanian and English, Article 37 of the JVA
accords equal weight to both versions of the text. However I do not attach any
significance to the slightly different wording for the purpose of the issues which I
have to determine.

Pursuant to the terms of the JVA, a joint venture company was established by
Svenska and Geonafta, called UAB Genciu Nafta (“the JV Company”). In the
preamble to the JVA, Svenska and Geonafta were defined as “Founders.” Svenska
and Geonafta, as “Founders,” each held 50% of the share capital of the JV Company.
The State was not defined as a “Founder” under the JVA and did not hold any shares
in the JV Company.

Article 41 of the JVA provided that the parties would develop either or both of the
Kretinga and Nausodis oilfields by a separate agreement. Disputes arose principally
in respect of the development and exploration of the Kretinga and Nausodis oilfields.
Article 41 of the JVA provided:

“Fields within the Agreement Area

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

As soon as practical after the Effective Date, Svenska shall
carry out a technical economic feasibility study in respect of the
Kretinga and Nausodis fields within the Agreement Area and
the Parties shall, where the study, in the opinion of the Parties
proves this to be economically feasible, develop either or both
fields by a separate agreement”

Svenska and Geonafta failed to agree terms for the development of the Kretinga and
Nausodis oilfields as envisaged at Article 41 of the JVA. Geonafta, which held the
licence to develop these oilfields prior to the JVA, continued to develop them
independently of Svenska. Svenska claimed that the JVA entitled Svenska to
exclusive rights to develop the Kretinga and Nausodis oilfields. As a result, Svenska
filed a Request for Arbitration with the ICC Secretariat on 12 June 2000. On 19 and
29 August 2000, the State wrote to Svenska and the ICC Secretariat stating an
objection to jurisdiction on the alleged grounds that the State had not consented to
arbitrate differences with Svenska. A three-member tribunal was appointed
comprising Messrs Mogens Skipper-Pedersen, Edward Greeno and Gytis Kaminskas.
Terms of Reference were agreed with the arbitral tribunal on 8 August 2001. These
were signed with an express reservation in respect of jurisdiction on the State’s part,
in the following terms:

“[The State] declares that its signature of these Terms of
Reference does not constitute an acceptance of the jurisdiction
of the ICC Court of Arbitration and/or the Arbitral Tribunal.”.

On 16 and 17 October 2001, a hearing took place in Copenhagen on the issue of the
arbitrators’ jurisdiction over the State. As I have already stated, the Tribunal issued
the Interim Award on jurisdiction on 21 December 2001 in which it held that it had
jurisdiction over the State. The Tribunal held that the State was a party to the JVA. It
relied, in part, on the words of the JVA which express the State’s consent to be
contractually bound by the JVA. At page 63 of the Interim Award the Arbitrators
held:

“The Arbitral Tribunal holds that by signing the [JVA] and by
acknowledging itself to be legally and contractually bound “as
if the Government were a signatory to the agreement,”
GOVERNMENT became a party to the Joint Venture
Agreement with SVENSKA and [Geonafta] ... By this
signature, the agreement became effective in accordance with
article 11.1 of the [JVA]. This interpretation is supported by
Government Resolution No 205 of 27 March 1993, in which
the Government authorises the Minster of Energy and Mr
Motuza to approve the founding agreement of the Genciu Nafta
enterprise “on behalf of the Government.” The Arbitral
Tribunal cannot accept Government’s allegation that this
signature is merely an approval by GOVERNMENT in its
administrative capacity. As pointed out by Svenska, the [JVA]
vests a number of rights and obligations on the part of
GOVERNMENT, and it needs a strong support, which is not
available in this case, to consider that GOVERNMENT’s
signature is of no significance to such rights and obligations...”

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

In the absence of any indication in the wording of the JVA or any other indication of
intentions in relation to the arbitration agreement, the Tribunal also relied on a
presumption of Lithuania’s intent. At pages 63 and 65 the arbitrators said:

“The Arbitral Tribunal also holds that by signing the [JVA],
GOVERNMENT is bound by the arbitration clause in article 9.
Although GOVERNMENT signed the [JVA] in a different
capacity than a “Founder,” we have found _ that
GOVERNMENT is as a party to the [JVA] signed “as if it was
a “signatory” and therefore became bound by the provisions of
the [JVA], as if GOVERNMENT had been a “Founder.”
GOVERNMENT is therefore also bound by the arbitration
provision in article 9 unless there is support for an allegation
that GOVERNMENT intended a different dispute resolution
mechanism. [...] Such support does not exist.” ...

“The [JVA] was an agreement between three parties, each
having its rights and obligations ...In such a contract there is an
implicit assumption that the parties have agreed to the same
dispute resolution mechanism.”

The State complains that, in coming to their conclusion, the arbitrators did not take
into account international law and practice, nor did they consider accepted practice in
the international petroleum industry except to the extent that arbitration was an
accepted form of dispute resolution in that industry. The State also complains that the
arbitrators did not take into account the separability of the arbitration agreement, but
instead assumed that the use of the word “Founder” was an imprecision owing to late
changes to the draft JVA; that the arbitrators did not base their decision on positive
evidence that Lithuania had, in fact, consented to arbitrate disputes with Svenska; and
that, instead, the arbitrators’ reasoning appears to have been based on three grounds:

i) the absence of any evidence that Lithuania’s signature did not amount to an
implied agreement to arbitrate disputes with Svenska;

ii) the absence of any evidence that Lithuania intended a different dispute
resolution mechanism to apply from that provided for under Article 9 of the
JVA; and

iii) an assumption that Lithuania agreed to the arbitration agreement at Article 9 of
the JVA.

As I have already stated, following a two-week hearing on the merits, in which the
State fully participated, the Tribunal issued the Final Award on 30 October 2003.
Both the State and Geonafta were ordered to pay damages of USD $12,579,000 plus
interest and costs on a joint and several basis. Although the State’s written
submissions to the Tribunal formally maintained “all arguments and allegations put
forward in the course of the arbitral proceedings previously”, and raised arguments
about the arbitrability of certain issues, there was no further point taken in argument
about the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, based on the State’s allegation that it was not
party to Article 9 of the JVA.

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

20.

21.

As I have likewise already said, on 2 April 2004 Svenska issued ex parte proceedings,
seeking leave to enforce the Final Award and for service out of the jurisdiction. In
addition to the subsequent procedural history which I have already set out in
paragraph 7 above, I should mention that on 29 September 2004, Svenska applied to
have the State’s Part 11 Application struck out or alternatively dismissed, on the
grounds that pursuant to CPR Part 24 the State had no real prospect of successfully
defending the claim. In short, Svenska contended that:

i) the State having participated in a hearing before the Tribunal on jurisdiction;

ii) the Tribunal having found in the Interim Award that Lithuania was bound by
the arbitration clause set out in Article 9 of the JVA;

iii) the State having not appealed the Interim Award, but rather having participated
in the hearing before the Tribunal on the merits; and

iv) the State having not appealed the Final Award, but rather having chosen to
defend the matter on enforcement;

the State was now estopped from arguing that it was not a party to the arbitration
agreement.

Svenska’s application was dismissed by Mr Nigel Teare QC, sitting as a Deputy High
Court judge of this Court, on 10 January 2005. The judgment is reported as Svenska
Petroleum Exploration AB v. Republic of Lithuania [2005] 1 Lloyd’s Rep. 515. In
summary, Mr Teare QC held that, under s.101(1), Arbitration Act 1996, the Court
must recognize the arbitrators’ Interim Award unless the State brings itself within one
of the grounds for inviting the court to decline recognition in s.103(2). If the State
brought itself within one of the grounds within s.103(2) for refusing recognition of the
Interim Award, the Court would have a discretion to refuse recognition. One of the
grounds giving rise to a discretion was that the State was not a party to the arbitration
agreement pursuant to which the Arbitrators purported to act. He then went on to
hold that, even if it were to be accepted that the State could establish that it was not a
party to the arbitration agreement, the Court would, for the purposes of the
application, nevertheless exercise its discretion to recognize the arbitrators’ Interim
Award. He said at paragraph 27:

“27. In my judgment the present case is an appropriate case
in which to exercise the discretion conferred upon the
Court by section 103(2) of the Act to recognise an
arbitration award by permitting the Claimants to rely
upon it in defence of the Government's claim to set
aside the proceedings notwithstanding that, leaving
aside the effect of that award, the Government could, it
is assumed, prove that it was not a party to the
arbitration agreement. Firstly, having objected to the
tribunal's jurisdiction on the grounds that it was not
party to the arbitration agreement the Government
participated in a two day hearing on that very issue in
Denmark in October 2001 when both factual and
expert evidence on the law of Lithuania was adduced.

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

22.

Secondly, the tribunal decided that issue against the
Government in an interim award published in
December 2001 of some 69 pages which set out
extensively the facts and evidence relied upon, the
expert evidence of Lithuanian law, the arguments of
the parties and the reasoning and conclusions of the
tribunal. Thirdly, having lost on that issue, the
Government did not take the opportunity to seek a
review of the interim award in the Danish Courts. No
reason was suggested as to why this step could not
have been taken. Fourthly, the Government
participated in a 13 day hearing on the merits which
resulted in a final award against the Government
published in October 2003. Fifthly, having decided
not to challenge the final award in the Danish Court in
February 2004 and to notify the Claimants of the
Government's position, the Government then, after the
Claimants took steps to enforce the final award in
April 2004, claimed immunity from the jurisdiction of
this Court, a contention which could only made good if
the State was not party to the arbitration agreement,
contrary to the decision of the arbitral tribunal in its
interim award which the Government had not
challenged.”

Accordingly he decided to recognise the Interim Award. However, having recognized
the Interim Award, he accepted that he then had to decide, for the purposes of the
application before him, whether the Interim Award gave rise to an issue estoppel on
the question whether the State was a party to the arbitration agreement. He held that
it was clear that the arbitrators’ decision that the State was a party to the arbitration
agreement in Article 9 of the JVA was a decision which followed a hearing on the
merits. However, in order to establish the issue estoppel, it was also necessary for the
Claimant to prove that the decision of the Tribunal was “final and conclusive”. This,
the Deputy Judge held, Svenska could not do. He decided that, because it had not
been established for the purposes of the application before him that the right to
challenge the Interim Award under Danish law had been lost once and for all, the
Interim Award was not, in the relevant sense, “final and conclusive”. The Deputy
Judge therefore held that he could not, on a Part 24 application, say that the State was
estopped from arguing that it was not a party to the arbitration clause in Article 9. In
paragraph 36 and 37 of his judgment he stated:

“36. ... Having considered the evidence on Danish law it
seems to me that it cannot be said that the decision of
the arbitral tribunal in Denmark finally and
conclusively determined that the Government was
party to the arbitration agreement.....

37. There was discussion in the evidence of Danish law as
to the circumstances in which, by reason of delay or
waiver, the right to review the interim award might be

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

lost but this did not feature in the Claimants’ argument.
It was not said, for example, that although the interim
award did not, as at the date of the award, finally and
conclusively determine the question whether the
Government was party to the arbitration agreement, yet
it now did because of delay in exercising, or waiver, of
the right of review.”

Does the State fall within the exception contained in section 2 of the Act?

23. The first issue for my determination is whether the State falls within the exception
contained in section 2 of the Act. Section 2 provides (so far as is material) as follows:

“(1) A State is not immune as respects proceedings in
respect of which it has submitted to the jurisdiction of
the courts of the United Kingdom.

(2) A State may submit after the dispute giving rise to the
proceedings has arisen or by a prior written agreement;
but a provision in any agreement that is governed by
the law of the United Kingdom is not to be regarded as
a submission.

(3) A State is deemed to have submitted -
(a) if it has instituted the proceedings; or
(b) subject to subsections (4) and (5) below, if it
has intervened or taken any step in the
proceedings.
(4) Subsection (3)(b) above does not apply to intervention

or any step taken for the purpose only of —

(a) claiming immunity; or

(b) asserting an interest in property in
circumstances such that the State would have

been entitled to immunity if the proceedings
had been brought against it.”

24. One of the terms of the JVA was Article 35, which provided as follows:
“GOVERNING LAW AND SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY

35.1 GOVERNMENT and EPG hereby irrevocably waives
[sic] all rights to sovereign immunity.

35.2 This Agreement shall be governed by the laws of
Lithuania supplemented, where required, by rules of
international business activities generally accepted in

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

25.

26.

27.

28.

the petroleum industry if they do not contradict the
laws of the Republic of Lithuania.”

However, the State contends that, on its true construction (as allegedly demonstrated
by evidence as to the purpose of Article 35, given by a Professor Katuoka and
corroborated by a Mr Zukovskis), Article 35 amounted to a waiver of Sovereign
Immunity in respect of Geonafta only (Geonafta being at the time of entry into the
JVA a state enterprise), and that all that the State was doing under the terms of the
clause was to give its consent to Geonafta’s own waiver.

The JVA contains no express submission to the jurisdiction of the English Court.
Article 9 of the JVA does contain an arbitration agreement referring disputes between
the two “Founders” (which is the collective definition set out in the preamble to the
JVA of Geonafta and Svenska) to inter alia ICC arbitration and is in the following
terms:

“9.1 Disputes between the Founders concerning the
performance or interpretation of this Agreement are
settled through negotiations between the Founders.

9.2 In the event that disputes cannot be settled within 90
days of the receipt of the written notice by either
Founder about the existence of such disagreement, the
disputable matter shall be submitted upon agreement
of the Founders for consideration to:

(a) the Court of the Republic of Lithuania; or

 

(b) independent arbitration in Denmark,
Copenhagen, to be conducted in accordance with
International Chamber of Commerce Rules of
Arbitration in the English language. In case the
Founders do not reach agreement on the
institution where the dispute is to be settled, the
disputable matter shall be submitted for
consideration to an independent arbitration
provided in sub-paragraph (b) of this paragraph.”

The State contends — and it is a critical plank of its case - that, because it is not a
“Founder”, it is not a party to the agreement to arbitrate. This is an issue to which I
will have to turn later in this judgment in the context of the submissions on section 9
of the Act. It submits, that even if, contrary to its primary contention, the State itself
agreed to waive its own, as opposed to Geonafta’s, sovereign immunity under Article
35, that waiver under Article 35 did not per se amount to a submission to the English
Court’s jurisdiction for the purposes of section 2; accordingly, Article 35 cannot
assist Svenska unless the State is also found to have agreed that it would be a party to
arbitration proceedings under Article 9 of the JVA.

Therefore the questions which, as I see it, I have to decide under this head are as
follows:

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

29.

30.

i) on the true construction of Article 35, did the State waive its own sovereign
immunity thereunder, or did Article 35 amount to a waiver of Sovereign
Immunity in respect of Geonafta only;

ii) if the former, did the waiver of the State’s immunity in clause 35.1 amount to a
submission to the jurisdiction of the English court, irrespective of whether the
State was a party to the arbitration agreement contained in Article 9 of the
IVA.

If the answer to sub-issue ii) is that the waiver of the State’s immunity contained in
clause 35.1 amounts to a submission to the jurisdiction of the English court only if the
State was in fact a party to the arbitration agreement under Article 9 of the JVA,
because only in that event would the Court have jurisdiction to enforce the Award,
then there is no separate or free-standing issue under section 2 of the Act, since in
reality the issue falls to be decided under section 9.

Subject to the points referred to below, it was common ground that the JVA had to be
construed in accordance with its governing law, namely Lithuanian law, and that the
relevant principles of construction were contained in Articles 6.193-5 of the
Lithuanian Civil Code as elaborated in a commentary by a Professor Mikelenas (“the
Commentary”). However, the parties were not in agreement as to the relevance and
importance of the principal text of the contract or whether Article 6.193 represents a
complete statement. In addition, the State relied on “international law and practice”,
which Mr Shackleton identified as “the interpretations of similar situations by other
arbitral tribunals and by the courts of the United States, France and Switzerland where
these issues have arisen”. It was also common ground that, although the expert as to
foreign law has to provide the English Court with the relevant foreign principles and
rules of construction, in relation to a contract it was for the English Court, in the light
of those principles and rules to determine the meaning of the document; see Dicey
and Morris, The Conflict of Laws (2000) qd3" Edition) at paras. 19-019 and 32-188-
9; the Fourth Supplement thereto (2004) at p.26 and authorities there cited; and
Rouyer Guillet & Cie v Rouyer Guillet & Co Ltd. [1949] 1 All ER 244 (CA).
Accordingly, both parties correctly accepted that the views, given by their respective
experts as to the true interpretation of the contract, were not admissible evidence.
Likewise, the subjective views of Mr Zukovskis as to the interpretation of Article 35
were not legitimate aids to my determination.

Articles 6.193-5 of the Lithuanian Civil Code and the relevant commentary
(excluding footnotes) are as follows:

“Article 6.193: Rules on Interpretation of Contracts

1. A contract must be interpreted in accordance with
good faith. In interpreting a contract, it is necessary
primarily to determine the parties’ good intentions and
not rely only on a literal interpretation of the text of the
contract. In the event the real intentions of the parties
cannot be established, the contract must be interpreted
in accordance with the meaning that reasonable
persons analogous to the parties would have attributed
to it in the same circumstances.

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

2. All terms and conditions of the contract must be
interpreted taking into account their interrelation, the
essence of the contract as well as its purpose and the
circumstances of its conclusion. When interpreting a
contract, it is necessary to have due regard to usual
terms and conditions, although they are not provided
for in the contract.

3. In the event of doubt concerning terms which may
have several meanings, the meaning, which is most
suitable according to the nature, essence and subject-
matter of the contract, shall be attributed to these
terms.

4. In the event of doubt concerning contractual
conditions, these shall be interpreted against the
contracting party that proposed such conditions, and in
favour of the party that accepted them. In all cases, the
conditions of a contract must be interpreted in favour
of consumers or a party who concludes a contract by
way of adherence.

5. When interpreting the contract, pre-contractual
negotiations, an established course of conduct between
the parties, post-contractual conduct and existing
usages shall be taken into consideration as well.

Article 6.194: Language Discrepancies

Where a contract is drawn up in two or more languages and all
texts of the contract have equal legal force, in the case of
discrepancy between the versions, preference shall be given to
the text which was drawn up first.

Article 6.195: Filling in Gaps of a Contract

Where parties leave certain matters unagreed, which are
necessary for the performance of the contract, the court, at the
request of a party, may fill in such gaps in the contract by
establishing appropriate conditions, taking into account non-
mandatory legal norms, the intentions of the parties, the
purpose and essence of the contract, standards of good faith,
reasonableness and justice.

The Commentary:

1. The Article commented on repeats Articles 4.1 — 4.6 of
the UNIDROIT Principles. The contract has to be
interpreted when a dispute arises between the parties

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

concerning its validity, type, nature, amendment,
termination, true meaning of one or another condition,
etc.

In accordance with Article 45 of the Law on Approval,
Entry into Force, and Implementation of the Civil
Code of the Republic of Lithuania, Article 6.193-6.195
of the Civil Code are applied to the interpretation of
contracts irrespective of the time of their conclusion.
This rule is set out because the rules on the
interpretation of contracts provided in the Article
commented on are not new — they were known and
recognised by both legal doctrine and judicial practice
before the entry into force of the Civil Code.

Paragraph 1 of the Article establishes two significant
principles of interpretation of contracts. First,
contracts must be interpreted in good faith. This
principles requires that consideration be given to the
intentions of both parties, analysis of the contract as a
whole, and not certain part[s] of it, and in case of
doubt as to the validity of a contract, to give priority to
an interpretation that confirms the validity of the
contract, etc. In addition to good faith, the principles
of justice and reasonableness must be applied when
interpreting contracts. For instance, both good faith
and justice require that a contract be interpreted in
favour of a party which is economically weaker, e.g.
for the benefit of the consumer or an employee or a
party which concluded the contract by way of
adherence.

Second, the Article commented on embodies the
principle of subjective interpretation of contracts
which requires the determination of the true intentions
of the parties and not only the written text of the
contract. This principle means that in case of any
discrepancy between the textual meaning of provisions
of the contract and the true intentions of the parties,
priority must be given to the parties’ true intentions
which they had in mind when concluding the contract.
However, this principle should not be overestimated.
In case the parties’ true intentions vary, attention
should be focused on the textual analysis of the
contract, since it might be helpful in determining
which party’s intentions correspond to the textual
meaning of the contract. Therefore, the Article
commented on also establishes that when the parties’
true intentions cannot be determined, the contract must
be interpreted in the way a reasonable person, being a

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

party under identical circumstances, e.g. having the
same profession, experience or qualification, would
understand its text.

2. Paragraph 2 of the Article being commented on sets
out several other principles of contractual
interpretation. First, this Article establishes the
principle of systemic interpretation of the contract
which requires any contractual condition to be
interpreted with regard to the entire context of the
contract. Furthermore, no part of the contract, annex
or any other constituent part should be left without
consideration or evaluation (e.g. it is necessary to
have regard to the preamble of the contract, its
annexes, subsequent amendments, etc). In this case,
the presumption that each word or phrase has a certain
meaning and significance is valid, as usually parties do
not use them without a reason. Therefore, it is
necessary to determine the meaning of each word or
phrase, and not on the contrary, to state that one or
another word or phrase is meaningless or insignificant.
Also, it is necessary to bear in mind that terms and
conditions of a contract are of two types: explicitly
expressed and implicit (Article 6.196 of the Civil
Code). Therefore, when interpreting a contract, due
regard must be paid not only to explicitly expressed
terms and conditions, but also to implicit terms and
conditions, for instance, those which are usually found
in contracts of a similar nature. When interpreting
contracts, it is necessary to take into account traditions
of the trade, mutual relations between the parties, the
circumstances of the conclusion of the contract, etc.

Another principle of contractual interpretation is the
determination of its objectives. The purposes of a
contract may help to reveal the parties’ true intentions,
the meaning of one or another condition, etc. The
purposes of the contract may help to determine the
type, nature of the contract and the extent of mutual
rights and duties of the parties.

3. Paragraph 3 of the Article commented on sets out the
tule of interpretation when polysemic words and
definitions are encountered. Frequently, the same
words may have several meanings. Sometimes parties
indicate in the contract interpretations of definitions
used in the contract. Definitions must be interpreted in
the way they were defined in the contract by the
parties. Words or definitions the meaning of which is
not set out in the contract must be assigned the

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

meaning which is most acceptable in terms of the type,
nature, essence, subject-matter, parties of the contract
and other important circumstances.

4. Paragraph 4 of the Article being commented on
embodies the so-called contra preferentem rule. This
means that terms and conditions that are unclear and
ambiguous in the contract are to be interpreted against
the benefit of the party which proposed or drafted
them. For instance, unclear and ambiguous terms and
conditions of a contract are to be interpreted against
the benefit of the party which drafted them and in
favour of the party who concluded the contract by way
of adherence. As most consumer contracts are
contracts of adherence, the Article being commented
on sets a general rule that in case of doubt, it is
necessary to interpret contracts for the benefits of users
and the party which has concluded the contract by way
of adherence, i.e., the party who is economically
weaker.

5. Paragraph 5 of the Article being commented on sets
out the general rule that not only the text of the
contract, but also the actual circumstances surrounding
the conclusion and fulfilment of the contract as well as
other action of the parties are important for the
interpretation of the contract. Therefore, when
interpreting a contract, it is necessary to take into
account the parties’ pre-contractual negotiations,
signed documents of negotiations, verbal and written
statements by the parties, exchanges of
correspondence, established relations between the
parties, traditions of the trade and other customs, actual
acts of the parties when concluding, fulfilling or
making any amendments, etc to the contract. Actual
acts of the parties must also be interpreted in order to
determine the true intentions of the parties (paragraph
1 of the Article being commented on).

 

Frequently, after lengthy negotiations parties include
in the contract a special condition indicating that this is
to be the sole agreement and the whole previous
correspondence of the parties or the signed documents
become invalid (the reservation of integration or
consolidation). However, such a contractual condition
does not have any impact on the interpretation of the
contract — the whole pre-contractual documentation
between the parties may be used for the interpretation
of the contract and for the determination of the
common intentions of the parties.”

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

31.

32.

33.

34.

In my judgment, and applying the rules and principles set out in Article 6, as
amplified by the Commentary, on the true interpretation of Article 35 of the JVA, the
State clearly waived its own sovereign immunity thereunder, and it is impossible
sensibly to construe Article 35 as amounting to a waiver of Sovereign Immunity in
respect of Geonafta only. Every draft of the JVA, except the first draft, and the final
version of the JVA, contained a clause by which both Geonafta and the State waived
state immunity and submitted to arbitration under the auspices of ICSID (International
Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes). At no point did either party ever
suggest that the waiver of immunity was restricted to Geonafta and that was all to
which the State was agreeing. Accordingly on this issue I construe the JVA against
the State’s contentions.

I now turn to consider the question whether the waiver of the State’s immunity in
clause 35.1 amounts to a submission to the jurisdiction of the English court, for the
purposes of section 2 of the Act, irrespective of whether the State was a party to the
arbitration agreement contained in Article 9 of the JVA. For the purposes of deciding
this issue as a free standing one, I assume that the State did not agree to arbitrate
issues between itself and Svenska under Article 9.

The issue whether such a waiver of immunity amounts to a submission to the
jurisdiction of the court is discussed by Dickinson, et al, State Immunity, Selected
Materials and The Commentary at pages pp.349-50:

“Some difficulty may arise .... in the event that an agreement
contains, not a provision submitting disputes to the English
courts (or other courts in the United Kingdom), but a provision
merely setting out the State’s agreement to waive any immunity
that it may possess in any jurisdiction in which the counterparty
should choose to bring proceedings. Such an agreement does
not sit comfortably within the framework of s.2. The English
courts may have jurisdiction in respect of the subject-matter of
proceedings brought against a State in these circumstances, but
that would not be because the State had submitted to the
jurisdiction in the normal sense. To fall within s2(1), the
waiver of immunity provision would have to be characterized
as a submission by the State to the jurisdiction of the English
courts to the extent that such courts may have jurisdiction under
their own rules in the absence of consent. It is submitted, that
such characterization, whilst not free from artifice, would
accord with the spirit of the section”

Mr. Bools submitted that Article 35.1 of the JVA should be characterized in the way
suggested: he contended that Svenska was understandably wary about entering into a
commercial contract with the nascent Republic of Lithuania and only agreed to do so
because the State agreed to contract on the same basis as a private party; he submitted
that an agreement irrevocably to waive all rights to immunity only makes sense if
interpreted as an agreement to be treated as a private party. He submitted that, by
agreeing to be treated as a private party the State, as Dickinson suggests, agreed to
submit to the Courts of foreign states to the extent that they would have jurisdiction
over private parties (i.e. to the extent that they would have jurisdiction absent
consent); and that, as is demonstrated by the English Court’s jurisdiction over

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

35.

36.

Geonafta in the present case, the Court would have jurisdiction over the State under
its ordinary jurisdictional rules for private parties. In support of his submission that
Article 35.1 should be interpreted as an agreement by the State to be treated as if it
were a private party, Mr Bools relied upon the judgment of Saville J., as he then was,
in A Company Ltd v. Republic of X [1990] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 520. In that case clause 6
of the relevant agreement provided that

“The Ministry of Finance hereby waives whatever defence it
may have of sovereign immunity for itself or its property
(present or subsequently acquired).”

Saville J. held that

“It seems to me that, read in the context of what was
undoubtedly a commercial bargain between the parties, the
intent and purpose of the clause is quite clear, namely, to put
the State on the same footing as a private individual so that
neither in respect of the State not its property would any
question of sovereign immunity arise in connection with the
State’s obligations to the plaintiffs under the agreement. [at p.
523, col 1.]”

Mr. Bools submitted that, in the present case, the purpose of Article 35 is similarly
clear.

I do not accept Mr. Bools’ submissions. I cannot sensibly construe clause 35, which
is purely a waiver of the State’s immunity, as a written submission to the jurisdiction
of the English Court within sections 2(1) and (2) of the Act. My reasons may be
summarised as follows.

In my judgment, A Company Ltd (supra) is clearly distinguishable on its facts. In that
case, as well as the express waiver of immunity “for itself and for its property” in
clause 6 of the relevant agreement, there was an express choice of law clause (which
on its own did not engage section 2 - see section 2(2)) and an express submission to
the jurisdiction of the English Court and to arbitration in England. That was at clause
7, which was in the following terms:

“7, Governing Law and Arbitration

(a) This agreement shall be governed by... the laws of
England...and the [State] hereby submit (sic) to the
jurisdiction of the English courts.

(b) Any dispute relating to....shall be resolved in London
... under the auspices of, and accordance with the rules
and regulation of the Coffee Trade Federation.”

The State had expressly accepted that it had, by clauses 6 and 7 submitted to the
jurisdiction of the English court in respect of claims under the agreement. The
relevant issue in A Company Ltd was whether the State was entitled to invoke
immunity from a Mareva injunction under subsections 13(2) and (3) of the Act.

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

37.

38.

Those subsections expressly provide that there should be no injunction or other relief
against a State unless it gives written consent, and that a provision merely submitting
to the jurisdiction of the courts does not amount to such consent for the purposes of
the subsection. Thus the question in the case was whether the immunity given in
clause 6 amounted to a written consent to injunction relief and other enforcement
measures, not whether such a clause amounted to a submission to the jurisdiction,
which is the issue here. Not surprisingly, Saville J concluded that, in the context of
the commercial agreement which he had to consider (which contained, in another
clause, not only an express submission to the jurisdiction of the English Court but also
an agreement to arbitrate here), the waiver of immunity at clause 6, in particular by its
reference to property, clearly amounted to a consent to enforcement measures, or, in
other words, a waiver of State immunities in relation to enforcement.

In this case, on the other hand, the question is whether, on the stated hypothesis (i.e.
no agreement on the part of the State to submit to arbitration under Article 9), the
waiver of immunity amounts to a submission to the jurisdiction of the English Court.
That seems to me to be a very different question. In the absence of any such
submission in the JVA, it is, in my judgment, not only wholly artificial, but also
wrong, to say that a waiver of immunity such as contained in clause 6 can be treated
as a consensual submission to the jurisdiction of the English Court for the purposes of
section 2 of the Act, simply on the basis that the State has under Article 35 agreed to
waive all immunity points. Moreover, in the absence of an agreement on the part of
the State under Article 9 to submit to arbitration (and, on this hypothesis, there was no
such agreement), the characterisation of the waiver of immunity provision “as a
submission by the State to the jurisdiction of the English courts to the extent that such
courts may have jurisdiction under their own rules in the absence of consent” leads
nowhere, as the English courts would not have jurisdiction to enforce an arbitration
award against a non-party to the arbitration. Moreover, there is either a submission to
the jurisdiction or there is not. There is an inherent difficulty in characterising a
clause such as clause 35 as a submission to the jurisdiction of the English Court, for
immunity purposes, but not for other purposes. But to interpret the waiver as a
submission to the jurisdiction of the English Court for all purposes would clearly be
impermissible, as it would be imposing obligations upon the State, to which it never
agreed.

 

I accept Mr Shackleton’s submission that the Act lays down a presumption of
immunity, which applies subject to the exceptions set out in the Act. There is no
authority to support a freestanding concept of waiver, outside the scope of the Act. If
there were such authority, I was not referred to it. A State will enjoy immunity
pursuant to Section 1 of the Act, unless one of the exceptions can be proven. Thus
any waiver alleged must conform with the requirements of the sections of the Act
which provide exceptions to immunity, for example an express submission to the
English Courts or an express submission to arbitration. Accordingly I reject
Svenska’s submissions on section 2.

Section 3 of the Act - Is the State a party to a commercial transaction and do the present
proceedings relate to that transaction?

39.

The second issue which arises is whether the State falls within the exemption afforded
by section 3 of the Act. Section 3 provides that:

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

“(1) A State is not immune as respects proceedings relating
to—

(a) a commercial transaction entered into by the
State...

(3) In this section ‘commercial transaction’ means —

(a) any contract for the supply of goods or services

(c) any other transaction or activity (whether of a
commercial, industrial, financial, professional or
other similar character) into which State enters or
in which it engages otherwise than in the
exercise of sovereign authority.”

Is the State a party to a commercial transaction?

40.

Al.

42.

The first question under this head is whether the JVA was a commercial transaction
entered into by the State or whether it was a signatory to the JVA merely in an
administrative capacity or in the exercise of its sovereign authority.

Mr Shackleton, on behalf of the State, submitted that, as a matter of fact, the JVA is
not a commercial transaction as far as it concerns the State; that the State was never a
commercial party to the JVA, nor indeed defined as a “party” to the JVA at all; that
there was evidence from Dr Gediminas Motuza, (who was involved in the
negotiations for the JVA in his capacity as Director of the Geological Survey, which
supervised and regulated Geonafta) and Professor Katuoka (the expert in Lithuanian
law on behalf of the State), that Lithuania’s role in this project was not commercial
but public, relating as it did to the regulation and licensing of the country’s natural
resources; and that the provisions relied on by Svenska as examples of commercial
obligations of the State are not commercial matters, but areas generally relating to the
public interest and the administrative and regulatory spheres; and that there was no
evidence that the State was getting into the oil business itself.

Although the JVA is arguably somewhat of a hybrid agreement, on this point I prefer
the submissions of Mr Bools, as to the correct characterisation of the JVA. I did not
find the evidence of either Dr Motuza or Professor Katuoka of any assistance on this
point. I conclude that the JVA is a commercial transaction as defined in subsections
3(3)(a) and (c). This can be seen from certain of the relevant terms of the JVA. I
refer to the following by way of example, although there are others that support the
conclusion. Although not in terms an option, Article 18 effectively provides the State
with the right to purchase all of the oil produced under the agreement at market price.
Article 18D defines the ratios of profit sharing between EPG and Svenska. Article
18E provides:

 

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

43.

44.

“T. It is presumed that Government will purchase and take
all oil produced hereunder at Market Price as defined
in Article 19.2. If Government does not pay (30 days
after invoice or on other mutually agreeable terms) for
the crude oil take in hard currency, then each Party
shall be allowed to take its shares hereunder in kind.

2. If Svenska and/or EPG shall elect to take its/their
shares hereunder in kind, Government shall give
whatever licence or permission may be required to
allow export of oil from [Lithuania].”

In effect the JVA granted the State the right to buy all oil produced under the JVA at
market price. Only if the State did not elect to do so, could Geonafta and Svenska
export the oil produced for sale elsewhere.

Under Article 21, moreover, the State gave the joint venture the right to use certain
assets and infrastructures, with the right to the State and Geonafta to remove and use
assets purchased by Svenska or Geonafta, which had become the property of the joint
venture, but had become surplus to its requirements. There was also a warranty given
by the State to Svenska that the Joint Venture would have the right to use the areas
required for operations, as though it were the legal owner, and a release given by the
State to Svenska in respect of any liability for environmental damage together with a
contractual indemnity in favour of Svenska in the event that it did incur any liability
in respect of such damage. Importantly, under Article 33 the State was given wide
contractual rights of cancellation of the entire JVA as against Svenska, with a
corresponding obligation upon the State to pay the fair market value of Svenska’s
share of the field facilities left behind in Lithuania. Furthermore, under Article 40.1
the State agreed that Svenska would be granted an option to develop additional oil
fields within Lithuania in a specified area. Svenska was to propose a work
programme; if the State deemed it unsatisfactory and solicited alternative proposals
from others, Svenska was given the opportunity to match those proposals. In the
event that it did so, the parties agreed that Geonafta and Svenska would form a further
joint venture to “carry out the exploration work proposed and develop any discoveries
which are deemed commercial”. In substance this clause gave Svenska a valuable
commercial option over these additional fields. Further Article 40.2 provided
Svenska with the entitlement to “opportunities to participate in bidding for
exploration development and production of petroleum” in Lithuania outside the
specified areas. Finally, Article 41 provided for the parties to develop the Kretinga
and Nausodis fields:

“As soon as practical after the Effective Date, Svenska shall
carry out a technical-economic feasibility study in respect of
the Kretinga and Nausodis fields within the Agreement Area
and the Parties shall, where the study, in the opinion of the
Parties proves this to be economically feasible, develop either
or both fields by separate agreement.”

As the Tribunal stated at page 66 of the Interim Award, the dispute between Svenska
and the State was one which related to an alleged breach by the State of its express or
implied contractual obligations under, in particular Articles 40 and 41 of the JVA.

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

4S.

46.

Moreover, as the Tribunal stated at page 68 of that Award, which I have quoted
above, the JVA “is a commercial contract regarding the exploration and exploitation
of oil fields within Lithuania”. Whilst I am not in any way bound by the views of the
Tribunal, I share its views as to the correct characterisation of the contract.

As to the question whether the State was a party to a commercial transaction, not only
did the State expressly assume a raft of obligations under the final JVA, but it also
signed it and agreed that it was “legally and contractually” bound by it. In addition to
the articles to which I have already referred above, the following articles of the JVA
make it clear that the State was a party to, and assumed obligations under, the JVA:

i) Article 11 provided that the Agreement was only effective when all parties,
including the State, signed it. Article 11.2 provided that the Agreement could
only be changed with the State’s consent.

ii) Article 15.1 granted the joint venture company the right to the oil extracted
under the Agreement, a right which only the State could grant.

iii) Under Article 24 the State granted an exemption from customs duties.

iv) Article 26 granted the State a right of access to records and reports and in
return the State gave an undertaking of confidentiality.

v) Similarly, Article 29 granted the State a right of access to the Agreement Area
and in return the State gave the joint venture an indemnity in respect of loss or
damage.

vi) Article 31 gave the State a right of requisition and in Article 31.4 the State
gave an indemnity in return.

vii) Article 34 defined the State’s position in the event of a force majeure event.

Accordingly, whatever may be the position in relation to the agreement to arbitrate,
(which is an issue that I consider below), it is clear in my judgment that, by signing its
acknowledgement that it was “legally and contractually bound” and by accepting
obligations and rights under various of the clauses of the JVA, the State was clearly a
party thereto. In my judgment, therefore, the JVA was a “commercial transaction,
entered into by the State”.

Do the present proceedings relate to that transaction?

47.

48.

The second question, which arises under this head, is whether, for the purposes of
section 3 of the Act, Svenska’s enforcement proceedings under section 101 of the
1996 Act are proceedings “which relate to a commercial transaction”.

For the State, Mr Shackleton submitted that, even if the JVA was a commercial
transaction as far as the State is concerned, these proceedings do not relate to the
underlying commercial transactions of the JVA, but rather to the Final Award and its
enforcement. He argued that, in this respect, a clear distinction is drawn between
adjudicative and enforcement proceedings and that these proceedings clearly fall into
the latter category. He submitted that the distinction is laid down in the provisions of
the Act itself and relied upon the decision of Stanley Burnton J in AJC Ltd v. The

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

Federal Government of Nigeria [2003] EWHC 1357, where it was held that
proceedings for the registration of a foreign judgment under the Administration of
Justice Act, 1920 were not proceedings relating to a commercial transaction. In that
case, Nigeria asserted immunity. The judgment creditor, which was owed unpaid
commission on sales, argued that the underlying transaction was commercial and
invoked the Section 3 exception to State immunity. The same argument as that now
put forward by Svenska was rejected by Stanley Burnton J, who stated at paragraph
24:

“(b) Do the proceedings relate to a commercial
transaction entered into by a State?

24. In my judgment, the proceedings resulting from an
application to register a judgment under the 1920 Act
relate not to the transaction or transactions underlying
the original judgment, but to that judgment. The issues
in such proceedings are concerned essentially with the
question whether the original judgment was regular or
not: see section 9(2)(a) to (f). The correctness of the
original judgment on questions of law or fact is
irrelevant. Section 9(2)(d), the fraud exception, is
exceptional: in effect, a judgment obtained by fraud is
treated as irregular, on the basis that “fraud unravels
all”. The registering court is entitled to examine the
nature of the cause of action underlying the original
judgment only under section 9(2)(f), which is a narrow
and seldom-applied exception concerned’ with
illegality and the like.

25. This conclusion is supported by reference to section 9
of the State Immunity Act, which applies where a state
has entered into a written arbitration agreement, and
excludes immunity “as respects proceedings in the
courts of the United Kingdom which relate to the
arbitration”. Most, if not all, arbitration agreements
entered into by a state relate to commercial
transactions entered into by that state. If, for the
purposes of the Act, proceedings relating to the
arbitration also relate to the underlying commercial
transaction, it is difficult to see why section 9 was
required.

 

26. Furthermore, if Parliament had intended the State
Immunity Act to include an exception from immunity
relating to the registration of foreign judgments, it
would have been illogical to limit it to commercial
transactions entered into by the state (which is the
consequence of AIC’s contentions), with no provision
for the registration foreign judgments where the
exception to immunity before the original court was

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

the equivalent of one of the other exceptions to
immunity in that Act.

27. In Holland v Lampen-Wolfe [2000] 1 WLR 1573, Lord
Millett, at 1587F to H, opined that the words
‘proceedings relating to’ in section 3(1)(a) should be
given a narrow construction. This is consistent with
my above conclusion.

28. It follows that, even if the underlying transaction
between AIC and the Defendants were commercial,
section 3(1)(a) of the State Immunity Act is
inapplicable. There is in this case no other relevant
exception to the immunity of a state from the
jurisdiction of this court. It follows that the Nigerian
judgment should not have been registered under the
1920 Act.

29. This conclusion means it is unnecessary to consider
whether any issue estoppel arising from the foreign
judgment applies to the question whether the state
defendant entered into a commercial transaction. Both
parties in the present case assumed that this court must
determine that question itself. My provisional view is
that this is correct. However, in a case in which the
claimant has obtained judgment from a foreign court
on an alleged contract with the state defendant, but the
defendant denies that it entered into the contract, this
implies that this court might arrive at a conclusion
inconsistent with the judgment of the foreign court on
the merits. That would be an anomalous situation. It
is an added reason for preferring the narrow
interpretation of section 3(1)(a) of the State Immunity
Act.

30. The conclusion that the Defendants are immune from
the proceedings for the registration of the judgment in
this country is unsurprising. Leaving aside Admiralty
proceedings and the like, the underlying principle of
the State Immunity Act is that a state is not immune
from the jurisdiction of the courts of the United
Kingdom if it enters into commercial transactions or
undertakes certain activities having some connection
with this jurisdiction. Purely domestic activities of a
foreign state are not the subject of any exception to
immunity. Sections 3(1)(b), 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 11 all
contain territorial qualifications to the exceptions to
immunity to which they relate. Section 3(1)(a) does
not include any such qualification, but even there the
claimant wishing to bring proceedings must establish a
basis for jurisdiction under CPR Part 6.20, normally

 

   

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

49.

under paragraphs (5) or (6), relating to contractual
claims. Paragraph (5) requires that the contract be one
which was made within the jurisdiction, or made by or
through an agent trading or residing within the
jurisdiction, or (in the case of a foreign state
defendant) be one which the state has agreed should be
governed by English Law or subject to the English
courts having jurisdiction. Paragraph (6) is limited to
breaches of contract committed within the jurisdiction.
The Nigerian judgment in this case relates to a purely
domestic matter, and I do not think that it was ever
intended that the State Immunity Act should exclude
immunity in such cases.”

Mr Bools, on the other hand, submits that I should not follow the decision of Stanley
Burnton J in AJC Ltd v. The Federal Government of Nigeria, because the decision is
not binding upon me and, it is said, the judge’s reasoning was unsatisfactory. In
support of this submission, Mr Bools argued as follows:

i) The question of the meaning of the words “relating to” is one of statutory
construction aimed at ascertaining the intention of Parliament. The words
“proceedings relating to” as a matter of ordinary language are wide enough to
cover the present situation: the present proceedings “relate to” the JVA.
Notably, the words Parliament chose to use were “relate to” and not, for
example, “arising directly out of’. Some looser connection between the
transaction and the proceedings must therefore have been intended.

ii) Tf that is right, the question becomes whether there is any reason to believe that
Parliament intended to depart from the ordinary meaning of the words it used.
There is none.

iii) The underlying principle behind section 3 is clear enough: states should have
immunity in relation to Sovereign activities, but if a state descends into the
commercial arena, it should be dealt with as if it were a private party. It would
be illogical to limit that treatment to adjudication to the exclusion of
enforcement proceedings.

iv) Treating states in this way would not result in the courts interfering in
domestic transactions of other states unconnected with the United Kingdom,
because the court’s ordinary jurisdictional rules will still have to be satisfied.

v) The suggested reading of section 3 is not incompatible with section 9
expressly dealing with arbitral proceedings: the fact that a state might lose
immunity under two provisions of the Act is not surprising. Therefore it is no
answer to say that most commercial transactions contain arbitration clauses
and would fall within Article 9 in any event. Some would not and would
therefore only be covered by section 3.

vi) Finally, there is no force in the argument that it would be illogical to limit
enforcement of judgments/awards to those arising out of commercial
transactions while not applying it to other transactions covered by other

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

50.

51.

sections of the Act: each section of the Act has to be considered according to
its own terms: so, for example, section 4 deals with “proceedings relating to a
contract of employment between the State and an individual...” It may well be
that enforcement proceedings in relation to an employment award equally
“relate to a contract of employment” in the same way that the present
proceeding relate to a commercial transaction.

In my judgment, I should follow the decision of Stanley Burnton J in AJC Ltd v. The
Federal Government of Nigeria largely for the reasons which he gives. Although the
view expressed by Lord Millett in the House of Lords in Holland v Lampen-Wolfe
[2000] 1 WLR 1573, at 1588, that:

“In my opinion the words “proceedings relating to” a
transaction refer to claims arising out of the transaction, usually
contractual claims, and not tortious claims arising
independently of the transaction but in the course of its
performance.”

was strictly obiter, it shows that the phrase “proceedings relating to the transaction”,
in the context of Section 3 of the 1978 Act, should indeed be given a narrow
construction; that is to say, they should be limited to claims that arise out of the
contract or transaction itself, and not extended to those arising out of some subsequent
act, albeit that that act itself might loosely “relate to” the contract or transaction. A
claim to enforce an arbitration award necessarily “arises out of” the award. As Mr
Bools realistically accepted, there is a clear analogy between proceedings to register
judgments and proceedings to enforce arbitration awards. The decision in AJC Ltd v.
The Federal Government of Nigeria has been cited with some approval by Dame
Hazel Fox QC in the introduction to her work The Law of State Immunity, Oxford
University Press (2002) at page xxvii, although she questioned the judge’s reasoning
by reference to the utility of section 9 of the Act, stating ibid. that his reading “may
neglect the prime purpose of section 9 which was to construe consent to arbitration as
submission to the English Court’s jurisdiction”. Be that as it may, and even
accepting, as Mr. Bools submits, that there well may be situations where there is no
overlap between a section 3 case and a section 9 case, I conclude that these
enforcement proceedings under section 101 of the 1996 Act do not relate to the
underlying commercial transactions of the JVA, but rather to the arbitration and the
Final Award.

Accordingly Svenska’s case under section 3 of the Act fails.

Issue Estoppel

52.

The issue that arises under this head is whether, given that the arbitrators decided in
the Interim Award that the State was a party to the arbitration agreement in Article 9
of the JVA, the State is estopped from contending that it was not so bound. As I have
already said, in his judgment of 11 January 2005 on Svenska’ Part 24 application, Mr.
Teare Q.C held that Svenska had established all the necessary elements of an issue
estoppel, save for establishing that the Interim Award was, as a matter of Danish law,
final and conclusive. He held that, for these purposes, an arbitrators’ award on
jurisdiction was only final and conclusive if it could no longer be challenged under
the law of the courts with supervisory jurisdiction over the arbitration.

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

The State’s threshold submission on this point is that Mr. Teare QC has already
decided the issue of issue estoppel relating to the Interim Award adversely to Svenska
on the Part 24 application and it is therefore not open to Svenska to re-argue the point
before me. The State contends that the issue has been determined on the merits by
Mr. Teare in a final and conclusive judgment, Svenska having sought permission to
appeal the decision of Nigel Teare QC, (which was granted) but then electing not to
appeal. In other words, Mr. Shackleton submitted that Svenska itself was estopped
from raising the point again and that it would be an abuse to do so. Mr Shackleton
further submitted that, even if it were technically open to Svenska to do so, the
decision was a fully reasoned finding on the merits and Mr. Teare’s judgment should
be regarded as finally determinative of the matter.

I reject Mr. Shackleton’s threshold submission. I accept Mr. Bools’ submission that
Mr. Teare’s decision was only given in the context of the CPR Part 24 application.
Although the Deputy Judge did not expressly say so, it is clear that all he was
deciding was whether the State’s claim to immunity should be struck out or dismissed
pursuant to Part 24 as being hopeless on the grounds of issue estoppel; he was not
determining the actual issue himself. This is clear from the terms of the order made
by him on 11 January 2005 which merely dismissed the Claimant’s Part 24
application. A course that would have been open to him, had he thought it
appropriate to have done so, would have been to have given a final judgment on the
issue in the State’s favour; see CPR Part 24.2 and the notes at 24.6.2. He did not do
so.

Moreover, it is clear from paragraph 37 of his judgment, that he was not, on the
application before him, considering the argument presented before me by Mr. Bools
(but not before the Deputy Judge) that, although the Interim Award did not, as at the
date of the Interim Award, finally and conclusively determine the question whether
the State was party to the arbitration agreement, yet it now did because of the State’s
delay in exercising, or waiver of, the right of review. Mr Bools told me that the
reason why such an argument was not advanced at the stage of the Part 24 application
was that it could not be said that the contrary argument — that the right of challenge
had not been lost — was unarguable, such that it had no real (as opposed to fanciful)
prospect of success for the purposes of the Part 24 application. In contrast, such an
argument was run before me.

Accordingly, this court is not precluded from adjudicating on the issue, as it is well-
established that an interim, or interlocutory, decision of this type does not give rise to
res judicata or issue estoppel.

I therefore have to decide whether, on the evidence before me, as at the present date,
and on the balance of probabilities, the Interim Award was final and conclusive, so as
to give rise to an issue estoppel. In practice this means that I have to decide whether
it is more likely than not that the First Defendant has, as a matter of Danish law, now
lost the right to challenge the arbitrators’ Interim Award, it being common ground
that, if it could no longer be challenged under the law of the courts with supervisory
jurisdiction over the arbitration (i.e. the Danish Courts), the decision would indeed be
final and conclusive.

At the hearing before Mr Teare Q.C. both parties filed expert evidence of Danish
arbitration law: these reports were also relied upon in evidence before me. Svenska

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

59.

60.

relied on the Report of Messrs. Joren Gronborg and Peter Fogh and the State relied
on the Report of Messrs. Kim Hakonsson and Kim Frost. Both experts’ reports
agreed that not only could the Final and Interim Awards theoretically be the subject of
challenge or appeal in the Danish courts on any of the grounds set out in sections 7(1)
and 7(3) of the Danish Arbitration Act (Act no. 81 of 24 May 1982), but also that the
same defences could be relied upon in any enforcement proceedings brought in the
Danish Courts by the successful party under section 9 of the Danish Arbitration Act.

Both reports expressly addressed the question of whether the right to challenge the
Interim Award had been lost and both agreed as to the applicable test as a matter of
Danish law. Messrs. Gronborg and Fogh stated that if a party had left “an
unreasonably long time to pass” before challenging an award, that fact (taking into
account all of the circumstances of the case) will be interpreted as an expression that
the party has, in reality, accepted the award. [Gronborg and Fogh Report, §2.8.]
Messrs Hakonsson and Frost put the test in much the same way:

“\.. if a party does not appeal an award within a reasonable
time, the courts may find that the party due to unreasonable
delay in asserting a right has forfeited his right to appeal the
award” (Hakonsson and Frost Report, p.6).

Has the State’s delay in challenging the Interim Award become “unreasonable” such
as to preclude it from challenging it? On that Svenska’s experts expressed the
following views:

“If an extended period of time has lapsed after the arbitration
award was executed, the courts may, however, find that the
lack of action has constituted an implied acceptance of the
arbitration award and consequently a waiver of the right to
challenge. ...

It is in our opinion not possible to state when an ‘unreasonably
long time’ has passed. When exercising a ‘test of
reasonableness’ Danish courts will take all circumstances into
consideration and the circumstances will rarely be the same
from case to case. It is, however, our opinion that a party, who
are dissatisfied with an Arbitration Award, but does not
commence legal proceedings or raises a challenge as a defence
until almost three years later will be seen by the Danish courts
as having waived the right to challenge. [Gronborg and Fogh
Report, §2.8]”

Messrs Hakonsson and Frost, the State’s experts, were more equivocal:

“However, if a party does not appeal an award within a
reasonable time, the courts may find that the party due to
unreasonable delay in asserting a right has forfeited his right to
appeal the award ....

[W]hat constitutes ‘reasonable time’ is not clear. If the
Lithuanian government decides to appeal the interim award

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

61.

before the Danish courts, the relevant court would review the
matter and make a decision on the question. In our opinion the
fact that more than three years has passed since the final award
was announced implies a right that a Danish court would not
consider an appeal at this point of time as an action within
‘reasonable time’. It is, however, difficult to estimate that risk.
[p.6]”

Mr Shackleton contended:

i)

ii)

iii)

iv)

v)

vi)

vii)

viii)

that the State’s expert report equates the provisions relating to challenging
awards and those relating to defending enforcement procedures;

that both sides’ experts’ reports showed that the Final Award could be subject
to challenge by the Danish courts on any of the grounds set out in sections 7(1)
and 7(3) of the Danish Arbitration Act (Act no. 81 of 24 May 1982); that
there would therefore be no issue preclusion in respect of the argument that the
State had not agreed to arbitrate; and thus if Svenska were to seek to enforce
the final award in Denmark today, the State would “certainly” be able to raise
a defence to enforcement proceedings based on the lack of consent to arbitrate;

the question of whether the State is party to the arbitration agreement at Article
9 of the JVA is clearly reviewable by the Danish courts, either in a challenge
to the Award itself (Interim or Final), or as a defence to any enforcement
proceedings which may be brought by Svenska in Denmark;

Svenska’s latest submission invites this court to speculate as to how much
weight a Danish court would give to the State’s decision not to challenge the
award, but to challenge its enforcement, and this is not a legitimate exercise
for this Court;

the experts clearly agree that the court would have to weigh up all the
circumstances in reviewing whether a challenge to the award, or a defence of
enforcement proceedings, would succeed; but the courts nonetheless would
have jurisdiction to consider the question of whether the State was a party to
the arbitration agreement and that its decision on this question would depend
upon the context in which the question was raised; and that this clearly argues
against any issue estoppel arising as a matter of law;

if there is a question to be decided under Danish law on the merits, it is
unsatisfactory that the court has not had the benefit of hearing oral evidence
from the experts on the point raised (again) by Svenska;

that the Danish law evidence cannot be regarded as such as “to prove an issue
estoppel”; moreover, the expert evidence has not been fully argued and tested
in cross examination and the State has not been given the opportunity to reply
to Svenska’s fresh allegations;

Accordingly Lithuania’s final submission on this issue is that this Court cannot
be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the question of consent to
arbitration has been decided finally and conclusively under Danish law.

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

62.

63.

64.

I reject these submissions by the State. It is clear from reading the expert reports
submitted by both sides, that, although whether the State was a party to the arbitration
agreement at Article 9 of the JVA might have been an issue that was prima facie
reviewable by the Danish courts, either in a challenge to the Award itself (Interim or
Final) brought by the State by way of appeal, or as a defence under section 9 of the
Danish Arbitration Act to any Danish enforcement proceedings brought by Svenska,
the question could nonetheless arise in either such proceedings whether the State was
precluded from raising such an argument as a result of the passage of time, its failure
to challenge the Interim or the Final Awards, waiver or any other relevant
circumstance. In other words, the possibility exists under Danish law that the Interim
Award had indeed become final and conclusive, gave rise to an issue estoppel and
therefore precluded the State either from challenging the Interim Award by way of
appeal, or by way of a defence to any Danish enforcement proceedings brought by
Svenska. I do not find such a position surprising, since it equates to the position in
relation to English arbitration proceedings under sections 31 and 73 of the English
Arbitration Act 1996. Second, with the assistance of the Danish expert evidence as to
the relevant principles which a Danish supervisory Court would apply to determine
the matter, this Court is in as good a position as a Danish court to consider whether
the State’s delay in seeking to challenge the Interim Award is reasonable, such that
the supervisory court would permit the State now to challenge that Award. Moreover
the fact that it may not be possible as a matter of law to state with certainty or
definitively when an ‘unreasonably long time’ has passed, does not mean that a
Danish Court could not, or would not, decide whether, in all the circumstances, a
party has indeed lost the right to challenge an arbitral award, nor does it preclude me
from doing so. Moreover, the function of the Danish law evidence is not “to prove an
issue estoppel” or to disprove it either. Its function, in the circumstances, where
Danish law does not identify a specific date when, or event upon the happening of
which, the State would be precluded from challenging the Interim Award, is to
articulate the relevant legal principles by which the Danish Court would be guided in
determining if such a time had arrived.

The views of the respective Danish law experts were clearly set out in their reports
and, in the event, did not differ greatly. There was no need for that evidence to “be
fully argued and tested in cross examination” as Mr. Shackleton submitted. Moreover
no application was made by the State either to cross-examine Svenksa’s experts or for
an adjournment of the application. The State had every opportunity to deal with
Svenska’s case on this point, which cannot be regarded as involving the raising of
fresh allegations.

In my judgment, on the balance of probabilities, were the Danish Court now to
address itself to the issue whether the Interim Award was binding, or whether the
State was still free to challenge that Award before the Danish Court, as the
supervisory court of the arbitration proceedings, the Danish Court would conclude
that it was no longer open to the State to do so. The Interim Award was rendered on
21 December 2001, now nearly four years ago. The State had every opportunity to
challenge the Interim Award, had it chosen to do so. But it deliberately did not take
advantage of that opportunity; instead it chose fully to participate in the arbitral
hearing on the merits, which led to the Final Award. Moreover, as the passage at
page 238 of the Final Award, which I have cited above, shows, after the Interim
Award had been given, the State did not “argue .. that [Svenska’s] .. claim for

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

damages is not arbitrable or that the Arbitral Tribunal otherwise lacks jurisdiction
with respect to this claim”. No doubt the State fully participated in the substantive
hearing hoping for success before the Tribunal. Had it been successful, it would then
have been entitled to have relied upon the Award, for example in resisting any
proceedings which might have been brought by Svenska against it in Lithuania. It
passed the Governmental Resolution on 11 February 2004, referred to above, deciding
effectively not to challenge the Final Award, and further resolving that the resolution
be specifically communicated to Svenska. No doubt Svenska relied upon that
decision in informing its strategy as to what further steps it would take to enforce the
Final Award. In all those circumstances it seems to me unlikely in the extreme that a
Danish supervisory court would now permit the State to challenge the Interim Award
in the Danish Courts. I consider that, on the balance of probabilities, a Danish Court
would decide that any appeal at this point of time to the Danish Courts to challenge
the Interim Award would not be an action within ‘reasonable time’ and that they
would regard the State, for the purposes of those proceedings and any enforcement
proceedings, as effectively having waived its right to do so. I therefore agree with
Mr. Bools’ submission that, in all the circumstances, the Interim Award gives rise to
an issue estoppel and debars the State from arguing before the English court that it
was not a party to the arbitration agreement in Article 9 of the JVA. Accordingly, in
my judgment, because of the issue estoppel, the State is not entitled to rely on the fact
that it alleges that it was not a party to the arbitration agreement in the context of its
claim to state immunity.

Scope of section 9 of the Act

65.

66.

67.

The next issue that arises is whether section 9 applies to proceedings which are for the
enforcement of an award delivered in foreign arbitration proceedings and therefore
whether Svenska can rely on the exception. Section 9 of the Act provides as follows:

“(1) Where a State has agreed in writing to submit a dispute
which has arisen, or may arise, to arbitration, the State
is not immune as respects proceedings in the courts of
the United Kingdom which relate to the arbitration.

(2) This section has effect subject to any contrary
provision in the arbitration agreement and does not
apply to any arbitration agreement between States.”

Svenska contends that proceedings for the recognition and enforcement of an Award
are proceedings “which relate to the arbitration” within section 9 and that the meaning
of those words is plain. Accordingly, on the basis that the State is indeed estopped
from denying that it was a party to the arbitration agreement in Article 9 of the JVA, it
contends that the exception in section 9 applies and therefore the State cannot claim
immunity.

The State, on the other hand, submits that section 9 does not apply, first, to
enforcement proceedings and, secondly, to proceedings which relate to the
enforcement of a foreign arbitral award. It contends for a limited interpretation of the
scope of Section 9. It contends that these enforcement proceedings do not “relate to
an arbitration”, for the purposes of section 9 of the Act, but rather solely to the

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

68.

arbitration award. The proceedings, it is said, are not supportive of the arbitral
process, but relate to the enforcing jurisdiction’s treatment of the arbitration award.

Mr. Shackleton’s submissions on this point may be summarised as follows:

i)

ii)

There is no connecting factor between the arbitration clause or the dispute and
the United Kingdom or the courts of the United Kingdom. Support for the
view that in such circumstances section 9 is not engaged is to be found in
Dicey & Morris (2000) The Conflict of Laws 13th edition, London, Sweet &
Maxwell at page 251:

“This exception applies to proceedings relating to the
arbitration, including proceedings to enforce the arbitration
agreement or for review of an award. The Bill which resulted
in the 1978 Act expressly provided that this Exception did not
apply to proceedings for the enforcement of the award.
Although the question is not free from doubt, it is suggested
that the exception does not apply to enforcement of an award.”

Further support is to be found in Dame Hazel Fox’s article (1988) “States and
the Undertaking to Arbitrate,” 37 International and Comparative Law
Quarterly, page 1 at page 13, and also in The Law of State Immunity, Oxford,
Oxford University Press at 166 to 167. At the former passage Dame Hazel
Fox explains some of the reasons why enforcement proceedings do not come
with the scope of the Section 9 exception:

“First the section contains no express limitation to proceedings
relating to arbitration of commercial matters. Had section 9
followed Article 12 of the [ECSI]...and one of its purposes was
to ratify that Convention- it would have restricted the
proceedings to “commercial or civil matters.” By omitting to do
so, it theoretically covers all arbitration, domestic and
international, relating to non commercial matters. For States
the distinction has great importance; many disputes with
private parties arise by reason of the exercise of governmental
power, or involve mixed issues of commercial law or public
law. It is in this sensitive area that a State may consent to
settlement by arbitration where it would adamantly oppose
reference to a local court. To impute automatically submission
to the local court by reason of the consent to the agreement to
arbitrate is to endanger States’ willingness to consent to any
third party process of settkement. The 1958 New York
Convention on Reciprocal Enforcement of Arbitral Awards
recognises the significance of the distinction between
commercial and non-commercial matters by allowing States to
limit the obligation of their courts to give effect to foreign
awards...‘which are considered as commercial under the
national law of the State making the declaration.”

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

iii)

iv)

v)

vi)

These considerations, submits Mr Shackleton, are particularly relevant in the
circumstances of this arbitration given the non-arbitrable (and non-
commercial) nature of many of the disputes that arise under Lithuanian law.

Mr Shackleton also relies upon Dame Hazel Fox’s rationale for a limited
interpretation of the scope of Section 9 (ibid. at page 14):

“The second omission appears to be any limitation of the
section to English arbitration. Is an undertaking by a State to
refer a future dispute to arbitration outside the United
Kingdom, and for which the proper law is foreign law, within
the section so as to constitute consent to proceedings in the
English court? [...] Although as far as I know, the point has not
appeared in any English reported case, this disregards the
additional requirement that the English court will require a
jurisdictional connection between itself and the arbitration
agreement, such as England being the place of arbitration,
which would rule out such extreme situations. Certainly in the
United States [...] the case law after some hesitation has
emphasised the need for territorial links with the US courts and
refused to construe a waiver of immunity in respect of one
jurisdiction as waiver to all jurisdictions. On this analogy
consent to arbitration in England may constitute consent to
proceedings in English courts, but consent to arbitration
elsewhere will not [...] Had section 9 once again followed the
wording of Article 12 of the European Convention there would
have been no ambiguity. Article 12 expressly limits the local
court proceedings to those relating to the validity or
interpretation of the arbitration agreement, arbitration
procedure and setting aside the award...Such a limitation
would seem to have been in conformity with the general
approach which was to separate off enforcement measures and
to require a separate express consent by the State to their
application.”

Further he submits that section 9 does not apply in relation to disputes of a
public nature relating to a state’s licensing of the natural resources on its own
territory, particularly when the resources presented a valuable energy source in
a time of political and economic transition.

Further he submits that the wide construction considered by Svenska conflicts
with the approach of the European Convention on State Immunity 1972. One
of the purposes of the State Immunity Act 1978 was to ratify the Convention.
Article 12 of the Convention provides:

“Where a Contracting State has agreed in writing to submit to
arbitration a dispute which has arisen or may arise out of a civil
or commercial matter, that State may not claim immunity from
the jurisdiction of a court of another Contracting State on the
territory or according to the law of which the arbitration has

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

vii)

viii)

ix)

taken or will take place in respect of any proceedings relating
to:

(a) the validity or interpretation of the arbitration
agreement;

(b) the arbitration procedure;

(c) the setting aside of the award,

unless the arbitration agreement otherwise provides.”

He then submits that this is not a case where it is legitimate to place any
reliance upon Hansard. The words of section 9 of the Act are not ambiguous
or obscure as required under the first limb of the test in Pepper v Hart as
outlined by Lord Browne—Wilkinson at [1993] AC 634. Nor can it fairly be
said that either suggested construction leads to an “absurdity” as is required by
that case, whatever the merits of either construction.

Even if regard is to be paid to the passages in Hansard relied upon by Svenska,
these short statements cannot be regarded as determinative of the issue of the
proper construction of section 9. In particular, no evidence has been put
forward that section 9 was intended to apply to disputes arising out of a
foreign State’s regulation of its underground natural resources.

Mr Shackleton also placed reliance upon certain United States authorities. He
submitted that, despite the broad language of the American Foreign Sovereign
Immunity Act, in the United States, a number of decided cases have declined
to infer waiver from the existence of an arbitration agreement in a contract,
particularly where there was no link with the United States. It appears that
some form of territorial connection, or a willingness to submit to the
jurisdiction of any State, will be required before American courts will allow a
waiver of sovereign immunity. Thus:

a) In Verlinden B.V. v. Central Bank of Nigeria 488 F. Supp. 1284
(S.D.N.Y 1980) the parties entered into a contract regarding the sale of
cement. The contract contained a provision providing for ICC
arbitration and the application of Netherlands law. The plaintiff,
however, sued on a letter of credit, not the cement contract. The letter
of credit contained neither provision. If Nigeria waived immunity, it
did so only for disputes under the contract. Even if this was not the
case, the Southern District of New York held that when a foreign state
agrees to submit its disputes with another, non-American private party,
to the laws of a third country, it does not implicitly waive its immunity
as to the jurisdiction of the courts of the United States.

b) In Obntrup v. Firearms Center, Inc. (1981) 516 F. Supp. 1281 D.C.C
an action in tort was brought against the seller of a gun which
malfunctioned and caused damage. The seller joined the manufacturer
of the gun, a public corporation in Turkey. The corporation claimed
immunity. The plaintiff relied on an arbitration clause in the agreement

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

69.

between the seller and the manufacturer whereby disputes were to be
submitted for settlement by the International Chamber of Commerce in
Paris; and argued that the arbitration clause amounted to a waiver.
Pollak J. rejected the argument and held that

“a waiver of immunity by a State as to one jurisdiction
cannot be interpreted to be a waiver as to all
jurisdictions.”

c) In Zernicek v. Petroleos Mexicanos, 614 F. Supp. 407 (S.D. Tex.)
1985 the court stated:

“[MlJost courts have refused to find an implicit waiver of
immunity to sue in American courts from a contract
clause providing for arbitration in a country other than
the United States.”

d) Other authority supports the position. Hans Smit has stated in H. Smit,
(1981) International Contracts, New York, Mathew Bender, at page
259 that:

“[I]t may well not be an effective waiver for the
purposes of subject matter and in personam competence
when suit is brought on the award in a place other than
that of the arbitration. After all a person who agreed to
an arbitration clause does not contemplate proceedings
in a place other than that in which the arbitration is to
take place and perhaps the place in which he resides.
Construing a waiver of immunity clause as waiving
objection to suit in a place with which the defendant has
no reasonable connection would appear not only unfair
but may also be unconstitutional.”

I do not accept these submissions. In my judgment, there is no linguistic or other
basis for construing the language used in section 9 of the Act (particularly when
viewed in the context of the execution provisions of section 13) as excluding
enforcement proceedings, or as excluding proceedings which relate to the
enforcement of a foreign arbitral award. Nor is there any justification for excluding
arbitrations which “may relate to disputes of a public nature relating to a state’s
licensing of the natural resources on its own territory”. If, however, there is any
doubt, or any ambiguity in the language, such that it is legitimate to place reliance
upon Hansard, then the Parliamentary proceedings leading to the enactment of the Act
resolve that ambiguity. As Dame Hazel Fox has observed — see State Immunity ibid.
at page 167 -

“During the passage of the bill through Parliament a clause
excluding a provision for the enforcement of an arbitral award
was deleted from this section. This and the reference in section
13(4)(b) to an arbitral award would seem to indicate that
proceedings may be brought for registration to turn an award
into an order of the court, provided leave to serve proceedings

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

70.

71.

abroad can be obtained under CPR 6.20-12 ... Section 13,
relating to measures of enforcement, would govern how any
such court order could be executed.”

The debate in the House of Lords to which Dame Hazel Fox referred is reported in
Hansard, 16 March 1978, Cols 1516-17.

“The Lord Chancellor moved Amendment No.15 ...
Page 5, line 13, leave out subsection (2).

This Amendment is intended to remove the immunity
currently enjoyed by States from proceedings to enforce
arbitration awards against them. Clause 10(1) [as s.9 then was]
removes immunity from proceedings relating to arbitration
where the State had submitted to the arbitration in the United
Kingdom, or according to United Kingdom law, but by
subsection (2) enforcement proceedings are excepted; that
exception is now to be removed. If the Government
Amendments to Clause 14 are accepted, the property of a State
which is for the time being in use or intended for commercial
purposes will become amenable to execution to satisfy and
award. However, it would not be possible to proceed to such
execution without first bringing enforcement proceedings to
turn the award into an order of the court on which the execution
could be levied, and unless the State had waived its immunity
to enforcement, Clause 10(2) would prevent the necessary steps
being taken. This Amendment will delete the subsection.”

The Amendment was agreed. It is clear therefore that section 9, as enacted, was
indeed intended to apply to proceedings for the recognition and enforcement of
awards.

As [have set out above, the State also argues that there is a requirement of link with
the United Kingdom and that, accordingly, section 9 only applies when there is a
“connecting factor between the arbitration clause or the dispute and the United
Kingdom”. I accept Mr. Bools’ submission that the passage from Dame Hazel Fox’s
“States and the Undertaking to Arbitrate” 37 ICLQ 1 relied upon by Mr. Shackleton
does not support the submission that section 9 requires a connecting factor between
the arbitration and the United Kingdom; that passage merely notes the apparent
omission of “any limitation of the section to English arbitration”. Moreover, the
Parliamentary proceedings as reported in Hansard for 28 June 1978, Col 316 make it
clear that the omission was deliberate:

“The Lord Chancellor: My Lords, I beg to move that the
House doth agree with the Commons in Amendment No 2.
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that where a State has agreed in
writing to submit a dispute to arbitration in, or according to, the
law of the United Kingdom, the State is not immune as respects
proceedings which relate to the arbitration. The Amendment
removes the links with the United Kingdom, and by deleting

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

72.

723.

the reference to the United Kingdom or its law, it will ensure
that a State has no immunity in respect of enforcement
proceedings for any foreign arbitral award.”

The Amendment was passed.

Mr. Bools also referred me to Dickinson et al, State Immunity: Selected Materials
and Commentary, §4.068, which summarizes the position in the following way:

“Two important amendments were made to the text of clause
10 of the Bill [which became s.9] in its passage through
Parliament. First, Clause 10(2) excluding the operation of the
exception in “proceedings for the enforcement of an award”
was omitted. Secondly, words limiting the operation of the
exception to arbitrations “in or according to the laws of the
United Kingdom” were excluded, thereby permitting
proceedings relating to foreign arbitrations (including
proceedings to register a foreign award for enforcement).”

In my judgment, it is therefore clear that section 9 was intended to apply to “any
foreign arbitral award” and there is no justification to be found in the language used in
section 9 (in particular when contrasted with that used in section 3) for limiting the
exception to awards relating to purely commercial disputes. Nor do I gain any
assistance from Mr. Shackleton’s citation of the European Convention on State
Immunity 1972 or the U.S authorities to which he referred. The relevant section
which I have to construe is section 9 of the Act, which is in very different terms.
Accordingly, I hold that the present proceedings for the enforcement of a foreign
arbitration award are indeed within the scope of section 9. It follows that, in my
judgment, on the basis that the State is indeed estopped by the Interim Award of the
Tribunal that it was a party to the arbitration agreement, the State cannot rely on
sovereign immunity for the purposes of these proceedings.

Was the State party to the arbitration agreement contained in Article 9 of the JVA?

74.

75.

It is only if I were to be wrong in my finding that the State is estopped by the Interim
Award of the Tribunal that the issue as to whether the State was indeed a party to the
arbitration clause at Article 9 of the JVA arises for my determination. However, in
case this matter goes further, and since I have heard a substantial amount of evidence
and argument on the matter, it is right that I should express my conclusion on this
issue. The point may also be relevant to enforcement proceedings in Lithuania and
Germany. As Mr. Shackleton submitted, it is clear that, in doing so, I have to come to
an independent conclusion on the matter, rather than merely reviewing the decision of
the Tribunal for the purpose of seeing whether the Arbitrators were entitled to reach
the decision which they did.

Two further points should be stated at the outset, since Mr. Shackleton devoted a
considerable time in submission to addressing them. First, I accept that the issue is
whether the State agreed, whether expressly or impliedly, to arbitrate its disputes with
Svenska by the procedure laid down in Article 9; in other words, it is not sufficient
that Svenska establishes merely that the State was party to the JVA; it must also
establish that the arbitration clause was intended to cover disputes between the State

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

and Svenska and the State agreed to be bound thereby. The separability of an
arbitration clause, a concept well-known to English law, is also well-established under
Lithuanian law, as the experts agreed. That proposition is well-established by the
authorities to which Mr. Shackleton referred in paragraphs 222 — 239 of his helpful
opening submissions. Second, I accept that, for the purposes of deciding this issue,
the State cannot be equated with Geonafta, which at all material times was a separate
corporate entity, albeit that at the time of the conclusion of the JVA, it was a state
enterprise, only being privatised in June 2000. I thus accept that the mere fact that a
state enterprise agrees to arbitrate does not itself imply consent by a state itself to
arbitrate. There must be a manifestation of the State’s own intention so to do. That
proposition is well-established by the authorities to which Mr. Shackleton referred in
paragraphs 176 — 221 of his opening submissions.

Applicable law

76.

77.

78.

79.

In order to answer the question what law governs the question whether or not a state
has agreed in writing to submit a dispute to arbitration, the English court must apply
English conflicts rules. Rule 57(1) of Dicey and Morris, The Conflict of Laws (2000)
(13" Edition) provides that the validity, effect and interpretation of an arbitration
agreement are governed by its applicable law. In the absence of exceptional
circumstances, the applicable law of an arbitration agreement is the same as the law
governing the contract of which it forms a part; see ibid. §16-012.

I have already set out above the relevant express choice of law clause contained in
Article 35.2 of the JVA. From that clause it is clear that the applicable law of the
arbitration agreement contained within the JVA is therefore Lithuanian law,
supplemented, where required, by “rules of international business activities generally
accepted in the petroleum industry if they do not contradict the laws of the Republic
of Lithuania”.

The question for the Court is therefore whether, as a matter of Lithuanian law, the
State and Svenska agreed that disputes between them should be submitted to
arbitration. I accept Mr. Bools’ submission that there is no basis, in answering that
question, for having recourse to any other law than Lithuanian. Neither of the parties’
experts suggested that Lithuanian law did not provide the rules necessary to answer
the question. In particular, Prof. Katuoka (the State’s expert) did not suggest that
recourse should be had to anything other than Lithuanian law. Dr Foigt (Svenska’s
expert) said that some members of the judiciary in Lithuania might have regard to the
decisions of foreign courts, but not all. The fact that the Lithuanian courts might look
to other jurisdictions for comparative decisions in particular cases does not suggest
that Lithuanian law on the question of the validity of an arbitration agreement is in
any way inadequate or requires supplementing. Both experts clearly set out the
applicable principles of Lithuanian law in their reports.

Nor does Article 35.2 justify any invocation of principles of “international law” as
Mr. Shackleton suggested. The clause gives primacy to Lithuanian law and only
permits other laws to be referred to where they are “required” to supplement
Lithuanian law, which they are not in the present case. Moreover, even if it were
necessary to so, recourse may only be to the “rules of international business activities
generally accepted in the petroleum industry”. There is no basis for simply asserting
that these rules are the same as the rules of international arbitration. Furthermore,

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

recourse is to be had to such rules only insofar as they do not contradict the laws of
Lithuania. Lithuanian law provides rules for determining whether the arbitration
clause is a valid agreement to arbitrate. Insofar as the rules of international arbitration
are the same as Lithuanian law they add nothing; insofar as they differ, they are
inapplicable because they contradict Lithuanian law. They can, therefore, be
disregarded in any event. The State did not, in any event, adduce any evidence of
what were the “rules of international business activities generally accepted in the
petroleum industry”.

The applicable principles of Lithuanian Law

80.

81.

82.

I heard lengthy expert evidence, both written and oral, relating to Lithuanian law.
However there was, in the main, agreement between the parties on the essential
requirements under Lithuanian law for a valid arbitration agreement. The principal
features may be summarised as follows:

i) At the time that the JVA was concluded there was no requirement that an
arbitration agreement had to be in any particular form; see Professor
Katuoka’s Report, §62-64.

ii) At the time that the JVA was concluded there was no legal impediment to the
State’s agreeing to arbitrate disputes that might arise under that contract; see
the First Report of Dr Foigt, page 7; and Professor Katuoka’s Report, §64.

iii) The principle of the separability of arbitration agreements is well-recognized
under Lithuanian law; i.e. arbitration agreements/ clauses are separable from
the contracts in which they might be contained; see Professor Katuoka’s
Report, §§83 — 89 and Second Report of Dr Foigt, §§27-28.

iv) A valid arbitration agreement required the parties to express their common
will to submit disputes between themselves to arbitration in writing; see
Professor Katuoka’s Report §71-73.

v) Although the JVA was concluded in 1993, when construing it and, in
particular, Article 9, the Civil Code 2000 (which entered into force on 1 July
2001) must be applied; Article 45 of the Law on Approval, Coming into Force
and Enforcement of the Civil Code of the Republic of Lithuania, dated 18 July
2000; see Professor Katuoka’s Report, §§76-77 pp.16-17 and Second Report
of Dr Foigt, §16.

Article 6.193 of the Civil Code, “Rules of the Interpretation of Contracts”, and the
Commentary thereon, (which I have already set out in full above) make it clear that
the process of interpretation of a contract under Lithuanian law is significantly
different from the approach that is applied under English law. In particular, under
Lithuanian law it is legitimate to have regard to a far wider range of factual material,
than would be permissible under English law.

T accept Mr. Bools’ submissions that the following important principles of Lithuanian
law relating to the interpretation of contracts can be derived from the expert evidence
and the materials which they produced:

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

83.

i) The overriding principle is that a contract should be interpreted in good faith.

ii) Thereafter, the Court’s search is for “the real intentions of the parties without
being limited by the literal meaning of the words”. In other words, unlike
under English law, the primary objective is to ascertain what the parties
subjectively actually intended, regardless of the words they used. In the
present case, therefore, the enquiry becomes one into whether Lithuania and
Svenska intended that disputes between them would be resolved by arbitration,
regardless of the literal meaning of the words they used.

iii) In seeking to ascertain the parties’ actual intention, regard must be had to “the
preliminary negotiations between the parties, practices which the parties have
established between themselves, the conduct of the parties subsequent to the
conclusion of the contract, and the existing usages”. Consequently, and again
contrary to the position in English law, the court must look at the negotiations
which led to the conclusion of the contract, take into account earlier drafts of
the contract and consider each party’s subjective intention.

iv) If, despite these sources, what the parties really intended cannot be ascertained
then the court will apply an objective interpretation and give the contract “the
meaning that could be attributed in the same circumstances by reasonable
persons in the corresponding position as the parties”.

The issue before the Court in reality is whether the pre-contractual dealings between
the parties demonstrate that they intended disputes between Lithuania and Svenska to
be submitted to ICC arbitration. I should say that both experts gave their opinions as
to whether or not, applying Lithuanian law to the facts, the State was a party to the
arbitration agreement in Article 9 of the JVA. Professor Katuoka concluded that it
was not; Dr. Foigt concluded that it was. However, as I have already said above,
both parties agreed that, although the expert as to foreign law has to provide the
English Court with the relevant foreign principles and rules of construction, it was for
the English Court, in the light of those principles and rules, and any relevant factual
material, to determine the meaning of the JVA. Accordingly it is not necessary for
me to analyse, accept or reject the respective opinions of the experts as to the true
construction of the JVA.

The State’s principal arguments

84.

qa)
85.

The onus is on Svenska to establish that the State was indeed party to an agreement to
arbitrate. However it is convenient to set out the five principal arguments upon which
Mr. Shackleton relied to support the State’s contentions that it was not a party to the
arbitration agreement.

State not a party to the JVA

The first contention was that the State was not a party to the JVA at all. I have
already rejected this argument, in the context of my decision on section 3 of the Act.
In this context I merely add that it is clear from the evidence before me that the State
was involved with the negotiations with Svenska from the outset.

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

(2)
86.

87.

88.

89.

Article 9 is limited to disputes between Founders

Secondly the State argues that it is not a party to the arbitration agreement in Article
9. It relies in particular on the actual wording of Article 9 of the JVA and its drafting
history. It submits that these are the most important elements in the construction of
Article 9, and that the importance of the text itself and contractually agreed definitions
is clearly set out in the Lithuanian law on the interpretation of contracts. Mr.
Shackleton submitted that there is no room for reasonable doubt as to the meaning of
Article 9: it is expressed in plain terms (with clearly defined legal meaning) and
expressed so as not to include the State. He also submitted that support is also to be
derived from Lithuania’s role in the JVA, which was, on any reading, profoundly
different in character from that of Svenska or Geonafta.

Mr. Shackleton submits that the only parties to the arbitration agreement are the two
Founders which are clearly defined in the JVA as Svenska and Geonafta; that not
only is the meaning of the defined term, “Founder”, clear in the JVA itself, but the
word has an established legal meaning in Lithuanian law, as defined in the Law on
Joint Stock Companies and the Law on Foreign Investments, both of which are
referred to in the preamble to the JVA; that that meaning corresponds to an
incorporating shareholder; that the incorporating shareholders of the JV Company
were Svenska and Geonafta; that the State is defined separately from the parties to
the agreement, at Article 13.12 of the JVA, as the State or effectively any other
Department “having the right to control the activity of the joint venture within the
limits of its competence;” and that the language of the arbitration provision which
refers to “disputes between the Founders,” “negotiations between the Founders” and
notice by “either Founder,” is clearly inconsistent with Svenska’s position that
tripartite arbitration was agreed, but is consistent with an arbitration agreement
between two parties only. Accordingly, he submits, clause 9 is limited to disputes
between Founders and, as the State was not a founder of the JV Company, the clause
cannot cover its disputes with Svenska. The JVA contains a clear definition of the
“Founders.” The preamble of the JVA indicates that Gargzdai State Oil Geology
Company (later reorganised into Geonafta) is a “Lithuanian Founder” and Svenska is
a “Swedish Founder.” Both are referred to collectively as the “Founders.”

Many of these points (but not the conclusion which Mr. Shackleton seeks to draw) are
accepted by Mr. Bools on behalf of Svenska. Thus Svenska does not contend that
EPG/Geonafta and the State were a single entity, nor that under Lithuanian law, the
corporate veil between EPG/Geonafta and the State would be lifted or pierced. It is
not Svenska’s case that the State was a founder (i.e. incorporator or promoter) of the
JV Company. Nor is it Svenska’s case that all references in the JVA to “Founders”
automatically include the State. What Svenska submits is that it was not the parties’
intention that the use of the word “Founder” in Article 9 was intended to exclude the
State from the scope of the arbitration agreement. It is irrelevant to that issue whether
the State was, or could have been, a founder of the JV Company and it is irrelevant
whether it was included in the preamble as one of the “Founders”. Mr. Bools submits
that the simple point is that it was Svenska’s and the State’s common intention that,
irrespective of the language used, they be covered by the agreement in Article 9 to
submit disputes between themselves to ICC arbitration.

 

If I had been approaching the interpretation of the JVA in accordance with English
law principles of construction (and in the absence of a claim for rectification), I would

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

(3)
90.

91.
(4)
92.

93.

reject Mr. Bools’ submissions, as the language of Article 9, when construed in the
context of the entire JVA and against what would be the permissible factual matrix
under English law, does not support the conclusion that the State has agreed to
arbitrate its disputes. However, the approach which is required under Lithuanian law
means that, in order to establish the parties’ subjective intentions, I have to consider
the evidence relating to the parties’ pre-contractual negotiations, and the various
drafts of the JVA, as an aid to the interpretation of the words used, and therefore I do
not accept Mr. Shackleton’s submissions that I should approach the matter merely by
reference to the language used in the JVA and in isolation from the factual evidence
relating to the pre-contractual negotiations. Obviously, when I come to consider the
question whether the evidence relating to the parties’ pre-contractual negotiations
shows that the parties’ intentions were that the State should be party to the arbitration
clause, I must, under the relevant Lithuanian principles of construction, give
appropriate weight to the actual words used in Articles 9 and 35.

The Bilateral Investment Treaty

Third, the State argues that, as a bilateral investment treaty between Sweden and
Lithuania had been concluded on 17 March 1992 (“the BIT’), the parties’ intention
must have been that disputes between them would be settled under the procedure laid
down in Article 7 of that Treaty and that it was for that reason that the reference to the
State submitting to arbitration was removed from the JVA. Further Mr Shackleton
submits that support for the clear language of the text of Article 9 is found in the
removal of any mention of Lithuania and the subsequent removal of ICSID clauses
from drafts of the JVA and the simultaneous coming into force of a BIT between
Lithuania and Sweden.

T address this argument below, in my analysis of the pre-contractual negotiations.
Arbitrability

In his oral evidence, but not in his Report, Professor Katuoka sought to argue that
provisions of the 1996 Lithuanian Law on Commercial Arbitration and the 1995
Lithuanian Law on Sub Soil Exploitation were both retroactive and made the disputes
between Svenska and the State non-arbitral. This was relied upon by the State
generally in its arguments, and also to support its contention that in such
circumstances it was unlikely that the State would have agreed to have become party
to the arbitration clause in Article 9 of the JVA.

I do not accept Professor Katuoka’s views in this respect. Although referring to both
pieces of legislation in his Report, Professor Katuoka did not there assert that they

were retroactive. When asked direct in cross-examination

“...why in paragraph 131 you do not say that these two Acts
have retroactive effect?”

Professor Katuoka simply replied:

“T do not have anything more to say.”

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

94.

95.

6)

96.

97.

98.

On this issue, I prefer Dr Foigt’s evidence, namely that neither of the acts had
retroactive effect, which may be why Professor Katuoka did not assert the contrary in
his written Report and instead went on to consider the law as it applied in 1993. In
this regard Professor Katuoka relied upon Article 28 of the Civil Code of 1964. I
accept Mr. Bools’ submissions that his reliance was, however, misplaced. First,
Article 28 of the 1964 Code, as the Professor read it, was permissive and not
prohibitory: it permitted disputes arising out of civil legal relationships to be referred
to arbitration, maritime arbitration or foreign trade arbitration; it did not go further
and prohibit arbitration of other disputes. Secondly, the Provisional Rules of Oil
Prospecting, Exploration, and Production in the Republic of Lithuania 16 March
1992, made clear (in Article 61) that disputes involving “Oil works” might be
arbitrated. The dispute in the present case fell within the definition of “Oil works”
within Articles 6-10 of the Rules and was therefore arbitrable.

It follows that, as Dr Foigt stated, there was no prohibition in Lithuanian law on the
underlying dispute being submitted to arbitration.

The evidence relating to pre-contractual negotiations (and post-contractual
conduct) does not establish that Article 9 should be construed as extending the
arbitration agreement to the State

In summary, the State’s principal argument was that the evidence relating to pre-
contractual negotiations, and indeed how Svenska, Geonafta and the State conducted
themselves after the JVA was concluded, supports its position that the State did not
consent to become a party to Article 9 of the JVA. Mr Shackleton submitted that the
mere fact that the State may have been a party to the JVA does not imply its consent
to arbitration, where actual consent was lacking. One cannot assume consent to
arbitration simply because one party (a fortiori a State) does not object or because
there is no evidence of intent to consent to any alternate dispute resolution
mechanism. To proceed on an assumption that a State must arbitrate unless otherwise
agreed is especially inappropriate in a context where the arbitration clause clearly
excluded the State by its terms.

Mr. Shackleton further submitted that the State’s position was supported by the
evidence of Dr Motuza, who confirmed that one of the purposes of the language of the
JVA referring only to Svenska and Geonafta, was clearly to dissociate Lithuania from
the JVA itself and from the arbitration clause.

Mr. Shackleton further submitted that the fact that Sweden and Lithuania signed a
bilateral investment treaty must be taken into account when seeking to ascertain the
parties’ common intention and that that intention was that disputes between them
would be settled under the procedure laid down in Article 7 of that Treaty.

Consideration of the evidence relating to pre-contractual negotiations

99.

I turn now to consider the evidence relating to pre-contractual negotiations and
whether or not it supports Svenska’s argument that, from the time of the earliest drafts
of the JVA, the parties intended their disputes (including those involving the State) to
be settled by arbitration and that it was the common intention of Svenska and the
State that the dispute resolution provisions of Article 9 of the Final JVA should apply

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

to disputes between the two of them. For this purpose, it is necessary to set out the
negotiations in some detail.

The parties’ relationship started when representatives of Svenska met representative
of the Lithuanian Amalgamation of Geological Works in Vilnius on 11 September
1989 The purpose of the meeting was discuss a possible joint venture. The minutes of
the meeting record that the parties’ intentions had been approved by “Lithuanian
Soviet Ministers”. The Swedish delegation was received by Mr Prunskiene, the Vice
President of the Lithuanian Council of Ministers. The initial contacts were therefore
established between the State and Svenska.

On 11 March 1990, Lithuania declared independence from the Soviet Union.

Further meetings were held in Stockholm on the 4 and 6 September 1990. Lithuania
was represented by, amongst others, Dr Leonas Ashmantas, the Minister of Energy.
Following these meetings copies of a Feasibility Report were sent to the State.
Thereafter on 31 January 1991 a Letter of Intent (“LOI”) was signed. The parties
were the “Lithuanian Corporation of Geological Works” (“LG”) and Svenska. The
LOI recorded that:

“LG has been assigned by the Lithuanian Government to
negotiate a joint venture with SPE regarding exploration for
and development of petroleum.”

The law and arbitration clause stated:

“Swedish law to govern and arbitration proceedings in cases of
dispute to be carried out in Stockholm.”

Furthermore, the letter of intent itself was subject to a similar provision:

“This Letter of Intent shall be governed by Swedish law. Any
disputes arising hereunder shall be settled by arbitration in
Stockholm under the auspices of the Arbitration Tribunal of the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce.”

As Dr Motuza accepted, from the start the Swedish side had insisted that all disputes
be settled other than in the Lithuanian courts, by international arbitration. This was
reflected in the 31 January 1991 LOI. I accept Mr. Bools’ submission that both under
the LOI and under the proposed JVA three things were clearly intended by all parties
at this stage, namely: disputes would be arbitrated, the arbitration would be outside
Lithuania and the governing law would be Swedish. Moreover, at this stage, the
negotiations were clearly being conducted by LG on the instructions of the State.

The Letter of Intent was signed on 31 January 1991. On 11 March 1991, the
Lithuanian Corporation of Geological Works (LG) was ‘liquidated’. On 13 June 1999
it was agreed that all rights and obligations of LG under the LOI should “as of 31
January 1991 [be] vested in/assumed by EPG as if EPG were [the] original party” to
the Letter of Intent. The signatories to this further agreement were Svenska, EPG, the
Ministry of Energy and the State Geological Service of Lithuania. Once again,

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

105.

106.

107.

108.

therefore, the State was directly involved in the parties’ negotiations through the
Ministry of Energy.

In October or November 1991, Dr Motuza and others reviewed the Letter of Intent. It
was one of his first acts after being appointed as the head of the State Geology
Service. Thereafter Dr Motuza became the principal intermediary between Svenska
and the Lithuanian side. He organised meetings and attended most of them. They
were predominantly held in his office in Vilnius. He was one of the few people who
spoke English (none of those from EPG did) and so he would often transmit both
Geonafta’s views and those of the State. He was however a geologist and not a
lawyer.

As he stated in evidence, in reviewing the LOI Dr Motuza had particular regard to the
position of the State under the terms of the LOI. He was aware that a number of the
terms of the LOI referred to Lithuania and, as head of a State agency, he had an
obligation to consider whether those terms were unfavourable to Lithuania. Dr
Motuza was assisted in his review by Mr Miknevicius, an external consultant from
Belgium. Mr Miknevicius’s primary recommendation was that the “LOI should be
discarded or completely renegotiated...” The report went on to make further, specific
recommendations including the following two:

“Republic of Lithuania is a sovereign state with its own
legislation; any contract or document related to activities
carried out in the territory of the Republic and referring to the
laws of a foreign country is considered as illegal and void”

Any possible disputes shall be settled by the Court of
Arbitration of Den Hague, the Netherlands”.

When he had received Mr Miknevicius’s report, Dr Motuza discussed its contents and
recommendations with Dr Ashmantas, the Minister of Energy. Neither Dr Motuza
nor Dr Ashmantas objected to Mr Miknevicius’s suggestion that “Any possible
disputes” should be settled by arbitration in the Hague. I accept Mr. Bools’
submission that at this stage it was clear that the State was actively involved in the
negotiations with Svenska; and that the original LOI had provided for arbitration in
Stockholm but the State’s adviser had suggested that the Hague was to be preferred as
a venue for arbitration. Neither Dr Motuza nor Dr Ashmantas dissented from that
suggestion or suggested that arbitration was an inappropriate forum.

Following the State’s review of the LOI, a renegotiation of it took place at a meeting
on 5-7 November 1991. The State Geology Service’s minutes of the meeting record
that the original negotiations were conducted “With the assignment of the
Government of the Republic of Lithuania”. They also record that:

“All provisions of the Letter of Intent unfavourable to
Lithuania were reviewed, amended or annulled in this sitting.”

Dr Motuza signed the minutes of the meeting and agreed in evidence that it accurately
recorded what he understood to be the position at that stage. The negotiating team
(and in particular Dr Motuza) informed the Minster of Energy about progress in the
negotiations. Thereafter Dr Motuza and Dr Ashmantas reported back to the Prime

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

109.

Minister because, as Dr Motuza said, “The Prime Minister was concerned regarding
the development of investments in the oil industry”. A memorandum by which Dr
Motuza and Dr Ashmantas reported to the State makes clear who had been
negotiating with Svenska:

“Executing Resolution No.109 of the Government of the
Republic of Lithuania of 29 March 1991 and Order No.4-16333
of the Government of the Republic of Lithuania, the Ministry
of Energy of the Republic of Lithuania and the State Geological
Survey have performed the following preparatory works on
exploitation of oil fields and use of oil.

1. They have held negotiations with the Swedish
company Svenska Petroleum Company...”

Moreover it is clear from a copy of the document drawn up at the meeting in
November 1991 that there had been negotiations about both the governing law and the
seat of any arbitration. The following, apparent compromise, was reached:

“Article 2.2. page 5, [of the LOI] Governing law and
arbitration, text to be deleted and replaced by:

‘The law governing the contractual relations between the
Parties shall be law of a country to be agreed with an
established tradition of contracts of this nature among private
enterprises and which shall contain generally accepted
principles of international business. Arbitration proceedings in
cases of dispute to be carried out in Stockholm under
internationally accepted arbitration rules.’

The aforesaid shall not prejudice normal rights for the Republic
of Lithuania as a sovereign state to issue and enforce new
legislation of a public nature.”

That document was signed with “the consent and approval” of the Ministry of Energy
and the State Geological Service.

T accept Mr. Bools’ submission that by this stage, therefore, Svenska and the State had
actively negotiated the governing law and arbitration clause. It is also clear that the
arbitration clause was intended to cover disputes with the State: first, given that the
negotiations had directly involved the State, it would have been very odd if it did not;
and, secondly, the reservation in the second paragraph set out above would have been
otiose if the first paragraph had not been intended to relate to the State. Moreover Dr
Motuza explained why they had agreed to arbitration in Stockholm:

“We agreed that provision because we understood the concern
of Svenska in relation to the security and protection of the
investment and there was no real legal system in Lithuania, so
we left it in here. We thought our court system would develop
and we would change it later.”

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

110.

111.

112.

113.

The position appears therefore to have been that the Government of Lithuania, as the
holder of the right to exploit the country’s oil reserves had authorised a state entity
(originally LG and latterly EPG) to negotiate with Svenska for the formation of a joint
venture. Negotiations were conducted by LG and EPG under the supervision of the
State through the Ministry of Energy and the State Geological Service. The State was
kept apprised of the progress of the negotiations, reviewed the contractual documents
produced and authorised their signing. At this stage the evidence shows that it was
not yet settled which state entity would be the contracting party under the JVA, but it
was clear that the State was keen not to fetter its right to legislate. It follows that the
State must at this stage have envisaged that it would, in some way, be a party to and /
or bound by the terms of the JVA: if the State was in no way bound by the JVA, there
was no need for it to spell out that the choice of law and arbitration clause in the LOI
was in no way intended to fetter its right to “issue and enforce new legislation”.

As envisaged at the meeting in early November 1991, a first draft of the JVA was
produced on or around 21 November 1991. Many of its clauses make clear that the
State was intended to be a party to it. In particular, Article XX VII (3) provided that

“This Agreement after signature by the Parties and by
Government shall have the status of law in Lithuania.”

In addition, it was also intended that all disputes under the contract would be
arbitrated: Article XXIII provided that:

“1, Periodically EPG and Svenska and, as necessary,
Government shall meet to discuss the conduct of
activities under this Agreement and will make every
effort to settle amicably any problem arising
therefrom.

2. Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or
relating to this Agreement, or the breach, termination
or invalidity thereof which cannot be settled amicably,
shall be settled by arbitration under the auspices of
ICSID (International Center for Settlement of
Investment Dispute).

The arbitration proceedings shall be conducted in the
English language.

3. This Agreement shall be governed by the laws of ”.

Again, I accept Mr. Bools’ submission that the fact that the State was intended to
bound by this clause is borne out by the reference to “Any dispute” arising out of the
agreement and the fact that any arbitration was to be under the auspices of ICSID —
which could only apply to disputes involving a State. (Notably this clause was
included at a time well before Sweden and Lithuania concluded their bilateral
investment treaty.)

A Mr. Ivanauskas (of EPG) responded to the November 1991 draft JVA in a detailed
letter of 2 January 1992. The first substantive issue which he raised was the need to

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

114.

115.

comply with Article 14 of the Law on Foreign Investments which required all joint
venture agreements to include various details. One of the requirements was that the
agreement specify a dispute resolution procedure. Mr Ivanauskas suggested that, in
the first instance, all disputes should be settled by arbitration in Lithuania, in
Lithuanian and “if Svenska is not satisfied with the decision” that it might appeal to
an ICSID arbitration to be conducted in English.

On 17 March 1992, Sweden and Lithuania entered into the BIT.

The next draft of the JVA was dated 25 March 1992. EPG had made a number of
suggested amendments and many of these were incorporated into the new draft. EPG
and Svenska were named as the founders and parties to the joint venture. Once again,
however, it was clear from the draft that the parties intended the State to have rights
and obligations under the Agreement. Although the detail of the dispute resolution
clause changed, it remained the case that it applied to “Any dispute, controversy or
claim arising out of or in relation to this Agreement....”. Thus Article XXIII provided
for arbitration in the first instance in Lithuania, a right of ‘appeal’ by Svenska to an
ICSID arbitration tribunal within | month of the Lithuanian award (or to another
intentionally recognized body if ICSID arbitration was no longer available), and a
waiver by EPG and the State of State immunity. It was in the following form:

“1, Periodically EPG and Svenska and, as necessary,
Government shall meet to discuss the conduct of
activities under this Agreement and will make every
effort to settle amicably any problem arising
therefrom.

2. Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or
relating to this Agreement or the breach, termination,
or invalidity thereof which cannot be settled amicably,
shall be settled by arbitration in Lithuania in
accordance with applicable Lithuania legislation.

3. Following receipt of the Lithuanian arbitration award
Svenska shall have the right, during one (1) month to
challenge the award by initiating arbitration
proceedings under the auspices of ICSID (International
Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes) or, if
ICSID is no longer available, another internationally
recognized and accepted institution. Such arbitration
shall, unless otherwise agreed, be conducted in Oslo,
Norway, under the English language.

Government and EPG hereby waives [sic] all rights to
sovereign immunity and submit to the full and final
jurisdiction of ICSID (or another institution as
aforesaid).

4. This agreement shall be governed by the laws of
Lithuania provided that the rules of international

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

116.

117.

118.

119.

business activities generally accepted in the petroleum
industry shall apply in cases of conflict.”

Although the bilateral investment treaty had been signed by this stage, it was not yet
in force. It is clear from the March draft that the parties were moving towards a
compromise where each secured what was most important to it: as Dr Motuza said in
evidence, the State’s primary concern was to have Lithuanian law as the governing
law and Svenska’s primary concern was that disputes should be finally settled other
than in Lithuania. Again I accept Mr. Bools’ submission that if there was any doubt
that the reference to ICSID arbitration was intended to encompass the State it was
dispelled by the State’s waiver of sovereign immunity and its express submission to
the jurisdiction of ICSID.

On or before 27 April 1992 the draft contract was submitted to the Oil Works Licence
Committee and was considered in detail by, amongst others, the Ministry of the
Economy, the Environmental Protection Department and the Ministry of Trade and
Material Resources. Each made detailed comments to the Oil Works Licensing
Committee on the terms of the Agreement and these were relayed to Svenska. The
only issue raised by the Committee relating to the dispute resolution clause was as to
the choice of applicable law. There was no suggestion that the State should not be a
party to both the Agreement and the arbitration clause.

The next draft was prepared in early August 1992. The governing law clause was
slightly amended but the remainder of Article XXIII remained unchanged: all
disputes were to be submitted to arbitration in Lithuania, with a right of appeal to
ICSID arbitration in Oslo. The State and EPG waived Sovereign immunity and
submitted to the jurisdiction of an ICSID tribunal.

At this stage, on about 13 August 1992, the form of the Agreement changed. In
particular, the information which was required by Article 14 of the Law on Foreign
Investments had previously been included in a summary form on the first page of the
contract. It was now expanded and divided into a number of separate articles.
Importantly, Article 14.10 required “The procedure for arbitrating disputes to be
included”. This became Article 9. In earlier drafts Article XXIII had dealt with
dispute resolution, governing law and waiver of Sovereign immunity. These were
now split between Articles 9 and 35 of the Agreement and the wording of the clauses
was changed. In particular the wording of the arbitration clause was altered to make it
clearer that it complied with the requirement of Article 14.10 of the Law on Foreign
Investments. The relevant clauses were as follows:

“9.1 Disputes between the founders concerning the carrying
out of this Contract are settled in accordance with the
Statute of the Company or through negotiations
between the founders.

9.2 In the event that disputes cannot be settled through
negotiations, they shall be settled in the Courts of Law
of the Republic of Lithuania.

“9.3. The judgement given by a Lithuania Court of Law may
be challenged by SVENSKA during one (1) month

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

120.

121.

after receipt thereof by initiating arbitration
proceedings under the auspices of ICSID or, if ICSID
is no longer available, another internationally
recognized and accepted institution. Such arbitration
shall unless otherwise agreed be conducted in the
English language in Copenhagen, Denmark or such
other place as the Parties may agree.”

“35.1 GOVERNMENT and [Geonafta] hereby irrevocably
waives [sic] all rights to sovereign immunity and
submit to the full and final jurisdiction of ICSID (or
another institution as stated in Articles 9.2 and 9.3
above.)

35.2. This contract shall be governed by the laws of
Lithuania supplemented, where required, by rules of
international business activities generally accepted in
the petroleum industry.”

I accept Mr. Bools’ submission that there is no evidence that, by separating the
arbitration clause from the governing law and Sovereign immunity clause, the parties
intended fundamentally to alter the scope of the arbitration clause. Likewise I accept
his submission that there is evidence to suggest that they did not: viz.

i)

ii)

iii)

iv)

There is, in the contemporaneous documents, nothing (either internal to the
parties or by way of communication between them) to suggest that the
intention of recasting the contract was to exclude the State from the scope of
the arbitration clause.

Every previous draft of the JVA had provided that al/ disputes were to be
arbitrated and there is nothing to suggest that the parties suddenly changed
their intention between the March and August 1992 drafts.

All but the very first draft of the JVA contained an agreement by the State to
waive Sovereign immunity and to submit to the jurisdiction of an arbitral
tribunal. There is nothing in the evidence to suggest that its intention in this
regard had fundamentally changed.

Despite Article XXIII, and particularly the applicable law, having been
discussed by the parties (and having been discussed internally by the parties),
no one had ever suggested either internally in State circles or to Svenska that it
was unacceptable for the State to be a party to the arbitration clause.

T also accept the importance of the point that, even after Article XXIII had been split
in two, Article 35 continued to contain the State’s agreement to waive sovereign
immunity and to submit to the jurisdiction of “ICSID (or another institution as stated
in Articles 9.2 and 9.3)”. Those other institutions were the Lithuanian courts whose
judgment was challengeable before an ICSID tribunal or “If ICSID is no longer
available another internationally recognized and accepted institution”. Therefore the
State was intended to continue to be a party to the arbitration clause despite the
splitting of the clause into two and despite the reference in Article 9 to “founders”.

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

122.

123.

124.

Neither the division nor the introduction of the word “founder” was intended
fundamentally to change the nature of the parties’ agreement. It would appear
therefore that all that the redrafting had been intended to do was to make clear that the
draft complied with Article 14 of the Law on Foreign Investments.

The next draft was produced in early November 1992. In it Article 9 was modified to
provide for the decision of a Lithuanian court to be challenged by an ICC arbitration
in Denmark. Article 35 remained unamended — it still referred to the State and EPG
submitting to the full and final jurisdiction of ICSID or other institution referred to in
Articles 9.2 and 9.3 above. Mr Karl Thalin, General Counsel to Svenska from 1980 -
1995, who was responsible for the negotiations with the State and Geonafta
throughout the period 1990-1993 leading up to the conclusion of the JVA, stated in
evidence that the change from ICSID to ICC was requested by the State and was
communicated to him by Dr. Motuza, although Dr. Motuza gave no explanation for
the change. Dr. Motuza denied that he suggested this change. Although both Mr
Thalin and Dr. Motuza were honest witnesses, I prefer the evidence of Mr. Thalin in
this respect, and indeed generally, as his recollection was clearer. He had no
continuing connection with Svenska and had for some time been employed by another
institution. From 2002 to March 2004 Dr. Motuza had been head of the geology
division at Geonafta and his evidence gave the impression on occasions of being
somewhat partisan.

The November 1992 draft was reviewed by a number of Government Ministries,
including the Ministry of Justice. The evidence of Mr. Vladimiras Zukovskis, who
worked in the legal department of the Lithuanian Ministry of Justice and was
responsible for reviewing some of the drafts, was that this draft was the first that he
reviewed and that he had not previously been involved in the parties’ negotiations.
On 9 December 1992, Mr Zukovskis wrote to the State with his comments on the
November draft. He made several comments about various aspects of the draft which
needed clarification, but none about either the dispute resolution clause or the
governing law and sovereign immunity clauses. At around the same time, however,
on 8 December 1992, the Ministry of Economic Relations transmitted its comments to
the State. The Ministry noticed the mismatch between Article 9 and Article 35: the
former had been changed to refer to ICC arbitration in Denmark but the latter still
referred to the State and EPG submitting to the jurisdiction of the ICSID tribunal.
The Ministry wrote:

“As regards 35.1 — here the ICSID (International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes) is mentioned. If this is the
final instance of dispute settlement, this should be discussed in
Article 9.”

In other words, what the Ministry was suggesting was that Articles 9 and 35 should be
brought into line: if an ICSID tribunal was to be the final arbiter (as Article 35
presently said), then Article 9 needed to reflect that fact. That was not, however, what
had been intended: the parties had at that stage agreed to substitute ICC arbitration in
Denmark for ICSID arbitration: it was Article 35 which no longer reflected their
intention, not Article 9; Article 35 should have referred to ICC, not ICSID,
arbitration. There was no suggestion in the Ministry’s communication, or indeed
elsewhere, that the State was not prepared to agree to arbitration. If Article 9 had not
been thought to and intended to apply to disputes with the State, it would not have

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

been inconsistent for Article 35 to provide that the State submitted to ICSID
arbitration. Furthermore it would not have been necessary for the State to waive
Sovereign immunity.

125. Thus it came about that reference to ICSID and indeed all arbitration was deleted
from Article 35 in the next draft of 4 February 1993. So far as relevant, that provided
as follows:

“9.1 Disputes between the founders concerning the carrying
out of this Agreement are settled in accordance with
the Bylaws of the Company or through negotiations
between the founders.

9.2 In the event that disputes cannot be settled through
negotiations, they shall be settled in the Court of the
Republic of Lithuania.

9.3 The judgement given by a Lithuanian Court may be
challenged by Svenska during One (1) month after
receipt thereof by initiating arbitration proceedings.
Such arbitration shall be conducted in Copenhagen,
Denmark or such other place as the parties may agree
upon in the English language in accordance with the
International Chamber of Commerce Rules of
Arbitration.”

“35. GOVERNMENT and EPG hereby irrevocably waives
all rights to sovereign immunity.

This Agreement shall be governed by the laws of
Lithuania supplemented, where required, by rules of
international business activities generally accepted in
the petroleum industry if they do not contradict the
laws of the Republic of Lithuania”

126. That draft was prepared taking into account the comments of the various Government
Ministries. Reporting back to the State on 17 February 1993, Dr. Motuza wrote

“The Remarks provided by the Ministries of Justice and
Economy are attached. Taking into account these and other
remarks made while authorisation, the following paragraphs of
the text of Agreement are corrected or otherwise changed:
according to remarks of the Ministry of Justice — p.p. 1.5; 8.1;
9; 15.2; 16.2; 26.8; 35.1; Ministry of Economics — p.p. 3.3;
3.4; 4.1; 5.2; 20.4; 32.2... etc.

127. However, Article 9 of the 4 February 1993 draft still referred to the judgment of the
Lithuanian courts being appealable to an ICC arbitration. That was not surprisingly
unacceptable to the Ministry of Justice who wrote on 10 February 1993:

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

128.

129.

130.

“Point 9.3 is completely unacceptable since a decision of the
Court of the Republic of Lithuania may be appealed only in the
procedure prescribed by the Civil Procedure Code...”

Thereafter the parties appear to have negotiated the solution which was ultimately
incorporated in Article 9: namely disputes to be submitted either to the Lithuanian
courts or to ICC arbitration in Denmark on agreement of the parties and, if the parties
did not agree, then the dispute would go to ICC arbitration. This gave the Lithuanian
courts a potential role, but also gave Svenska the protection of knowing that they
could choose ultimately to arbitrate their disputes outside Lithuania. The wording
which ultimately became Article 9 was proposed by the Ministry of Justice. It was
incorporated in manuscript in a draft of 4 February 1993.

So far as the evidence was concerned, it was common ground between Mr. Thalin and
Dr. Motuza (and, so far as they were able to shed any light on the matter, the other
witnesses) that Svenska had proposed ICSID arbitration in an early draft of the JVA
and that, although there was some discussion about various aspects of the arbitration
clause (for example, venue and the change to ICC arbitration), there was never any
discussion, or negotiation, about the State not being prepared to agree to be bound by,
and a party to, an arbitration dispute resolution method. As Mr. Thalin said in
evidence, and I accept, at all times throughout the negotiations, critical features for
Svenska were: that the State should be an immediate party to the JVA; and that there
should be recourse to international arbitration to settle disputes arising under the JVA.
What is clear, however is that in the earlier drafts the State had appeared to be content
to be a party to ICSID arbitration in respect of all disputes arising under the JVA.
Moreover, I accept Mr. Thalin’s evidence, that if Dr. Motuza, or anyone on the State’s
part, had suggested at the time that reference to ICSID, and indeed all arbitration, was
deleted from Article 35 in the draft of 4 February 1993, or, indeed, at any other stage
in the negotiations, that the State was not prepared to be a party to the arbitration
dispute resolution procedure at all, the likelihood is that Svenska would have walked
away from the negotiations.

So far as Dr. Motuza’s evidence was concerned, I reject Mr. Shackleton’s submission
that the State’s position was supported by the evidence of Dr Motuza, that “one of the
purposes of the language of the JVA referring only to Svenska and Geonafta, was
clearly to dissociate Lithuania from the JVA itself and from the arbitration clause”.
Dr. Motuza’a evidence (particularly that contained in his written witness statements)
was in some respects internally inconsistent. Thus on the one hand it was clear from
what he said both orally and in writing, and from the State’s contemporaneous
internal communications produced in evidence, that neither he, nor anyone instructing
him in the course of negotiations on behalf of the State, ever positively discussed or
addressed the issue that the State might refuse to agree to be a party to an arbitration
clause, having originally appeared quite content to be bound by the ICSID arbitration
clause. This evidence I accept. On the other hand he also gave evidence to the effect
that the fact that the State signed the JVA in a separate capacity “reflected the fact that
the State had never intended to be a commercial party to the JVA or a party to the
dispute resolution clause.” This evidence, and evidence to similar effect from the
State’s two other witnesses (Messrs Kumpa and Zukovskis), I reject. It was, in the
main, mere assertion and self-serving. The fact is that there is no evidence that the
State ever had, or formed, the intention not to be a party to the arbitration clause, and

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

131.

132.

an arbitral dispute resolution procedure, having clearly indicated earlier in
negotiations that it was prepared to do so. I should also say that I do not accept the
assertions in the State’s evidence that Dr. Motuza would not have been authorised to
have negotiated any such arbitration clause; that he was so authorised is borne out by
the submission of the drafts referring to ICSID arbitration.

In my judgment, the correct analysis of the evidence which I have set out extensively
above, is that there was, as Mr. Thalin said in evidence, a drafting error at the time
that reference to ICSID and indeed all arbitration was deleted from Article 35 in the
draft of 4 February 1993. I hold that this did not reflect any change in the State’s
actual intention, which remained that it was prepared to be bound by the arbitration
procedure in clause 9.

I should deal at this stage with the State’s argument that the reason why the reference
to arbitration was removed from Article 35 was because the parties intended that any
disputes which Svenska had with the State could be arbitrated under the auspices of
the BIT. I reject this argument largely for the reasons given by Mr. Bools in
submission. They may be summarised as follows:

i) Save for a passing reference in a Svenska Board Minute to there being an
investment treaty between the two countries, the State has provided no
evidence to support its submission that it was the parties’ common intention
that the investment treaty would govern their disputes. The State’s own
factual witnesses’ evidence does not support the case now being advanced, nor
do the internal State communications. In other words there is no evidence
whatsoever to support the notion that this was the reason driving the
amendments to the draft JVA.

ii) The State’s argument in this respect on the interpretation of the various draft
JVAs is as follows:

a) When Article XXIII was split, it was intended that the dispute
resolution provision in Article 9 apply as between Geonafta and
Svenska and that, as provided for in Article 35, the State submit to
ICSID jurisdiction in relation to its disputes with Svenska.

b) Thereafter it was realised that it was unnecessary to have a reference to
ICSID arbitration in Article 35 because all disputes which might arise
would be covered by the treaty and its dispute resolution procedure,
Article 7. Therefore the unnecessary reference to ICSID in Article 35
was deleted.

iii) This argument is unsound for the following reasons:

a) First, although this is clearly not determinative, as I have ruled against
the State on this point in any event, it is wholly inconsistent with the
State’s case that it was never intended to be a party to the JVA. If it
was never intended to be a party, submits Mr. Bools, why was a clause
providing for the resolution of disputes between it and Svenska
included in the first place?

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

133.

134.

135.

b) The State’s agreement to submit to ICSID jurisdiction was included in
the very first draft of the JVA (21 November 1991) which pre-dates the
bilateral investment treaty, which was concluded on 17 March 1992, by
several months. It was not the case, therefore, that the reference to
ICSID was included simply to reflect what would have been the
position under the treaty in any event.

c) The suggestion that the submission to ICSID arbitration was deleted
because it was thought to be otiose in light of the treaty is unsupported
by any evidence and inconsistent with the evidence of why the
amendments to Article 35.1 were actually made — namely because it
was thought to be inconsistent with Article 9.

d) Finally, the argument is fallacious because it equates a contractual
agreement to submit disputes arising under the JVA with a treaty
commitment to submit disputes under the treaty to arbitration. The
treaty did not provide the same scope of protection that the express
submission in clause 35 would have done: it cannot therefore have
been the case that the parties deleted it because they regarded it as
otiose: it was not, as it extended ICSID jurisdiction far beyond that
which existed under the treaty.

In relation to the last point, I refer to Chapter 11 of Redfern and Hunter, Law and
Practice of International Commercial Arbitration. There the authors discuss bilateral
investment treaties and the rights of arbitration under them. They point out that for a
claim to be entitled to arbitrate under a bilateral investment treaty to succeed, the
claimant must first establish that it is a protected investor within the terms of the
treaty and that the dispute relates to a protected investment. Thereafter

“Tf the jurisdictional hurdles are overcome, the question arises
whether the host state has breached its substantive obligations.
[§11-23]”

Thus a claim will only lie under the treaty for breaches by the state of the obligations
it has assumed under the treaty. As to the content of those obligations Redfern and
Hunter say: “There is a surprising degree of uniformity between substantive
protections in the treaties, aided by model treaties established as negotiating models
by the main capital-exporting nations”. They go on to cite examples of common
protections: “Fair and equitable treatment’; “full protection and security”; “no
arbitrary or discriminatory measures impairing the investment”; “no expropriation
without prompt, adequate and effective compensation”; “national and ‘most favoured
nation’ treatment”; and “free transfer of funds related to investment”.

These are precisely the sort of protections which appear in the treaty between Sweden
and Lithuania. In short, each state, by the treaty, assumes obligations towards
investors. It is for breach of those treaty obligations which an investor might have
recourse to ICSID arbitration under clause 7 of the BIT:

“(1) Any dispute between one of the Contracting Parties an
investor of the other Contracting Party concerning the

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

136.

137.

interpretation or application of this Agreement shall, if
possible, be settled amicably.

(2) If the dispute cannot be thus settled within six months
... it shall at the request of either party be submitted to
arbitration for a definitive settlement....”

Clause (3) goes on to provide that if both States are parties to the Washington
Convention then the dispute may be submitted to ICSID. It follows that the procedure
laid down in Article 7 is a procedure for resolving claims by an investor that a
Contracting State has breached one of its obligations under the Treaty. It does not
provide for claims for breach of contract — which do not also amount to breaches of
treaty obligations — to be resolved under the treaty disputes resolution provisions.

T accept Mr. Bools’ submissions that it is for this reason that there is a real difference
between Svenska and the State being parties to a contractual agreement to resolve
their disputes under the JVA by ICSID arbitration and Lithuania and Sweden being
parties to a treaty which contains an agreement to resolve their disputes with investors
under the treaty by ICSID arbitration. It is unsustainable to suggest that the parties
regarded the two as equivalents such that deleting the State’s agreement to submit to
ICSID arbitration in Article 35 made no difference: its effect (if the State had not
been covered by Article 9) would have been to have taken the vast majority of
contractual disputes outside the scope of arbitration and that was never the parties’
intention.

Accordingly I reject the State’s arguments in relation to the BIT.

Geonafta’s and Svenska’s post-contractual dealings

138.

In reaching my conclusion, I have also considered the evidence relating to Geonafta’s
and Svenska’s post-contractual dealings, but that has not assisted me in reaching my
conclusion as to the true interpretation of Article 9.

Conclusion

139.

140.

In my judgment, the evidence of the parties’ pre-contractual negotiations
demonstrates the common intention of the State, Geonafta and Svenska that their
disputes (including those involving the State) should be settled by arbitration and that
the dispute resolution provisions of Article 9 of the Final JVA should apply to
disputes between the State and Svenska, notwithstanding the inappropriate use of the
words “Founders” and other words in that clause. In reaching this conclusion I have
given due weight to the wording in clause 9. However, despite the fact that it does
not prima facie reflect the actual intentions of the parties as I have held them to be,
the relevant principles of Article 6.193 of the Lithuanian Civil code require the Court
to search for the parties’ real common intention notwithstanding the literal meaning of
the words used. Accordingly, it follows that, in my judgment, the State was indeed a
party to the arbitration agreement in Article 9 of the JVA and therefore it is not
entitled to State immunity in the present proceedings by virtue of section 9 of the Act.

Finally, I should say how grateful I am to both Mr. Shackleton and Mr. Bools for their
very helpful written and oral submissions, and also to Mr. Shackleton for the

MRS JUSTICE GLOSTER, DBE Svenska Petroleum —v- Government of Lithuania
Approved Judgment

provision of various further documentary submissions and materials following the
hearing.

Crown Copyright. Source: BAILII. This information is licensed under the terms of the Open
Government Licence: http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence.
(http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/Comm/2005/2437.html, accessed 13 September
2012.)

