Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 1 of 21

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT

SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK Judge Hellerstein

 

INDEPENDENT POWER TANZANIA LTD., COMPLAINT

 

Plaintiff,

vs. O?7 YA O36 6

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA,

Defendant.

 

INTRODUCTION

 

1, This action is brought on behalf of Independent Power Tanzania Ltd. ("PTL"), "
which developed, financed, built, and operates, a privately financed 100 MW power plant in the
Republic of Tanzania. The IPTL plant is the largest entirely private investment in Tanzania, and

the first privately-financed power project in Sub-Saharan Africa (the “Power Plant”).

2. IPTL’s existence is presently in peril because the Government of the Republic of
Tanzania has failed to honor its obligations under its unconditional guarantee of its wholly-
owned utility -- Tanzania Electric Supply Company (“Tanesco”) -- obligations under a Power
Purchase Agreement. Tanesco’s payment obligations that are relevant here were determined by
an arbitration award that was rendered in an arbitration between Tanesco and IPTL concerning
that Power Purchase Agreement. The Government of Tanzania, by virtue of its guarantee of
Tanesco’s obligations, owes to IPTL the sum that Tanesco has failed to pay. IPTL has
demanded payment pursuant to the terms of the Guarantee, but the Government of Tanzania has

failed to make payment.

108029584

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 2 of 21

3. The undisputed sum that the Government of Tanzania presently owes to IPTL is

US$ 26,016,487.15. IPTL seeks judgment in that amount.
THE PARTIES

4. Independent Power Tanzania Limited is a corporation organized under the laws of

the Republic of Tanzania, with its principal place of business in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

5. The Government of the United Republic of Tanzania (“GOT”) is the national

government of the Republic of Tanzania.
JURISDICTION

6. The GOT maintains an embassy in Washington DC, and a consulate within the
City of New York. Further, upon information and belief, the GOT maintains bank accounts
within the United States, including, but not limited to, Bank of America accounts within New
York (account number 994201GRF), and Washington D.C. (account 9953270001). The GOT
also owns real estate in Maryland and in New York City. The GOT and TANESCO conduct

extensive financial transactions with the World Bank, in Washington DC.

7. The Court has jurisdiction over GOT pursuant to the Foreign Sovereign
Immunities Act (“FSIA”). Under 28 U.S.C. § 1330(a), a district court has subject matter
jurisdiction if a foreign state is “not entitled to immunity either under sections 1605-1607 .. . or
under any applicable international agreement.” Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1605(a)(1), an exception
to foreign state immunity occurs when “the foreign state has waived its immunity either
explicitly or by implication.” As discussed in Paragraph 12 below, GOT has explicitly waived
its right of immunity. Under 28 U.S.C. § 1330(b) this court has personal jurisdiction because
subject matter jurisdiction exists under subsection (a) and service of process has been made
under 28 U.S.C. § 1608.

10802958.4 2

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 3 of 21

BACKGROUND - THE TANZANIA POWER PLANT PROJECT

8. By Agreement with IPTL dated as of June 8, 1995, the Government of Tanzania

stated, among other things, that

Whereas,

(1) The GOT as a matter of policy has decided to involve the
private sector in the generation of electricity for sale to
the national grid.

(2) Consistent with the GOT’s policy and guidelines, [IPTL]
has proposed to design, insure, finance, acquire,
construct, complete, own, operate and maintain an
electric power plant (the “Facility”) at Tegeta, Dar es
Salaam, Tanzania, to supply electric power to Tanzania
Electric Supply Company Limited (TANESCO).

(3) Simultaneously herewith, [IPTL] is entering into a Power
Purchase Agreement with TANESCO.

(4) The GOT and [IPTL] are entering into this Agreement so
that [IPTL’s] proposal to build the Facility may be
implemented in a manner that reflects the close
cooperation between the public and private sectors in the
generation of electricity for sale on the national grid.

9. Accordingly, IPTL and Tanesco entered into a Power Purchase Agreement (the
“PPA”) with an effective date of 26 May 1995. Pursuant to the PPA, IPTL privately financed,

developed, constructed, and operates, a nominal 100 MW power plant in Tanzania.

10. Pursuant to the PPA, Tanesco is to pay IPTL, on a monthly basis, and for a term

of twenty years, capacity payments, energy payments and supplemental payments.
THE GOVERNMENT OF TANZANIA GUARANTEE OF PAYMENT

11. By guarantee dated June 8, 1995, entered into between The Government of the

United Republic of Tanzania (the “GOT”), on the one side, and IPTL on the other, the GOT

irrevocably and unconditionally guarantee[d] and promise[d] to
pay [IPTL] any and every sum of money TANESCO is obligated
to pay to [IPTL] pursuant to the Power Purchase Agreement
TANESCO has failed to pay in accordance with the terms of those
agreements.

10802958.4 3

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 4 of 21

12.

The obligations of the Guarantor under this Guarantee shall be
absolute and unconditional and shall remain in full force and effect
until all the covenants, terms, and agreements set forth in the
Power Purchase Agreement, shall have been completely
discharged and performed, unless waived by [IPTL] in writing.

Further, the GOT has expressly represented that the Guarantee and the obligations

it pertain to are commercial, not governmental, acts, and that it waives any immunity with

respect to any of its assets, “other than its aircraft, naval vessels and other defense related assets

or assets protected by the diplomatic and consular privileges under the State Immunity Act of

England or the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of the United States or any analogous

legislation (the “Protected Assets”)”:

The Guarantor irrevocably and unconditionally agrees that it is
subject to suit in the England! with respect to its obligations
hereunder, and that the execution, delivery, and performance of
this Guarantee constitute private and commercial acts of the
Guarantor. The GOT hereby irrevocably and unconditionally
agrees: (i) that should any proceedings be brought against the GOT
or its assets, other than its aircraft, naval vessels and other defense
related assets or assets protected by the diplomatic and consular
privileges under the State Immunity Act of England or the Foreign
Sovereign Immunities Act of the United States or any analogous
legislation (the “Protected Assets”), in any jurisdiction in
connection with this Guarantee or any of the transactions
contemplated by this Guaranty, no claim of immunity from such
proceedings will be claimed by or on behalf of the GOT on behalf
of itself or any of its assets (other than the Protected Assets); (ii) it
waives any right of immunity which it or any of its assets (other
than the Protected Assets) now has or may in the future have in
any jurisdiction in connection with any such proceedings; and (iii)
it consents generally in respect of the enforcement of any judgment
against it in any such proceedings in any jurisdiction to the giving
of any relief or the issue of any process in connection with such
proceedings (including without limitation, the making,
enforcement, or execution against or in respect of any of its assets
whatsoever (other than the Protected Assets) regardless of the use
or intended use of the asset.

A copy of the Guarantee is annexed as Exhibit A.

Non-exclusive jurisdiction.

10802958.4

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 5 of 21

13. While the Guarantee contains an arbitration clause calling for the arbitration of
any disputes under the Guarantee, this action does not concern any disputes under the Guarantee.
Rather, all such disputes have already been arbitrated in the ICSID Arbitration with TANESCO.
This action is solely to collect sums that are indisputably due pursuant to the Guarantee as
already held in the ICSID Arbitration Award. Specifically, this action is only to collect those
sums that Tanesco has not disputed are due under the PPA, and hence are presently due under the

Guarantee. Accordingly, this suit is not subject to the arbitration clause in the Guarantee.
THE ICSID ARBITRATION

14. On 25 November 1998, after the Power Plant was constructed, Tanesco
commenced the ICSID arbitration against IPTL. Tanesco sought generally to (1) terminate the
Power Purchase Agreement between it and IPTL, and (2) failing termination, to reduce the tariff

set forth in that Power Purchase Agreement.

15. The Government of Tanzania was involved in the arbitration, and aware

throughout of the proceedings and issues under deliberation.
THE ICSID ARBITRATION AWARD

16. Asset forth above, IPTL and Tanesco conducted a lengthy arbitration with
respect to disputes arising in connection with the PPA. Included among those disputes was their
dispute about the amount of the monthly capacity payments under the PPA. After extensive
hearings and the issuance of several preliminary awards, the Tribunal issued the final ICSID
Award. By Final Award dated July 12, 2001, ICSID rendered an Award in the arbitration
entitled Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited v. Independent Power Tanzania Limited
(ICSID Case No. ARB/98/8) (the “ICSID Award”). The full ICSID Award is published on the

ICSID website.

10802958.4 5

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 6 of 21

17. In that ICSID Award, the ICSID Tribunal ordered Tanesco to, among other
things, comply with its obligations under the Power Purchase Agreement. The Power Purchase

Agreement has a term of 20 years.

18. Pursuant to the Power Purchase Agreement (and the ICSID Award), Tanesco is
obligated to make monthly capacity, energy, supplemental and Penalty/Bonus payments to IPTL
(PPA, p. 16-17]. In the event that Tanesco has some dispute about a portion of the payments,
IPTL is still entitled to timely payment of the undisputed portion of the payments, while any

dispute is resolved as to the disputed portion of the payments [PPA, p. 20-21].

19. During the course of the arbitration, the parties agreed-upon a financial model that
would determine the monthly capacity payments [Award, p. 25, {| 2B]. The financial model was
made part and parcel of the ICSID Award [Award, p. 25, ¥ 2B].

20. Accordingly, the ICSID Award requires Tanesco to pay to IPTL, on a monthly
basis, capacity payments determined in accordance with the ICSID Financial Model.

21. | The Government of Tanzania, by virtue of its guarantee of TANESCO’s payment
obligations, is obligated to pay to IPTL sums that Tanesco is required to pay pursuant to the
Power Purchase Agreement and ICSID Award, but does not do so.

EVENTS SINCE THE CONCLUSION OF THE ICSID ARBITRATION

22. For approximately five years, IPTL submitted capacity payment invoices to
Tanesco that were all calculated based on the ICSID Financial Model. Tanesco’s agent Dr.
Martin Swales reviewed the invoices, and based on his certification that they were calculated in

accordance with the ICSID Financial Model, Tanesco paid the invoices (albeit often very late).

10802958.4 6

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 7 of 21

However, beginning in January 2007, Tanesco stopped making payments’, despite the fact that
(1) the invoices were calculated in accordance with the ICSID Financial Model in the same
manner as they had been for the previous five years, and (2) Dr. Martin Swales certified that the
calculations with respect to each and every invoice were performed correctly under the ICSID
Financial Model. As indicated above, Dr. Swales was intimately involved in the ICSID
arbitration, and was deeply involved in the preparation of the financial model that is part of the

ICSID Award.

23. Despite the fact that a great deal of the capacity payment invoices are undisputed
by Tanesco, and hence the undisputed sums are unquestionably due to IPTL, Tanesco and the
Government of Tanzania have refused to pay to IPTL even the undisputed portions, and have
prevented the Bank of Tanzania from releasing any funds from escrow to fulfill those payment

obligations.

24. Presently, the total payments due to IPTL total US$44,567,717.70 million, plus

overdue interest of US$1,442,788.30 through November 1, 2007.

25. The amount of the undisputed payments alone is approximately
US$ 26,016,487.15 million, plus overdue interest of US$1,153,395.52, through November 1,

2007.
26. — Inthis action, IPTL seeks recovery of only the portion due to IPTL that is not
disputed.

27. As indicated above, each of these invoices was reviewed by, and certified as

correctly calculated by, Tanesco’s agent Dr. Martin Swales.

? Other than US$ 3,599,918 received in February2007 for December 2006 Energy Payment and US$ 3,216,004
received in May 2007 for partial payment of the November 2006 Capacity Payment.

10802958.4 7

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 8 of 21

28.  IPTL has demanded on numerous occasions that Tanesco release the undisputed
portions of the payments that are overdue, in compliance with the PPA and Tanesco's obligations
under the ICSID Award. However, Tanesco has refused to comply with that Award and to

comply with its obligations under the PPA.

29. The consequence of this is that IPTL is facing imminent financial ruin. It is
unable to maintain the plant, service its debt and other financial obligations, or to produce
electricity when it is needed. It is believed that this is Tanesco's very intent -- to effectively

expropriate the plant for its own purposes, by violating the ICSID Convention and ICSID Award.

30. Despite numerous requests to the Government of Tanzania, it has failed to comply
with its obligations under its guarantee of Tanesco's obligations, and has made no payment to
IPTL.

CLAIM FOR RELIEF

31.  IPTL repeats and realleges the allegations contained in paragraphs 1 through 30 as
if fully set forth herein.

32. Based on the terms of the PPA and the ICSID Arbitration Award, TANESCO
presently owes to IPTL the sum of US$46,010,506.00 including the overdue interest.

33. The portion of that sum which is undisputed is US$27,169,882.67 including the

overdue interest.

34.  IPTL has made all necessary demands of the Government of Tanzania Guarantee

with respect to the sum due.

35. Based on the terms of the Guarantee, the Government of Tanzania owes to IPTL

the sum of US$ 27,169,882.67.

36. | The Government of Tanzania has failed to make the payment as required.
10802958.4 8

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 9 of 21

37. Wherefore, IPTL demands judgment in the sum of $27,169,882.67, against the

Government of Tanzania, on the Guarantee.

Dated: New York, New York
November 15, 2007

 

Attorneys for Plaintiff
437 Madison Avenue
New York, NY 10022
(212) 940-3000

10802958.4 9

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 10 of 21

EXHIBIT A

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 11 of 21

DATED THIS 8TH DAY OF JUNE 1995

BETWEEN

GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

INDEPENDENT POWER TANZANIA LIMITED

GUARANTEE

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 12 of 21

GUARANTEE

THIS GUARANTEE is made at Dar es Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania the of 8th day
of June 1995

BETWEEN:

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA acting through its
Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals (hereinafter referred to as the “Guarantor") of the one

part; and

Independent Power Tanzania Limited a limited company incorporated under the laws of
Tanzania, whose registered office is located at 5th Floor, Extelcoms House, Samora Avenue,
P O Box 1461, Dar-es-Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania (hereinafter referred to as the
“Company”) of the other part.

WHEREAS:

(A) The Guarantor and the Company have entered into an Implementation Agreement (the
“Implementation Agreement") dated 8th day of June 1995.

(B) =‘ The Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited (“TANESCO’) has entered into a Power
Purchase Agreement with the Company (the "Power Purchase Agreement”) dated 26th
day of May 1995

(C) In accordance with Article XXII of the Implementation Agreement, the Guarantor has
agreed to enter into this Guarantee of the payment obligations of TANESCO under the _
Power Purchase Agreement. ~

L —

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 13 of 21

NOW IT IS HEREBY AGREED as follows:

GUARANTEE
Guarantee

In consideration of the Company entering into the Power Purchase Agreement with
TANESCO the Guarantor hereby irrevocably and unconditionally guarantees and
promises to pay the Company any and every sum of money TANESCO is obligated to
pay to the Company pursuant to the Power Purchase Agreement TANESCO has failed
to pay in accordance with the terms of those agreements.

Waiver of Defence

The obligations of the Guarantor under this Guarantee shall be absolute and unconditional
and shall remain in full force and effect until all the covenants, terms, and agreements
set forth in the Power Purchase Agreement, shall have been completely discharged and
performed, unless waived by the Company in writing. The obligations of the Guarantor
shall not be modified or impaired upon the happening from time to time of any event,
including the following:

1.2.1 The extension of time for payment of any amounts due or of time for
performance of any of the covenants, terms, or agreements of TANESCO, set
forth in the Power Purchase Agreement.

1.2.2 Amendments to the Power Purchase Agreement that do not affect in any material -
way the rights or obligations of TANESCO, or the Company under those

agreements.

1.2.3. The failure, omission, or delay by the Company to enforce, ascertain, or exercise
any right, power or remedy under or pursuant to the terms of the Power Purchase
Agreement, Insurance, or this Guarantee;

1.2.4 The bankruptcy, insolvency, or other failure or financial disability of TANESCO,
or the Company; or

1.2.5 The addition, or partial or entire release of any guarantor, maker, or other Party
(including TANESCO) primarily or secondarily responsible for the performance
of any of the covenants, terms, or agreements set forth in the Power Purchase

or by any i waiver, d or thing wi that
may release or create a defence for a guarantor (other than performance in-

accordance with the terms of the Power Purchase Agreement).
—_

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 14 of 21

Continuing Guarantee

1.3.1 This Guarantee shall be a continuing security and, accordingly, shall extend to
cover the balance due to the Company at any time from TANESCO under the
Power Purchase Agreement. No demand made by the Company hereunder shall
prejudice or restrict the right of the Company to make further or other demands.

Additional Security

1.4.1 This Guarantee shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or derogation
of, any other security that the Company may at any time hold in respect of the
obligations of TANESCO under the Power Purchase Agreement.

1.4.2. The Company may enforce this Guarantee notwithstanding that it may hold any
other guarantee, lien, or security of or for the obligations of TANESCO under
the Power Purchase Agreement or have available to it any other remedy at law

or equity.
Preliminary Recourse

1.5.1 Before taking steps to enforce this Guarantee and demanding payment from the
GOT, the Company shall be obliged only to make demand in writing for payment
from TANESCO. After 30 Days (during which time the Company shall make
further requests for payment, with a copy to the GOT of each request, trom
TANESCO from the date payment was due, the Company may notify the GOT
in writing that payment from TANESCO is past due and make a demand for
payment from the GOT under this Guarantee, and the GOT shall make payment
within five (5) Days. Late payments hereunder shall bear mark-up at an annual
Tate equal to the then applicable one-year LIBOR rate plus three (3) percentage
points, Amounts in dispute under the Power Purchase Agreement shall be deemed
not to be due and owing for purposes of this Guarantee until expiration of any
dispute resolution procedures provided in each of the respective Agreements.

1.5.2 Except as provided in Article 1.4.1, the Company shall not be obliged before
taking steps to enforce this Guarantee to exercise any other remedies that may be
available to it under or in respect of the Power Purchase Agreement or to obtain
judgment against TANESCO thereon.

Certification

Any demand for payment made pursuant to this Guarantee shall be made in person by
a duly authorized officer of the Company at the Guarantors offices at Sokoine Drive,
Mkwepu Street, PO Box 2000, Dar es Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania and shall
be accompanied by a certificate signed by a duly authorized officer of the Cor

stating that: =a

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 15 of 21

“We hereby certify that (1) [specify Company], (the “Company”) is making this
demand on the Government of the Republic of Tanzania (the “Guarantor”) in the
amount of United States Dollars [insert amount] in accordance with Article | of
the Guarantee dated 8th day of June 1995, between the Guarantor and the
Company; (2) the amount specified above is due and payable by the Tanzania
Electric Company Limited ("TANESCO") under the Power Purchase Agreement
between the Company and TANESCO and no part of the amount specified above
is the subject of a dispute between the Parties; (3) demand in writing for payment
from TANESCO has been made; (4) for a period of not less than 30 Days from
the date payment was due, further request for payment have been made to
TANESCO or to obtain the payment of such amount; and (5) such amount, on the
date hereof, remains unpaid by TANESCO".

Subordination

Any right that the Guarantor may at any time have to be indemnified by TANESCO in
respect of sums paid out by the Guarantor in performance of this Guarantee shall be
subordinated to the rights of the Company to recover from TANESCO in full all sums
that may at any time become due from TANESCO under the Power Purchase Agreement.

No Set-off

No set-off, counterclaim, reduction, or diminution of any obligation that the Guarantor
has or may have against the Company shall be available to the Guarantor against the
Company in connection with any obligation of the Guarantor to the Company under this
Guarantee; provided, however, that notwithstanding the foregoing the Guarantor shall
have the benefit of all rights of set-off, counterclaim, reduction, or diminution of any
obligations that are available to TANESCO, pursuant to the Power Purchase Agreement
or that are otherwise directly related to the Project.

Consent to Jurisdiction

Each Party hereby consents to the jurisdiction of the courts of London, England for any
action filed by the Party to enforce any award or decision of any arbitrator(s) or experi(s)
who were duly appointed under this Agreement to resolve any Dispute between the
Parties. With respect to any such proceedings for the enforcement of any such award
against the assets of a Party (other than the Protected Assets in the case of enforcement
proceedings against the GOT):

(a) | The GOT appoints the Commercial Counsellor’ of The United Republic of
Tanzania in London (or, in his absence, a responsible officer in the Tanzania
High Commission) whose address is presently 43 Hertford Street, London WIY
TTF, England to receive for and on its behalf service of process in such
jurisdiction. in any such enforcement proceeding;

(b) The Company appoints Mr. Ahmed Daya whose address is presently we

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 16 of 21

Station Road, Edgware, Middlesex HA8 7AR, England to receive for and on its
behalf service of process in such jurisdiction in any such enforcement proceeding;

(c) Each Party shall maintain in England a duly appointed agent for the receipt of
service of process and shall notify the other Party of the name and address of
such agent and any change in such agent and/or the address of such agent; and

(d) Each Party agrees that the failure by any such agent for the receipt of service of
process to give it notice of any process that has been served on such agent shall
not impair the validity of such service or of any judgment based thereon.

2 REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
The Guarantor represents and warrants that, as of the date hereof:
2.1 Power and Authority

The Guarantor has full power, authority, and legal right to incur the obligation, to execute
and deliver, and to perform and observe the terms and provisions of this Guarantee.

2.2 Legal Validity

This Guarantee constitutes legal, valid, binding, and enforceable obligations of the
Guarantor in accordance with its terms.

2.3 Approvals

All necessary action has been taken, and all approvals required have been obtained, under
the Laws of Tanzania to authorize the execution, delivery, and performance of this
Guarantee.

2.4 Tax

In addition to any amount then due and payable to the Company by TANESCO under the
Power Purchase Agreement respectively, and payable by the Guarantor under the terms of
this Guarantee, the Guarantor shall be liable for any duty, impost, levy, charge, fee or tax
of whatsoever nature ("Tax") levied or imposed by a Governmental Authority or any
political subdivision or authority thereof on or with regard to any payment hereunder unless
the payment, if made by TANESCO would itself have been subject to the Tax. If under
applicable law the Guarantor is unable to pay the Tax and the Company is required to pay
the Tax, the amount to be paid to the Company hereunder shall be increased by an amount
sufficient so that such payment, net of the Tax, would equal the payment the Company
would have received from TANESCO net of any Taxes applicable to payment fro
TANESCO to the Company. a

ly “yy

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 17 of 21

2.5 Full Faith and Credit

The obligations and covenants of the Guarantor in this Guarantee constitute unconditional
obligations of the Guarantor, for the performance of which the full faith and credit of the
Guarantor is pledged.

2.6 Sovereign Immunity

The Guarantor irrevocably and unconditionally agrees that it is subject to suit in the England
with respect to its obligations hereunder, and that the execution, delivery, and performance
of this G itute private and ial acts of the Gi . The GOT hereby
irrevocably and unconditionally agrees: (i) that should any proceedings be brought against
the GOT or its assets, other than its aircraft, naval vessels and other defence related assets
or assets protected by the diplomatic and consular privileges under the State Immunity Act
of England or the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of the United States or any analogous
legislation (the “Protected Assets"), in any jurisdiction in connection with this Guarantee or
any of the transactions contemplated by this Guaranty, no claim of immunity from such
proceedings will be claimed by or on behalf of the GOT on behalf of itself or any of its
assets (other than the Protected Assets); (ii) it waives any right of immunity which it or any,
of its assets (other than the Protected Assets) now has or may in the future have in any
jurisdiction in connection with any such proceedings; and (iii) it consents generally in
respect of the enforcement of any judgment against it in any such proceedings in any
jurisdiction to the giving of any relief or the issue of any process in n connection with such

without ion, the making, against or
in respect of any of its assets whatsoever (other than the Protected Assets) regardless of the
use or intended use of the asset.

3° UNDERTAKING
3.1 Duration

This Guarantee shall remain in full force and effect from and after the date hereof until the
termination of the initial term of the Power Purchase Agreement and for so long thereafter
as any amount owned the Company by the Guarantor, TANESCO, in connection with such
initial term is or may be outstanding.

3.2 Performance of Agreements
The Guarantor shall not take any action that would prevent or interfere with the
performance by TANESCO of any of its obligations under the Power Purchase Agreement

(except, in the case of any unintentional action, where the Guarantor promptly remedies
such action). 2
2

/

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 18 of 21

4 NO WAIVER; REMEDIES CUMULATIVE
4.1 No Waiver

No failure or delay by the Company to exercise any right or remedy under this Guarantee
shall constitute a waiver of that right or remedy. No single or partial exercise of any right
or remedy shall preclude any other or further exercise thereof or the exercise of any other
right or remedy. No waiver by the Company shall be effective unless it is in writing.

4.2 Remedies Cumulative

The rights and remedies of the Company provided by this Guarantee are cumulative and not
exclusive of any rights or remedies provided by law.

5 NOTICES
5.1 Address for Notice

All notices or other communications (together “Notices") to be given or made hereunder
shall be in writing; shall be addressed for the attention of the person indicated below and
shall be delivered personally or sent by registered or certified mail or facsimile. All Notices
shall be deemed delivered (a) when Presented personally, (b) if received on a business Day
of the iving Party, when by facsimile to the iving Party's facsimile
number specified above and, if received on a Day that is not a business Day of the receiving
Party, on the first business Day of the receiving Party following the date transmitted by
facsimile to the receiving Party’s facsimile number specified above, (c) one (1) Day after
being delivered to a courier for overnight delivery, addressed to the receiving Party, at the
address indicated above (or such other address as such Party may have specified by notice
delivered to the delivering Party at its address or facsimile number specified above) or (d)
five (5) Days after being deposited in a regularly maintained receptacle for the postal service
in Tanzania, postage prepaid, registered or certified, return receipt requested, addressed to
the receiving Party, at the address indicated above (or such other address as the receiving
Party may have specified by written Notice delivered to the delivering Party at its address
or facsimile number specified above). Any notice given by facsimile shall be confirmed in
writing delivered personally or sent by registered or certified mail, but the failure to so
confirm shall not render void or invalidate the original notice if it is in fact received by the

Party to which it is addressed. The address for service of each Party and its respective
facsimile number shall be: ~~

/

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1

5.1.1 For the Guarantor

* Attention

* . Address

* Facsimile
5.1.2 For the Company
* Attention

* Address

* Facsimile

Filed 11/15/2007 Page 19 of 21

The Government of United Republic of Tanzania

The Principal Secretary

Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals
Sokoine Drive, Mkwepu Street
PO Box 2000

Dar es Salaam

United Republic of Tanzania
5144071

Independent Power Tanzania Lid.
Mr. James Mugemalira

Sth Floor, Extelcoms House
Samora Avenue, P O Box 1461
Dar es Salaam

United Republic of Tanzania

51-46017

* with a copy to the Company’s counsel: © LONG & COMPANY

* Attention
* Address

*~ Facsimile

Ms. Joanne Long
9B Bukit Ceylon, 50200 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

603- 201 4832

or such other addresses or facsimile numbers as either Party may have notified
to the other Party in accordance with this Article 5.1.

5.2 Effectiveness of Service

Each Notice under this Guarantee shall be effective only upon actual receipt thereof.

6 ASSIGNMENT

6.1 Assignment by the Guarantor

The Guarantor may not assign or transfer all or any part of its rights or obligations —

hereunder without the prior written consent of the Company.

!

—)

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 20 of 21

6.2 Assignment by the Company
The Company may not assign or transfer all or any part of its rights or obligations
hereunder without the prior written consent of the Guarantor. Notwithstanding the provision
of the immediately preceding sentence, for the purpose of construction or permanent
financing of the GOT, the Company may assign or create a security interest over its rights
and interests in and to this Guarantee.

6.3 Successors

This Guarantee shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the Guarantor and the
Company and the respective successors and permitted assigns of each.

7 GOVERNING LAW AND ARBITRATION
7.1 Governing Law

The rights and obligations of the Parties under or pursuant to this Guarantee shall be
governed by and construed according to the Laws of Tanzania.

7.2 Arbitration
Any dispute or difference between the Parties arising out of or in connection with this

Agreement shall be arbitrated in accordance with Article 21.2 of the Implementation
Agreement.

8 MISCELLANEOUS
8.1 Severability

If one or more provisions contained in this Guarantee is held or found to be invalid, illegal,
or unenforceable in any respect, the provision(s) shall be given effect to the extent permitted
by law and the invalidity, illegality, or unenforceability of any provision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining provisions of this Guarantee.

8.2 Definitions

The capitalized terms used but not defined in this Guarantee‘shall have the meanings given
to them in the Implementation Agreement. ——

Case 2:07-cv-10366-AKH Document 1 Filed 11/15/2007 Page 21 of 21

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this Guarantee has been executed the day first above written,

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

 

PRUSETPAL SECRETARY

MINISTRY OF WATER, ENERGY
By + RAPHAEL MOLLEL AND MINERALS

Title : PRINCIPAL SECRETARY
MINISTRY OF WATER, ENERGY AND MINERALS

INDEPENDENT POWER TANZANIA LTD.

 

By : JAMES B. RUGEMALIRA
Title : DIRECTOR

