APPENDIX A

APPEWDIX A TO FINAL AWARD DATED JUNU 22, 2001

 

ERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEME
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

 

BEFORE THE

 

ICSID Case Number ARB/98/8

 

TANZANIA ELECTRIC SUPPLY COMPANY LIMITED (Claimant)
and
INDEPENDENT POWER TANZANIA LIMITED (Respondent)

ee

DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT'S REQUEST FOR
PROVISIONAL MEASURES

 

 

_—

Introduction

 

1. On 30 November 1998, five days after the Request for Arbitration on behalf of
the Claimant (“TANESCO”) was lodged with the Centre (on 25th November
1998), one week before it was registered by the Centre (on 7 December 1998),
and some four months before the Tribunal was constituted (on 23° March 1999),
the Respondent (“IPTL”) applied to the High Court of Tanzania, seeking, inter
alia, an order for interim payments. That relief was granted, but execution has now
been stayed by a single Justice of the Court of Appeal of Tanzania pending appeal
to that Court. Any decision by this Tribunal on the Claimant's Emergency
Request for Recommendation of Provisional Measures addressed to those judicial

proceedings has been deferred at the request of the Parties.

2. At the first session of the representatives of the Parties with the Tribunal, held on

14" June 1999, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rules 13 and 20, a timetable was
fixed for the future conduct of the arbitration, including for the making and
hearing of any request for provisional measures which IPTL might see fit to make

now that the Tribunal was fully constituted and seized of the dispute.

As anticipated, IPTL filed a Request for Provisional Measures, in which it sought
a recommendation, pursuant to Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, that

TANESCO:-

ji) Permit commercial operation of the Facility;

(ii) Pay to IPTL US $32.607 million, as accumulated capacity payments
which it alleged had been due since deemed commercial operation of
the Facility on 15" September 1998; and

(iii) Continue to pay capacity payments at the rate of USD $3.623 million
per month (or, alternatively, US $3.4 million per month as allegedly
previously agreed by TANESCO) until final determination of the

issues in the arbitration.

_ Further written submissions followed, and a hearing took place before the

Tribunal in London on 18" and 19" October 1999, IPTL being represented by Mr
Sentner and Mr Penski of Messrs Nixon Hargrave. Devans & Doyle LLP, and
TANESCO being represented by Mr Hawkins of Messrs Hunton & Williams. In
the course of the hearing, Mr Sentner withdrew IPTL’s request for a

recommendation relating to the claimed lump-sum in respect of accumulated

capacity payments, and amended the first recommendation sought to clarify that
IPTL not only wished tc have permission to operate the Facility, but effectively
sought a recommendation that TANESCO co-operate in doing all that was
necessary to enable such operation to commence, which necessarily included the
completion of operational tests, and the connection of the Facility to the

Tanzanian electricity grid.

5. A number of issues were argued, including in particular the following:-

(i) Did the Tribunal have jurisdiction to entertain the request or to make
the recommendations sought?

(ii) Was the request one for conservatory measures Or. in effect. for
specific performance of the Agreement?

(iii) Would the effect of making the recommendations sought be to
maintain the “status quo”?

(iv) Did IPTL demonstrate an urgent need for the relief sought?

6. Before considering these matters, we observe that both Parties concentrated a
great deal of attention in their written and oral submissions on the “merits” of the
dispute. As we sought to make clear in the course of the hearing, we think it
neither appropriate nor indeed possible for us at this stage to form or express any
concluded view on the merits. Our decision is required to address only the issues

formulated by the parties and recited above.

Do we have jurisdiction?

7

cd

It was common ground that our jurisdiction (if any) must flow from one of two

sources, namely:-

(i) English arbitration procedural law, and in particular the Arbitration Act
1996; and/or

(ii) the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules.

The former was argued by IPTL to be applicable because in paragraph 18(c) and
(e) of their Agreement, the Parties had provided that the “arbitration shall be
conducted in London, England” and that “ [t]he Law governing the procedure and
administration of [the] arbitration....shall be the English law.” The latter was
agreed to be applicable because the Parties’ Agreement refers disputes to

arbitration under the ICSID Convention and Rules.

Without determining whether or not it applies vel non, we note that the English
Arbitration Act grants considerable powers to arbitrators, and in particular, under
section 38(4), the power to give directions in relation to the preservation of
property. However, section 39 provides that the Tribunal only has power to order
on a provisional basis relief which it would have power to grant in a final award
(including, in particular, a provisional order for the payment of money or

disposition of property) if the parties agree to confer such power on the Tribunal.

9. Rule 39(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, which follows Article 47 of the ICSID

Convention, provides, under the heading “Provisional Measures” :~

“At any time during the proceeding a party may request that provisional
measures for the preservation of its rights be recommended by the Tribunal.
The request shall specify the rights to be preserved, the measures the
recommendation of which is requested, and the circumstances that require

such measures.”

10. As we understand it, IPTL sought to found jurisdiction on section 39 of the
English Arbitration Act and Rule 39 of the ICSID Rules, which latter provision it
contended constituted an agreement by the Parties to extend the powers of the

Tribunal.

_We conclude that we have jurisdiction to make the recommendations sought,

provided that they satisfy the requirements of Rule 39, which is all the power the
Tribunal would have even if section 39 of the English Arbitration Act applied (as
to which it is unnecessary for us to reach or express any conclusion).

Is this an application for conservatory measures? Would the recommendations

sought maintain the “status quo”?

12. Although neither Article 47 nor Rule 39 uses the phrase “conservatory measures”,
it is implicit in those provisions and it is our understanding that it has been so

construed and applied. Provisional measures for the preservation of rights in our

view contemplate measures that will prevent the erosion of rights pending final
resolution of the dispute. We accept that the rights which such measures can be
invoked to protect are not limited to proprietary rights, and are not limited to

rights over corporeal things. They can include. for example, contractual rights.

13. However, there is in our view a distinction to be drawn between the protection of

rights and the enforcement of rights. It was no doubt in appreciation of this that

 

Mr Sentner sought to contend that the recommendations sought would have the
effect of maintaining the “status quo”. His justification for this was the assertion
that IPTL enjoyed rights under the Agreement which, in the absence of the
recommendations sought. would be likely to be eroded, since there was a risk that
the lenders to IPTL. whose rights to foreclose on the loan security (the Facility)
had already accrued, would do so and thus deprive IPTL of ownership of the
Facility; and a real risk that, by the time any final award in the arbitration were to
be issued, TANESCO, and its owner, the Tanzanian Government, would not be in
a financial position to be able to honour it, since no revenues would have been

generated by the Facility in the meantime.

14. This submission requires a degree of speculation. There was no evidence put
before us to the effect that the lenders have been contemplating foreclosure other
than the letter of Bumiputra-Commerce Bank Berhad Corporate Banking dated
16" November 1999 threatening “drastic steps to recover the loan granted” should
“the situation remain unchanged by end November 1999.” We doubt, however,
whether the lender would regard such a step as in its financial interest, since the

Facility could not be sold to be operated by a purchaser without the co-operation

of TANESCO. It may be that, by the time our final award is issued, assuming that

we were to uphold IPTL’s claim and make a substantial monetary award in its

favour, TANESCO would be unable to satisfy it. But there is some precedent for

 

the view that conservatory or provisional measures under Rule 39 should not be

 

recommended in order, in effect, to give security for the claim. See e.g. Atlantic

Triton Co. Ltd v Guinea (Case No. ARB/84/1) 3 ICSID Reports 3; see also Paul

 

D. Friedland, “Provisional Measures In ICSID Arbitration”, 2 Arb Int’] 335, 348.

15, In our view, Mr Hawkins was right in his submission that what IPTL sought, in

reality, was specific performance of the Agreement and/or an interim mandatory

injunction requiring such performance. As we understand it, the “status quo” can

be summarised as follows: IPTL, on the one hand, is contending that the

Agreement remains in being and requires the Facility to be put into operation,

whereas, on the other hand, TANESCO is contending that it was entitled to cancel

the Agreement. and in any event that the applicable Reference Tariff, agreement

upon

which it is alleged is necessary before the Facility can be operated, has not

yet been agreed; and, pending resolution of the dispute, the Facility has been

standing idle. Far from seeking to maintain that “status quo”, the

recommendations sought by IPTL were plainly directed to affect a fundamental

change to it.

16. We do not go so far as to conclude that “provisional measures” under Rule 39 can

never include recommending the performance of a contract in whole or in part: it

 

is not necessary for us to go that far. But where what is sought is, in effect,

performance of the Agreement, and where the only right said to be preserved

thereby is the right to enjoy the benefits of that Agreement, we consider that the
application falls outside the scope of Rule 39, and therefore is beyond our

jurisdiction to grant.

-Ttis said that TANESCO would not suffer any harm if the recommendations were

to be made, since the electricity produced and put into the grid would be readily
saleable at a profit to TANESCO. This may well be. although there was evidence
from Dr Swales to the effect that Tanzania’s immediate needs for further
electricity may not be so substantial as at one time had been thought. But we do
not think that the balance of convenience. or, looking at it from a different
perspective, the balance of harm, can be a sufficient ground on its own for
granting this sort of relief — if the nature of the relief is beyond that contemplated

by Rule 39.

Has IPTL demonstrated an urgent need for the relief sought?

18. Nor are we persuaded that IPTL has demonstrated an urgent need for the relief

sought. As we have indicated, we have serious doubts about the assertion,
unsupported by evidence, that the lenders may foreclose, or at least do so in the
foreseeable future. Further, whilst it may be that TANESCO’s ability to satisfy a
substantial monetary award, save out of income from the sale of electricity from
the Facility, may be in doubt, if our final award were to be in IPTL’s favour, and
the Facility is ultimately put into operation, IPTL will receive its agreed tariff
payments for the full contractual period of 20 years. All it will have lost will have

been the use of the money over a period when it will have been committed to

repayment of capital and interest under its loan facility. There is no reason to
believe that TANESCO would be unable to satisfy any award of damages in
respect of this, out of its revenues on the sale of electricity produced. There is,
admittedly. a great deal of uncertainty, but the burden at this stage must be on

IPTL to make out its case of urgent need. It has not done so.

19. For the above reasons, the Tribunal declines to make the recommendations

sought.

Dated this 2ofK day of Uurwtey 1999,
Hon. Charles Brower Hon. Andrew Rogers QC

Unnten, Breve uy :

 

Kenneth Rokison QC

 

