APPENDIX B

APPENDIX B TO FINAL AWARD DATED JUNE 22, 2001

BEFORE THE INTERNATIONAL

BEFORE LEE rere

CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

ICSID Case Number ARB/98/8

 

TANZANIA ELECTRIC SUPPLY COMPANY LIMITED

(Claimant)

and

INDEPENDENT POWER TANZANIA LIMITED

(Respondent)

 

DECISION ON PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 

Introduction

1. At the hearing before the Tribunal on 18 and 19 October 1999, it
was proposed by the Tribunal, and agreed between the parties, that
the parties should address certain issues of construction and / or
law, arising in the arbitration, to be determined by the Tribunal on
a preliminary basis. A schedule for the filing of submissions on the

formulation of the preliminary issues, and written memorials and

Nn

counter-memorials in relation to such issues, as finally formulated

by the Tribunal, was agreed and ordered.

Subsequently, in the course of correspondence between the parties’
legal representatives, the Secretariat of ICSID and the Tribunal, the
issues to be determined as preliminary issues were defined as

follows:
1. Was or is TANESCO entitled to terminate the PPA?

2. If not, what are the effects (if any) on the parties’
respective rights and obligations under the PPA of:
(a) the change from low speed to medium
speed diesel engines; and / or
(b) any other alleged differences between the
Facility as built and that provided for in
the PPA and/or any other agreements

between the parties?

3. How is the final Reference Tariff to be calculated, in
the light of the said change and any other differences

which may be established?

4. What was the effect on the parties’ respective rights
and obligations of Addendum No. 1| dated 9 June
1995, and, in particular, did Addendum No. | on its
true construction have the effect that the final
Reference Tariff was to be calculated by reference to

the reasonable and prudently incurred cost of the

wn

Facility as built; and what were “the underlying

assumptions stated in the PPA”?

Written memorials were filed on behalf of the parties in relation to
the above issues on 26 January 2000, together with witness
statements and documents relied on. Reply submissions were
served on behalf of the parties on 28 February 2000, together with

further witness statements and documents.

Before the hearing, both parties provided the Tribunal with copies

of the legal authorities to be relied on.

An oral hearing on the preliminary issues took place before the
Tribunal at the Fleet arbitration Centre, London on 13, 14 15, and
16 March 2000, TANESCO being represented by Mr Robert W.
Hawkins, Mr John Jay Range and Mr Brett A. Bakke of Messrs
Hunton & Williams, and IPTL being represented by Mr Robert C.
Sentner, Mr Christopher M. Paparella and Miss Nancy P. Hill of
Messrs Nixon Peabody LLP.

At the start of the hearing, the Tribunal was informed that none of
the witnesses whose statements had been served on either side was

required to be called for cross-examination.

An application was pursued on behalf of TANESCO, following its
request filed on 7 March 2000, for postponement of the hearing
pending the disclosure by IPTL of further documents which had
been requested. The Tribunal, after deliberation, refused this

application.

Following the hearing, and in accordance with directions agreed
between the parties, and given by the Tribunal, short post-hearing
briefs dated 20 April 2000 were served on behalf of both parties.

The record in relation to the preliminary issues then being closed,
the Tribunal has considered the submissions advanced on behalf of
the parties, both written and oral, together with the evidence
adduced, and has reached its unanimous decision on the
preliminary issues (which is intended to be final in relation to those
issues which it determines, and which will be incorporated in our

Final Award in due course) as follows:

Having had the benefit of the parties’ respective submissions, and
in light of the way the parties put their case, it appears to the
Tribunal that the preliminary issues ordered can and should be

considered under three broad headings, as follows:

(1) Was the PPA a valid and binding contract? This question
involves two sub-issues, namely:

(i) Did the PPA never become binding because of the
failure of a condition precedent (namely the approval
of the Government of the Republic of Tanzania)?

(ii) Was the PPA void for uncertainty (a question which
involves consideration of the meaning and effect of

Addendum No. 1)?

(2) If the PPA became a valid and binding contract, was

TANESCO entitled to serve Notice of Default, and is

(ly

TANESCO entitled to give notice of termination
accordingly? This question sub-divides into:
(i) _ issues of construction / agreement; and

(ii) issues of waiver and / or estoppel.

(3) If the PPA was and remains in force, how should the
Reference Tariff be adjusted pursuant to Addendum No. 1?
In addition to the meaning and effect of Addendum No. 1
(see (1)(ii) above), this question raises the issue whether the
actual costs taken for the purposes of the adjustment must be

such costs as are reasonable and were prudently incurred.

We believe that in seeking to answer the above questions, we shall
effectively have covered the listed preliminary issues, and we

proceed to consider them in the above order.

Was the PPA a valid and binding contract?

(i) Did the PPA never become binding because of the failure of
a condition precedent?

(ii) | Was the PPA void for uncertainty?

In relation to the first sub-issue, TANESCO’s contentions can be

summarised as follows:

(1) It was made clear to IPTL that TANESCO required the
approval of the Tanzanian Government before committing
itself to the PPA;

(2) The Government in turn made it clear to TANESCO that its

approval was dependent upon an effective mechanism for

(3)
(4)

adjusting the Reference Tariff in the PPA to take account of
any changes in the assumptions upon which it had been
based;

The Government’s stance was communicated to IPTL;

The mechanism stated in Addendum No. | was not effective
to achieve that purpose, and, accordingly, a condition

precedent to the efficacy of the PPA was not satisfied.

In relation to the second sub-issue, TANESCO contends;

()

(2)

G3)

That Addendum No. 1, although expressed as an
“Addendum”, was an integral part of the PPA;

That its meaning and effect were so uncertain that it should
be regarded as void for uncertainty on two grounds ~ first,
because the assumptions underlying the Reference Tariff
were not stated in the PPA, and it was therefore impossible
to derive from the words used the parties’ presumed
intention as to the assumptions to which the Addendum was
intended to refer; and second, because there was no
machinery provided in Addendum No. 1 for adjusting the
Reference Tariff to take account of any changes in the
relevant assumptions;

That the mechanism for the adjustment of the Reference
Tariff for which Addendum No. | purported to provide was
such a fundamental part of the parties’ bargain that it could
not be severed, and, accordingly, the whole contract should

be regarded as void and of no effect

(i)

Condition precedent — Government approval

It was not suggested that there was anything in the terms of the
PPA itself that expressly provided for Government approval as a
condition precedent to the efficacy of the bargain, although such
provisions are not uncommon where government agencies or
government-owned commercial enterprises are involved. Nor does
TANESCO argue for an implied term. In advancing its argument,
and despite Article 19.5 of the PPA The “Entire Agreement”
provision, TANESCO relies on correspondence during the period
leading up to the signature of the PPA, some of which passed
between government departments, some of which was
communicated to TANESCO, and only a portion of which was

passed on to otherwise involved IPTL.

In doing so, TANESCO relies specifically on Section 101 of the
Tanzanian Evidence Act, 1967, which provides, in its material

parts:

“When the terms of any such contract, grant or other disposition of
property, or any matter required by law to be reduced to the form
of a document, have been proved..., no evidence of any oral
agreement or statement shall be admitted, as between the parties to
any such instrument or their representative in interest, for the
purposes of contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from

its terms:

Provided that - ...

(c) the existence of any separate oral agreement,
constituting a condition precedent to the attaching of any
obligation under any such contract, grant or disposition of

property, may be proved...”

It is contended that the same principle must apply, a fortiori, where

reliance is placed on other written communications.

It is unnecessary for the Tribunal to consider in this context
whether the question of the admissibility of the correspondence
relied on should properly be regarded as a matter of substantive
law (in which case Tanzanian law would apply), or procedural law
(in which case the laws of England, as the seat of arbitration,
would apply), since the Tribunal is satisfied that English law would
also permit reference to such correspondence for this purpose. In
any event, Article 34(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules would give

the Tribunal full discretion in this regard.

However, in the opinion of the Tribunal, there is nothing in the
correspondence or in the record of meetings leading up to the
signature of the PPA which, upon analysis, supports TANESCO’s

contention.

Following meetings between representatives of IPTL and the
Government of Tanzania that concluded on 15 December 1994,
and a further meeting between Mr Rugemalira of IPTL and the
Commissioner for Energy and Petroleum Affairs on 21 December
1994, at which it was confirmed that IPTL’s proposal was
“technically acceptable” to TANESCO, on 28 December 1994, Mr

Mollel, the Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Water, Energy

and Minerals, wrote to IPTL stating:

“I am pleased to inform you that the Government has

endorsed your proposal and has directed the facilitation of

the implementation of the Project subject to the following:

(a) IPTL will proceed immediately to conclude a [PPA]
with [TANESCO] substantially upon the terms as
outlined in your draft PPA but with amendments as
agreed between IPTL and TANESCO.....”

On 4 January 1995, the Managing Director of TANESCO wrote to
IPTL asking for additional information and data, including project

cost estimates and details of financing sources. He added:

“In summary we require information and data that enabled
you calculate the capacity and energy charges you proposed

in your document dated 21 November 1994...”.

IPTL replied on 11 January 1995, responding to the queries raised
and stating a project contract price of US $163,000,000 including
US $14,000,000 for gas conversion equipment.

Discussions then took place on 16, 17, and 19 January 1995
between representatives of IPTL and TANESCO in the presence of
representatives of the Government of Tanzania, in the course of
which IPTL was again requested to provide clarification on what
were described as “two key items”, namely (a) the tariff and (b) a

breakdown of capital costs. At the meeting, a number of

amendments to the draft PPA were discussed and agreed. It was
recorded that the signing of the PPA was still subject to the
approval of TANESCO’s Board of Directors, and further that
TANESCO would promptly make its recommendations to the

Government for “final endorsement”.

A Cabinet Meeting was held on 3 May 1995, at which it was
agreed that the President should be advised that the Government in
principle should approve the PPA; that the Cabinet’s Economic and
Finance Committee should meet immediately to review and discuss
in detail technical issues regarding rates for Capacity Charge,
Energy Charge, Capacity Utilisation and a stand-by letter of credit
as approved at the experts’ sessions; that TANESCO should be
permitted to sign the PPA; and that the Ministry of Water, Energy
and Minerals also should be permitted to sign an Implementation
Agreement with IPTL immediately. It was recorded that the

President concurred with the above and ordered its implementation.

Accordingly, on 16 May 1995, the Principal Secretary of the
Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals wrote to TANESCO’s
Managing Director, with a copy to the Secretary to the Cabinet,
informing him of the approvals given at the Cabinet Meeting, and

continuing:

“On that basis, TANESCO and our ministry have been
permitted to sign with IPTL contracts on Power Purchase
Agreement and Implementation Agreement. However, we
have been asked not to state Capacity Charge rates until we

have submitted...an explanation on the rates. This means,

10

for the time being we will only agree on the formula and

criteria that will eventually produce the rates.”

The letter ended:

“Please take the necessary action to sign an agreement with
IPTL as soon as possible with attention to the stated

conditions...”

Two days later, on 18 May 1995, the Principal Secretary of the
Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals wrote to IPTL, informing
it that Government approval had been granted for TANESCO to

sign the PPA. His letter continued:

“The Government has however required us to review and elaborate
on Capacity Charge, Energy Charge and Standby Letter of Credit
with a view to bringing down the cost of the project. Your Co-
operation in this respect will be highly appreciated... TANESCO
and the Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals stand ready to sign

the above agreements accordingly...”

IPTL replied on the same day, noting the stated approval, and
attaching notes clarifying and elaborating upon the Capacity and

Energy Charges. Its letter continued:

“Regarding the suggestion that we sign the Agreements without
indicating the Reference Tariff we have contacted our Financial
Advisors on the matter and regret to report that this will not be

acceptable as such document will remain unbankable.”

ll

On 25 May 1995, IPTL wrote to the Principal Secretary to the
Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals, with copies to the Chief
Secretary, the Economic Advisor to the President and the
Managing Director of TANESCO, recording an agreement with the
Minister discussed that morning that, since the PPA did not specify
a final tariff but was only quoting a reference tariff “on the basis of
the January 1995 assumptions”, the parties should go ahead and
sign “if the Chief Secretary will also confirm that this is not in

conflict with the decision of the Cabinet...”.

The letter continued:

“We have since consulted the Chief Secretary and he is in
agreement that signing the Agreements with a tentative reference
tariff is within the spirit of the Cabinet’s decision...We have
agreed that if I let you have sight on the revised PPA to satisfy
yourself that it only talks about a reference tariff you will instruct

TANESCO to sign tomorrow...”.

On 30 May 1995, Mr Rugemalira of IPTL sent a Memorandum to

his colleague, Mr Daya, stating:

“I refer to our telephone conversation when I informed you that
Government wants us to give the assumptions on which we have

based to arrive at the capacity charge...and the Energy charge.....”

On the following day, 31 May 1995, Mr Rugemalira wrote to the
Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals,

with copies to the Chief Secretary, the Director General of the

12

Investment Promotion Centre and the Managing Director of
TANESCO, listing the assumptions used to determine the capacity
charge “contained in...the proposal submitted...in November 1994
which was the basis of negotiations and agreements reached in

January, 1995...”

The letter continued:

“[W]e have made a provision in the agreement with TANESCO
that any changes in the stated assumptions will result in
adjustments in the Reference Tariff proportionately...[W]Je agreed
with the Minister and the Principal Secretary...that in view of the
clarifications we provided you would seek the approval of State
House so that we sign the PPA immediately as directed by the

Cabinet but mentioning the Reference Tariff...

...We request you to authorise TANESCO to sign the PPA
now...and any justifiable changes can be done by way of side

memoranda or addendum to the Agreement...”.

On 5 June 1995, the Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Water,
Energy and Minerals wrote to the Secretary to the Cabinet,

referring to his letter of 16 May 1995, and stating:

«_To avoid wasting any more time, we have reached an
agreement with IPTL that the contract should be signed now
stating “Reference Tariff’ of 10 US dollar cents per kWh

with an understanding that this price may change depending

28.

30.

on realistic changes which may occur in the utilized

criteria...

...Before authorising TANESCO to sign the contract with

IPTL, stating Reference Tariff, I seek your approval...”

The Secretary to the President replied the following day stating:

“__.[T]he correct meaning of those directives is that your
ministry and the Electricity Company should satisfy
themselves with the terms of the contract prior to signing it.
It is important that the contract should contain a clause,
which will provide an opportunity for both sides to review
the agreed tariff rates in accordance with any changes in the

utilized criteria...”.

On 7 June 1995, the Principal Secretary of the Ministry wrote to
TANESCO stating that TANESCO could now sign the contract
with IPTL.

In fact, we understand that the PPA had already been signed on
behalf of TANESCO on 26 May 1995, but was still retained by it
until 9 June 1995, when it was handed over at the same time as

Addendum No. | was signed.

The Tribunal is not persuaded that the effect of the correspondence
to which we have referred was to render Government approval a
condition precedent to the efficacy of the PPA. Whilst we accept

that the Government wanted the PPA to provide a mechanism for

14

(ii)

adjusting the Reference Tariff, primarily so that TANESCO could
obtain the benefit of any “savings”, and that IPTL was made aware
of this, it was never provided, or indeed suggested to IPTL that it
was necessary for there to be any formal Government approval
communicated to it, nor that those negotiating and ultimately
signing and returning the PPA on behalf of TANESCO lacked
authority to do so. Indeed, lack of relevant authority was not
pleaded or relied on per se. We further conclude that, although the
Government expressed its desire to TANESCO in clear terms, in
the end it left it to the relevant Ministry and in particular to
TANESCO to satisfy itself that the terms of the PPA provided the
mechanism for adjustment which the Government wanted. On this
basis, the Minister of Water, Energy and Minerals authorised

TANESCO to sign the PPA in the terms it did.

The alleged inefficacy of the adjustment mechanism provided

in Addendum No. 1

Appendix B to the PPA provides for the payment of a Reference
Tariff, which is comprised of two elements, namely a “Capacity
Charge”, designed to compensate IPTL for establishing the facility
to generate electricity at the contract rate, and an “Energy Charge”,
to compensate for the costs of providing electricity from the
facility so established, as required by TANESCO. The former
obviously would have included the costs of the design and
construction of the facility as well as financing costs; the latter

would include fuel costs and ongoing maintenance.

33.

34.

35.

36.

In the correspondence to which we have referred above, it was
clear that the Tanzanian Government and TANESCO required
some adjustment mechanism to take account of any changes in the
assumptions upon which the Reference Tariff had been based.
Although they had in mind receiving the benefit of any savings,

they conceded that IPTL should be compensated for any increases.

Paragraph 1 of Addendum No. | provided as follows:

“Before commencement of commercial operations the Reference
Tariff mentioned in Table I of Appendix B will be adjusted
upwards or downwards depending on the effect of changes that
will have taken place on any and all the underlying assumptions

stated in the Power Purchase Agreement...”.

As appears from the correspondence which we have set out in
extenso above, the Tanzanian Government inquired as to the
assumptions upon which the Capacity Charge and the Energy
Charge had been based; this inquiry was passed on by Mr
Rugemalira to Mr Daya; and on 31 May 1995, IPTL wrote to the
Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals
setting out in detail the assumptions used to determine the Capacity

Charge.

It will be apparent that, although the request made by the
Government and passed on related to all assumptions, the
assumptions stated in the letter of 31 May 1995 only covered those
underlying the “Capacity Charge”, and not those on which the

“Energy Charge” had been calculated.

16

37.

38.

39.

40.

It is common ground that the letter of 31 May 1995 was “on the
table” in front of the parties’ representatives when they negotiated

and agreed the terms of Addendum No. 1.

It seems to us, and was, we think, common ground between the
parties’ legal representatives at the hearing, that Addendum No. |

could be construed in a number of ways:

(1) | That the reference to “assumptions” was a reference to those
set out in Appendix H to the PPA, which related only to tax
and duty matters;

(2) That the reference to “assumptions” was a reference to those
set out in the letter of 31 May 1995 to which we have just
referred;

(3) That the reference to “assumptions” was a reference to all
the assumptions which had been made by IPTL in arriving at
the Reference Tariff, whether or not expressed in that letter;

(4) | That the meaning of Addendum No. | was so uncertain that

it should be rejected as void and meaningless.

On behalf of TANESCO, it was submitted that the Tribunal should
adopt construction (4), with a “fallback” of (3), while IPTL

contended primarily for construction (2), with a “fallback” of (1).

The starting point must be the actual words used, which must be
literally applied, unless their literal meaning is insensible or
obviously does not reflect the mutual intention of the parties. In

this context, the Tribunal was, not surprisingly, referred to that part

17

of the speech of Lord Hoffman in Investors Compensation Scheme
Limited v West Bromwich Building Society etc [1998] 1 All ER 98,
at page 115, where he said:

“The meaning which a document (or any other utterance)
would convey to a reasonable man is not the same thing as
the meaning of its words. The meaning of words is a matter
of dictionaries and grammars; the meaning of the document
is what the parties using those words against the relevant
background would reasonably have been understood to
mean. The background may not merely enable the
reasonable man to choose between the possible meaning of
words which are ambiguous but even (as occasionally
happens in ordinary life) to conclude that the parties must,

for whatever reason, have used the wrong words or syntax...

The “rule” that words should be given their “natural and
ordinary meaning” reflects the common sense proposition
that we do not easily accept that people have made linguistic
mistakes, particularly in formal documents. On the other
hand, if one would nevertheless conclude from the
background that something must have gone wrong with the
language, the law does not require judges to attribute to the
parties an intention which they blatantly could not have
had...... Many people. including politicians, celebrities and
Mrs Mallaprop, mangle meanings and syntax but
nevertheless communicate tolerably clearly what they are

using the words to mean...”

41.

42.

43.

44.

The Tanzanian Evidence Act, 1967, to the extent to which it

applies, provides in Section 104 as follows:

“When language used in a document is plain in itself, but is
unmeaning in reference to existing facts, evidence may be

given that it was used in a peculiar sense”.

Upon a literal construction of the words, the only assumptions
“stated in the PPA” were those in Appendix H, which referred to
assumptions concerning taxes and duties of various kinds. But it
was, as we understand it, common ground that it was not the
intention of either party to limit Addendum No. | in this way; and
for this reason, we should be inclined to reject this construction,
unless we were driven to it as the only construction which would

result in the survival of the contract.

We should also have been inclined to reject alternative construction
(4), as an admission of defeat. It was again, we think, common
ground that a tribunal should strive to give some meaning to every
provision in a contract — especially one which has been specifically
negotiated and agreed, as was Addendum No. 1. As is stated in the
28" edition of Chitty on Contracts, Volume I “General Principles”,

paragraph 2-133 at page 149:

“The court will make considerable efforts to give meaning to an

apparently meaningless phrase...”.

This leaves the Tribunal with a choice between alternatives (2) and

(3). In support of the latter, Mr Hawkins, for TANESCO, placed

19

45.

46.

repeated emphasis on the reference to “...any or all the underlying
assumptions...”, but chose, as indeed he had to, to ignore the word
“__ stated...”.Not only did TANESCO’s “fallback” construction
involve, in effect, striking out part of the clause; in the view of the
Tribunal it makes little commercial common sense. It would mean
that the parties had agreed to adjust a Reference Tariff by reference
to changes and assumptions which IPTL had never communicated
to TANESCO. In fact, as has emerged in the evidence, there was a
mathematical model constructed in 1995 on which it is said that the
Reference Tariff was based; but TANESCO did not know that at

the time, and in any event was unaware of its contents.

As has been seen from the exchanges of correspondence among the
Tanzanian Government, TANESCO and IPTL during the period
leading up to the signature of the PPA, the Government was
anxious not only that TANESCO should benefit from any savings
in the assumptions underlying the PPA, but also to be informed
what those assumptions were. The only assumptions which were
reported to TANESCO in response to the Government’s enquiries

were those set out in the letter of 31 May 1995.

It is true that the Government’s enquiry related to all the
assumptions underlying or utilised in the PPA, and in the enquiry
referred to in Mr Rugemalira’s Memorandum of 30 May 1995,
which gave rise to the 31 May 1995 letter, had apparently
specifically requested assumptions used as the basis for both the
Capacity Charge and the Energy Charge. But it was only given the
latter, and although this may at first sight appear odd, there may

have been good reason for IPTL so limiting its response to the

20

47.

enquiry. As IPTL stated in its 31 May 1995 letter, the main factor
which could alter the assumptions and thus the Tariff would be the
project cost. Furthermore, under the terms of Addendum No. 1 as
agreed, the Reference Tariff was not going to be subject to
continual adjustment throughout the period of the PPA, but was to
be the subject of a once and for all adjustment “[b]efore
commencement of commercial operations...”, depending on the
effect of changes that “will have taken place”. By that time, the
project cost would have been known, together with all or most of
the other costs and charges involved in the design and construction
of the facility, as well as its financing, and putting it into operation.
Whilst changes in design might have caused some re-assessment of
the assumptions used for the purposes of arriving at the Energy
Charge, such as maintenance costs and fuel consumption costs, the
actual figures for those aspects of IPTL’s expenditure to be
recovered from the Energy Charge portion of the tariff would only
change in the course of the performance of the PPA, which was to

last for a minimum of 20 years.

In relation to alternative construction (2), as was again emphasised
by Mr Hawkins, Addendum No. | refers to the underlying
assumptions stated in the PPA, and not to those stated in the letter
of 31 May 1995. However, it is common ground that the letter was
before the draftsmen of Addendum No. 1, and, taking the totality
of the evidence, including in particular the communications which
led up to the drafting and signing of Addendum No. 1, which we
have set out at some length above when considering the question of
Government approval, the Tribunal concludes that the mutual

intention of the parties was to refer to the assumptions set out in

21

(iii)

48.

49.

that letter. Although the representatives of both parties appear to
have been extremely fluent in the English language, it may not
have been their first language, and the explanation could well be
that, rather than using the wrong words, they simply used the
wrong syntax and intended to refer to “...any or all of the stated
assumptions underlying the PPA...”. But this involves a degree of

speculation, which is not necessary to our decision.
The mechanism for adjustment

This problem falls into a somewhat different category. It is not so
much a question of the parties purporting to make an agreement but
failing to make it clear what their mutual intention was, as it is a
question of the parties not having made any provision for the

mechanism whereby the Reference Tariff was to be adjusted.

In these circumstances, the Tribunal is of the clear and unanimous
view that the PPA must be read as subject to an implied term that
the adjustment made must be such as would be appropriate and
reasonable to take account of the changes. Whilst we anticipate that
there may be problems and indeed disagreements in applying the
test of reasonableness, the fact that there is an arbitration clause in
the PPA, under which we were appointed, means that any dispute
as to precisely how the Reference Tariff should be adjusted may be
determined by this Tribunal, and, indeed, there is a further period
reserved later this year for any hearing which may be necessary for

this purpose.

22

(iv)

50.

51.

52.

 

Thee q of the possible void of Addendum No. 1

Since the Tribunal has concluded that Addendum No. 1 is not void
for uncertainty, the consequences of its alleged voidness on the
PPA as a whole becomes a wholly academic question. However, as
the matter was argued, we think we should make it clear that, even
if we had reached the conclusion that paragraph 1 of Addendum
No. 1 was void for uncertainty, we should not have gone on to hold

that the whole PPA thereby foundered.

Although we accept that Addendum No. | was an integral part of
the PPA, especially in as much as it was signed at the same time as
the signed PPA was handed over by TANESCO to IPTL, it
nevertheless constituted a “gloss” on a contract already agreed in
principle. Certainly, the PPA could stand without it. Had the point
been taken at an early stage, before the parties and in particular
IPTL had begun to implement the PPA, we should have been
doubtful whether it was the mutual intention of the parties that the
contract without Addendum No. | should be binding on them; but
since, by the time the point was taken, IPTL had spent an
enormous amount of time, effort and money in implementing the
PPA over a period of some years, the suggestion that all of this had
been done under a purported contract which was in reality void and

of no effect is extremely unattractive.

It may seem illogical to adopt a different view of the consequences
of the alleged voidness of Addendum No. 1, depending upon the
extent to which the PPA had been purportedly performed, but the

question must be: Must Addendum No. 1 be taken to have been of

23

(2)

(i)

such importance to the PPA that the parties (applying an objective
test) must be taken to have concluded that the contract could not
stand and operate without it? Whatever the parties may have
concluded had the question been posed in June 1995, after the PPA
had been substantially performed by IPTL by designing,
constructing and commissioning the power plant at a cost of over
US $150,000,000, in our view the question only permits one

answer: The PPA must stand unamended.

Thus, for the reasons stated above, the Tribunal concludes that the
PPA did not lack efficacy because of the non-satisfaction of a
condition precedent, and it was not void for uncertainty; thus, the

PPA constituted a valid and binding contract.
Notice of Default

Construction / Agreement

TANESCO asserts that it was and is entitled to terminate the PPA,
having delivered to IPTL on 9 April 1998 a valid Notice of Default
pursuant to Article XVI of the PPA. That Article provides, in

pertinent part, as follows:

“16.1.THE SELLER Events of Default — Termination by
TANESCO.

Each of the following events shall be an event of default by THE
SELLER [IPTL] (each a “SELLER Event of Default”), which, if
not cured within the time period permitted (if any), with the prior

written consent of the GOT [Government of Tanzania], a copy of

54.

which consent shall be provided to THE SELLER with any notice
provided under Article 16.3 shall give rise to the right on the part
of TANESCO to terminate this Agreement pursuant to Article
16.33...

(c) the failure of THE SELLER to comply with any of its
material obligations under this Agreement and such failure
shall continue uncured for 90 Days after notice thereof by
TANESCO, provided that if such failure cannot be cured
within a period of 90 Days with the exercise of reasonable
diligence, then such cure period shall be extended for an
additional period of 90 Days so long as THE SELLER is

exercising reasonable diligence to cure such failure;...”

That Notice of Default (referred to in Article 16.3 of the PPA as a
“Notice of Intent to Terminate”) asserted specifically that IPTL
was “in default on its obligation to supply and install slow speed
diesel generating sets in accordance with Section 1.1 of Appendix

A to the PPA.”

It is common ground that IPTL in fact installed ten medium speed
diesel generators of 10 MW each and that the aforementioned
Section 1.1 of Appendix A to the PPA specifies that “[eJach
generating unit shall be slow speed diesel generating sets” (of
which five of 20 MW each were envisioned). [Emphasis added]. It
likewise is agreed that IPTL has not cured the asserted default but
that TANESCO at no time has proceeded to issue a Termination

Notice.

55.

The first issue thus raised is whether the installation of slow speed
diesel generating sets as provided in Section 1.1 of Appendix A to
the PPA constituted one of IPTL’s “material obligations” under the
PPA within the meaning of Article 16.1(c). A threshold question is
raised by the parties as to whether what is “material” in this context
is to be determined by reference to the terms of the PPA alone, or
instead should (or may) be judged on the basis of judicial
precedents or other substantive provisions of the applicable law
(which is Tanzanian law). The Tribunal holds that Article 16 of the
PPA constitutes an agreed termination scheme which must be
judged on its own. The standards that otherwise exist under the
applicable Tanzanian law governing a party’s right to terminate a
contract, absent such a special arrangement, are not pertinent to our
task. It would be correct, however, as IPTL contends, for the
Tribunal to consult such law for any guidance it might give as to
the meaning of the word “material” were the Tribunal to be in
doubt as to such meaning. The Tribunal is not, however, in doubt

on this point.

TANESCO directs our attention in particular to Sub-Section 1.5.13
of Appendix A and Articles 4.1(b), 7.1(f) and 9.1(a) of the PPA as
supporting its assertion that the installation of slow speed diesels,
as specified in Section 1.1 of Appendix A, is a material obligation.
The lattermost provision (Article 9.1(a)) stipulates, in pertinent
part, that IPTL shall ...“construct . . . the Facility... in accordance

with this Agreement”; and “Facility” is defined in Article 1.1 by

26

reference to Recital 1, ie, “described more specifically in
Appendix A.” Article 4.1(b) provides, as one of the “Conditions
Precedent to [TANESCO’s] Purchase Obligations”, that:

“*...Not less than 30 Days prior to the Commencement Date,
THE SELLER shall submit to TANESCO the general layout
drawings of the Facility, which submission shall be
accompanied by a certificate from the Independent Engineer
stating that (i) the Facility, when constructed in accordance
with such general layout drawings, will (A) conform with

the Description of the Facility...”

It is relevant that “Description of the Facility” is defined by Article
1.1 “as described in Appendix A.” Thus the critical references in
those two Articles are to Appendix A as a whole, and hence are not
limited to Section 1.1 thereof (which contains the PPA’s sole

reference to “slow speed diesel generating sets”).

Sub-Section 1.5.13 of Appendix A, which falls, as does Section
1.1, under the heading “FACILITY DESCRIPTION,” provides as

follows:

“All specifications referred to the above are indicative only
and may be changed, modified and/or altered as THE
SELLER deem fit to carry out the performance
requirements. Such changes, modifications and/or

alternations [sic] shall be mutually agreed with TANESCO.”

TANESCO argues that since this is a Sub-Section of Section 1.5,
“Specific List of Equipment,” all other Sub-Sections of which

27

(1.5.1-1.5.12) list individual plant components, its effect is limited
to those other Sub-Sections and cannot apply to Section 1.1 (or,
presumably, to any of the other Sections, namely 1.2-1.4, collected
under the rubric of “1.0 FACILITY DESCRIPTION”). On this
basis TANESCO argues that the specification of “slow speed diesel
generating sets” in Section 1.1 of Appendix A was immutable, and
therefore clearly material. In any event, TANESCO argues, it did
not agree with the change to medium speed diesels as 1.5.13 would

require. This point is treated separately below.

Against this, IPTL advances a number of points which to the
Tribunal are persuasive. First, it avers (something which
TANESCO has not contradicted) that any change, as took place,
from five 20 MW slow speed engines to ten 10 MW medium speed
diesels necessarily entails a number of alterations in the “Specific
List of Equipment” detailed in Sub-Sections 1.5.1-1.5.12. Since, it
is suggested, the one cannot be altered without disturbing the other,
the tolerance of change memorialized in Sub-Section 1.5.13
perforce extends to Section 1.1. TANESCO’s letter of 21 January
1998 to IPTL enclosing a Table I detailing 30 variations from the
original specifications of Sub-Sections 1.5.2-1.5.12 that
accompanied the change appears to confirm this. Second, the
statement in Sub-Section 1.5.13 that the specifications therein are
“indicative only” and may be changed “as THE SELLER {IPTL]
deem fit to carry out the performance requirements” leads to the
conclusion that IPTL, in its sole discretion, may initiate and
implement changes compatible with the contractually fixed

performance goals, subject only to the need for informal agreement

28

with TANESCO. A third point, which IPTL does not appear to
have pursued so precisely, is that under Article 1.2(ix) of the PPA:

“unless otherwise provided herein, whenever a consent or
approval is required by one Party from the other Party, such
consent or approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or

delayed.”

It would appear, in context, that it would have been unreasonable
for TANESCO to have withheld its agreement to the change to
medium speed engines so long as their use would not prejudice
achievement of the agreed performance goals, threaten the integrity
of the overall TANESCO grid, or otherwise impair any other

contractual objective.

This brings us to Article 7.1(f) of the PPA:

“Without the prior written consent of TANESCO (which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed), THE
SELLER shall not make, or permit to be made, any material
modification to the design or construction of the Facility if
such modification could reasonably be expected to have a
material adverse effect on TANESCO’s rights under this
Agreement or the TANESCO System.”

IPTL reads this as expressly empowering it unilaterally to have
substituted medium speed diesels for slow speed ones, so long as
such change “could [not] reasonably be expected to have a material
adverse effect on TANESCO’s rights” under the PPA or on its

grid. IPTL argues, in effect, that no particular plant specification

29

60.

61.

could be material in and of itself, since IPTL’s right to make
modifications is limited only by the requirement that it eschew any
unconsented “material adverse effect” that “could reasonably be
expected.” TANESCO’s rejoinder that Section 7.1(f) simply
imposes a limitation and has no authorizing force is unpersuasive.
IPTL might have added that Section 7.1(f) scotches any notion that
even such a major change as occurred could per se have material
character when it indicates that it could be unreasonable for
TANESCO to withhold its consent to a modification
notwithstanding its reasonable expectation of a material adverse

effect - a curious notion, indeed, as the Tribunal sees it.

It thus appears to the Tribunal, based on the PPA’s terms alone,
that the use of slow speed diesels was not a material obligation of
the PPA. While neither the parties’ dealings leading to conclusion
of the PPA nor their conduct thereafter has played any role in the
Tribunal’s reaching this conclusion, it may be noted that both,
which are discussed in another context below, also support the
view that neither party ever regarded the installation of slow speed

diesel generating sets as a material obligation of the PPA.

A further question arises, however, as to whether IPTL’s obligation
under Article 7.1(f) not to act in a certain way is itself a material
one within the meaning of Article 16, thus permitting TANESCO
to terminate the PPA upon any breach thereof by IPTL. (It should
be noted that TANESCO did not advance this argument, relying

instead basically on its contention that Section 1.1 of Appendix A

30

constituted a material obligation to install low speed diesel
generating sets, and citing Article 7.1(f) in support). In this
connection, one must first consider whether IPTL’s change from
slow to medium speed diesel engines without TANESCO’s prior
written consent was a “material modification” that “could
reasonably be expected to have a material adverse effect on
TANESCO’s rights” under the PPA within the meaning of Article
7.1(f), which, if accomplished without TANESCO’s prior written
consent, would constitute a breach of Article 7.1(f). As to this latter
issue, while the Tribunal has found that the installation of slow
speed diesels was not a material obligation of the PPA, doubtless
the change to medium speed machines did effect a “material
modification to the design or structure of the Facility” within the
meaning of Article 7.1(f). The dispute as regards the possibility of
a breach of Article 7.1(f), therefore, is solely over the character and

likelihood of any resulting effect.

As regards a possible breach, the Tribunal notes that what “could
reasonably be expected” necessarily is to be judged as of the time
the challenged modification was made. Hindsight has no place
here. TANESCO claims that its rights under the PPA could
reasonably have been expected to suffer a material adverse effect
in two respects. The first is financial: Various higher costs
reasonably could have been anticipated, which then would have
increased the tariff chargeable to TANESCO under the PPA in a
degree constituting material adversity. This contention appears to
the Tribunal, however, to be debatable to an extent which

precludes a determination that a material adverse effect “could

31

63.

64.

reasonably be expected.” The available evidence suggests, if
anything, that the overall capital acquisition costs associated with
medium speed generators are generally less than those connected
with low speed diesels. While TANESCO presents evidence that
the resulting operating and maintenance costs might be higher,
IPTL, while not conceding the point, accepts that on a proper
interpretation of the PPA any such increases are for its account and
hence will not increase the tariff charged to TANESCO. This being
the case, TANESCO could not reasonably have been expected to
suffer any adverse effect on the tariff it must pay, let alone a

material one.

Following the hearing held on these preliminary issues, and in
accordance with the Tribunal’s directions, TANESCO submitted
further documents, lately produced to it by IPTL, as well as
additional testimony, in support of a supplemental written
submission dated 10 April 2000, making further arguments
directed to its contention that “a material adverse effect” on its
rights under the PPA “could reasonably be expected” from the use

of medium speed engines.

Citing, in particular, a “Preliminary Tender Adjudication Report”
and a “Tender Adjudication Report (Update)” prepared in
September and December of 1995, respectively, by the concern
that became the Independent Engineer under the EPC Contract,
which evaluated the competing bids for that contract, TANESCO

argued that the cost of converting Wartsila medium speed engines

32

65.

66.

to gas was higher than for Hyundai’s slow speed engines; that
Wartsila’s final bid for engines (including such conversion) was
higher than the competition; that the Hyundai slow speed diesels
were technically preferable, in that they were more reliable, less
expensive to operate and maintain, and had been proven to be
convertible to gas; that Wartsila, in direct communication and
contact with Mechmar, quoted for certain portions of the EPC
Contract prices “far below” those proposed in the formal tendering
process; and that Wartsila’s final EPC Contract price was $9.1
million higher than Hyundai’s, potentially resulting in a higher

tariff.

In the view of the Tribunal, the lately-produced documents on
which TANESCO relies, when read as a whole, present a
somewhat different picture than emerges from TANESCO’s

discussion of them.

The “Preliminary Tender Adjudication Report” of September 1995,
for example, makes clear that it “covers the preliminary evaluation
of the three submitted Tenders” and that its “purpose is to short-list
the tenderers for negotiation/final clarification.” In its conclusion,
that report ranks Hyundai first and Wartsila second, immediately
following which it notes that the tender process “did not resolve all
the technical and commercial issues” and “[c]onsequently there are
a number of outstanding items having financial impact...which still
require clarification or confirmation before entering into a

contract.” Finally, “[a]s a result of the preliminary evaluation [both

33

67.

68.

Hyundai and Wartsila] are short-listed” (MAN B&W having been

eliminated). The report concludes:

“It is recommended that further negotiations be carried out

with these two tenderers before the award is made.”

The second such report, the “Tender Adjudication Report
(Update)” of December 1995, provided “the detailed commercial
and technical evaluation of the two short-listed Tenders.” It ranked
Wartsila engines first as to price, “[bJased on the initial capital
cost”, but opined that Hyundai had “given the most attractive
techno-commercial offer, notwithstanding that the [Wartsila] offer
has a higher [internal rate of return],” which “is mainly due to the
lower initial capital cost of [Wartsila], for both the [fuel oil] and
Natural Gas operating regimes.” After detailing certain advantages

of slow speed engines, the report stated:

“This is the case of purchasing a cheaper plant against a
technically better plant that is likely to perform reliably in

the long run.”

The report concluded by recommending “that both of the
Tenderers...be requested to have a face to face, across table
meeting” to discuss five described issues, “after which a Final
Tender Evaluation Report may be drafted, which will contain a
recommendation for the Award of Contract to the most attractive

offer.”

The anticipated final “Tender Adjudication Report” then was

issued in January of 1996. It covered “the technical aspect of the

34

two” proposals but did “not include the economic/financial aspects
which Mechmar Corporation has instructed that they are conducted
by Fieldstone Private Capital Group.” Thus the report noted that it
“cannot make a complete recommendation for Contract Award”
since it “is the responsibility of Mechmar Corporation to combine
technical and financial reports before deciding on the Award.” The
report gives Wartsila and Hyundai exactly equal total points in its
“Tender Evaluation Table,” which, like the earlier reports, includes
evaluation of commercial terms as well as technical issues. The

report’s “Conclusion” bears repeating:

“The two (2) short-listed Tenderers have been fully
evaluated on project programme, experience, commercial

terms and technical aspects of their offers.

The replies received from each of the two Tenderers, after
the Tender Clarification meetings, resolved all major
technical issues. Commercial issues were to be resolved by

negotiations...

From the technical evaluation, both of the offers are
equivalent. The Project Financial is being carried out by the
Financial Adviser. Based on the Project Financial and this

technical evaluation, a final decision may be made.”
(Emphasis added).

As appears from the Tribunal’s decision communicated in its letter
of 5 May 2000, the Tribunal has concluded that the recently
produced documents do not justify the scheduling of a further

35

69.

70.

hearing on the issues addressed in this Interim Award, or an order

for depositions.

The Tribunal already has indicated the reasons for its conclusion
that the provision of the PPA which referred to slow speed diesel
engines was not a “material obligation” of the PPA, and that the
installation of medium speed engines as opposed to slow speed
engines could not “reasonably be expected to have a material
adverse effect on TANESCO’s rights” under the PPA. Nothing that
TANESCO most recently has put forward affects the Tribunal’s
conclusions on theses two crucial issues. IPTL’s reasons (or
motives) for installing medium speed engines are irrelevant; what
is pertinent is whether IPTL has complied with the terms of the
PPA. To the extent that the evidence on which TANESCO
concentrates is argued to support a conclusion that the eventual
EPC Contract price was, as TANESCO alleges, “inflated” due to
an “unholy alliance,” this is to be dealt with, as the Tribunal has
indicated above (and will detail below), in connection with

determining the tariff TANESCO is to pay.

The second of its “rights under” the PPA on which TANESCO
claims that IPTL’s substitution of medium speed machines
reasonably portended a material adverse effect is its right under
Article 2.2 to negotiate “a further term of 5 years” following the

initial 20 year term of the PPA:

36

71.

“The initial term of this Agreement or subsequent extension
periods may be extended for a further term of 5 years if
either TANESCO or THE SELLER requests an extension of
this Agreement. The parties shall promptly enter into good
faith negotiations to reach an agreement on the extension of
this Agreement, on terms and conditions mutually acceptable
to both parties, provided always that the agreement on such
extension is reached at least 1 year prior to the end of the
initial term or subsequent extension periods , as the case may
be. If the Parties cannot agree to the terms and conditions
for the extension of this Agreement, THE SELLER will be
permitted to contract with any other party for the sale of
dependable capacity and electrical energy from the Facility
and TANESCO shall deliver to the SELLER any necessary
Consents for such sale, provided, however, that TANESCO
shall have no obligation to assist in such sale unless

otherwise required by law.”

TANESCO adduces evidence (which IPTL counters) indicating
that medium speed diesels may last only 15-20 years whereas the
usual life of slow speed engines is 25 years. It contends that the
restricted life span of medium speed diesels prejudices its prospects

of a five-year extension.

Quite apart from the fact, however, as IPTL points out, that Article
2.2 only imposes an obligation to negotiate in good faith, which
might or might not actually result in a contract extension,
TANESCO’s arguments overlook the fact that Article 2.2 expressly

contemplates the possibility of multiple “subsequent extension

37

73.

periods” - not just one - which could take the PPA well beyond the
life expectancy of even the hardiest slow speed diesel. Consistent
with this fact, the PPA elsewhere expressly undercuts any notion
that IPTL is obligated to furnish turbines with a life span greater
than 20 years. Article 4.1(b), under the heading “Conditions
Precedent to [TANESCO’s] Purchase Obligations,” on which
TANESCO strongly relies elsewhere, requires delivery prior to
construction of “a certificate from the Independent Engineer stating
that .. . (iii) the Facility has a useful life no shorter than the initial
Term [under Article 2.1],” i.e., 20 years. Therefore, on this point as
well, the Tribunal finds that TANESCO’s claim of an expectable
material adverse effect is not supported. Accordingly, IPTL did not
act in contravention of Article 7.1(f) of the PPA, and hence the
Tribunal need not decide whether the same constituted a material

obligation within the meaning of Article 16.

In summary, then, the Tribunal rules that IPTL has not failed to
comply with any of its material obligations under the PPA and
hence that TANESCO has no right to terminate the PPA as
provided by its Article XVI.

Moreover, the Tribunal is persuaded that through its own acts and
omissions related to the change to medium speed engines
TANESCO agreed to such change and thereby deprived itself of
any right it might otherwise have had to take issue with such
change (other, of course, than to question the tariff it is to pay, as is

discussed below). TANESCO cannot complain now of that to

38

74,

75.

which it has failed to object in the particular circumstances set

forth below and to which it consequently has agreed.

The first written proposal IPTL submitted to TANESCO, under
date of 21 November 1994, presented both slow and medium speed

diesels:

“The types of engines considered in this project are the

medium speed and low speed engines.”

The draft PPA submitted therewith likewise specified in its
Appendix A at Section 1.1 “either medium or low speed diesel
generating sets.” These references doubtless reflected the fact that
IPTL had solicited and received preliminary bids for both types of
engines (two for medium speed engines, from Stork-Wartsila, the
eventually successful bidder, and MAN B & W, and one for low

speed ones, from Hyundai).

Meetings between representatives of TANESCO and IPTL leading
up to execution of the PPA were held 28 November, 13, 14, and 15
December 1994 and 16, 17, and 19 January 1995. No evidence
indicates that at any of those meetings there was any discussion of
the speed of generating sets to be specified in the PPA. What is
represented as a first draft of the PPA, however, date-stamped “25
JAN 1995”, refers in Appendix A at Section 1.1 to “either medium
or low speed diesel generating sets.” It is agreed that shortly
thereafter, on 27 and 29 January 1995, a representative of Stork-

Wartsila, which in its preliminary bid had offered only medium

39

76.

77.

speed engines, met in Tanzania with TANESCO’s Director of
System Control and Transmission, Mr. Saleh, who “recall{s]
general discussions along [the] lines [of] the advantage of using 10
MWs units in the proposed power plant.” As detailed above, a
number of meetings took place in late May and early June of 1995
resulting in the conclusion and signature of the PPA and its
Addendum No.1. No evidence indicates any discussion
whatsoever during those meetings focusing on the speed of

generating sets to be installed.

More than a year following conclusion of the PPA, but well before
execution by IPTL of a contract for construction of the Facility,
TANESCO again was introduced to Stork-Wartsila, which it is
agreed was already well known at TANESCO in that TANESCO
already had in its plants 50 or so Wartsila engines. Various
personnel of the two met on 23 July 1996, apparently because
Stork-Wartsila had been selected by IPTL to construct the
projected new power plant. IPTL and Stork-Wartsila signed their
contract for such construction on 4 February 1997. It provided for

the installation of 10 medium speed diesel engines of 10 MW each.

In an attempt to comply with the “Condition Precedent” contained
in Article 4.1(b) of the PPA, IPTL under date of 15 April 1997
transmitted to TANESCO (which contends that the same occurred
only on 6 May 1997) general layout drawings of the project
together with a statement from the project’s “Independent

Engineer.” As the parties agree, the layout drawings clearly show

40

78.

ten engine installations and under “Remarks” on each sheet note
“10 x 18 W 38,” which it is agreed denotes a specific Wartsila
medium speed generator type. The drawings concededly were
reviewed by TANESCO’s then Director of Diesel Plants at the
direction of TANESCO’s Managing Director, transmitted through
TANESCO’s Deputy Managing Director for Technical Services.
Although the Director of Diesel Plants then commented on them in
writing, he has indicated in these proceedings that at the time he
“was unfamiliar with the terms of the PPA,” and was “therefore
unaware of the specifications for the power plant IPTL was to
build;” that the drawings’ reference under “Remarks” to “10 x
18W 38” “did not come to my attention” at the time; and that in
any event it “would not have been of any significance to me had I

seen it as I did not know what it meant.”

It is not disputed that the certificate of the Independent Engineer
complied with the requirements of Article 4.1(b) in all respects,
save one: TANESCO asserts that the certificate’s recitation that
the plant, “when constructed in accordance with the general layout
drawings and the technical specification,” “[mJeets generally with
the Description of the Facility” was false, was intentionally
misleading, was calculated to conceal the fact that medium speed
diesels were to be installed, and, indeed, by failing to fulfill the
stated condition precedent leaves TANESCO free of any obligation
to pay IPTL for electrical energy or capacity. (Emphasis added.)
The Tribunal’s conclusions above regarding material obligations,
however, dispose of any notion that the substance of the certificate

was not appropriate. Moreover, the Tribunal discerns no serious

41

79.

difference between “meets generally” and the requirement of
Article 4.1(b) for a certification that the plant “will . . . conform
with the Description of the Facility.” (Emphasis added.) On the
face of it, Article 4.1(b) was substantially satisfied. What is
pertinent for present purposes is the fact that, with full opportunity
to review the general layout drawings, the Managing Director of
TANESCO responded to them and the certificate by simply
replying two days after TANESCO states that it received them, i.e.,
on 9 May 1997 stating “We have noted Independent Engineer’s
certification of the facility conforming to the requirements of the
PPA’s Article IV Clause 4.1(b).” In doing so the Managing
Director declined to sign a “suggested form of reply” also enclosed
by IPTL with its letter dated 15 April 1997, which would have
recorded express “agreement” by TANESCO that such

requirements had been met.

Somewhat over a month later, on 12 or 13 June 1997, IPTL,
TANESCO and Stork-Wartsila personnel met in Tanzania. While
there is dispute as to whether anything was said regarding the
speed of diesels to be installed, it is noteworthy that TANESCO
emphasizes that the meeting focused on issues relating to the
interconnection of the new plant to be constructed by Stork-
Wartsila with TANESCO’s existing power grid. This view of the
meeting tends to be confirmed by the text of a contemporaneous
(17 June 1997) memorandum of TANESCO’s Manager Electrical
Plant and Maintenance directed to its Director System Control and
Transmission, and by two subsequent letters, one to IPTL from the

latter dated 19 June 1997 that refers to the meeting and is headed

42

80.

81.

“CONNECTION OF IPTL SYSTEM TO TANESCO GRID AT
KUNDUCHI,” and the other dated 22 August 1997 and addressed
to that same Director on behalf of Stork-Wartsila that refers to the
meeting and bears the subject heading “Connection of IPTL 100
MW diesel power station to Tanesco grid at Kunduchi sub-station.”
These documents tend to support IPTL’s contention that
TANESCO was not actually concerned with how the plant would
generate the specified amount of power; rather it was concerned to
achieve a compatible connection with its grid. As IPTL notes, too,
the first of those communications, which is an internal TANESCO
memorandum, refers to “all ten proposed D/G [presumably diesel

generator] sets.”

It is agreed that site work for the plant began in August 1997.
Concurrently, as of 28 August 1997, IPTL reported to the Principal
Secretary of the Tanzanian Ministry of Energy and Minerals (but
apparently not to TANESCO itself) that “[mJanufacture and works

testing of all 10 engines has been completed.”

On 4 September 1997 TANESCO, IPTL and Stork-Wartsila met to
“clarify technical details". The Managing Director of TANESCO
has confirmed that “[i]n mid-September 1997, I was aware that
construction activities were underway” on the project. On 18
September 1997 he wrote to IPTL inviting it to meet “in order to
review the underlying assumptions in the PPA and [its] Addendum
No. 1... and to review the reference tariff in the PPA in light of . .

. recent developments,” i.e., financial closing and the award of

43

83.

construction and supply contracts. The Managing Director’s letter
requested “in advance all the necessary information and
documentation” relevant to such tariff review. IPTL replied very

preliminarily by letter of 14 November 1997.

Curiously, perhaps, on 12 November 1997 the firm of London
Economics, appointed (apparently by the Government of Tanzania
or TANESCO) “to provide an independent review of the project,”
wrote to TANESCO’s Managing Director inquiring “whether [‘the
proposed diesel plant’] is a slow or medium speed diesel, and
whether the station will be a ten by 10 MW station or a five by 20
MW station.” Presumably prompted by this query, two days later,
on 14 November 1997, TANESCO, by a letter signed “for:
MANAGING DIRECTOR”, inquired specifically of IPTL
“whether the units will be slow or medium speed, the number of
units to be installed and their sizes, a precise date for

commissioning the plant etc.” (Emphasis added.)

IPTL replied to this query by letter of 26 November 1997, which
enclosed “[tJechnical details of the diesel Generation Plant of
which there are 10 units each generating a nominal 10 MW.”
Those “technical details” in turn stated explicitly that “[t]he
engines shall be of four stroke, medium speed.” (Emphasis added.)
TANESCO takes the position that only with this notification did it
become aware that Stork-Wartsila intended to install medium
speed engines, rather than slow speed ones as specified in Section

1.1 to Appendix A to the PPA. Although there is almost no

44

84.

85.

evidence on the subject, it does not appear to be disputed that as of
this date the ten engines had not yet been shipped from their place
of manufacture in The Netherlands. Rather, it is asserted by IPTL,
and not challenged by TANESCO, that they began to be
transported from The Netherlands to Tanzania sometime in
December 1997 and that transportation from their point of arrival
in Tanzania to the site started sometime in January 1998. However,
no doubt IPTL was already under a contractual obligation to Stork-

Wartsila in respect of them.

When, so far the record before us shows, TANESCO next
communicated with IPTL, on 10 December 1997, it was not to
respond to the disclosure in the latter’s 26 November 1997 letter
that it would install medium speed diesels. Instead, it responded
specifically to IPTL’s earlier letter, of 14 November 1997, which
very preliminarily had addressed tariff issues as requested by
TANESCO in its letter of 18 September 1997. This latest letter

requested further specific supporting documentation.

When IPTL responded to this 10 December 1997 letter on 13
January 1998, it included among the various documentation it
enclosed a “technical description of the facility” which was, in
effect, a reconstituted Appendix A to the PPA which in Section 1.1
specified “ten (10) generating sets” of which “[e]ach generating

unit shall be medium speed diesel generating sets.”

45

86.

Eight days later (by letter of 21 January 1998) TANESCO
responded by noting:

(1) “There have been significant changes to the type, rating and
quantities of equipment to be installed,” which changes (as
noted earlier) were described extensively in a Table I
enclosed therewith (which expressly noted the change to

medium speed diesels).

(2) | “{C]ontrary to the provisions of . . . Item 1.5.13 of Appendix
A to the PPA, TANESCO’s consent for these changes has

not been sought.”

(3) “[I]t appears to us that these changes are not reflected in the
tariff calculations. Our view is that there should be
significant cost reductions resulting from these changes
which should be reflected in the corresponding reduction in

the tariff rates...”

No indication was given that TANESCO believed that a material
obligation of the PPA had been breached, or that the medium speed
diesels were not acceptable. The focus of the letter was entirely on
the effect the changes should have on the tariff. Indeed, the letter
reiterated TANESCO’s earlier demands for “missing information
and documents” - according to TANESCO in these proceedings,
principally the EPC Contract - because “we have to meet to review
the tariff on the basis of the signed agreements and contracts.”
Incidentally, the reference in numbered point (2) set out above, to

Item 1.5.13 of Appendix A to the PPA, suggests that, contrary to

46

87.

88.

its submission before the Tribunal, TANESCO did regard that
provision as applicable to a change in speed of the diesel engines

(as the Tribunal has determined above).

The fact that TANESCO’s concerns about the use of medium
speed diesels were solely tariff-related was confirmed five days
later, on 26 January 1998, when the Managing Director of
TANESCO wrote to the Principal Secretary of the Ministry of
Energy and Minerals, referring to TANESCO’s 21 January 1998
letter to IPTL as “registering our concern that consent for this
change was not sought nor have we seen any reduction in the
energy charges that IPTL will invoice TANESCO.” TANESCO’s
Managing Director also pointedly invited the Ministry to “take up
with IPTL any unfulfilled obligations under the Implementation
Agreement [between IPTL and the Government of Tanzania] and
the Generation License [issued by the Minister of Energy and
Minerals]”. “In this way we will be tackling the problems that have
come to light recently in their totality.” The objective of this
intended coordinated pressure was clearly stated by TANESCO’s
Managing Director: “Our intention is to renegotiate the tariff after
we have reviewed [the] documents” awaited from IPTL,
specifically the EPC Contract and certain financing documents.
Again, no objection was registered as to the actual use of medium

speed diesel generating sets.

Particularly telling is the Principal Secretary’s 9 February 1998

response specifically to this letter. In it “[t]he Ministry wishes to be

47

89.

advised whether the change of type of engines from slow speed to
medium speed plus other changes in project scope . . . as per your
table I attached to your [21 January 1998 letter to IPTL] does not
constitute a default as per the prevailing PPA signed between you
and them.” (Emphasis added). The Principal Secretary then

ventures an answer to his own question:

“Earlier IPTL had written to you to assure you that their
Engineer had substantiated that the machines are according
to specifications as per the PPA and you had made some
replies. Don’t those replies constitute authority to change the
scope as allowed by the PPA and thus meaning that they

have not breached the contract?”

The Principal Secretary clearly was referring to the correspondence
exchanged between IPTL and TANESCO 15 April and 9 May
1997 as discussed above in which TANESCO had “noted” IPTL’s
submission of general layout drawings and a certificate of the
Independent Engineer in pursuance of Article 4.1(b) of the PPA.
He went on to express the same objective as TANESCO had
posited: “Those, and any other general advice on the subject which
will assist in putting pressure on IPTL to draw them to renegotiate

the [Implementation Agreement] and the PPA will be appreciated.”

It is against this background that one must judge the fact that
during a further two months, until 9 April 1998, when TANESCO
issued its Notice of Default, TANESCO continued to undertake no
action whatsoever to call into question the technical

appropriateness of the installation of medium speed diesel engines.

48

90.

91.

Roughly contemporaneously with the exchange just described
between TANESCO and the Ministry of Energy and Minerals,
IPTL responded to TANESCO’s 21 January 1998 communication,
by letter of 5 February 1998 comprising five pages, the first three
of which largely set forth the pertinent economic, technical and
practical reasons why IPTL had chosen to proceed with medium
speed rather than slow speed diesels in order to meet its contractual
obligations to TANESCO. In its “Conclusion” to this letter IPTL
noted that it “had read Clause 7.1(f) of the PPA and in good faith
that states only material changes would require the consent of
TANESCO.” It went on to express the view that its scope of
responsibilities as an IPP had not changed. Just over three weeks
later, by letter of 27 February 1998, IPTL delivered to TANESCO
copies of the EPC Contract and certain financing documents “in
the spirit of cooperation” and under an injunction that their

confidential character be respected.

The reaction of TANESCO to the disclosure of these documents
was to request IPTL by letter of 11 March 1998 to provide “at your
earliest convenience” a series of other agreements “which we need
in order to verify the project costs and financing terms and
conditions.” The letter concluded with an invitation “for
discussions on the PPA .. .in Dar es Salaam beginning on
Thursday 26 March 1998.” Here, too, no substantive objection was

raised to the installation of medium speed diesels.

49

93.

Under cover of a letter of 23 March 1998 IPTL delivered what
appear to be the requested documents, and proposed instead of 26
March 1998 “that we meet in Dar es Salaam for the clarification
meeting on the reference tariff under the PPA on the 8" and 9" of
April 1998.” It appears to be agreed that that meeting then in fact
was set for 14 April 1998. Prior to that meeting, by letter of 6 April
1998, IPTL informed TANESCO that “load testing of the first
three Diesel Generator Units [of ten in total] is scheduled to start
on May 15" 1998 and that the Initial Operations Date (OD) will
be June 1* 1998.” Then, just prior to the 14 April 1998 meeting
scheduled to discuss the reference tariff under the PPA,
TANESCO, by letter of 9 April 1998, delivered its Notice of
Default.

It appears that when the parties met on 14 April 1998 IPTL
“refused to negotiate or discuss the final tariff ‘unless and until’
TANESCO withdrew the Notice of Default,” as TANESCO
recorded in a letter to IPTL the very next day, 15 April 1998.
TANESCO’s focus on tariff reduction is reflected again in its
statement in that letter that “consensual resolution of the matter
raised by the Notice of Default may be possible in the context of
final tariff negotiations and . . .the parties should certainly explore
such means of resolving the matter.” Again, on 22 April 1998, in a
letter “urgling] IPTL to return to the negotiation table,”

TANESCO’s Managing Director reiterated:

50

94.

“that the issues relating to substitution of the diesel engines
raised in the Notice of Default are essentially economic
issues and that final tariff negotiations and discussions of the
Notice of Default should move forward on a parallel basis,
thereby maximizing chances of resolving all issues in the

most expeditious, cost-effective manner.” (Emphasis added.)

The record before us indicates that the parties indeed did meet
again on 14 and 15 May 1998 to discuss both issues. On 15 May
1998 TANESCO submitted to IPTL an extensive request for
documents “in connection with the parties’ negotiations of a final
tariff’ which related “primarily to IPTL’s project costs.” This
request later was followed by others. Thereafter matters ultimately

led to this arbitration.

From the foregoing recitation of facts, spanning the period 21
November 1994 to 15 May 1998, the Tribunal concludes that
TANESCO did not really care, one way or the other, whether slow
or medium speed diesels were installed (which, as previously
noted, tends to confirm the Tribunal’s conclusion, set forth earlier,
that use of the former was not a material obligation of IPTL under
the PPA); therefore, as TANESCO came to know that medium
speed diesels were contemplated, which the Tribunal concludes
occurred not later than 26 November 1997, it effectively consented
to their installation. This is evident from the fact that engine type
seems never to have been discussed during the negotiations leading

to the PPA; from the seemingly indifferent manner (so far as

51

engine type was concerned) with which senior TANESCO
personnel reviewed the general layout drawings in May (or April)
of 1997; and from TANESCO’s concentration at critical times on
the project’s interconnection with its overall power grid. Most
striking, however, is the fact that when TANESCO was
incontrovertibly confronted with the reality of having medium
speed engines, it never once objected to them or even hinted at the
possible presence of a ground for declaring a default and invoking
its right to terminate the PPA under Article XVI. To the contrary,
while bemoaning the fact that its consent had not been asked, it
unwaveringly focused solely on bringing about a tariff reduction.
Even when its “owner,” the Ministry of Energy and Minerals,
expressly speculated on the possibility that the installation of
medium speed engines constituted a breach (and then surmised that
it did not), a full two months before TANESCO issued its Notice of
Default on 9 April 1998, TANESCO did not react. It can only be
concluded that TANESCO, having heard IPTL’s explanations for
its choice of medium speed diesels and having considered the
various expert reports it had received from Acres International
(which had rendered a report to the Ministry of Energy and
Minerals in September 1996, which TANESCO’s Managing
Director states did not come to TANESCO’s attention until “late
September of 1997,” that discoursed extensively on the
comparative merits of the two types of diesels for this project) and
London Economics, decided to accept the change but to pursue its

tariff implications.

95.

96.

(ii)

97.

The Tribunal concludes that prior to 9 April 1998 the change to
medium speed diesels had been “mutually agreed with
TANESCO” within the meaning of Sub-Section 1.5.13 of
Appendix A to the PPA. It will have been noted that Sub-Section
1.5.13 does not require that such agreement be in writing. Since the
PPA elsewhere, e.g., in Article 7.1(f), does contain express
requirement for “written consent,” the omission of such stipulation
in Sub-Section 1.5.13 must be understood to dispense with any
need for a writing. This result is not affected by Article 19.8, which

requires:

“This Agreement may be modified or amended, and any
provision hereof may be waived, by an instrument in writing

and signed by both Parties.”

Agreement within the meaning of Sub-Section 1.5.13 of Appendix
A constitutes fulfillment of a requirement of the PPA and not a

modification, amendment or waiver of any provision thereof.

This disposes finally of any claim that IPTL breached the PPA in
any respect, material or otherwise, in installing medium speed

diesels.

Waiver / Estoppel

In view of the Tribunal’s conclusions set out above, it is strictly

speaking unnecessary to deal with the alternative submission

53

98.

99.

advanced on behalf of IPTL that, by operation of one, or other, of
the doctrines of estoppel, waiver or election, TANESCO is
precluded from contending that IPTL was in material breach of the
PPA by installing ten medium speed diesel engines instead of five
slow speed diesel engines, by failing to obtain TANESCO’s
agreement to the change in the indicative specifications in
Appendix A, and / or by failing to obtain TANESCO’s prior
written consent as required by Article 7.1(f) of the PPA to the
change, by reason of its standing by and / or inducing IPTL to

proceed with the project after learning of the proposed change.

There was an interesting debate as to whether the doctrines, or any
of them, were matters of procedure, and, thus, governed by English
law, or whether they were matters of substance, and therefore
governed by the law of Tanzania. There is no clear guidance to be
derived either from authority or from academic writing. However,
the Tribunal is content to proceed on the view which appears to be
most favourable to TANESCO, namely, that each of the doctrines
is a matter of substantive law, and therefore governed by the law of
Tanzania. For what it is worth, and without deciding the point, the
Tribunal considers that this is more likely to be the correct view,
because application of, for example, the principles of promissory

estoppel may create substantive rights.

Ascertainment of the current law of Tanzania on estoppel, waiver
and election is rendered uncertain by two factors. First, by the
Judicature on Application of Laws Ordinance of 1920, Tanzania
adopted the law of England as it stood at that date. The law so

adopted has, of course, been modified from time to time by

54

subsequent Tanzanian legislation but, with one exception, that is of
no relevance to the problem under consideration. Unfortunately,
there appears to be a difference of opinion between two of the
advocates representing TANESCO as to whether the law of
Tanzania is to be taken to have developed along the same lines as
English law since 1920, or to be “frozen” as at that date. Mr
Morrison expressed the view that if, by reason of subsequent
English decisions there have been any developments in any
concepts of English law which were part of that law in 1920, then
such decisions will be regarded as persuasive authority before a
Tanzanian court. Further, as we understand it, the development of
any such doctrine by any superior court of standing in other
common law jurisdictions would be of similar persuasive authority.
Mr Mkono adopted a different view. He submitted that it was
irrelevant how English common law developed after 1920: unless
there were a lacuna in the law of Tanzania in the particular field,
developments in England were of no authority whatever. Mr
Morrison’s view appears to have been supported by the “expert”
witness statements of Dr Kabudi and Mr Bumani, filed by the
parties respectively at an earlier stage of the proceedings in relation
to the Applications for Provisional Measures. The Tribunal accepts
their view, which appears to accord with common sense, and was
further tacitly adopted by the parties by the citation of a
considerable body of comparatively recent English authority on
other aspects of the arbitration. It should be added, for
completeness, that no argument was advanced to the effect that any
of the more recent English decisions referred to both in the written

submissions and in oral argument should be taken as inapplicable

55

100.

101.

on the ground that local conditions, or any other factor, made the

decision inapplicable to Tanzania.

The second problem arises from the provisions of Section 123 of
the Tanzanian Evidence Act, under which an intentional statement,
representation or omission is required in order to make out a claim
of estoppel. However, there is nothing to suggest that this statutory
provision is intended to be exhaustive, and excludes the application
of other forms of waiver or estoppel as these have developed in

England and other common law jurisdictions.

In the absence of full argument on the point, it is inappropriate for
the Tribunal to determine whether there is a distinct legal concept
or doctrine of “waiver” in Tanzanian or indeed in any common law
system. According to its strict legal connotation, waiver is an
intentional act, done with full relevant knowledge, whereby a
person abandons a right by acting in a manner inconsistent with
that right. However, the better view is that, apart from estoppel or a
new agreement, abandonment of a right will only occur where the
person said to have waived the right is entitled to alternative rights
which are inconsistent the one with the other, as, for example, the
right to require continuing performance of a contract and the right
to treat it as having been repudiated for essential breach (see, for
example, Kammins Ballrooms Co Limited. v Zenith Investments
(Torquay) Limited [1971] AC 850 at p.883). On this view, this
category of waiver is, in truth, an example of the doctrine of
election. Another category of waiver is where a person is prevented
from asserting, in response to a claim against him, a particular

defence, or objection, which would otherwise have been available.

56

102.

103.

Here, waiver is said to arise when that person agrees not to raise
the particular defence or so conducts himself as to be estopped
from raising it. In these circumstances, the authorities dealing with
waiver do not call for special consideration separately from

election and estoppel.

Turning to election, the broad principles applicable are not in
doubt. The doctrine only applies if a person has alternative rights
which are inconsistent the one with the other. It is this concurrent
existence of inconsistent rights which explains the doctrine:
because they are inconsistent, neither one may be enjoyed without
the extinction of the other, and that extinction confers upon the
elector the benefit of enjoying the other — a benefit denied to him
so long as both remained in existence. Generally, it is sufficient if
one party has been consciously led by the other party to believe
that the latter has decided not to rescind, to exercise a contractual
right to terminate or to treat the contract as at an end on grounds of
repudiatory breach, or that the reasonable inference from the
actions of that party, or indeed from its inaction, is that it has
decided not so to do. Where a right to elect exists, the party
enjoying such right is not generally bound to elect at once: it may
wait and consider which way to exercise its election, so long as it
can do so without causing prejudice to the other party. But in most
commercial contexts, a failure to exercise a right to rescind, cancel
or terminate within a reasonable time will be taken to evidence an

election to affirm the continuing existence of the contract.

Estoppel is a label which today covers a complex array of rules

spanning various categories. These include estoppel by conduct,

57

104.

105.

106.

estoppel by representation, promissory estoppel, proprietary
estoppel, estoppel by acquiescence and estoppel by convention. All
these categories are directed towards the same fundamental
purpose, namely, protection against the detriment which would
flow from a party’s change of position if the assumption or
expectation that led to it were permitted to be denied. The
foundation of the doctrine is in all cases the concept of

unconscionability.

The factual material relied upon by IPTL has been fully set out
earlier. It is IPTL’s case that if this material is insufficient to justify
the conclusion that TANESCO agreed to the change from low
speed to medium speed diesel engines, such material is at least

sufficient to found an estoppel.

But for one matter, the Tribunal would have been inclined to
conclude that, even if we were wrong in our conclusion that there
was an agreement to the change, the facts which we have recited
would nevertheless have been amply sufficient to give rise to an
estoppel by convention (the parties having apparently acted on the
basis of a common assumption that IPTL was contractually entitled
to install medium speed diesel engines), or at least an estoppel by
acquiescence (TANESCO having stood by without comment or
protest in the knowledge that IPTL was taking steps to have the
medium speed engines shipped and installed, between, at the latest,

November 1997 and April 1998).

The one matter which causes us to hesitate to draw such a

conclusion at this stage is that both estoppel by convention and

58

107.

estoppel by acquiescence, in common with other types of waiver
and estoppel, are the children of equity; and it is axiomatic that “he
who seeks equity must do equity”, and that “he who seeks equity
must come with clean hands”. TANESCO has asserted, particularly
in the light of documents recently disclosed by IPTL, that IPTL
should be disentitled from relying on any equitable defence,
because these documents suggest that there were “shady dealings”
between IPTL, Mechmar and Wartsila, who formed an “unholy
alliance”, which resulted in an artificially inflated EPC Contract
price (an allegation which, if persisted in, will no doubt require
further investigation at the hearing fixed for July). Further,
TANESCO has also recently raised an allegation that the PPA was
procured by bribery, or at least that IPTL was guilty of attempting
to bribe TANESCO and / or Tanzanian Government

representatives.

TANESCO has made application to the Tribunal, inter alia, to
defer its decision on TANESCO’s termination claim and IPTL’s
waiver / estoppel defence until it has been afforded the opportunity
of cross-examining a number of IPTL witnesses, whom it has
identified. Whilst the Tribunal has, nevertheless, decided to
proceed to its decision on the termination claim as argued (on the
basis that the documents disclosed do not, in the Tribunal’s view,
affect its conclusions, and the answers of the witnesses concerned
to the questions which TANESCO would wish to ask them would
similarly not affect such conclusions), different considerations

could apply in relation to the waiver and estoppel points.

59

108.

(3)

109.

110.

111.

In these circumstances, and since, in the light of the Tribunal’s
decision on the issues of construction, it is unnecessary for the
waiver or estoppel points to be determined, the Tribunal has
decided to withhold any decision on these points, at least for the

time being.

Tariff Adjustment

The result of our conclusions in sections (1) and (2) above, is that
the Reference Tariff falls to be adjusted “upwards or downwards”,
depending on changes that have taken place in any of the
underlying assumptions stated in IPTL’s letter of 31 May 1995 (see
paragraph 35 above). This letter listed twelve assumptions said to
have been used to determine the capacity charge contained in the
Mechmar proposal submitted on 21 November 1994, and which
was the basis of negotiations and agreements reached in January

1995 (see paragraph 26 above).

In the absence of detailed submissions from either side as to
precisely how any of the assumptions listed have changed, and as
to how such change should be reflected in an adjustment to the
tariff, we consider that it would be dangerous for us to express any
preliminary views at this stage, even in general terms. We
anticipate that these matters will be canvassed in detail before us at

the July hearing.

There are, however, two points that should be mentioned. First, it

was said on behalf of IPTL that the “IRR” (the Internal Rate of

60

Return) stated in the letter of 31 May 1995 should have been
22.31%, and that the figure of 23% was an error. Second, it was
submitted on behalf of TANESCO that in applying any
adjustments to the Reference Tariff, one should apply a test of

reasonableness and prudence to the costs incurred by IPTL.

The IRR

112.

In so far as we have concluded that the “base line” for the purposes
of any adjustment under Addendum No. 1 should be the

assumptions stated in the letter, whether or not there was a

 

unilateral error on the part of IPTL should be of no consequence.
However, in the course of the hearing, IPTL very fairly
volunteered the correction, which would deem to operate in
TANESCO’s favour, and it further seems to be common ground
that the necessary correction should be made. Accordingly, the

“IRR” figure should be amended to read “22.31%”.

Reasonableness and Prudence

113.

The Tribunal is satisfied that, in circumstances where the
consideration to be paid by one contracting party is dependent
upon sums paid or payable by the other contracting party to a third
person or persons, there is an implied obligation on the paying
party to act prudently and reasonably in its dealings upon which the
consideration will depend. We consider that this principle applies

equally where, as in this case, a prima facie price, payable by one

61

114.

115.

116.

117.

party, falls to be adjusted by reference to the other party’s

expenditure.

In the present case, it is suggested on behalf of TANESCO that
IPTL and Mechmar, on its behalf, did not make a reasonable or
prudent EPC Contract with Wartsila, and, in particular, that it was
unreasonable to accept Wartsila’s final tender price in
circumstances where Hyundai had reduced its tender to a lower
figure. There are also allegations that there was underhand dealing

which resulted in a falsely inflated EPC Contract price.

A considerable amount of evidence has already been put before us
on these matters, for the purposes of TANESCO’s application for
further documentary disclosure, and in support of its application
for the questioning of witnesses or postponement of our decision
on certain issues (applications which we have dealt with separately,

and as to which we say nothing further in this Award).

These are, however, amongst the matters with which we anticipate
the Tribunal will have to grapple when we deal with the tariff

adjustment issue in detail at the hearing in July.

Although this was not specifically canvassed at the hearing, it
seems to us that the burden must be on the party alleging a breach
of what must be an implied term, to establish the lack of reasonable
or prudent conduct on which it relies, after having had the benefit
of full relevant discovery (which we have now ordered in this

case).

118. In its post-hearing brief, IPTL raises the further point that, if there

is an implied term that the costs incurred must be incurred

reasonably and prudently, TANESCO must exercise its right to

contend that any costs were unreasonably or imprudently incurred,

and therefore either not to be taken into account, or to be subject to

adjustment, “in a commercially reasonable fashion”, and that
TANESCO failed so to do. IPTL further contends that for this
reason, TANESCO should be taken to have waived its right so to

claim, or to be estopped from doing so. This is, we think, a new

point, which was not argued at the hearing, and as to which we

think it right to express no view at this stage.

Conclusions

119. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal therefore concludes as

follows:

QQ)

(3)

That the PPA was not subject to an unsatisfied condition
precedent as alleged or at all, and was not void for
uncertainty; and accordingly was a valid and effective

contract between the parties;

That TANESCO was not entitled to serve Notice of Default
and was and is not entitled to give notice of termination

pursuant thereto;

That the Reference Tariff should be adjusted in accordance
with Addendum No. | by reference to changes that had taken

place, before commercial operations would have commenced

but for TANESCO’s purported Notice of Default, in any of
the assumptions listed in Mr Rugemalira’s letter to the
Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Water, Energy and
Minerals dated 31 May 1995, with the following

qualifications, namely:-

(i) that the figure of 23% for “IRR” should be
amended to read “22.31%”;

(ii) that it is open to TANESCO to prove that any costs
incurred by IPTL relating to any of the listed
assumptions were not reasonably and prudently so

incurred.

We therefore answer the Preliminary Issues listed in paragraph 2

above:

(1) Not on any grounds argued and dealt with in this

decision.

(2) None, save that there may be consequences on the cost
of the Facility and therefore on the adjustment to the
Reference Tariff to be carried out pursuant to

Addendum No. | to the PPA.

(3) & (4) The “underlying assumptions stated in the PPA” were
those listed in Mr Rugemalira’s letter to the Principle
Secretary of the Ministry of Water, Energy and
Minerals dated 31 May 1995, and the effect of

64

Addendum No. 1 dated 9 June 1995 was as

summarised in sub-paragraph (3) above.

Dated this ..... Phd ... day of May 2000

Cnerles a. Pret Ce

Hon. Charles Brower Hon Andrew Rogers QC

Kenneth Rokison,

65

