INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

TECO Guatemala Holdings, LLC
(Claimant)
v.

Republic of Guatemala
(Applicant)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23)
Third Annulment Proceeding

 

DECISION ON STAY OF ENFORCEMENT

Members of the Committee
Ms. Deva Villanta, President of the ad hoc Committee
Prof. Lawrence Boo, Member of the ad hoc Committee
Prof. Doug Jones AO, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Assistant to the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Felipe Aragon Barrero

 

May 17, 2021

TECO Guatemala Holdings, LLC v. Republic of Guatemala
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23) — Third Annul: Pr di

 

Decision on Stay of Enforcement

I. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

On February 12, 2021, the Republic of Guatemala filed with the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes [“ICSID”] an Application for Annulment of the Award
rendered on May 13, 2020 [the “Resubmission Award”] and supplemented by the
Supplementary Decision dated October 16, 2020, in the resubmission proceeding in
TECO Guatemala Holdings, LLC v. Republic of Guatemala (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23),
[the “Annulment Application”]. In its Annulment Application the Republic of Guatemala
requested the stay of enforcement of the Resubmission Award and the Supplementary
Decision pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention. The Annulment Application
was filed pursuant to Article 52 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States [the “ICSID Convention”] and
Rule 50 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings [“Arbitration
Rules”).

On February 22, 2021, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Annulment
Application and notified the Parties that the enforcement of the Award was provisionally
stayed pursuant to Arbitration Rule 54(2).

On March 31, 2021, the Secretary-General notified the Parties of the constitution of the ad
hoc Committee [the “Committee” ] in accordance with Article 52(3) of the Convention. Its
members are: Ms. Deva Villanta, a national of Spain, as President, Prof. Doug Jones, a
dual national of Australia and Ireland, and Prof. Lawrence Boo, a national of Singapore.
All members were appointed by the Chairman of the ICSID’s Administrative Council.
Ms. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski, Legal Counsel, was appointed to serve as
Secretary of the Committee.

On April 3, 2021, the Secretary of the Committee wrote to the Parties on instructions of
the ad hoc Committee regarding the arrangements for the First Session and the request for
stay of enforcement of the Resubmission Award and the Supplementary Decision.

On April 10, 2021, the Committee, through the ICSID Secretariat, circulated a draft
Procedural Order No. | to the Parties and invited the Parties to submit a joint proposal
advising the ad hoc Committee of the Parties’ agreements on procedural matters. The
Committee made reference to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2) and paragraph 92 of the
Annulment Application in which the Republic of Guatemala requested that the stay of
enforcement of the Resubmission Award and the Supplementary Decision be maintained
until the Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application has been issued. In such
regard, the Committee invited the Parties to confer and jointly propose by April 14, 2021
a schedule of written submissions so as to efficiently address the Guatemala’s request for
the continuation of the stay; to consider whether an extension of the Rule 54(2) 30-day

TECO Guatemala Holdings, LLC v. Republic of Guatemala
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23) — Third Annul: Pr di

 

Decision on Stay of Enforcement

deadline was necessary and would be agreed between the Parties; and to agree on the
language of their written submissions on the stay.

Il. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

On April 14, 2021, the Republic of Guatemala informed the Committee, inter alia, that:

“the Parties had conferred and agreed to the continuation of the stay of enforcement
of the Resubmission Award until the Committee has rendered a decision on the
Republic’s Annulment Request. Thus, we respectfully request the Committee to
confirm the Parties’ agreement and order the continuation of the stay of the
enforcement of the Resubmission Award until after the final decision in these
annulment proceedings is rendered, dispensing the parties with written submissions
on the matter”.

On April 15, 2021, TECO informed the Committee, among other things, that it did not
oppose Guatemala’s request that the stay of enforcement of the Resubmission Award be
maintained until the decision of the ad hoc Committee is rendered.

On April 16, 2021, the Republic of Guatemala after referring to TECO’s communication
of April 15, 2021, requested that the Committee issue the corresponding decision, ordering
the “continuation of the stay of the enforcement of the award” during the Annulment
Proceedings and until the final decision on the annulment of the Resubmission Award is
rendered.

On May 6, 2021, the Committee asked the Parties to confirm whether they required the
Committee to issuea Decision recording the Parties’ agreementon the stay of enforcement.

On the same date, and in response to the Committee’s letter of May 6, 2021, the Republic
of Guatemala requested “the issuance of an order confirming the continuation of the stay
of enforcement of the Award of Resubmission dated May 13, 2020 and the Supplemental
Decision dated October 16,2020. The Committee will note from the Parties’ comments on
the draft Procedural Order No. 1 submitted to the Committee on April 27, 2021 that TECO
has no objection to the Republic making this request”.

TECO Guatemala Holdings, LLC v. Republic of Guatemala
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23) — Third Annul: Pr di

 

Decision on Stay of Enforcement

Til. THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

The applicable rules to the stay of enforcement of an award are Article 52(5) of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention provides that:

“The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so require, stay
enforcement of the award pending its decision. If the applicant requests a stay of
enforcement of the award in his application, enforcement shall be stayed
provisionally until the Committee rules on such request”.

Arbitration Rule 54(1) provides that:

“The party applying for the interpretation, revision or annulment of an award may in
its application, and either party may at any time before the final disposition of the
application, request a stay in the enforcement of part or all of the award to which the
application relates. The Tribunal or Committee shall give priority to the
consideration of such a request”.

Additionally, the Committee takes note that Article 10(26)(6) of the Dominican Republic-
Central America Free Trade Agreement [“DR-CAFTA” or the “Treaty”], in force for the
United States since March 1, 2006, and for Guatemala since July 1, 2006, under which the
Resubmission Award and Supplementary Decision were rendered, states that:

“A disputing party may not seek enforcement of a final award until:
(a) in case of a final award made under the ICSID Convention

(i) 120 days have elapsed from the date the award was rendered and
no disputing party has requested revision or annulment of the
award; or

(ii) revision or annulment proceedings have been completed [...]”.

The Committee takes note of (i) the above provisions, whichforesee the non-enforceability
of an award while an annulment proceeding is pending; and (ii) Claimant’s lack of
opposition to Respondent’s request for stay of enforcement of the Resubmission Award
and the Supplementary Decision until the Committee has rendered a decision on the
Republic’s Annulment Request.

TECO Guatemala Holdings, LLC v. Republic of Guatemala
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23) — Third Annul: Pr di
Decision on Stay of Enforcement

IV. DECISION

16. In light of the above, and pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention, ICSID
Arbitration Rule 54 and Article 10(26)(6) DR-CAFTA, the Committee confirms the
continuation of the stay of enforcement of the Resubmission Award rendered on May 13,
2020 and supplemented by the Supplementary Decision dated October 16, 2020, in the
resubmission proceeding in TECO Guatemala Holdings, LLC v. Republic of Guatemala
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23), until the Committee has rendered its Decision on

 

Annulment.
[signed]
Ms. Deva Villantia
President of the ad hoc Committee
[signed] [signed]
Prof. Lawrence Boo Prof. Doug Jones AO
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee

