INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
TECO GUATEMALA HOLDINGS, LLC

Claimant

and

REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23
Supplementary Decision Proceeding

 

DECISION ON THE CLAIMANT’S REQUEST FOR A SUPPLEMENTARY DECISION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Vaughan Lowe, Q.C., President of the Tribunal
Dr. Stanimir Alexandrov, Arbitrator
Prof. Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mrs. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Date of dispatch to the Parties: October 16, 2020

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

 

Repr ing TECO Gi la Holdi LLC:

Ms. Andrea Menaker
White & Case LLP
5 Old Broad Street
London EC2N 1DW
United Kingdom
and
Mr. Petr PolaSek
Ms. Kristen M. Young
White & Case LLP
701 Thirteenth Street NW
Washington, D.C. 20005
United States of America
and
Mr. David Nicholson
Mr. Javier Cuebas
TECO Energy, Inc.
702 North Franklin Street
Tampa, FL 33602-4429
United States of America

Repr ing the Republic of Guatemala:

Mr. Jorge Luis Donado Vivar
Procurador General de la Nacion
Leda. Ana Luisa Gatica Palacios
Le. Julio Eduardo Santiz
Le. Mario René Mérida Pichardo
Procuraduria General de la Nacion - PGN
15 av. 9-69 Zona 13
Ciudad de Guatemala
Republica de Guatemala

and
Mr. Roberto Antonio Malouf Morales
Ministro de Economia
Leda. Alba Edith Flores de Molina
Le. Alexander Cutz
Ministerio de Economia -MINECO
8 av. 10-43 Zona 1
Ciudad de Guatemala
Republica de Guatemala

VI.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PARTIES

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY.

 

PARTIES’ POSITIONS.
(1) Claimant’s Position
(2) Respondent’s Position
ANALYSIS

 

COSTS

 

DECISION

 

CIWMB N EY

IL

PARTIES

The claimant is TECO Guatemala Holdings, LLC (“TECO” or the “Claimant”), a limited
liability company established in 2005 under the laws of the state of Delaware in the United
States of America. TECO is a subsidiary entirely owned by TECO Energy Inc. (“TECO
ENERGY”), a parent company established under the laws of the state of Florida, United

States of America.
The respondent is the Republic of Guatemala (““Guatemala” or the “Respondent’”).

The Claimant and the Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties”. The Parties’

representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 9 June 2020, Claimant filed with the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID”) a Request of the same date for a Supplementary Decision in respect
of the Award rendered on 13 May 2020 in the resubmission proceeding of TECO
G la Holdings, LLC v. Republic of G la (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23) (the

 

“Resubmission Award”) (the “Request”) by the Tribunal comprising Prof. Vaughan
Lowe, Q.C. (British), President, appointed by the Secretary-General pursuant to DR-
CAFTA Article 10.19.3 and Article 37(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention; Dr. Stanimir
Alexandrov (Bulgarian), appointed by Claimant; and Prof. Brigitte Stern (French),
appointed by Respondent.

On 11 June 2020, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request in accordance
with Rule 49(1)(a) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules and transmitted the same to the Members
of the Tribunal and the Parties.

On 15 June 2020, the Tribunal fixed a timetable for the Parties’ submissions on the

Request.

Til.

On 29 June 2020, Respondent submitted observations on the Request.

On 2 July 2020, Claimant advised that it did not intend to avail itself of the opportunity to

file a response to Respondent’s observations of 29 June 2020.

PARTIES’ POSITIONS

qd) Claimant’s Position

In accordance with Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 49 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, Claimant requests the Tribunal to supplement the Resubmission Award
“by awarding Claimant interest on 75 percent of Claimant’s costs incurred in the Original
Arbitration (equal to US$ 7,520,695.39) running from 19 December 2013, i-e., the date of
the Original Award.”!

Claimant submits that the Tribunal omitted to decide in the Resubmission Award the
question concerning the interest to be awarded to Claimant upon the costs it incurred in the
original arbitration (the “Original Arbitration”), running from the date of the original

award rendered on 19 December 2013 (the “Original Award).”

Claimant relies on Pac Rim? as support for the Request on the basis that the tribunal in that
case acknowledged that it had “inadvertently overlooked” a claim for post-award interest,

and summarily awarded that interest by way of a supplementary decision.*+

Claimant points out that it expressly requested the Tribunal to award such interest both in

its resubmission Memorial and in its resubmission Reply. °

Claimant recalls that the Tribunal decided in the Resubmission Award that “Respondent

shall bear its own costs and reimburse 75% of Claimant’s costs, including its contribution

' Request, 49.
2 Request, ff 1-4.

3 Pac Rim Cayman, LLC y. Republic of El Salvador, (CSID Case No. ARB/09/12, Decision on the Respondent's
Request for a Supplementary Decision, 28 Mar. 2017 §§{1.15-1.16.

4 Request, 3.
5 Request, 4, referring to Resubmission Memorial, {| 268 and Resubmission Reply, | 246.

2

to the costs and expenses incurred by ICSID, arising in the proceedings before the Original

Tribunal.”°

According to Claimant, the omission is material as it would imply that instead of receiving
the 75 % of its costs that Claimant was awarded (i.e., US$ 7,520,695.39), it would in fact

only receive 50%,’

Claimant contends that in line with the Tribunal’s reasoning in the Award, the applicable
interest rate here should also be of US Prime plus 2 %,° which, when applied to the above-
indicated 75 % of Claimant’s incurred costs, would amount to US$ 3,454,058.70 in interest

as of 31 May 2020.°

(2) Respondent’s Position

Respondent submits that Claimant’s request is unfounded, an attempt in bad faith and
greed by Claimant to obtain a higher compensation than awarded, and should be dismissed

in its entirety.!°

Respondent explains that Claimant “did not address, did not justify and did not specifically
request in the submission section of its memorials, as well as during the hearing its alleged
claim for interest on the costs of the Original Arbitration”, and that, therefore, the Tribunal
did not have to decide on a claim that did not exist. In support, Respondent cites the
Genin"! tribunal’s holding where in similar circumstances it rejected the supplementary

request. |?

Nonetheless, should the Tribunal find that Claimant did submit the claim, the Respondent

asserts that the Tribunal, in the exercise of its discretion under Article 61(2) of the ICSID

© Request, | 5, quoting Resubmission Award, §] 155 (emphasis added).
7 Request, 7.

* Request, 8. See Resubmission Award, 135.

° Request, 4 6.

© Respondent’s Observations, 42.

‘Alex Genin, Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v The Republic of Estonia, \CSID Case No. ARB/99/2,
Decision on Claimants’ Request for supplementary Decisions and Rectification, 10 April 2002.

2 Respondent’s Observations, {ff 3-5.

20.

21.

22.

Convention, did not have to address, specifically and in detail in the Resubmission Award,

a claim that was barely outlined during the arbitration."

According to Respondent, because the Tribunal held in the Resubmission Award that
Guatemala shall pay 75% of the costs incurred by the Claimant in the Original Arbitration,
and nothing more, the Tribunal “rejected, explicitly and implicitly, the claim that motivates

the Request.”!*

Respondent, recalling Prof. Schreuer’s interpretation that the supplementary decision
under Art. 49(2) of the ICSID Convention “is not designed to afford a substantive review
or reconsideration of the decision”,'> and along the same lines also relying on LG&E,'®
argues that Claimant’s Request is “unacceptable and exceeds the scope of a supplementary
decision, as the claim on the Request has been decided and rejected by the Arbitral
Tribunal.”!”

Should the Tribunal find that the Request is acceptable — argues Respondent — the Tribunal
should not award interest on the costs of the Original Arbitration, because “the Claimant

has been completely repaired in this arbitration proceedings.” !*

Finally, as relief, Respondent requests that the Tribunal:
(i) “Deny the Claimant’s Request of Supplementary Decision in its entirety.

(ii) If par impossible, the Tribunal considers the Claimant has a right to claim
interest derived from the costs of the Original Arbitration, order must be
calculated from the Award’s issuance on 13 May 2020, the date of its actual
awarding.

(iii) Order the Claimant to entirely reimburse Guatemala, the costs incurred on its
defense inc ion to this ‘y decision pr dit

3 Respondent’s Observations, { 7-9.
4 Respondent’s Observations, 10-12.
'S Christoph H. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, (2009), page 849, § 28.

'6 LG&E Energy Corp., et al v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Claimants’ Request for
Supplementary Decision, 8 July 2008, | 16.

"7 Respondent’s Observations, § 13-15.
'8 Respondent’s Observations, 16-18.

23.

24,

25.

26.

(iv) Order any further relief to Guatemala that the Tribunal may deem
appropriate.”

ANALYSIS
Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

“The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45 days after the date on

which the award was rendered may after notice to the other party decide any

question which it had omitted to decide in the award... .”
The Tribunal acknowledges that Claimant had requested in its resubmission Memorial that
the Tribunal “order Respondent to bear all of Claimant’s costs incurred in the Original
Arbitration, or, at a minimum, 75 percent of Claimant’s costs incurred in the Original
Arbitration, as set forth in the chart below, plus interest from the date of the Award in the

Original Arbitration.”?°

The Tribunal further considers that Claimant’s current application clearly falls within the
scope of ICSID Article 49(2), and that the Tribunal has the power and the duty to respond

to that application.

It was noted in the Resubmission Award that the “the Parties are broadly agreed that costs
awards should reflect the extent to which each party in an arbitration was successful.”?! It

was on that basis that the Tribunal decided in the Resubmission Award as follows:

“155.E. On the matter of costs:

i. Respondent shall bear its own costs and reimburse 75% of
Claimant’s costs, including its contribution to the costs and expenses
incurred by ICSID, arising in the proceedings before the Original
Tribunal;

ii. Each Party shall pay the costs and expenses relating to the
Annulment proceedings as determined in paragraph 382 of the
Annulment Decision;

° Respondent’s Observations, 23.

2 Resubmission Memorial, {268 (emphasis omitted).
2! Resubmission Award, | 153.

27.

28.

29.

30.

iii. Each Party shall bear its own costs and one half of the costs and
expenses incurred by ICSID in the proceedings before this
Tribunal.”
The Tribunal also decided in the Resubmission Award that “[t]he US Prime rate of interest
plus 2%, payable both pre- and post-Award until the date of payment, is the rate of interest

applicable to the sums owing as of 21 October 2010.”

Under the rules applicable to this arbitration, it is for the Tribunal to “decide how and by
whom those expenses [incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings], the fees
and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of
the Centre [i.e., ICSID] shall be paid.”*+ Thus, as the Tribunal noted in paragraph 151 of
the Resubmission Award, the ICSID Convention “gives the Tribunal discretion to allocate
all costs of the arbitration, including attorney’s fees and other costs, between the Parties as
it deems appropriate.” The obvious corollary is that a claim for costs is not necessarily
subject to the same principles as govern reparation for losses sustained as a result of an
unlawful act, although a tribunal may decide in the exercise of its discretion to apply the

same principles in both circumstances.

The Tribunal does not consider that entitlements to sums awarded to a party by way of
costs in an arbitral award can generally be said to be owing prior to the date of the award.
In the present case, however, the Tribunal distinguished between the costs arising in (i) the
proceedings before the Original Tribunal, (ii) the Annulment proceedings, and (iii) the

Resubmission proceedings.

The decision of the Original Tribunal, set out in its Award dated 19 December 2013, in
relation to the costs arising in the original proceedings, was annulled by the ad hoc
Committee in light of its partial annulment of the Original Award. The present Tribunal’s

decision in paragraph 155.E of the Resubmission Award is thus a retrospective

2 Resubmission Award, | 155.E.
23 Id., $9 155.C.
24 ICSID Convention, Article 61(2).

31.

32.

determination of the amount of the costs awarded in the proceedings that ended with the

Original Award of 19 December 2013.

Having considered the submissions of the Parties, the present Tribunal accordingly decides
that the 75% of Claimant’s costs, including its contribution to the costs and expenses
incurred by ICSID, arising in the proceedings before the Original Tribunal, which
Respondent was directed by paragraph 155.E of the Resubmission Award to pay to

Claimant, is to be treated as if it were a sum owing as of 19 December 2013.

The Tribunal further decides that in order to avoid Respondent obtaining a significant
benefit from the delay in payment, interest is payable on that sum running from 19
December 2013. The Tribunal, by a majority, considers that the costs of the ICSID
procedures may be regarded as being something to which both sides contribute as a
payment for the availability of a facility which ultimately benefits them both, rather than
an additional element in the damages sustained by a successful claimant; and it considers
further that the balance between the Parties will be restored if the interest reflects what
Respondent would have been able to earn from the savings corresponding to the delayed
payment due in respect of costs, rather than the cost to Claimant of borrowing that sum.
Accordingly, it decides, by a majority, that the interest payable pursuant to the preceding

paragraph is payable at a non-commercial rate: the US prime rate.

Vv. COSTS

33.

34,

Respondent requested that Claimant be ordered to reimburse Respondent’s costs incurred
in its defense in connection with this supplementary decision proceeding.” Claimant did

not formally request an order in respect of these costs.

The Tribunal considers that neither Party should have to bear the whole cost of this
Supplementary Decision, and that both Parties have the benefit of the system of checks and

procedures provided by ICSID. Accordingly, it decides that each Party shall bear its own

25 Respondent's Observations, | 23(ii).

VI.

35.

costs and one half of the costs and expenses incurred by ICSID in these supplementary
proceedings before this Tribunal.
DECISION
For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal decides as follows:
(i) Claimant’s Request for a Supplementary Decision is hereby granted.

(ii) Respondent shall pay Claimant the sum of US$ 7,520,695.39 in respect of its
costs incurred in the Original Arbitration, plus interest compounded annually at

the US Prime rate, running from 19 December 2013.

(iii) The fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the administrative
expenses of ICSID incurred in connection with Claimant’s Request for a

Supplementary Decision shall be borne by in equal shares by the two Parties.

(iv) Each Party shall bear its own legal and other expenses incurred in connection

with Claimant’s Request for a Supplementary Decision.

[signed]

“Dr. Stanimir Alexandrov - “Prof. Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: SEP 2 4 2020 Date:

Prof. Vaughan
President of the Tribunal

 

Date:

 

[signed]

Dr. Stanimir Alexandrov Prof. Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: Date: 25 August 2020

Prof. Vaughan Lowe, Qc,
President of the Tribunal

Date:

 

Dr. Stanimir Alexandrov Prof. Brigitte Stem
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: Date:

[signed]

Prof. Vaughan Lowe, Q.C.
President of the Tribunal

Date: OCT 0 8 2020

