 

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR
SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

TECO GUATEMALA HOLDINGS, LLC
Claimant
v.
THE REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA

Respondent

ICSID CasE No. ARB/10/23

 

CLAIMANT’S COUNTER-MEMORIAL ON ANNULMENT OF THE AWARD

 

WHITE & CASEup
Andrea J. Menaker

Petr PolaSek

Kristen M. Young

9 February 2015 Counsel for Claimant

 

CLAIMANT’S COUNTER-MEMORIAL ON ANNULMENT OF THE AWARD

L
IL.
A.

Il.
IV.

VI.

VII.

Vill.

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION. 1
SUMMARY OF THE DISPUTE AND THE AWARD. ........ccscssssssssssssssessssssssssssessesnes 2

The Legal And Regulatory Framework Adopted By Guatemala

Guaranteed Both A Depoliticized Tariff Review Process And Fair

Returns For Electricity Distributors..........cscsssssssssesscesecessssessssessssessssesssssssssessssessseees 5

EEGSA’s 2008-2013 Tariff Review Was Conducted In An Unlawful,

Arbitrary, And Non-Transparent Manner, To Obtain The Lowest

VAD. 10

Guatemala’s Arbitrary And Unjustified Conduct Violated Its

Obligation To Accord TECO’s Investment In EEGSA Fair And

Equitable Treatment Under Article 10.5 Of The DR-CAFTA ......ccssssssessssssssseseeee 15
LEGAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ANNULMENT .......ccssssssssssssssssssssssssseees 19

THERE ARE NO GROUNDS TO ANNUL THE TRIBUNAL’S
FINDING THAT IT HAD JURISDICTION RATIONE MATERIAE
OVER THE DISPUTE 25

THERE ARE NO GROUNDS TO ANNUL THE TRIBUNAL’S
FINDING THAT GUATEMALA BREACHED ARTICLE 10.5 OF

 

THE DR-CAFTA 40
The Tribunal Applied International Law To The Facts Presented ...........sssssssssseees AL
The Tribunal Did Not “Reverse” The Decisions Of The Guatemalan
Cc itutional Court, 48

 

THERE ARE NO GROUNDS TO ANNUL THE TRIBUNAL’S
DECISION AWARDING TECO COMPENSATION FOR THE
PERIOD BEFORE THE SALE OF EEGSA......ccssssssssssessessessesssesseeneenceneeneeneeseensceneene 58

THERE ARE NO GROUNDS TO ANNUL THE TRIBUNAL’S
DECISION AWARDING TECO COSTS

CONCLUSION

 

 

CLAIMANT’S COUNTER-MEMORIAL ON ANNULMENT OF THE AWARD
L INTRODUCTION

1. Pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1 dated 1 August 2014, TECO Guatemala
Holdings, LLC (“TECO” or “Claimant’’) hereby submits this Counter-Memorial on Annulment
of the Award rendered on 19 December 2013 (the “Award”) in the matter TECO Guatemala
Holdings, LLC v. Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23.!

2. As set forth in TECO’s Application for Partial Annulment of the Award dated 18
April 2014 (“Partial Annulment Application”) and its Memorial on Partial Annulment of the
Award dated 17 October 2014 (“TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment”), the Tribunal found
that it had jurisdiction ratione materiae over the claims presented by TECO under the Dominican
Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Agreement (“DR-CAFTA” or the “Treaty”),
and that the Republic of Guatemala (“Guatemala” or “Respondent”) breached its obligation
under Article 10.5 of the DR-CAFTA to accord TECO’s investment fair and equitable treatment.
The Tribunal then awarded TECO damages for the period from the date of Guatemala’s breach
until the date on which TECO sold its investment as a direct consequence of Guatemala’s breach,
as well as three-fourths of its arbitration costs.” As elaborated below, contrary to the contentions
advanced by Guatemala in its Memorial on Annulment of the Award dated 17 October 2014
(“Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment”),’ there are no grounds upon which to annul these

portions of the Award under Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention.

3. First, in asserting jurisdiction ratione materiae over the dispute, the Tribunal

properly applied the prima facie test to the allegations advanced by TECO in its pleadings, and

' Abbreviations and terms used in TECO’s Counter-Memorial on Annulment of the Award have the same
meaning as in TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment of the Award.

> As set forth in TECO’s Partial Annulment Application and Memorial, the Tribunal, however, improperly
denied TECO’s claim for damages suffered as a result of the impaired value at which TECO sold its
investment as a direct consequence of Guatemala’s breach, as well as TECO’s claims for interest for the period
until the sale and pre-award interest at the agreed rate; as TECO has demonstrated, these portions of the
Tribunal’s Award thus should be annulled on the grounds set forth in Article 52(1), subparagraphs (b), (d), and
(e) of the ICSID Convention. See generally TECO’s Partial Annulment Application; TECO’s Memorial on
Partial Annulment.

> Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment of the Award dated 17 Oct. 2014 (“Guatemala’s Memorial on
Annulment”).

correctly found that the dispute was not a mere domestic regulatory dispute under Guatemalan
law, but rather was a dispute under international law arising out of the arbitrary and unjustified
actions taken by Guatemala during EEGSA’s 2008-2013 tariff review. Second, in finding that
Guatemala had breached its obligation to accord TECO’s investment in EEGSA fair and
equitable treatment under Article 10.5 of the DR-CAFTA, the Tribunal properly applied
international law to the facts presented, and did not conflate a mere domestic law breach with a
breach of international law. In so finding, the Tribunal also did not reverse the decisions of the
Guatemalan Constitutional Court under Guatemalan law; to the contrary, the Tribunal granted
deference to those decisions in its Award, even though it found that it was not bound by them
under principles of international law, and that they had no res judicata effect on the dispute.
Third, in awarding TECO historical damages, the Tribunal properly applied the methodology
agreed by the Parties, i.e., that damages should be calculated as the difference between EEGSA’s
actual value reflecting Guatemala’s Treaty breach and a but-for scenario assessing EEGSA’s
value in the absence of the breach. In so doing, the Tribunal correctly determined that Bates
White’s 28 July 2008 VAD study fully incorporated the Expert Commission’s rulings, and that it
therefore should serve as the basis for calculating EEGSA’s value in the but-for scenario.
Finally, in assessing costs against Guatemala, the Tribunal acted in accordance with the Parties’
shared position that costs should follow the event. The Committee thus should reject

Guatemala’s application for annulment of the Award.

IL. SUMMARY OF THE DISPUTE AND THE AWARD

4. In its Memorial on Partial Annulment, TECO explained that its claim under
Article 10.5 of the DR-CAFTA® arose out of its investment in the Guatemalan electricity
distribution company, EEGSA, which TECO held through DECA II, a Guatemalan company,*
and Guatemala’s arbitrary and unjustified decision to decrease EEGSA’s electricity tariffs for the

2008-2013 tariff period by unilaterally reducing the VAD component of those tariffs, through

* See Dominican Republic — Central America — United States Free Trade Agreement dated 5 Aug. 2004,
Chapter Ten, Art. 10.5.1 (“Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment in accordance with
customary international law, including fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security.”) (CL-1).

> TECO’s Memorial {4 61, 63; Award JJ 1-7.

which the distributor recoups its investment and makes its profit, as well as the arbitrary and
unjustified actions that Guatemala took to achieve that objective.” As TECO demonstrated, these
actions culminated in Guatemala’s electricity regulator, the CNEE, arbitrarily disregarding
EEGSA’s entire 2008-2013 tariff review process and imposing its own unjustifiably and
unreasonably low VAD on EEGSA, in breach of the specific representations that Guatemala had
made during EEGSA’s privatization process, in complete disregard of the legal and regulatory
framework that Guatemala had adopted to induce foreign investment in EEGSA, and in violation

of its obligation to accord EEGSA due process.*

5. As TECO further demonstrated, the actions that the CNEE took during EEGSA’s
2008-2013 tariff review to decrease EEGSA’s VAD and resulting tariffs were not the actions of
an independent regulatory agency, nor were they motivated by a good faith interpretation of the
law.” Rather, as the CNEE’s own internal documents confirm, the CNEE deliberately and
arbitrarily disregarded the key principles set forth in the LGE and RLGE to achieve the outcome
that it wanted—namely, an unjustified sharp reduction in EEGSA’s VAD and resulting tariffs.'°
Indeed, as TECO explained, by imposing its own unjustifiably low VAD on EEGSA, the CNEE
unilaterally reduced EEGSA’s VAD by more than 45 percent and its revenue by approximately
40 percent, leading to downgrades of EEGSA by the two major rating agencies, and requiring
EEGSA to take drastic cost-cutting measures.'' In view of the significant financial losses that
Guatemala’s arbitrary and unfair treatment had caused to TECO, as well as TECO’s loss of faith
in the transparency and fairness of Guatemala’s implementation of its regulatory regime, TECO

subsequently sold its interest in DECA II to EPM on 21 October 2010.'?

6. In its Memorial on Annulment, Guatemala purports to summarize the dispute

giving rise to the arbitration, as well as the Tribunal’s Award, asserting that the dispute

° TECO’s Memorial 4{{ 220-221; Award 4 270-287.

7 TECO’s Memorial {¥f 84-219; Award {ff 270-320.

* Award {¥f 266-320.

° TECO’s Memorial 4¥f 84-219; 259-280; Award {ff 299-320.

'° TECO’s Reply {{f 164, 174; Award [ 299-320.

"' See TECO’s Memorial J 32; Award {ff 212, 225-226.

2 See TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment { 34; Award JJ 8, 236-237.

-3-

“concerned essentially whether the Guatemalan electricity regulator had acted properly under
Guatemalan law in deciding how to establish tariffs for a Guatemalan electricity distribution
company for the next five year period,”" and that EEGSA essentially “disagreed with the
manner in which the CNEE interpreted certain aspects of the procedure for the tariff review.”"4
Guatemala further asserts that, under the legal and regulatory framework adopted by Guatemala,
the CNEE has full discretion in conducting the distributor’s tariff review and in setting its VAD
and tariffs,'° and that the CNEE thus was fully entitled to disregard EEGSA’s VAD study and to
approve its own VAD study as the basis for setting EEGSA’s 2008-2013 VAD and tariffs,
because EEGSA had not revised its VAD study in accordance with all of the comments made by

the CNEE during the tariff review process.'°

7. Guatemala also contends that the Guatemalan Constitutional Court upheld and
affirmed “the legality of the conduct of the CNEE during the tariff-review process,”!” finding
that “the CNEE had acted within the scope of its jurisdiction” in setting EEGSA’s 2008-2013
tariffs.!* According to Guatemala, the dispute submitted by TECO to arbitration thus “related
merely to the correct interpretation and application of the Regulatory Framework, equating a
possible error by the regulator in such interpretation and application of the regulation, already
examined and ruled upon by the local courts, with a breach of the Treaty.”!?

8. Guatemala further contends that the Tribunal’s decision that Guatemala had
breached Article 10.5 of the DR-CAFTA “was based exclusively on CNEE Resolution 144-
2008,” but that this Resolution affirmed that the Expert Commission’s report was advisory, and
that the CNEE had acted in accordance with the regulatory framework.” According to

Guatemala, the Tribunal found that “the breach was not [the CNEE’s] decision [to set the tariffs

'3 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 16.
" 1d.931.

8 Id. { 32-38.

"© Td. {9 39-44.

" Id. 9.47.

8 1d. 48.

® Td. 4 53.

Id. 63.

on the basis of its own VAD study] per se but [rather] the fact that [the CNEE’s decision to do
so] was not sufficiently reasoned,” and that “the CNEE had failed to provide sufficient
motivation for what the Tribunal considered was a ‘disregard’ of the report of the Expert

ccign 172
Commission.””!

9. Guatemala further contends that in awarding TECO historical damages, the
Tribunal provided contradictory reasons and improperly ignored an alternative version of a VAD
study presented by Guatemala’s industry expert, Mr. Damonte,” and that the Tribunal’s award to
TECO of 75 percent of its costs is contradictory and fails to consider the reasonableness of the

23
costs.

10. As set forth below, Guatemala’s assertions not only are erroneous, but
mischaracterize the nature of the dispute between the Parties, distort the content of TECO’s
arguments in the underlying arbitration, disregard the Tribunal’s rejection of Guatemala’s

arguments, and misconstrue the Tribunal’s reasoning in the Award.

A. The Legal And Regulatory Framework Adopted By Guatemala Guaranteed
Both A Depoliticized Tariff Review Process And Fair Returns For Electricity

Distributors
11. As TECO demonstrated in its Memorial on Partial Annulment, in order to attract
much needed foreign investment in EEGSA and to maximize its privatization proceeds,
Guatemala undertook to establish a new legal and regulatory framework, which would unbundle
and depoliticize the generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity, and establish the
conditions necessary to attract foreign investment in its failing electricity sector. Accordingly,
and as reflected in the promotional materials circulated by Guatemala during EEGSA’s
privatization process, the new legal and regulatory framework adopted by Guatemala guaranteed
both a depoliticized tariff review process and fair returns for electricity distribution companies,

such as EEGSA, by limiting the role of the regulator in the calculation of the distributor’s

7 Td. 4 64.

» Id. Yl 16-23, 213-224, 238-241.

> Id. fl 24-27, 225-230, 235.

4 TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment q 10; Award {J 91-94.

5.

VAD,”> and by adopting the model efficient company approach using the new replacement value

of the assets (““WNR”) for calculating the VAD.”°

12. Specifically, Guatemala represented that EEGSA’s VAD would be recalculated
every five years by EEGSA based upon a VAD study prepared by an external engineering firm
prequalified by the CNEE and selected by EEGSA; that the CNEE’s authority during the VAD-
calculation process would be limited to reviewing and making observations on EEGSA’s VAD
study; and that any differences between the CNEE and EEGSA regarding that study would be
resolved by an impartial, three-person Expert Commission appointed by the parties.?”

Guatemala also represented that EEGSA’s VAD was to be calculated through the model efficient

5 TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment q 11; Award {J 126-132; Preliminary Information Memorandum
(C-27); Sales Memorandum (C-29); Roadshow Presentation (C-28).

26 TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment q 13; Award { 100.

27 TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment q 12; Award Qf 106-112; LGE, Arts. 74-77 (C-17); Sales
Memorandum, at 53 (C-29); Roadshow Presentation, at 19 (C-28); Preliminary Information Memorandum, at 9
(C-27). As TECO demonstrated in the arbitration, the language in the LGE; the Sales Memorandum which
Guatemala approved and its agents distributed to potential foreign investors in EEGSA, including TECO’s
parent company; the CNEE’s submissions to Guatemala’s Constitutional Court; and the CNEE’s own internal
documents all indicated that the Expert Commission’s rulings were binding. See TECO’s Memorial {{[ 41-43;
TECO’s Reply {| 37-50; TECO’s Post-Hearing Brief {[ 85; TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {| 59;
LGE Art. 75 (“The Commission shall review the studies performed and may make comments on the same. In
case of differences made in writing, the Commission and the distributors shall agree on the appointment of an
Expert Commission made of three members, one appointed by each party and the third by mutual agreement.
The Expert Commission shall rule on the differences in a period of 60 days counted from its appointment.”)
(C-17); Sales Memorandum, at 49 (“The Commission will review those studies and can make observations,
but in the event of discrepancy, a Commission of three experts will be convened to resolve the differences.”)
(C-29); CNEE Answer to Constitutional Challenge 1782-2003 dated 10 Nov. 2003, at 5-6 (“In the event of
discrepancies, pursuant to article 98 of the Regulations of the Law and 75 of the Law, an Expert Commission
shall be constituted, which shall resolve in a term of 60 days . . . .”) (C-81); Email from A. Campos to A.
Garcia, J.F. Orozco, M. Santizo, M. Peldez, M. Estrada, D. Herrera, M. Ixmucane Cordova dated 16 May
2007, attaching Terms of Reference for VAD Studies and Replies to EEGSA Comments, at 2 (stating that
“[nJeither does the LGE provide that eventual comments should be resolved by the Expert Commission, but
instead only irresolvable discrepancies,” in other words, that “irresolvable discrepancies” would be subject to
resolution by the Expert Commission) (emphasis added) (C-483); Sigla Supporting Report for the
Representative of the CNEE before the Expert Commission dated 27 May 2008, at 2 (“On May 5, 2008,
EEGSA submitted the Stage I.2 Report, the Final and amended version of the previous report, which gave rise
to Resolution CNEE 96-2008, detailing the CNEE’s disagreements with the report and ordering the formation
of the Expert Commission that is referred to in Article 75 of the LGE and that will be responsible for resolving
disagreements between EEGSA and the CNEE.”) (C-494). Despite this overwhelming contemporaneous
evidentiary record—and the lack of any contemporaneous, countervailing evidence—the Tribunal, relying
upon the isi of the Gi Constituti Court, that the Expert Commission’s rulings
were “not technically binding in the sense that the Expert Commission has no adjudicatory powers.” Award
670.

company approach, and that EEGSA’s regulatory asset base would be determined using the VNR
method.” This meant that EEGSA’s VAD was to be calculated off of the regulatory asset base

   

 

of a hypothetical model efficient company whose assets were new, rather than off of EEGSA’s

actual assets, which were dilapidated and in need of significant investment.”

13. In its Memorial on Annulment, Guatemala contends that, under the legal and
regulatory framework, each tariff review begins with the CNEE’s adoption of the methodology
or terms of reference (““ToR”) for the distributor’s VAD study, which VAD study allegedly
provides a mere “proposal by the distribution company to the regulator as to the VAD that
should be incorporated in the tariff to be charged to customers.”*” Guatemala further contends
that these VAD studies initially are prepared by the distributor,*! but that they must “follow the

9932

[ToR] set out by the regulator,” and that, although the distributor can challenge the ToR before

the Guatemalan courts, once those ToR are confirmed, they “become binding for the
distributors.”**

14. Guatemala also asserts that, “[o]Jnce the VAD study is presented by the
distribution company, the CNEE reviews it and may request, as the case may be, any necessary
corrections for them to conform to the terms of reference;” that the distribution company “must
incorporate the corrections;” and that, “if there are discrepancies between the CNEE and the
distributor, [A]rticle 75 of the LGE provides that an expert commission may be established to

9934

issue a pronouncement. Guatemala further asserts that the CNEE “is empowered to

commission a study in parallel,”** and that “the Regulations expressly allow the CNEE to

°8 TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment { 13; Sales Memorandum, at 14 (C-29); Roadshow Presentation, at
19 (C-28); see also Preliminary Information Memorandum, at 9 (C-27).

2° TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment q 13; Award {J 102-103.
°° Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment 4 35 (emphasis added).

* Td. 4.35.

* Id. 136.

* Td. 4.37.

“Td. 438.

* Td. 439.

calculate the new tariffs on the basis of an independent expert report commissioned by it in the

event that the distributor fails to incorporate its corrections to the study.”*°

15. Guatemala’s assertions are erroneous, and were expressly rejected by the Tribunal
in its Award. Specifically, as the Tribunal found, the CNEE does “not enjoy unlimited discretion
in fixing the tariff,” as Guatemala erroneously contends; to the contrary, “[t]he entire regulatory
framework is based on the premise that it would not be so.”*” As the Tribunal also found, “Tbly
providing that the tariff would be established based on a VAD study realized by the distributor’s
consultant, the regulatory framework guarantees that the distributor would have an active role in
determining the VAD and prevents the regulator from determining it alone and discretionally,
save in limited circumstances.”*® As the Tribunal further observes, the LGE “clearly establishes
the principle that the VAD component of the tariff would be established on the basis of a study
realized by a consultant pre-qualified by the CNEE and chosen by the distributor,” and that,
“To]nce the VAD is so established, the CNEE can calculate and fix the tariffs.”°? The Tribunal
confirms that the CNEE thus does not have discretion under the regulatory framework “to reject
without reasons the distributor’s study and — as the case may be — the Expert Commission’s
pronouncements,” and that these principles were considered to be an “important element of the
depolitization of the tariff review process” at the time of the privatization of Guatemala’s

electricity sector.”

16. The Tribunal also expressly rejected Guatemala’s argument that there was “no
obligation to ensure that the VAD approved is the one determined by the distributor’s study.”"!
As the Tribunal observes, “it would not make any sense for the regulatory framework to establish
a process whereby the distributor is requested to submit a VAD study, the regulator is requested

to comment on the same, and a neutral Expert Commission is called to make a pronouncement in

* 1d. 44.

*” Award { 563.
%8 Id. 4 506.

® Id. 4 527.

Td. Wf 531, 533.
“" Td. 4 528.

case of disagreement, if the regulator had the discretion to disregard the distributor’s study.”

As the Tribunal further notes, the amendment to “Article 98 RLGE is very clear in that the
regulator may only disregard the distributor’s VAD study and apply its own unilateral VAD

43

study in limited circumstances,” and that, “if such circumstances are not met, the regulator has

the obligation to set the VAD on the basis of the distributor’s study.” As TECO has explained,
5

and as the Tribunal confirmed, none of these circumstances applied in this case.* Moreover,
according to the Tribunal, “[a]s to Guatemala’s view that the regulator was at liberty to fix the
tariff based on a VAD study that did not reflect the Expert Commission’s pronouncements, it is
also incorrect.’”“°

17. In its Award, the Tribunal likewise rejected Guatemala’s argument that the ToR
were mandatory and binding on EEGSA.”” As the Tribunal observes, the ToR expressly provide
that they are “guidelines;” the Tribunal noted that “such term would not have been used if the
drafters of the [ToR] had not intended to preserve a certain degree of flexibility in its application
by the distributor’s consultant and the Expert Commission.”** Indeed, the Tribunal found that
Article 1.10 of the ToR, which EEGSA insisted on including as a condition for withdrawing its
legal challenge to the original ToR.” “was designed precisely to allow the distributor’s

consultant, under the control of the Expert Commission, to depart from the Terms of Reference

” Td. 529.

8 id. 530. As TECO explained in its Memorial on Partial Annulment, the amendment to RLGE Article 98
was enacted shortly before EEGSA’s 2008-2013 tariff review was scheduled to commence and fundamentally
changed the regulatory framework by subverting the requirement in LGE Article 74 that the distributor
calculate the VAD through its own consultant prequalified by the CNEE, and by introducing the possibility for
the very first time that the CNEE could calculate the distributor’s VAD itself on the basis of its own VAD
study, albeit in limited circumstances. See TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment { 18; Award {J 120-121,
625; Government Accord No. 68-2007 dated 2 Mar. 2007, Art. 21 (amending RLGE Art. 98) (C-104).

* Award { 530.

* TECO’s Memorial {{[ 264-266, 272; Award {f 304-306, 704-707, 725-726, 731.
“© Award { 698.

7 Td. 590-610.

Td. 1596.

*® TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment Jf 19-20; Award {J 169-170, 303.

-9-

in case the Terms of Reference would not comport with the regulatory framework, thus avoiding

the delays and complications of a judicial challenge.”*°

18. Similarly, as TECO demonstrated, and as the Tribunal found, EEGSA was not
required to incorporate the CNEE’s observations into its VAD study, as Guatemala asserts. In
its Award, the Tribunal notes that the “distributor was under no obligation to incorporate in its
VAD study observations made by the CNEE in respect of which there was a disagreement
properly submitted to the Expert Commission,” and that, “[u]nless the regulator provided valid
reasons to the contrary, it is only if and when the Expert Commission had pronounced itself in
favor of the regulator that such an obligation would arise.”*? Indeed, the Tribunal agreed with
TECO that it would be “entirely nonsensical for the regulatory framework to provide that, in case
of a disagreement between the CNEE and the distributor on the distributor’s VAD study, a
neutral Expert Commission would be constituted to pronounce itself . . . and at the same time to
oblige the distributor to immediately incorporate any such point of disagreement in its VAD
study.”° The Tribunal properly concluded that it would be “even more nonsensical to allow the
regulator to unilaterally impose its own VAD study because observations upon which there were
disagreements and that were subject to a pending pronouncement of the Expert Commission had

°4 Guatemala’s contention that the

not been immediately incorporated in the VAD study.
distributor “must incorporate the corrections” from the CNEE thus is incorrect, and was

expressly rejected by the Tribunal.*>

B. EEGSA’s 2008-2013 Tariff Review Was Conducted In An Unlawful,
Arbitrary, And Non-Transparent Manner, To Obtain The Lowest VAD
19. As TECO demonstrated in its Memorial on Partial Annulment, several factors

indicated that EEGSA’s VAD and resulting tariffs would increase significantly in its 2008-2013

°° Award { 609.

5! Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 38.
* Award { 589.

%3 Id. 4 579.

* Td. 580.

55 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 38.

-10-

tariff review, including that EEGSA’s network had grown considerably; that the cost of materials
used in electricity distribution, such as copper and aluminum, had far outpaced the rate of
inflation from 2003 to 2008; and that electricity prices had increased, requiring the use of wider,
more expensive cables to decrease electricity losses. In order to prevent an inevitable, but
politically undesirable, increase in EEGSA’s VAD, the CNEE undertook from the very
beginning of EEGSA’s tariff review to manipulate and to control its outcome, culminating in the
CNEE’s decision to ignore both the Expert Commission’s rulings and EEGSA’s revised VAD
study, and to approve its own VAD study, which neither EEGSA nor its prequalified consultant

even had an opportunity to review.”

20. In its Memorial on Annulment, Guatemala asserts that the VAD study submitted
by EEGSA’s independent consultant, Bates White, allegedly contained “numerous irregularities”
and departed from the ToR on “numerous occasions,” including, for example, that it allegedly
did not contain a database of reference prices and did not link the data contained in the cells of
the study’s electronic spreadsheets, resulting in a “vastly over-valued VAD.”** Guatemala
further asserts that, “[i]n view of the reluctance of Bates White and EEGSA to incorporate the
corrections indicated by the CNEE as required by the Regulation, the parties agreed to establish

an expert commission to issue a pronouncement on the disagreements,”

and that “the report of
the Expert Commission decided in favour of the CNEE with regard to most of the
disagreements” between the Parties, such as with respect to the alleged “lack of linkage,
traceability and auditability” of the Bates White study.” According to Guatemala, after
“receiving the report of the Expert Commission and in the absence of any regulatory provision
for further studies, the CNEE considered that: (a) in accordance with the Regulatory Framework,

it could not use the Bates White study to establish the new tariffs; and (b) it would set EEGSA’s

* See TECO’s Reply 313.

7 Award QW 164, 224-226, 315-317; see also TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {J 16-31.
58 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 40.

* Id. Ql.

© Td. 4 42.

-11-

VAD on the basis of the tariff study established by the independent and pre-qualified consultant

Sigla, as permitted by the Regulatory Framework.”*!

21. Guatemala further asserts that, even though “the Expert Commission’s report is
not defined as binding; it is not contemplated that the distributor may submit an amended version
of its VAD study after the Expert Commission’s report; and the Expert Commission has no other
function than to issue a report on disagreements, not to approve the VAD study (which is a
matter for the CNEE).”© Guatemala complains that EEGSA and its consultant Bates White
“nevertheless submitted a new unilateral VAD study on 28 July 2008 [i.e., after the Expert
Commission issued its Report] not contemplated by the Regulatory Framework arguing that it
incorporated all the corrections indicated by the Expert Commission’s report,” and that this VAD
study did not, in fact, incorporate many of the required corrections.°’ Guatemala also asserts
that, while “EEGSA requested the local courts to endorse its interpretation of the Regulatory
Framework,” those requests were rejected, and the Guatemalan Constitutional Court, in its 18
November 2009 decision, concluded not only that the Expert Commission’s report was not
binding, but that “the CNEE had acted within the scope of its jurisdiction and that it ‘followed
the process regulated by law’ during the tariff review, including in deciding which of the VAD

studies, that of Bates White or that of Sigla, it should use to set the tariff.”

22. Guatemala’s assertions are erroneous, and were rejected by the Tribunal in its
Award. As TECO has demonstrated, although the CNEE and its consultants had worked directly
with EEGSA and its prequalified consultant during EEGSA’s 2003-2008 tariff review,°° the
CNEE held only one meeting with EEGSA and Bates White during EEGSA’s 2008-2013 tariff
review to discuss EEGSA’s Stage A Report, following which neither the CNEE nor its

consultants submitted any comments for several months.® Bates White nonetheless finished all

°" Td. 42.

© 1d. 4 44.

1d. 4 45.

* Td. WY 46, 48.

°° TECO’s Memorial {{f 74-75, 82; Award {ff 144-149.
© TECO’s Memorial {¥f 110-114; Award §9{ 171-174.

-12-

nine stage reports on time, and EEGSA delivered the complete VAD study, along with revised
versions of each stage report, to the CNEE on 31 March 2008, as scheduled.*” In addition, after
receiving the CNEE’s observations on its VAD study, Bates White responded to each of the
CNEE’s observations as required, either by revising its VAD study to incorporate its
observations or by explaining the reasons that justified excluding them. Because Bates White
did not accept all of the CNEE’s observations, and because the CNEE did not accept Bates
White’s justifications, the CNEE called for the establishment of an Expert Commission under

LGE Article 75 to “decide on the discrepancies” between the parties.

23. As TECO remarked throughout the arbitration, the very fact that the CNEE had
called for the establishment of an Expert Commission demonstrated that the CNEE recognized
that it lacked the authority, under the laws and regulations, to simply unilaterally impose the
VAD that it wanted on EEGSA.”” Likewise, as TECO explained, because Bates White expressly
disagreed with many of the CNEE’s observations and thus refused to implement them into its
VAD study, Respondent’s argument in the arbitration that the Expert Commission was
established for the sole purpose of determining whether the Bates White VAD study
incorporated the CNEE’s observations was disingenuous; there was no dispute at the time that
Bates White had expressly disagreed with the CNEE’s observations, and that the Expert

Commission would be established to resolve those disagreements.”!

24. As TECO explained in its Memorial, despite the CNEE’s interference in the
Expert Commission process, including its attempts to rely upon a hastily-enacted amendment to
allow itself to unilaterally appoint the presiding member of the Expert Commission and to
improperly influence the Expert Commission through ex parte communications with its own

appointee,”” the Expert Commission ultimately ruled against the CNEE on several key

° TECO’s Memorial { 118; Award J 185.

8 TECO’s Memorial q 122; Award { 188.

© TECO’s Memorial { 124; Award {J 190-207.

” TECO’s Post-Hearing Reply { 91.

7! TECO’s Memorial QW 118-125, 193; TECO’s Post-Hearing Reply {J 87-89; Award {| 546-581.
” TECO’s Memorial {| 133-135, 267; TECO’s Reply {| 138-140; Award {f[ 310-313.

-13-

discrepancies, including the improper calculation of the FRC (the Capital Recovery Factor,
which converts the VNR into cash flow payments to the distributor), which the CNEE had

devised with its consultant specifically to decrease EEGSA’s VAD and tariffs.”

25. As TECO also demonstrated in the arbitration, and as the Tribunal confirmed,
EEGSA’s consultant, Bates White, submitted a revised VAD study to the CNEE, which fully
incorporated each of the Expert Commission’s decisions." As the CNEE’s own documents
reflect, however, the CNEE reviewed the Expert Commission’s report, and concluded that
complying with the Expert Commission’s decisions would substantially increase EEGSA’s VAD
and tariffs.”> As the Tribunal found, the evidence showed that CNEE “knew at the time that
correcting the Bates White study [in accordance with the Expert Commission’s report] would
have led to a higher VNR than the one proposed by Sigla,” its own consultant, and thus higher
tariffs.” The CNEE consequently proceeded to ignore the Expert Commission’s report, as well
as EEGSA’s revised VAD study, and to approve its own VAD study, which intentionally did not
comply with the Expert Commission’s decisions and instead applied many of the CNEE’s inputs
that had been expressly rejected by the Expert Commission, as the basis for setting EEGSA’s
2008-2013 tariffs.”

26. The Tribunal further found that the “regulator’s decision to reject the Bates White
study and apply the Sigla study was not based on an alleged failure by Bates White to

n78

incorporate the Expert Commission’s pronouncements,”’” and that Guatemala’s contentions

regarding EEGSA’s alleged failure to incorporate the Expert Commission’s decisions were

“unconvincing.” The Tribunal also rejected as baseless Guatemala’s assertions regarding the

* TECO’s Memorial (¥f 159-162; Award {ff 297, 726, 735.

™ TECO’s Memorial {ff 187-188; Award {J 297, 731.

” TECO’s Reply {If 164, 174; Award {Jf 690-695.

7 Award { 695.

7” TECO’s Memorial {ff 189-199; Award {f[ 222-224, 664-665.
*8 Award { 704.

” Id. (705.

-14-

alleged lack of linkage of the data in EEGSA’s revised VAD study,®° as well as Guatemala’s
complaints that the study was “overinflated” and that certain reference prices used in the study
were excessive,” finding that the explanations contained therein were not “unjustified or
unreasonable.”*!

27. The Tribunal concluded that, “[a]fter careful review of the evidence, [it was] not
convinced that the Bates White 28 July study failed to incorporate the Expert Commission’s
pronouncements or that there [was] any reason to depart from such pronouncements.”*” In other
words, the Tribunal held that (i) the CNEE did not have any valid reasons to depart from the
rulings of the Expert Commission, and (ii) EEGSA’s revised VAD study properly implemented
the Expert Commission’s rulings. The Tribunal thus concluded that an assessment of “what the
tariffs should have been had the CNEE complied with the regulatory framework . . . is properly
made on the basis of the Bates White’s July 28, 2008 [revised VAD] study.”*3

Cc. Guatemala’s Arbitrary And Unjustified Conduct Violated Its Obligation To
Accord TECO’s Investment In EEGSA Fair And Equitable Treatment

Under Article 10.5 Of The DR-CAFTA
28. As TECO explained in its Memorial on Partial Annulment, the Tribunal held in its
Award that the actions taken by Guatemala during EEGSA’s 2008-2013 tariff review,
culminating in its decision to reject without any valid reasons both the Expert Commission’s
decisions and EEGSA’s revised VAD study, and to impose its own VAD study on EEGSA,
reflected a willful disregard of the regulatory framework and constituted arbitrary treatment in

breach of “elementary standards of due process in administrative matters,” in violation of its

obligation to grant fair and equitable treatment under Article 10.5 of the DR-CAFTA.™ In so

80 Id. {| 706. Not only did TECO demonstrate that the Bates White report was “linked,” “auditable,” and
“traceable,” but TECO also demonstrated that the CNEE’s own allegedly independent study, prepared by
Sigla, contained the same alleged defects relating to linkage and traceability that Guatemala, in the arbitration,
complained about with respect to the Bates White report. See TECO’s Reply { 177; TECO’s Post-Hearing
Brief | 157.

§! Award { 705.

82 1d. {| 731; see also TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {J 40-41, 65.
3 Award { 742.

“Td. 7A.

-15-

holding, the Tribunal rejected Guatemala’s objection that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction ratione
materiae over TECO’s claim, because TECO’s claim allegedly related only to a mere domestic
regulatory dispute regarding the proper interpretation of Guatemalan law, which already had
been decided by the Guatemalan courts.** As the Tribunal concluded, “this dispute is about
whether the Respondent breached its obligations under the minimum standard of treatment,” and
thus “is an international dispute in which the Arbitral Tribunal will be called to apply
international law.”*° The Tribunal further found that Guatemala’s breach had “caused damages

”87 and awarded

to the Claimant, in respect of which the Claimant is entitled to compensation,
TECO historical damages for the period from 1 August 2008, when the CNEE arbitrarily
imposed the Sigla VAD on EEGSA, until 21 October 2010, when TECO sold its investment as a
result of Guatemala’s breach, in the full amount claimed.** The Tribunal also awarded TECO 75

percent of its costs.

29. In its Memorial on Annulment, Guatemala asserts that, contrary to the Tribunal’s
conclusions, TECO’s claim under Article 10.5 of the DR-CAFTA concerned nothing more than
a mere domestic regulatory dispute regarding the proper interpretation of Guatemalan law, and
that the Tribunal’s finding on liability “was based exclusively on CNEE Resolution 144-2008,”
which “was based on the premise that the Expert Commission’s report was advisory, and that the
report had confirmed that the Bates White study had deviated from the terms of reference.”””
Guatemala also asserts that the Tribunal improperly awarded damages to TECO for harm caused
by acts other than the allegedly limited violation of the Treaty by Guatemala, and that, in
assessing damages, the Tribunal improperly ignored an alternative VAD study presented by
Guatemala’s industry expert, Mr. Damonte.”! Finally, Guatemala asserts that the amount of

TECO’s costs was unreasonable and that the Tribunal’s 75 percent cost award to TECO is

85 Id. 4] 437-484.

8° Id. | 467.

Td. 7A.

88 Id. | 742.

8° Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 53.
Td. 4 63.

°! Id. ff 213-224, 238-241.

-16-

contradictory in that Guatemala, not TECO, allegedly prevailed in the arbitration, and, under the
principle that costs follow the event, TECO should not have been awarded costs.” Guatemala’s

assertions are erroneous, and mischaracterize the content of the Tribunal’s Award.

30. First, as TECO has explained, its claim for breach of the fair and equitable
treatment standard was not based upon a mere regulatory dispute over the proper interpretation
of Guatemalan law, as Guatemala contends; to the contrary, TECO’s claims arose out of
Guatemala’s deliberate and calculated actions taken in contravention of its prior
representations; its fundamental changes to the regulatory framework, which was adopted
specifically to induce foreign investment in its failing electricity sector; and its arbitrary and
bad faith conduct taken in connection with EEGSA’s 2008-2013 tariff review to decrease
EEGSA’s VAD.” In addition, as the record confirms, TECO expressly asked the Tribunal in the
arbitration to review Guatemala’s actions during EEGSA’s 2008-2013 tariff review not in light
of Guatemalan law, but rather in light of Guatemala’s obligation under Article 10.5 of the DR-
CAFTA to accord TECO’s investment in EEGSA fair and equitable treatment.”° This is

confirmed by the Tribunal in its Award.

31. Observing that TECO’s “case is based in large part on the assertion that the
CNEE willfully and without reasons disregarded the regulatory framework applicable to the
setting of electricity tariffs in Guatemala, as established by the LGE and the RLGE,’®” the
Tribunal found that “[t]he present dispute essentially rests on an allegation of abuse of power by
the regulator and disregard of the regulatory framework in the context of an administrative tariff
review process.”°* The Tribunal further found that TECO “alleges that, by failing to abide by the

conclusions of the Expert Commission and by unilaterally imposing a tariff based on its own

° Td. 49 225-230.

°} TECO’s Memorial {{[ 259-280; Award {{f 321-328.
°* TECO’s Memorial {{] 259-280; Award J 266.

°° TECO’s Memorial {ff 259-280; Award ff] 299-320.

© See, e.g., TECO’s Post-Hearing Brief {{] 100, 164; TECO’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility
dated 9 Nov. 2012 (“TECO’s Rejoinder”) {| 14-24; TECO’s Reply J] 228-282.

°” Award {| 497.
°8 Id. | 489 (emphasis added).

-17-

consultant’s study, Guatemala repudiated the fundamental principles upon which the regulatory

999

framework was based and upon which it relied when making the investment,””” and “that the

CNEE failed to act in good faith in the process of establishing the tariff for 2008-2013, and acted

in manifest breach of the law in disbanding the Expert Commission in July 2008.”'" As the

Tribunal thus confirms, TECO’s case was based “primarily on the arbitrary conduct of the

CNEE in establishing the tariff, as well as on an alleged lack of due process in the tariff review
wll

process, and not on a mere difference of opinion regarding the proper interpretation of

Guatemalan law, as Guatemala erroneously asserts. |?

32. Second, the Tribunal’s finding of liability was not based “exclusively on CNEE

Resolution 144-2008,” as Guatemala argues.!°

To the contrary, as the Tribunal’s Award
reflects, the Tribunal’s holding also was based upon the arbitrary manner in which the CNEE
established EEGSA’s 2008-2013 tariffs, including the CNEE’s “preliminary review” of
EEGSA’s revised VAD study.'* As the Tribunal observed, this preliminary review, which had
been “performed in Jess than one day was clearly insufficient to discharge” the CNEE’s
obligation to seriously consider the Expert Commission’s findings, and was further evidence of

“t]he arbitrariness of the regulator’s behavior.”!°

The Tribunal further observed that, “both
under the regulatory framework and under the minimum standard of treatment, the CNEE could
and should have taken the time, after careful review of the Expert Commission’s report, to

1106

implement its conclusions in the Bates White’s study, and that, based on the

contemporaneous evidence, it could “find no justification, other than its desire to reject the Bates

White study in favor of the more favorable Sigla’s study, for [the CNEE’s] behavior.”!”

” Td. 460.

1 Td. 461.

1°! Td. 473 (emphasis added).
102 See, e.g., Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment {| 53.
13 Td. 4.63.

' Award {ff 690-711.

1°5 Td. {J 690-691 (emphasis added).

1° Td. 1 690.

1 Td. 1 690.

-18-

33. The Tribunal further found that, by “accepting to receive the Expert
Commission’s report in the week of July 24, 2008, to then disregard it along with the Bates
White study on the basis that such date did not leave enough time to publish the tariff by August
1, 2008, the CNEE acted in breach of the fundamental principles of due process as well as in a
contradictory and aberrant manner.”!° Contrary to Guatemala’s contentions, these findings do
not relate to the content of Resolution No. 144-2008, but rather to the CNEE’s conduct and

failure to accord due process to EEGSA during its 2008-2013 tariff review.

34. As to damages, the Tribunal properly found that TECO suffered historical
damages in the full amount claimed.'” Contrary to Guatemala’s contentions, the Tribunal’s
reasoning regarding historical damages is internally consistent, and the Tribunal’s treatment of
Mr. Damonte’s testimony was not improper. Finally, as regards costs, contrary to Guatemala’s
contentions, the amount of TECO’s costs was not unreasonable, and, as is evident from the
Award, the Tribunal’s allocation of costs is fully consistent with the Tribunal’s assessment of the

Parties’ relative success in the case.'"°

Ill. LEGAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ANNULMENT

35. It is well established that the annulment procedure under Article 52 of the ICSID
Convention is not an appeal;''’ to the contrary, it is a limited remedy, and is confined to the five

grounds listed in Article 52(1), each of which concerns the integrity of the arbitral process.'!? As

18 Td. 688.

1 Td. 742. As noted above, the Tribunal’s denial of TECO’s damages for loss upon the sale of TECO’s
shares is the subject of TECO’s application for partial annulment of the Award. See TECO’s Memorial on
Partial Annulment § IV.

" Award {fl 769-779.

"! See INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES, BACKGROUND PAPER ON
ANNULMENT FOR THE ADMINISTRATIVE COUNCIL OF ICSID, 10 Aug. 2012, {{[ 72-75 (CL-N-147); see also
Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment { 69 (stating that the “annulment recourse is not an appeal mechanism
and the role of annulment committees is not to review the merits of an award, in order to correct its findings of
fact or law”).

12 See, e.g., Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, {23 (CL-N-132); Alapli Elektrik B.V. v. Republic of
Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/13, Decision on Annulment of 10 July 2014 (“Alapli v. Turkey, Decision on
Annulment”), {| 32 (RL-51); Iberdrola Energia S.A. v. Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/5,
Decision on Annulment dated 13 Jan. 2015 (“/berdrola v. Guatemala, Decision on Annulment’), { 74 (CL-N-
153).

-19-

the ad hoc committee in Wena v. Egypt confirmed, “the remedy of Article 52 is in no sense an
appeal;” an ad hoc committee’s “power for review” thus “is limited to the grounds of annulment
as defined in this provision... [which] are to be interpreted neither narrowly nor extensively.”!!
36. It also is well established that an ad hoc committee thus may not review the
merits of an award, or annul an award due to errors in the application of the law or mistakes of
fact.''4 In this regard, the ad hoc committee in MINE v. Guinea correctly observed that “Article
52(1) makes it clear that annulment is a limited remedy. This is further confirmed by the
exclusion of review of the merits of awards by Article 53. Annulment is not a remedy against an
incorrect decision. Accordingly, an ad hoc Committee may not in fact reverse an award on the
merits under the guise of applying Article 52,7115 Similarly, the ad hoc committee in MTD vy.
Chile noted that an annulment committee “cannot substitute its determination on the merits for
that of the tribunal. ... All it can do is annul the decision of the tribunal: it can extinguish a res
judicata but on a question of merits it cannot create a new one.”!'® These principles recently
were confirmed by the ad hoc committees in Alapli v. Turkey and in Iberdrola v. Guatemala. As
the ad hoc committee in Alapli v. Turkey remarked, it is not within the power of the ad hoc
committee “to review the substantive correctness of the Award, both in fact and in law;” instead,
the ad hoc committee “may only examine whether the standards of procedural integrity of the
underlying proceeding were adhered to.”''? In Iberdrola v. Guatemala, the ad hoc committee
similarly affirmed that “a ruling on the substantive correctness of the award is out of place in a

sl 18

decision on annulment, and that “annulment deals only with the legitimacy of the decision-

making process, not its merits.”!"

"3 Wena y. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, {{ 18 (CL-N-144).

"4 See INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES, BACKGROUND PAPER ON
ANNULMENT FOR THE ADMINISTRATIVE COUNCIL OF ICSID, 10 Aug. 2012, {| 72-75 (CL-N-147).

"5 MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, { 4.04 (CL-N-137).

''6 MTD v. Chile, Decision on Annulment, 54 (CL-N-138).

"7 Alapli v. Turkey, Decision on Annulment, { 33 (RL-51).

"8 Tberdrola v. Guatemala, Decision on Annulment, {74 (CL-N-153).
"9 Td. [74 (CL-N-153).

-20-

37. There is no dispute between the parties with regards to the legal standards of

a . - - - 2
failure to state reasons and serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.'”°

38. As noted by TECO in its Memorial on Partial Annulment, Article 52(1)(e) of the

ICSID Convention provides that an award may be annulled when it has failed to state the reasons

121

on which it is based.“ As TECO explained, ad hoc committees consistently have held that an

award is subject to annulment when it does not allow the reader (and, specifically, the parties) to

follow the tribunal’s reasoning, including where the award omits to provide any reasons or
provides reasons that are insufficient, inadequate, or contradictory.'? TECO also explained that
the requirement to provide reasons extends to the tribunal’s duty to consider or otherwise
respond to the arguments and evidence presented by the parties, and that, as the ad hoc
committee in Wena Hotels v. Egypt ruled, where the tribunal omitted to decide a question

submitted to it, to the extent that such omission may affect the reasoning supporting the award,

the award is subject to annulment.'??

39. As also noted by TECO in its Memorial on Partial Annulment, Article 52(1)(d) of

the ICSID Convention provides that an award may be annulled when the tribunal seriously

124

departed from a fundamental rule of procedure. As TECO explained, among those

120 See Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment { 180 (stating that “the total absence of reasons, as well as
insufficient, inadequate or contradictory reasoning, may constitute a ground for annulment” and that “[a]n
award must allow the reader to understand how the Tribunal went from the initial facts to its conclusions’)
(internal citations omitted); id. {| 236-237 (stating that fundamental rules of procedure include the parties’
rights to be heard and to have an equal opportunity to present their cases and, like TECO, citing Wena v.
Egypt, Decision on Annulment, {| 58 (CL-N-144/RL-64)).

"1 ICSID Convention, Art. 52(1)(e) (“Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in
writing addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following grounds: . . . (e) that the award has
failed to state the reasons on which it is based”).

 

122 See TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment il 85-87 (citing SCHREUER COMMENTARY ART. 52, p. 1003 {|
363 (CL-N-146), Rumeli v. Kazakhstan, Decision on Annulment, J 104 (CL-40), MINE v. Guinea, Decision on
Annulment, {| 5.09 (CL-N-137), Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, {{] 122-123 (CL-N-132), Caratube
vy. Kazakhstan, Decision on Annulment, {| 102 (CL-N-127)).

123 See TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment { 88 (citing Wena v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, {| 101
(CL-N-144)).

4 See ICSID Convention, Art. 52(1)(d) (“Either party may request annulment of the award by an application
in writing addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following grounds: . . . (d) that there has
been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure”).

-21-

fundamental rules of procedure is the right to be heard,'?° and the treatment of evidence and
burden of proof.'7 As TECO also explained, ad hoc committees have considered a departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure to be “serious” when the departure is substantial and
deprived the party of the benefit or protection which the rule was intended to provide.'?7 TECO
further explained that the departure is serious when it caused the tribunal to reach a substantially
different result from the one it would have otherwise reached; however, the applicant is not
required to prove that the tribunal necessarily would have changed its conclusion had the

fundamental rule in question been observed.'*

40. While the parties thus are in agreement with respect to the legal standards
governing the grounds for annulment for failure to state reasons and serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure, TECO disputes Guatemala’s description of the manifest excess of
powers legal standard.'?? There does not appear to be any dispute between the parties that, as
TECO explained, this ground for annulment encompasses situations where a tribunal exceeds or
fails to exercise its jurisdiction, or fails to apply the law agreed upon by the parties.'*° As TECO
also explained, however, the tribunal’s excess of powers must be “manifest,” in that it must be
obvious, self-evident, clear, flagrant (in other words, easily discernible), and substantially

serious. '*!

Al. Relying upon secondary sources, Guatemala asserts that the “control function of

"32 and that ad

annulment is particularly important in cases of deficient decisions of jurisdiction
®5 See TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment ff 81-82.

2° See id. J 83.

127 See id. {| 84 (citing MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, {| 5.05 (CL-N-137)).

128 See id. { 84 (citing Wena v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, {| 58 (CL-N-144) and Pey Casado v. Chile,
Decision on Annulment, {80 (CL-N-143)).

°° ICSID Convention, Art. 52(1)(b) (“Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in
writing addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following grounds: . . . (b) that the Tribunal
has manifestly exceeded its powers”).

130 See TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment il 75-78; Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment { 77 (stating
that a “manifest excess of powers exists when an arbitral tribunal exceeds the limits of the jurisdiction it has
been granted, or when it fails to apply the law applicable to the dispute”) (internal citations omitted).

5! See TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {ff 79-80.

132 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment {| 70; see also id. [71 (similar).

-22-

hoc committees “can and shall conduct a thorough review of jurisdictional issues.”'*? To the
extent that Guatemala suggests that an ad hoc committee is required to scrutinize a tribunal’s
decision on jurisdiction more closely than the tribunal’s other decisions (if challenged), that ad
hoc committees have a wider latitude to annul an award as regards jurisdiction than as regards
other matters, or that the requirement that the excess of powers be “manifest” does not extend to

jurisdictional issues, Guatemala is mistaken, for the following reasons.

42. First, the plain language of Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention does not
provide for a heightened level of scrutiny or a wider latitude to annul awards in respect of

matters of jurisdiction, and neither does it dispense with the requirement than an excess of
v134

powers as regards jurisdiction be “manifest.

43. Second, as the Centre explained in its Background Paper on Annulment, “ad hoc
Committees have acknowledged the principle specifically provided by the Convention that the
Tribunal is the judge of its own competence,” and, “[iJn light of this principle, the drafting
history suggests—and most ad hoc Committees have reasoned—that in order to annul an award

based on a Tribunal’s determination of the scope of its own jurisdiction, the excess of powers

must be ‘manifest.””!

44. Indeed, as the following examples demonstrate, ad hoc committees have rejected

the notion that decisions on jurisdiction require greater scrutiny than other decisions:

. In Azurix v. Argentina, the ad hoc committee remarked that “in cases where there
is any uncertainty or doubt as to whether or not a tribunal has jurisdiction, that
question falls to be settled by the tribunal itself in exercise of its competence-
competence under that provision,”'** and, for that reason, “Article 52(1)(b) does
not provide a mechanism for de novo consideration of, or an appeal against, a
decision of a tribunal under Article 41(1) after the tribunal has given its final

83 See Id. { 81.

‘4 ICSID Convention, Art. 52(1)(b) (“Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in
writing addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following grounds: . . . (b) that the Tribunal
has manifestly exceeded its powers”).

185 INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES, BACKGROUND PAPER ON
ANNULMENT FOR THE ADMINISTRATIVE COUNCIL OF ICSID, 10 Aug. 2012, 89 (CL-N-147).

136 4-urix v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, J 67 (CL-N-124).

-23-

award.”'” The committee concluded that it is “only where the tribunal has

manifestly acted without jurisdiction that an ad hoc committee can intervene
under Article 52(1)(b).”"8

. In SGS v. Paraguay, the ad hoc committee observed that “[uJnder Article 41 of
the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal shall be the judge of its own competence, and
thus its decision on the scope of its jurisdiction cannot be reviewed de novo by an
Annulment Committee.”!”” Thus, the committee held that “there is no difference
in the standard of review applicable to a claim of manifest excess of powers on
the basis of jurisdiction or on the merits.”"“°

. In Lucchetti v. Peru, the ad hoc committee stated similarly that “the wording of
Article 52(1)(b) is general and makes no exception for issues of jurisdiction,” and
“a request for annulment is not an appeal, which means that there should not be a
full review of the tribunal’s award.”"" The committee also concluded that “[o]ne
general purpose of Article 52, including its sub-paragraph (1)(b), must be that an
annulment should not occur easily,” and, “[f]rom this perspective, the Committee
considers that the word ‘manifest’ should be given considerable weight also when
matters of jurisdiction are concerned.”!?

. In MCI v. Ecuador, the ad hoc committee concluded that “[i]Jt makes no
difference that the issue in this case is about the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, since
jurisdiction does not give the ad hoc Committee a wider competence to assess the
validity of the award under Article 52 but must be dealt with as any other
issue. The committee also remarked that the “standards for reviewing the
Tribunal’s decision about competence are . . . the same as those which ad hoc
committees should apply when they review any other matters,”'“4

. In Soufraki v. UAE, the ad hoc committee stated that “the requirement that an
excess of power must be ‘manifest’ applies equally if the question is one of
jurisdiction,” and “[oJnly if an ICSID tribunal commits a manifest excess of

87 Td. 4 68 (CL-N-124).
'88 7d. | 68 (CL-N-124) (emphasis in original).

89 SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of Paraguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/29, Decision
on Annulment of 19 May 2014 (“SGS v. Paraguay, Decision on Annulment”), { 114 (CL-N-156).

9 Td. J 114 (CL-N-156).

‘4! Empresas Lucchetti, S.A. and Lucchetti Peru, S.A. v. Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4,
Decision on Annulment of 5 Sept. 2007 (“Lucchetti v. Peru, Decision on Annulment”), {101 (RL-60).

‘© Td. {101 (RL-60).
3 MC. Power Group L.C. and New Turbine, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/6,
Decision on Annulment of 19 Oct. 2009 (“MCI v. Ecuador, Decision on Annulment”), { 55 (RL-62).

“4 Td. 1 55 (RL-62).

-24-

power, whether on a matter related to jurisdiction or to the merits, is there a basis
for annulment.”!

. In Alapli v. Turkey, the ad hoc committee stated that “[w]ith respect to the failure
to exercise a jurisdiction which a tribunal did possess, the standards to be
employed are identical,” that the “excess of powers must be manifest, meaning
evident, obvious and clear on its face,” and that “the ICSID Convention does not
draw any distinction between jurisdictional excesses and other types of excesses
that a tribunal may commit.”"“

45. For the above reasons, the notions that the Committee should apply a heightened
scrutiny to the Tribunal’s decision on jurisdiction, that the requirement of a “manifest” excess of
powers does not apply to the Tribunal’ decision on jurisdiction, or that the Committee has a
wider latitude to annul the Tribunal’s decision on jurisdiction than its decisions regarding other

matters, are without basis.

IV. THERE ARE NO GROUNDS TO ANNUL THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDING THAT
IT HAD JURISDICTION RA TIONE MATERIAE OVER THE DISPUTE

46. As set forth above, the Tribunal rejected Guatemala’s jurisdictional objections,

7 Tn its Memorial on

and held that it had jurisdiction ratione materiae over the dispute."
Annulment, Guatemala contends that, in so holding, “the Tribunal exceeded its powers by
exercising jurisdiction over a merely regulatory dispute under local law, ignoring the
fundamental basis of the claim, applying no test prima facie, and merely accepting [TECO]’s
characterization of such claim.”'“* Guatemala further contends that, in rejecting its jurisdictional
objection that TECO “had submitted a merely regulatory dispute without examining either the
Treaty that conferred jurisdiction on the Arbitral Tribunal or the fundamental basis of [TECO]’s
claims,” the Tribunal “failed to give reasons as to how it reached those conclusions, in breach of

the ICSID Convention.”!”

8 Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, {| 119 (CL-N-132).
M6 Alapli v. Turkey, Decision on Annulment, {| 238 (RL-51).

7 See supra J 28; Award [| 437-488.

'48 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment qill.

Td. J 196.

-25-

47. According to Guatemala, the Tribunal “effectively skipped the entire analysis on
the matter of its jurisdiction,” and “omitted examining the Treaty and presenting an examination
of the facts and circumstances specific to the case enabling the Tribunal to claim jurisdiction
over [TECO]’s dispute as an international — as opposed to a domestic — claim.”'° Guatemala
further asserts that “[t]he Tribunal did not discuss at all the distinction between a claim under

51

domestic law and one under international law, and failed to apply the prima facie test

properly, by failing to analyze whether TECO’s “allegations and characterizations have a real

? Guatemala also asserts that the Tribunal

basis,” in view of the specific facts of the case,!*
rejected Guatemala’s jurisdictional arguments “without giving substantive reasons other than
plain refusal,” and without providing any explanation as to how it reached its conclusion.'>
Guatemala’s assertions are baseless, and its request that the Committee annul the Tribunal’s

decision on jurisdiction thus should be denied, as set forth below.

48. First, as the Tribunal’s Award plainly reflects, the Tribunal did not “effectively
skip[] the entire analysis on the matter of its jurisdiction,” and “omit[] examining the Treaty”!
Nor did the Tribunal fail to “discuss at all the distinction between a claim under domestic law

and one under international law,” as Guatemala contends.'>

To the contrary, in determining
whether it had jurisdiction under the DR-CAFTA and the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal first
observed that there was no dispute that TECO’s “30 percent shareholding in EEGSA qualifie[d]
as an investment pursuant to Article 10.28 of CAFTA-DR,” which, as the Tribunal noted,
includes “‘as an investment any asset that an investor owns or control[s], including shares in an

enterprise.”'*° The Tribunal further observed that there similarly was no dispute that TECO’s 30

1d. 195.
S! 14.96.
12 Td. 106.
153 Id. qg] 195, 196.
4 1d. 195.

5 1d. 1 96.

8° Award { 438.

-26-

percent “shareholding in EEGSA qualifie[d] as an investment under Article 25.1 of the ICSID
Convention,” or that TECO itself qualified as an investor under the DR-CAFTA.!*”

49. Having established that TECO and its shareholding in EEGSA thus were entitled
to protection under the DR-CAFTA and the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal proceeded to
examine whether it had jurisdiction ratione materiae over the dispute.'** Guatemala complains,
however, that, in so doing, the Tribunal failed to examine Article 10.16.1(a)(i)(A) of the DR-
CAFTA,!? and failed to recognize that Guatemala’s consent to arbitration as reflected in this
provision “did not refer to just any type of claim, but only to those claims concerning a violation

716 and that

by the Guatemalan State of investment protections established by the Treaty,
Guatemala’s consent thus did not extend to TECO’s claim, which allegedly was “based merely

on local law.”'*' Guatemala’s complaints are incorrect.

50. Article 10.16.1(a)(i)(A) of the DR-CAFTA provides that, “[iJn the event that a
disputing party considers that an investment dispute cannot be settled by consultation and
negotiation: the claimant, on its own behalf, may submit to arbitration under this Section a claim
that the respondent has breached an obligation under Section A” of the Treaty, which includes
the obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment.’ As Guatemala’s own pleadings reflect,
there was no dispute between the parties that TECO had invoked Section A of Article
10.16.1(a)(i), i.e., that TECO had submitted to arbitration a claim that Guatemala had breached

its obligations under the Treaty.'°

There thus was no need for the Tribunal to analyze Article
10.16.1(a)(i)(A) in detail in its Award, nor was there any need for the Tribunal to refer to or

quote this provision, as Guatemala erroneously asserts.'

ST Td. YJ] 439, 440.

88 Td] 444-465.

‘5° Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment 94; see also id. J 183.
1 1d. 191.

'! 1g. 791.

'© DR-CAFTA, Art. 10.16.1(a)(i)(A).

163 Guatemala’s Rejoinder {| 31.

‘64 Guatemala’s Memorial q 94.

-27-

51. Moreover, as Guatemala’s pleadings reflect, Guatemala argued in the arbitration
that, pursuant to Article 10.16.1(a)(i)(A), TECO could “only submit to arbitration a claim in
which it is alleged that the Guatemalan state violated one of the investment protection standards
established by the Treaty;” “[iJn other words, Guatemala’s consent to arbitration, and therefore
the jurisdiction ratione materiae of this Tribunal, does not extend to just any type of claim;
rather, it encompasses only those claims that genuinely involve violations of the substantive

provisions of the Treaty.”!® As the Award reflects, the Tribunal addressed this objection in full.

52. In its Award, the Tribunal expressly disagreed with Guatemala’s argument that
TECO’s claim was no more than a “domestic dispute on the interpretation of Guatemalan
law.”!°° The Tribunal correctly endorsed TECO’s view that the dispute was about whether
Guatemala had “breached its obligations under the minimum standard of treatment,” and thus
was “an international dispute in which the Arbitral Tribunal [would] be called to apply
international law.”'®” As the Tribunal remarked, the fact that the Tribunal would “have to decide
certain points of interpretation of the regulatory framework by applying Guatemalan law, does
not and cannot deprive the Arbitral Tribunal of its jurisdiction.”'® The Tribunal further
observed that “Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention is very clear in that international tribunals
can and must apply the laws of the host State to the questions in dispute that are submitted to

such law,7!

and that, although the Tribunal would “have to apply Guatemalan law to some of
the questions in dispute, the fundamental question that [the Tribunal] ultimately has to decide is,
on the evidence, whether the Respondent’s behavior is such as to constitute a breach of the

minimum standard of treatment under international law.”!”° The Tribunal thus duly considered

'65 Guatemala’s Rejoinder {| 32.
19 Award { 466.

"61 Td. | 467.

18 Td. 468.

'© Td. 1 469.

Td. 1.470.

-28-

the distinction between a claim under domestic law and one under international law, and

concluded (correctly) that TECO had submitted a claim under international law.'7!

53. Second, in determining whether it had jurisdiction ratione materiae over the
dispute, the Tribunal did not improperly apply the prima facie test to TECO’s allegations.'” To
the contrary, as TECO demonstrated in the arbitration, in assessing its jurisdiction ratione
materiae, a tribunal must determine whether the facts, as alleged by the claimant, “fall within
[the treaty] provisions or are capable, if proved, of constituting breaches of the obligations they
refer to.”'”> As the tribunal in Bayindir v. Pakistan explained, “[i]n performing this task, the
Tribunal will apply a prima facie standard, both to the determination of the meaning and scope
of the BIT provisions and to the assessment [of] whether the facts alleged may constitute

breaches.”!* The tribunal in Telefonica v. Argentina articulated the standard as follows:

As to the /egal foundation of the case, in accordance with accepted
judicial practice, the Tribunal must evaluate whether those facts,
when established, namely the unilateral changes of the legal
regime just mentioned and their alleged negative impact on
Telefénica’s investment, could possibly give rise to the Treaty
breaches that the Claimant alleges, and which the Tribunal is
competent to pass judgment upon. In other words, those facts, if
proved to be true, must be ‘capable’ of falling within the provision
of the BIT and of having caused or constituting treaty breaches as
alleged by the Claimant. It is of course a question of the merits as
to whether the alleged facts do constitute breaches of the BIT for
which the Respondent must be held liable.!”°

"Td. (466.

1? See id. Wf 444-465.

"3 Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/29, Decision on Jurisdiction of 14 Nov. 2005 (“Bayindir v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction”), { 197
(CL-84); see also Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 22 Apr. 2005 (“Jmpregilo v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction”), {| 254 (“[T]he Tribunal has
considered whether the facts as alleged by the Claimant in this case, if established, are capable of coming
within those provisions of the BIT which have been invoked.”) (emphasis in original) (CL-63).

™ Bayindir v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction, J 197 (CL-84).

"5 Telefonica S.A v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/20, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections
to Jurisdiction of 25 May 2006, {[ 56 (internal citations omitted) (emphasis in original) (CL-96).

-29-

54. TECO further demonstrated that, in applying the prima facie test, a tribunal “must
not address the merits of the claims, but it must satisfy itself that it has jurisdiction over the
dispute, as presented.”!”° As the tribunal in Siemens v. Argentina observed, “the Tribunal is not
required to consider whether the claims under the Treaty . . . are correct,” but rather “simply has
to be satisfied that, if the Claimant’s allegations would be proven correct, then the Tribunal has
jurisdiction to consider them.”!77

55. Consistent with this jurisprudence, the Tribunal noted in its Award that, “[i]n
order to assess whether it has jurisdiction to decide the present dispute, the Arbitral Tribunal
must determine whether the facts alleged by the Claimant are capable, if proven, of constituting
breaches of the Respondent’s international obligations under CAFTA-DR,” and that, “[a]s found
by many arbitral tribunals, in performing this task, the Arbitral Tribunal applies a prima facie
test. Analyzing TECO’s submissions, the Tribunal found that TECO “alleges that, by failing
to abide by the conclusions of the Expert Commission and by unilaterally imposing a tariff based
on its own consultant’s study, Guatemala repudiated the fundamental principles upon which the
regulatory framework was based and upon which it relied when making its investment,”'” and
“that the CNEE failed to act in good faith in the process of establishing the tariff for 2008-2013,

and acted in manifest breach of the law in disbanding the Expert Commission in July 2008.”!%

56. Applying the prima facie test to the allegations advanced by TECO, the Tribunal
properly held that TECO had “made such allegations that are such, if proved, as to establish a

" Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/13, Award of 31 Jan. 2006, | 137 (observing that this principle “has been recognized both by the
International Court of Justice and by Arbitral Tribunals in many cases”) (CL-67); see TECO’s Reply {| 283-
287; TECO’s Post-Hearing Reply {I 7-10.

"7 Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction of 3 Aug. 2004,
180 (CL-94); see also Chevron Corp. (U.S.A.) and Texaco Petroleum Corp. (U.S.A.) v. Republic of Ecuador
[II], PCA Case No. 2009-23, Third Interim Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of 27 Feb. 2012, { 4.8
(rejecting Ecuador’s submission that the claimants “must already have established their case with a 51%
chance of success, i.e. on a balance of probabilities,” preferring instead the claimants’ submission that “their
case should be ‘decently arguable’ or that it has ‘a reasonable possibility as pleaded’”) (CL-85); see TECO’s
Reply {| 283-287; TECO’s Post-Hearing Reply {J 7-10.

"8 Award ql 444, 445.
Td. 1 460.
180 Td. 4 461.

-30-

breach of Guatemala’s obligations under the minimum standard.”'*' As the Tribunal further
remarked, there was “in fact no doubt in the eyes of the Arbitral Tribunal that, if the Claimant
proves that Guatemala acted arbitrarily and in complete and willful disregard of the applicable

regulatory framework, or showed a complete lack of candor or good faith in the regulatory

process, such behavior would constitute a breach of the minimum standard,”!®?

57. While Guatemala itself recognizes in its Memorial that, “[o]f course if [TECO]’s

allegations were proven right in light of its characterization of the claim, then the Tribunal would

9183

have jurisdiction, it nonetheless argues that, “in this case, the Treaty dispute could not be

distinguished from the domestic dispute,” and that the Tribunal should have looked beyond
TECO’s characterization of its claim, as other tribunals have done in cases involving purely
contractual claims.'** Guatemala’s argument is meritless. Not only did the Tribunal expressly

reject Guatemala’s characterization of TECO’s claim as involving no more than a mere domestic

185

regulatory dispute over the proper interpretation of Guatemalan law,” but there is no legal

authority that supports Guatemala’s suggestion that claims arising from so-called domestic

regulatory disputes are analogous to claims arising from mere contractual breaches.'*°

58. As Claimant explained in the arbitration, although investment treaty tribunals, as

187

a general rule, do not have jurisdiction over purely contractual claims, *’ this is based upon the

distinction between action taken by the State in its sovereign capacity and action taken by the

State in its capacity as an ordinary contracting party. As the tribunal in Impregilo v. Pakistan

'S! Id. 4 464.

18 Id. 4 465.

183 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 106.

'S* Td. 107, 108.
'8S Award {| 466.
186 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 107.

'87 See, e.g., El Paso Energy Int'l Co. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 27 Apr. 2006, {| 65 (observing that an investment treaty tribunal “has jurisdiction over treaty
claims and cannot entertain purely contractual claims which do not amount to claims for violations of the
BIT”) (CL-118); SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/13,
De n on Objections to Jurisdiction dated 6 Aug. 2003, {[ 162 (finding that the tribunal did not have
jurisdiction over contract claims “which do not also constitute or amount to breaches of the substantive
standards of the BIT”) (CL-117).

 

-31-

explained, “[o]nly the State in the exercise of its sovereign authority (‘puissance publique’), and
not as a contracting party, may breach the obligations assumed under the BIT. In other words,
the investment protection treaty only provides a remedy to the investor where the investor proves
that the alleged damages were a consequence of the behaviour of the Host State acting in breach
of the obligations it had assumed under the treaty.”*8 The Azinian tribunal similarly found that
NAFTA Chapter Eleven does not “allow investors to seek international arbitration for mere

contractual breaches,”!*?

as this would elevate “a multitude of ordinary transactions with public
authorities into potential international disputes.”!”° There is no such distinction for so-called
domestic regulatory disputes, which, by definition, involve the State acting in its sovereign
capacity; as the Tribunal correctly found, whether a State’s regulatory actions constitute a treaty
breach thus is a merits decision, and not a jurisdictional one.!?! Indeed, as TECO noted in the
arbitration, all of the cases relied upon by Guatemala in support of its argument that so-called
mere regulatory disputes cannot give rise to a Treaty breach — with the exception of Iberdrola v.

Guatemala — were decided on the merits, not on jurisdiction.'”

59. Notably, although Guatemala relied extensively in the arbitration upon the
tribunal’s decision on jurisdiction in /berdrola for the principle that mere domestic regulatory
disputes fall outside the jurisdiction of an ICSID tribunal, the tribunal’s decision in that case was
grounded not on any legal conclusion to that effect, but rather on its finding that the claimant
had asked the tribunal to review “the regulatory decisions of the CNEE, the MEM and the
judicial decisions of the Guatemalan courts, not in the light of international law, but of the
domestic law of Guatemala.”!* As the Jberdrola tribunal observed, “according to the claim of

the Claimant, [the tribunal] would have to act as regulator, as administrative entity and court of

'88 Impregilo v. Pakistan, Decision on Jurisdiction, | 260 (CL-63).

'89 Robert Azinian and others. v. United Mexican States, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2, Award of 1 Nov.
1999 (“Azinian v. Mexico, Award”), | 87 (RL-2).

190 Td. (emphasis added).
See Award { 470.

' See TECO’s Reply ff 285-287.
193

 

Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief {| 48; Rejoinder on Jurisdiction {| 25-30; Jberdrola Energia S.A. v. Republic
of Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/5, Award of 17 Aug. 2012 (“Jberdrola v. Guatemala, Award”)
Ml 353-354 (CL-N-154).

-32-

instance, to define” various issues of Guatemalan law.'* The tribunal further found that there
was only marginally a “debate about violations of the Treaty or of international law, or about
which actions of the Republic of Guatemala, in exercise of State authority, had violated certain

standards contained in the Treaty,”!°

and that “[f]rom the way the debate and hearing developed
and from the issues raised, this process was more like an international trade arbitration than one
of investment.”'!°° Indeed, Guatemala emphasized in that case that Iberdrola had not made any
reference to international law during its hearing.'”” As TECO demonstrated in the arbitration, no
such findings could be made in this case.'°8

60. This was confirmed by the Tribunal in its Award. As the Tribunal observed,
“Ta]lthough the factual matrix in both cases is similar, the applicable treaties and the parties are
different,” and “the legal arguments and the evidence have been presented differently.”!” The
Tribunal properly remarked that its “task is to resolve the present dispute on the basis of the legal
arguments and the evidence presented before it,” and concluded that, “[a]s a consequence, the
Arbitral Tribunal, in making its findings on jurisdiction, cannot and will not rely on the findings

of the Iberdrola tribunal.”””

6l. In its Decision on Annulment, the ad hoc committee in Jberdrola confirmed that
the tribunal had “declined its jurisdiction based on the view that the Claimant had failed to
present clear and concrete reasoning as to which of Guatemala’s acts of authority could amount
to Treaty violations under international law." Interpreting the award in the Jberdrola case, the
ad hoc committee remarked that, “[a]ccording to the Award, even though Iberdrola did refer to

Treaty provisions and standards, its allegations consisted exclusively of differences as to the

' Tberdrola v. Guatemala, Award, J 354 (emphasis added) (CL-N-154).
Td. 4 352.

9 Td. 4 353.

7 1d. 4261.

'°8 See TECO’s Post-Hearing Reply {{f 20-21.

Award { 486.

2 Id. 4 487.

°°" Iberdrola v. Guatemala, Decision on Annulment, J 88 (CL-N-153).

-33-

interpretation of Guatemalan domestic law.”""? While criticizing the “particularly high” pleading

3 the ad hoc committee thus concluded that “it was the

requirements imposed by the tribunal,
Tribunal’s view that ICSID lacked jurisdiction and the Tribunal lacked competence because
Tberdrola’s application could only be framed under domestic law, and the Treaty only vests the

0 The ad hoc committee thus

Tribunal with jurisdiction over violations of international law.
rejected the argument advanced by Guatemala in TECO’s arbitration that the Jberdro/a tribunal’ s
decision on jurisdiction was premised on any principle regarding mere domestic regulatory
disputes; as the committee noted, “[t]he Award does not point to a necessary incompatibility
between domestic-law or regulatory disputes and international-law disputes under the BIT,”?°5
and that “Iberdrola was unable to accurately identify the portion of the Award in which the
Tribunal allegedly stated, as a matter of principle, that local disputes preclude international
disputes under the BIT.” In fact, the committee noted the improbability that the [berdrola
tribunal had dismissed the claim on the basis that so-called mere regulatory disputes could not
give rise to ICSID jurisdiction, because no authority for such a novel legal principle was cited by

427

the tribunal in its awar and indicated that, had the claim been dismissed on such a ground, it

would “be sufficient to warrant an annulment based on this specific ground, as it does not seem
tenable to maintain that there is some necessary incompatibility, as a matter of principle,
between a domestic-law violation and an international-law one.”?"> As a result, the committee

concluded that “Iberdrola’s application for annulment challenges a general thesis posed in the

202

~ Id. J 88 (CL-N-153).

203

Id. Jf 93-94 (CL-N-153). Notably, the ad hoc committee remarked that “[iJt is perfectly conceivable for
another tribunal dealing with this very same case to have found that, at least prima facie, the case involved
disputes concerning the BIT protection standards.” /d. {J 113, 133.

2 Td. 4 88 (CL-N-153).
°°5 Id. 86 (CL-N-153).
2° Td. 86 (CL-N-153).

207 Td. {| 87 (“Furthermore, it seems implausible for the Tribunal to have tried to so radically innovate in this
regard without expressly mentioning it and referencing any authority in support.”) (CL-N-153).

288 Id, {82 (CL-N-153).

-34-

abstract to decline jurisdiction, namely the Tribunal’s assumption that domestic-law issues

preclude international ones, a thesis not put forth in the Award.’”?”

62. Finally, the Tribunal did not “wrongly affirm[] jurisdiction on a mere domestic

law claim, already resolved by the local courts,””!°

as Guatemala contends, nor is Guatemala
correct in arguing that, where “the dispute concerns a mere disagreement between an investor
with the actions of an administrative body that has already been the subject of a final decision by
the local judicial authorities, the only available claim that may be brought forward is a claim for

2114s TECO demonstrated in the arbitration, denial of justice is but a subset of

denial of justice.
the international minimum standard, and one way in which a State may violate its obligation to
accord fair and equitable treatment.?!? TECO further demonstrated that, even in cases where the
State’s domestic courts are implicated, investment treaty tribunals have recognized that a breach
of the fair and equitable treatment standard can occur separate and apart from any treatment

accorded by the domestic courts.”3

63. In Vivendi II, for example, the tribunal rejected the very argument advanced by
Guatemala, finding, that “[t]o the extent that Respondent contends that the fair and equitable
treatment obligation constrains government conduct only if and when the state’s courts cannot
deliver justice, this appears to conflate the legal concepts of fair and equitable treatment on the
one hand with the denial of justice on the other.”?'* As the tribunal observed, if it “were to

restrict the claims of unfair and [inJequitable treatment to circumstances in which Claimants

*® Id. {89 (CL-N-153).
210 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 113.
* Td. 109.

212 TECO’s Reply {| 272; TECO’s Post-Hearing Brief {[ 49; TECO’s Post-Hearing Reply {] 18; DR-CAFTA,
Art. 10.5(1) (“Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment in accordance with customary
international law, including fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security”) (emphasis added)
(CL-1); compare id., Art. 10.5(2)(a) (“‘fair and equitable treatment’ includes the obligation not to deny justice
...-”) (emphasis added), with id., Art. 10.5(2)(b) (“‘full protection and security’ requires each Party to... .”)
(emphasis added); see also ATA Construction, Industrial and Trading Company v. Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/2, Award of 18 May 2010 (“ATA Construction v. Jordan, Award”), {J 121-
128 (CL-58).

*13 See TECO’s Reply { 275; TECO’s Post-Hearing Reply { 18.

2\4 Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Award of 20 Aug. 2007 (“Vivendi II”), 7.4.10 (CL-18).

-35-

have also established a denial of justice, it would eviscerate the fair and equitable treatment

standard.”*"°

64. Similarly, in ATA Construction v. Jordan, the tribunal found that Jordan had
violated the fair and equitable treatment standard by retroactively applying a new law that had
extinguished the investor’s right to arbitrate, which the tribunal deemed to be an “integral part”
of the claimant’s investment contract, even though the Jordanian Court of Cassation had
rendered a decision confirming the annulment of the claimant’s arbitration award and
extinguishing the arbitration agreement under Jordanian law.?!° As the tribunal observed, the
“operation of Jordanian law opened the door to the adjudication of the parties’ dispute before the
Jordanian State courts, depriving the Claimant of its legitimate reliance on the Arbitration
Agreement in the Contract of 2 May 1998.”?!7 In so ruling, the tribunal recalled “the general
tule according to which a State cannot invoke its internal laws to evade obligations imposed by a
given treaty or generally by public international law,” as well as “the unanimous award rendered
in the Desert Line Co. v. Yemen case,” which emphasized that “State authorities are estopped
from undertaking any act that contradicts what they previously accepted as obligations
incumbent upon them in a given context.””!* While the tribunal found that the extinguishing of
the claimant’s arbitration agreement by the Jordanian courts had violated the fair and equitable
treatment standard, the tribunal rejected the claimant’s denial of justice claim, finding that the
Court’s “actions could hardly be said to have constituted abusive misconduct, bad faith or a

denial of justice.”?””

65. As TECO explained, other investment treaty tribunals likewise have confirmed
that they are not required to follow domestic court decisions to determine whether applicable

treaty provisions have been violated.?° In CME v. Czech Republic, for example, the Czech

8 1d. (7 AAL.

216 ATA Construction v. Jordan, Award, {| 121-128 (CL-58).
217 1d. 124.

218 7d, | 122 (internal citations omitted).

2) 1d. 123.

220 TECO’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction { 53.

-36-

Republic argued that ongoing civil litigation in the Czech courts should determine whether the
host-State’s Media Council had made an appropriate decision not to allow the investor use the
license to operate a television station.”! The tribunal rejected the Czech Republic’s argument,
finding that the claimant was not required to wait for the Czech Supreme Court’s decision before
initiating arbitration proceedings, because “[t]he outcome of the civil court proceedings is
irrelevant to the decision on the alleged breach of the Treaty by the Media Council acting in
concert with the Respondent.”””

66. Similarly, in EDF v. Argentina, the fact that the Supreme Court of Mendoza had
rejected all claims brought by the claimants’ distribution company in the Argentine courts did
not render the EDF tribunal without jurisdiction to consider the claimants’ fair and equitable
treatment claim, nor did it limit the claimants’ fair and equitable treatment claim to a claim for
denial of justice. In so ruling, the tribunal observed that “the legality of Respondent’s acts
under national law does not determine their lawfulness under international legal principles,” and
that “[t]he fact that the Argentine Supreme Court has vested Respondent with robust authority
during national economic crises does not change the Tribunal’s analysis.”?~* The tribunal also
noted that Article 27 of the 1969 Vienna Convention precludes a host-State from “invok[ing] the

99225

provisions of its internal law as justification for its failure to perform, and that Article 3 of the

ILC Articles provides that the characterization of an act of a State as internationally wrongful “is

not affected by the characterization of the same act as lawful by internal law.”6

2! CME Czech Republic B.V. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award of 13 Sept. 2001, | 415 (CL-16).

222

“Id. J 415.

3 EDF Int'l S.A., Saur Int'l S.A. and Leon Participaciones Argentinas S.A. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/03/23, Award of 11 June 2012 (“EDF v. Argentina, Award”), J 1095 (CL-86).

4 Td. 907.

5 Td. 1.905.

26 Td. {| 906; see also Ioannis Kardossopoulos v. Georgia, ICSID Case No ARB/05/18, Decision on
Jurisdiction (“Kardossopoulos v. Georgia, Decision on Jurisdiction”), {| 146 (holding that “whatever may be

the determination of a municipal court applying Georgian law to the dispute, this Tribunal can only decide the
issues in dispute in accordance with the applicable rules and principles of international law”) (CL-88).

 

-37-

67. TECO further demonstrated that it is well established that a State cannot use its
own judicial system to insulate itself from a violation of an international law obligation.” As
the tribunal in Azinian noted, “an international tribunal called upon to rule on a Government’s
compliance with an international treaty is not paralysed by the fact that the national courts have
approved the relevant conduct of public officials.”?"*

68. In its Award, the Tribunal rejected Guatemala’s jurisdictional arguments, noting
that “[t]he fact that the Claimant did not make the argument that there was a denial of justice in
Guatemalan judicial proceedings cannot deprive the Arbitral Tribunal of its jurisdiction to assess

729 and that

whether the Respondent’s conduct was in breach of its international obligations,
“Tt]he Claimant’s case is in fact not based on denial of justice before the Guatemalan courts, but
primarily on the arbitrary conduct of the CNEE in establishing the tariff, as well as on an alleged
lack of due process in the tariff review process.””*? The Tribunal concluded that there thus was
“no need for the Claimant to establish a denial of justice in order to find the State in breach of its

international obligations as a consequence of the actions taken by the CNEE.”?*!

69. The Tribunal further noted that, while “[i]t is indeed true that the Guatemalan
courts have decided some of the questions in dispute concerning the interpretation of the
Guatemalan regulatory framework and the regularity of some of the CNEE’s decisions under
such law,” “[iJt is also true that this Arbitral Tribunal will have to apply Guatemalan law to some

of the regulatory aspects of the dispute, and that, in so doing, it may have to defer to the

7 TECO’s Reply { 282; TECO’s Post-Hearing Reply 19.

8 Azinian v. Mexico, Award, | 98 (RL-2); see also ATA Construction v. Jordan, Award, {| 122 (“[Tyhe
Tribunal recalls the general rule according to which a State cannot invoke its internal laws to evade obligations
imposed by a given treaty or generally by public international law.”) (CL-58); Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v.
United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1, Award of 16 Dec. 2002, { 140 (“As the Respondent
concedes, this Tribunal could find a [Treaty] violation even if Mexican courts uphold Mexican law...; this
Tribunal is not bound by a decision of a local court if that decision violates international law.”) (RL-5);
Kardossopoulos v. Georgia, Decision on Jurisdiction, [ 146 (holding that “whatever may be the determination
of a municipal court applying Georgian law to the dispute, this Tribunal can only decide the issues in dispute
in accordance with the applicable rules and principles of international law”) (internal citations omitted) (CL-
88).

2 Award 4 472.
28 14. 473.
1 1d, 484.

-38-

decisions made by the Guatemalan courts when such aspects of the dispute are subject to

Guatemalan law.”??

The Tribunal emphasized, however, that its “task is fundamentally to
assess the legal relevance of the facts under customary international law,” and that, “[a]s a
consequence, although the decisions made by the Constitutional Court of Guatemala will have
consequences on the findings that the Arbitral Tribunal will have to make under Guatemalan
law, such circumstance cannot deprive the Arbitral Tribunal of its jurisdiction to decide the case

: . 99233
under international law.””

70. The Tribunal, moreover, expressly disagreed with Guatemala’s argument that
TECO had “ask[ed] it ‘to act as an appellate court of third or fourth instance in matters governed
by Guatemalan law.’”4 As the Tribunal noted, its “task is not and cannot be to review the
findings made by the courts of Guatemala under Guatemalan law,” but rather is “to apply
international law to the facts in dispute, including the content of Guatemalan law as interpreted
by the Constitutional Court.”"* The Tribunal further noted that “the disputes resolved by the
Guatemalan judiciary are not the same as the one which this Arbitral Tribunal now has to
decide;” that the Tribunal “may of course give deference to what was decided as a matter of
Guatemalan law by the Guatemalan Constitutional Court;” but that “such decisions made under
Guatemalan law cannot be determinative of this Arbitral Tribunal’s assessment of the application

of international law to the facts of the case.””*°

71. In asserting jurisdiction ratione materiae over the dispute, the Tribunal thus did
not manifestly exceed its powers over a domestic regulatory dispute under local law, nor did the
Tribunal ignore the fundamental basis of TECO’s claim; fail to apply the prima facie case; or fail
to recognize that TECO’s “only claim . . . before an international tribunal would have been a

claim for denial of justice,” as Guatemala erroneously contends.” The Tribunal similarly did

232

2 Id. 4.474.
23 1d. 475,
14.4476.
5 1d. 477.
26 1d, 483.

237 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment qill.

-39-

not ignore the arbitration agreement, or fail to give reasons for how it had reached its conclusions

on jurisdiction?

To the contrary, as the Award reflects, the Tribunal properly applied the
prima facie test to the allegations advanced by TECO in its pleadings, and correctly found that
the dispute was not a mere domestic regulatory dispute under local law, but rather arose out of
Guatemala’s arbitrary and unjustified actions during EEGSA’s 2008-2013 tariff review, and its
failure to accord TECO’s investment in EEGSA fair and equitable treatment. There thus are no

grounds to annul the Tribunal’s decision to exercise jurisdiction over TECO’s claim.

Vv. THERE ARE NO GROUNDS TO ANNUL THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDING THAT

GUATEMALA BREACHED ARTICLE 10.5 OF THE DR-CAFTA

72. As set forth above, the Tribunal held that the actions taken by Guatemala during
EEGSA’s 2008-2013 tariff review, culminating in the decision to reject both the Expert
Commission’s decisions and EEGSA’s revised VAD study, and to impose a punitively lw VAD
on EEGSA derived from the CNEE’s own VAD study, which admittedly did not incorporate the
Expert Commission’s decisions and which EEGSA was not even permitted to review, reflected a
willful disregard of the legal and regulatory framework, and constituted arbitrary treatment and a

failure to accord due process in violation of Article 10.5 of the DR-CAFTA.>”

73. In its Memorial on Annulment, Guatemala asserts that, in so holding, the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers, by allegedly failing to apply international law to the facts of the
case, and reviewing and reversing the decisions of the Constitutional Court of Guatemala.”"!
Guatemala further asserts that, in holding Guatemala liable, the Tribunal not only failed to state
reasons with respect to the “test of applicable international law,”* but adopted contradictory
reasoning, which amounted “to a lack of reasoning, and failure to state reasons.””*? Guatemala’s
arguments are erroneous, and its request that the Committee annul the Tribunal’s decision on the

merits thus should be denied, as set forth below.

28 Id, 49] 183, 196.

2 See supra J 28; Award {¥f 707-711.

240 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment 9 145-174, 178.
241 1d. qf 114-144, 177.

2 14, 4 203.
8 14.212.

-40-

A. The Tribunal Applied International Law To The Facts Presented

74. In its Memorial, Guatemala contends that, in finding Guatemala liable under
Article 10.5 of the DR-CAFTA, the Tribunal did not engage in any “international law analysis of
the concepts of arbitrary conduct or due process, or of how a State measure can constitute either
of them, in light of the facts of this case,” but instead “focused almost entirely on Guatemalan
law.”>*4 According to Guatemala, “[i]nternational law was the primary applicable law in the
case [as TECO] brought the claim under an international treaty seeking to hold Guatemala
responsible internationally for the acts of its electricity regulator,” but “the Tribunal did not

»45 Guatemala further argues that the “[fJailure to

explain how it applied such international law.
apply the applicable law is a classic instance of manifest excess of powers,” as well as “a serious
failure to state reasons, because there is an obvious lack of motivation for the finding of a breach

7°46 and that the Tribunal “failed to

of the Treaty (as opposed to a breach of domestic law),
provide any reasoning as to why a purely domestic law finding could equate to a Treaty breach
—it simply made a leap in logic by equating a breach of the Regulatory Framework
(characterized as a ‘wilful disregard’) with a breach of the Treaty—without more.”**” Guatemala
further contends that the Tribunal did not “define the test of applicable international law,” or
explain “how that test applie[d] to the facts of the case,” and that “nowhere in the Award is there
an examination of the terms ‘arbitrariness’ or ‘due process’ under international law.748

Guatemala’s arguments are erroneous, and belied by the plain language of the Tribunal’s Award.

75. First, as the Award reflects, the Tribunal expressly noted that, in order “to assess
whether the Claimant ha[d] made a prima facie case of breach by Guatemala of its obligation to
grant FET [fair and equitable treatment], it /was] necessary, as a threshold matter, to define the
applicable standard under Article 10.5 of the CAFTA-DR.”*” In defining the applicable
standard under Article 10.5, the Tribunal observed that “Article 10.5(2) provides that FET under

4 1d. 13.

8 1d. 14.

246 1d. 15.

7 1d. (15.

248 Td, 49] 199, 203.

49 Award | 447 (emphasis added).

-41-

CAFTA-DR does not require treatment in addition to or beyond what is required by the
minimum standard of treatment applicable under customary international law,” and that “Article
10.5 also provides that the minimum standard ‘includes the obligation not to deny justice in
criminal, civil, or administrative adjudicatory proceedings in accordance with the principle of

due process embodied in the principal legal systems of the world.’”°°

76. Summarizing each Party’s arguments with respect to the content of the minimum

standard of treatment,”!

the Tribunal found that “the minimum standard of FET under Article
10.5 of CAFTA-DR is infringed by conduct attributed to the State and harmful to the investor if
the conduct is arbitrary, grossly unfair or idiosyncratic, is discriminatory or involves a lack of
due process leading to an outcome which offends judicial propriety.” Citing arbitral awards
and commentaries discussing the content of the minimum standard, the Tribunal noted that it
agreed “with the many arbitral tribunals and authorities that have confirmed that such is the
content of the minimum standard of treatment in customary international law.”?3 The Tribunal
further noted that it considered that “the minimum standard is part and parcel of the international
principle of good faith,” and that “[t]here is no doubt in the eyes of the Arbitral Tribunal that the
principle of good faith is part of customary international law as established by Article 38.1(b) of
the Statute of the International Court of Justice, and that a lack of good faith on the part of the
State or of one of its organs should be taken into account in order to assess whether the minimum

standard was breached.”?*4

77. The Tribunal also observed that, “pursuant to Article 10.5 of CAFTA-DR, a lack
of due process in the context of administrative proceedings such as the tariff review process
constitutes a breach of the minimum standard,” and that “[i]n assessing whether there has been

such a breach of due process, it is relevant that the Guatemalan administration entirely failed to

250 Td. 448 (emphasis omitted).
51 Id, qq] 449-453.

2 14. 454.
53 14. 4 455.

4 1d. 456.

-42-

992

provide reasons for its decisions or disregarded its own rules. 5° The Tribunal further observed
that, based upon such principles, “a willful disregard of the fundamental principles upon which
the regulatory framework is based, a complete lack of candor or good faith on the part of the
regulator in its dealings with the investor, as well as a total lack of reasoning, would constitute a
breach of the minimum standard.”° As the Tribunal remarked, the standard thus “prohibits
State officials from exercising their authority in an abusive, arbitrary or discriminatory manner,”
and “obliges the State to observe due process in administrative proceedings.”?*” The Tribunal
further remarked that “[a] lack of reasons may be relevant to assess whether a given decision was
arbitrary and whether there was [a] lack of due process in administrative proceedings,””** and
that “[iJt is particularly so in the context of a tariff review process that is based on the parties’
good faith cooperation, and in the context of which the parties had contemplated the intervention

of a neutral body to resolve differences.”?”

78. Guatemala’s assertions that the Tribunal “did not define the test of applicable
international law,” and that its “analysis of the content of the minimum standard of fair and
equitable treatment is limited to” one brief statement, thus are baseless. The Tribunal not only
defined the applicable legal standard under customary international law, but examined
specifically how that standard would apply in the context of administrative proceedings, such as

the tariff review process at issue in this case.7*!

79. Guatemala’s complaint that the Tribunal failed to examine the terms
“arbitrariness” or “due process,” and did not “even refer to the now classic definition of

262
As

 

arbitrariness by the International Court of Justice in the ELSI case,” likewise is meritles:

 

reflected in the Parties’ pleadings, both Parties referred to the ELSI case as setting forth the

55 1d. 4 457.

256 14. 458.

57 1d. 587.

258 Id. | 587.

9 Id. 4 587.

260 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment qi 197, 203.
26! Award ff 457-458.

262 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 200.

-43-

°63 there thus was no need for the

applicable definition of arbitrariness under international law;
Tribunal to discuss or to examine the ELS/ case in its Award, which was not in dispute between
the Parties. As elaborated above, moreover, in defining the applicable standard under Article
10.5, the Tribunal examined both “arbitrariness” and “due process,” noting specifically that “[a]
lack of reasons may be relevant to assess whether a given decision was arbitrary and whether

there was [a] lack of due process in administrative proceedings,””**

and that, “[i]n assessing
whether there has been such a breach of due process, it is relevant that the Guatemalan
administration entirely failed to provide reasons for its decisions or disregarded its own rules. 726

The Tribunal thus did examine the terms “arbitrariness,” and “due process,” and considered what
actions would run afoul of those obligations in the context of the facts of the case, contrary to

Guatemala’s assertions.

80. The same is true with respect to the case law cited by the Parties, and the
submissions of the non-disputing State parties on the content of the minimum standard of
treatment. In its Memorial, Guatemala complains that “[t]here is no analysis of the extensive
case law cited by the Parties and no examination of the difference between the international
minimum standard and the rule of fair and equitable treatment,” and that “the submissions of the
non-disputing parties deserved no mention in the merits sections of the Award, except to just one
reference to one of those submissions in a footnote.” These complaints are incorrect and

irrelevant.

263

“”* TECO’s Memorial {{ 240; TECO’s Reply {[ 231; TECO’s Post-! Hearing Brief { 41; TECO’s Post-Hearing
Reply { 25; G ”s Counter-Memorial {| 528; G ’s Rejoinder {| 165-166; Guatemala’s Post-
Hearing Brief {| 274-278; Guatemala’s Post-Hearing Reply {I 147.

264 Award { 587.

 

265 Td. 457. The Tribunal similarly did not need to analyze in depth the meaning of “abuse of power” in its
Award, as Guatemala contends. Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment { 167. In its Award, the Tribunal
observed that the dispute “essentially rests on an allegation of abuse of power by the regulator and disregard of
the Regulatory Framework in the context of an administrative tariff review process.” Award J 489. As
elaborated below, the Tribunal’s decision on liability rested upon its finding that the CNEE had repudiated “the
two fundamental regulatory principles applying to the tariff review process” through its actions, and that such
repudiation was “arbitrary and breache[d] elementary standards of due process in administrative matters.” See
infra J 83; id. | 711. In other words, as is clear from the Tribunal’s Award, TECO alleged and the Tribunal
found that the regulator had abused its power by acting arbitrarily, specifically by repudiating the fundamental
principles underlying the tariff review process, and by breaching standards of due process.

266 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 162.

-44-

81. As set forth above, the Tribunal not only relied directly upon relevant case law
and commentary in defining the content of the minimum standard of treatment under Article
10.5, noting specifically that it agreed with the standard as articulated by “many arbitral tribunals
and authorities,” but both Parties relied upon the very same case law regarding the minimum

268

standard of treatment;~”” there thus was no need for the Tribunal to engage in any further analysis

of the case law presented by the Parties in their pleadings, as Guatemala erroneously contends.”
The non-disputing State party submissions similarly did not present any views different from
those previously articulated in other NAFTA and DR-CAFTA cases, and as reflected in relevant

270

case law and commentary regarding the minimum standard of treatment;~" there thus also was

no need for the Tribunal to examine or to cite those submissions in its Award.

82. Second, applying the applicable standard to the facts of the case, the Tribunal held
that, “in adopting Resolution No. 144-2008, in disregarding without providing reasons the Expert
Commission’s report, and in unilaterally imposing a tariff based on its own consultant’s VAD
calculation, the CNEE acted arbitrarily and in violation of fundamental principles of due process
in regulatory matters.”?’'! The Tribunal further held that “both the regulatory framework and the
minimum standard of treatment in international law obliged the CNEE to act in a manner that
was consistent with the fundamental principles on the tariff review process in Guatemalan

w22272

la As the Tribunal observed, once the CNEE “had received the Expert Commission’s

report, [it] should have analyzed it and taken its conclusions onboard in establishing a tariff
based on the Bates White VAD study, unless it had good reasons to consider that such

conclusions were inconsistent with the regulatory framework, in which case it had the obligation

27 Award 4 455.

268 TECO’s Memorial Ml 229-258; TECO’s Post-Hearing Brief J] 11-54; TECO’s Reply {| 231-253; TECO’s
Post-Hearing Reply {| 25-50; Guatemala’s Counter-Memorial {| 460-494; Guatemala’s Rejoinder {[{] 79-104;
Guatemala’s Post-Hearing Brief {{{[ 247-291; Guatemala’s Post-Hearing Reply {J 116-138.

269 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 162.

270 TECO’s Post-Hearing Brief {{] 11-46; TECO’s Post-Hearing Reply {{{ 25-40; Guatemala’s Counter-
Memorial {| 460-494; Guatemala’s Rejoinder {| 79-104; Guatemala’s Post-Hearing Brief {{{] 247-291;
Guatemala’s Post-Hearing Reply ff 116-138.

*! Award J 664.

272

“Id. J 682.

-45-

to provide valid reasons to that effect;” no such reasons, however, were provided.?”? Thus, the
Tribunal explained, “both under the regulatory framework and under the minimum standard of
treatment, the CNEE could and should have taken the time, after careful review of the Expert
Commission’s report, to implement its conclusions in the Bates White’s study,” and that “[t]he
‘preliminary review’ that the CNEE performed in less than one day was clearly insufficient to
discharge that obligation.”?” As the Tribunal observed, it could “find no justification, other than
its desire to reject the Bates White study in favor of the more favorable Sigla’s study, for such a

behavior.”””>

83. In setting EEGSA’s 2008-2013 VAD and tariffs unilaterally, the Tribunal thus
found that “the regulator ha[d] repudiated the two fundamental principles upon which the
regulatory framework bases the tariff review process: first that, save in the limited cases
provided in Article 98 RLGE, the tariff would be based on the VAD study prepared by the
distributor’s consultant; and, second, that any disagreement between the regulator and the
distributor regarding such VAD study would be resolved by having regard to the
pronouncements of a neutral Expert Commission.”?”° The Tribunal held that “such repudiation
of the two fundamental regulatory principles applying to the tariff review process is arbitrary and
breaches elementary standards of due process in administrative matters,” and that “[s]uch
behavior therefore breaches Guatemala’s obligation to grant fair and equitable treatment under

article 10.5 of CAFTA-DR.”?””

84. As the Award reflects, in holding Guatemala liable, the Tribunal did not commit

9278

“serious omissions and shortcomings in reasoning, nor did it simply “equate the breach of

domestic law it had identified with a breach of international law without further discussion,”

as Guatemala contends. To the contrary, the Tribunal examined the content of the minimum

7 Id. | 683.
°™ 1d. 4 690.
7 Id. | 690.
278 1d. 710.
7 1d. 71.
278 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 203.
2? Id. 4172.

-46-

standard of treatment obligation under Article 10.5 by reference to arbitral decisions, upon which
both Parties had relied, and commentary; duly reviewed and analyzed the CNEE’s conduct in
view of the applicable legal standard under Article 10.5; and found that “the CNEE acted
arbitrarily and in violation of fundamental principles of due process in regulatory matters,” by,
among other things, adopting Resolution No. 144-2008, disregarding without providing any
reasons the Expert Commission’s Report, and unilaterally imposing a tariff based upon its own
consultant’s VAD calculation.*° In so finding, the Tribunal did not apply Guatemalan law, but

rather international law to the facts presented.

85. The Tribunal, moreover, did not conflate “the concepts of a domestic and an
international breach,” nor did it fail to show how Guatemala’s breach of the regulatory

' As elaborated

framework resulted in a breach of international law, as Guatemala asserts.”®
above, the Tribunal found not only that there were no justifications or reasons for the CNEE’s
actions in adopting Resolution No. 144-2008; in disregarding the Expert Commission’s Report;
and in unilaterally imposing a tariff based upon its own consultant’s VAD calculation, but that,
in doing so, the CNEE had repudiated the two fundamental regulatory principles underlying the
tariff review process.”*? As the Tribunal observed, “under the minimum standard, international
law prohibits State officials from exercising their authority in an abusive, arbitrary or
discriminatory manner,” and “obliges the State to observe due process in administrative

proceedings.””**

Based upon the evidence presented, the Tribunal found that Guatemala had
breached that standard, and thus had breached its international law obligation under Article 10.5

to accord fair and equitable treatment to TECO’s investment in EEGSA.

289 Award | 664.

281 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment {4 169, 170.
8? See supra J 83; Award ff 664-665.

°83 Award | 587.

-47-

B. The Tribunal Did Not “Reverse” The Decisions Of The Guatemalan
Constitutional Court

86. In its Memorial, Guatemala contends that international law “precludes de facto

99284

review of domestic decisions on questions of local law, and that, because “an arbitral tribunal

. wo . 92!
may not review decisions by national courts on local law matters, 85

it follows that a public
authority cannot be found to “be in breach of international law for implementing a decision
supported by its local courts unless the local courts’ decision itself is challenged under

992

international law.””*° Guatemala further contends that, although the Tribunal recognized in its

Award that it could not review the decisions of the Constitutional Court, it “did exactly the

4787

opposite in the Awar and thus failed to respect “local judicial decisions on questions of

local law.”?**

Guatemala also contends that the Tribunal’s Award is “plainly contradictory,”
because, “[o]n the one hand it states that decisions of the Constitutional Court cannot be
reviewed, but then it condemns Guatemala because of a CNEE Resolution (Resolution 144-

2008) that the Court expressly stated was in accordance with the Regulatory Framework.””*?

87. Specifically, Guatemala argues that the Constitutional Court, in ruling on
EEGSA’s amparo petitions under Guatemalan law, held that the CNEE had “acted within the
scope of its powers and that it ‘followed the process regulated by law,”” finding that the Expert
Commission’s report was non-binding; that the Expert Commission had been lawfully dissolved
by the CNEE after it had issued that report; and that the CNEE could decide, in light of the
report, to accept either EEGSA’s VAD study or its own consultant’s VAD study.” According
to Guatemala, the Tribunal thus “should not have resolved issues already settled by” the
Constitutional Court, including whether the CNEE had willfully disregarded the fundamental

principles of the regulatory framework, or whether the regulatory framework permitted the

284 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 114.
85 14. 115.

86 14. 116.

°87 Fd. 4 118-119.

288 Id, 142.

8 14,212.

°° Id. 4 120-121, 123.

-48-

CNEE, in the circumstances of the case, to disregard EEGSA’s VAD study and to approve its

own consultant’s VAD study."!

Guatemala further asserts that “[t]he Tribunal’s decision that
Guatemala breached the international minimum standard of the Treaty was based solely on
Resolution 144-2008,” even though “Resolution 144-2008 and its compatibility with the
Regulatory Framework had been precisely the object of the decision of the Constitutional

99292

Court, and that the Tribunal’s decision on liability thus “necessarily implies a revision of the

9293

decisions of the Constitutional Court. Guatemala’s arguments are erroneous, and

mischaracterize the scope of both the Constitutional Court’s decisions and the Tribunal’s

findings.

88. First, Guatemala’s contention that a public authority cannot be found to “be in
breach of international law for implementing a decision supported by its local courts unless the

99294

local courts’ decision itself is challenged under international law, is incorrect and was

expressly rejected by the Tribunal in its Award.”*> As set forth above, it is well established that a
State cannot use its own judicial system to insulate itself from a violation of an international law
obligation by validating its actions under national law,””° and that, as the tribunal in EDF y.
Argentina observed, the legality of a State’s “acts under national law does not determine their
lawfulness under international legal principles.””””

89. Applying these principles to this case, the Tribunal expressly disagreed with
Guatemala’s contention that, “in case of disagreement on the actions or decisions taken by the

regulator ‘the State cannot be held responsible [. . .] since another branch of the Government, the

1 14.125.
°°? Id. 4 127-128.
8 Id. 137.

4 Id. 116.

5 See supra Wf 62-66.

26 See supra J 67; TECO’s Post-Hearing Reply {| 19; TECO’s Reply {| 282.

7 EDF v. Argentina, Award, { 907 (CL-86); see also id. J 905-906 (noting that Article 27 of the 1969
Vienna Convention precludes a host-State from “invok[ing] the provisions of its internal law as justification
for its failure to perform,” and that Article 3 of the ILC Articles “provides that the characterization of an act of
a State as internationally wrongful is not affected by the characterization of the same act as lawful by internal
law”).

-49-

judiciary, has been called to intervene and has issued a decision on the matter.””?°* The Tribunal
correctly observed that “the disputes resolved by the Guatemalan judiciary are not the same as
the one which this Arbitral Tribunal now has to decide,” and that, while “[t]he Arbitral Tribunal
may of course give deference to what was decided as a matter of Guatemalan law by the

Guatemalan Constitutional Court,” “such decisions made under Guatemalan law cannot be

determinative of this Arbitral Tribunal’s assessment of the application of international law to the

facts of the case.”””?

90. The Tribunal also expressly disagreed with Guatemala’s argument that the
decisions of the Constitutional Court already had disposed of the dispute submitted by TECO to
arbitration, finding that “the decisions of the Constitutional Court cannot have the effect of a
precedent or have any res judicata effect in this arbitration,” and that they “obviously have [not]
disposed of the present dispute.”°°° As the Tribunal observed, “[n]ot only [were] the parties
different (EEGSA and the CNEE before the national court and Teco and Guatemala in this
arbitration), but this Tribunal has to resolve an entirely different dispute on the basis of different
legal rules,” and must “assess whether the regulator’s conduct materializes a breach of the
State’s obligations under the customary international law minimum standard.”*"' The Tribunal
thus found that it was “not bound by the Constitutional Court’s decisions,” but that “Tt]he
findings of the Constitutional Court may nevertheless be relevant to the solution of the present
international law dispute . . . insofar as the Constitutional Court interpreted aspects of the
regulatory framework that are submitted to Guatemalan law and which the Arbitral Tribunal
finds of relevance in order to assess whether the State’s international obligations were

breached.”*°

8 Award | 482.
Id. 483.
50 1d. 516.
*1 14. 517.
5 14. 518.
53 14. 519.

-50-

91. Second, the Tribunal’s holding that Guatemala breached the minimum standard of
treatment did not “reverse” the Constitutional Court’s rulings in EEGSA’s amparo proceedings,
nor is the Tribunal’s reasoning contradictory, or based solely upon Resolution No. 144-2008, as
Guatemala contends.** As the Award reflects, the Tribunal found that the Constitutional Court

had made two specific rulings.”

First, the Court ruled that “the CNEE was entitled to disband
the Expert Commission on July 28, 2008,” that is, after the Expert Commission had issued its
report on the discrepancies between the parties.°° Second, the Court ruled that, “because the
Expert Commission’s report [was] not binding upon the CNEE and because the regulator has the
exclusive power to set the tariffs, the CNEE was entitled to fix the tariffs on the basis of its own
independent study.”°°7 With respect to this ruling, the Tribunal explained that, while the Court
had decided that the CNEE was entitled to apply a tariff calculated on the basis of its own VAD
study, “it only did so on the basis that, in Guatemalan law, an expert report cannot be binding

and that the law reserves for the regulator the exclusive power to set tariffs.”°°*

92. Notably, the Tribunal found that neither EEGSA nor the CNEE had requested the
Constitutional Court to decide whether, in the circumstances of the case, EEGSA had failed to
correct its VAD study in accordance with the CNEE’s observations within the meaning of
amended RLGE Article 98, which would have entitled the CNEE to set EEGSA’s tariffs on the
basis of its own VAD study.°” The Tribunal accordingly found that the Constitutional Court had
not opined “on whether, pursuant to Article 98 of the RLGE, EEGSA indeed failed to correct its
VAD report,”*!° and that “[t]he mention, in the Constitutional Court’s decision, of an ‘omission’
on the part of EEGSA to implement the [CNEE’s] corrections, [] appears to be no more than a

factual reference to the CNEE’s submissions.”*'! The Tribunal further expressly noted that this

3% Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment qf 128-129.

*5 Award ¥ 512.

506 14. 514.

57 1d. 513.

508 1d, 542.

7d. 4 540.

31 Td. {¥] 543-544 (quoting Guatemala’s Post-Hearing Brief {{ 62).
1d. q 541.

-51-

finding was supported and confirmed by Guatemala’s own submissions in the arbitration, which
had emphasized that amended RLGE Article 98 “does not form the basis for the Court’s

decision,” and “had no influence on the Court’s decision.”?!?

93. Analyzing RLGE Article 98, the Tribunal found that “the distributor was under no
obligation to incorporate in its VAD study observations made by the CNEE in respect of which
there was a disagreement properly submitted to the Expert Commission.”*> Indeed, the Tribunal
agreed with TECO that a contrary reading of RLGE Article 98 would be nonsensical.*'* The
Tribunal accordingly held that, “[u]nless the regulator provided valid reasons to the contrary, it is
only if and when the Expert Commission had pronounced itself in favor of the regulator that such
an obligation [to incorporate observations made by the CNEE into its VAD study] would
arise.”35

94. In its Award, the Tribunal also found that, despite holding that the Expert
Commission’s report was not binding under Guatemalan law, the Constitutional Court had not
decided whether the CNEE nonetheless had the duty to consider it and to provide reasons for its
decisions to disregard it; this question, the Tribunal noted, “will thus have to be decided by the
Arbitral Tribunal.”?!° As the Tribunal remarked, “the Constitutional Court [could not] have
intended to say that the CNEE could arbitrarily and without reasons disregard the Expert
Commission’s recommendations,” and that “at no point in either of its two decisions does the
Constitutional Court say that fixing the tariff would be an entirely discretionary exercise on the

317

part of the regulator. The Tribunal further observed that such a conclusion would be

“manifestly at odds with the regulatory framework,”*'® as the entire regulatory framework is

3! Id. {§] 543-544 (quoting Guatemala’s Post-Hearing Brief {{ 62).
533 1d, 4 589.

514 1d. 4 579-580.

35 Id. 589.

516 14. 545.

517 1d. 4 562.

58 1d, | 562.

-52-

based upon the premise that “the regulator did not enjoy unlimited discretion in fixing the
9319

tariff

95. The Tribunal further noted that the Constitutional Court itself had confirmed that
“it had not been called [upon] to assess the ‘rationality’ of the adopted tariff;” such term, the
Tribunal found, could “be understood both with respect to the content of the tariff and with the
process leading to its establishment.”*”° As the Tribunal observed, “[w]hat the Constitutional
Court intended to say is clearly that, because the CNEE retains the exclusive power to fix the
tariff, such power could not be delegated in all or part to the Expert Commission;” this did not
mean, however, “that the Expert Commission’s report should not have been given serious
consideration by the CNEE,” or that “the CNEE had unlimited discretion to depart from it

. . 993
without valid reasons.”*”!

The Tribunal thus concluded that, although the decisions “of the
Expert Commission were not binding in the sense that it had no adjudicatory powers, the CNEE
nevertheless had the duty, under the regulatory framework, to give them serious consideration

99322

and to provide valid reasons in case it decided to depart from them, and that “/t/he obligation

to provide reasons derives from both the regulatory framework and from the international

obligations of the State under the minimum standard.”

96. Analyzing the evidence presented by the Parties, the Tribunal thus held that “both
the regulatory framework and the minimum standard of treatment in international law obliged
the CNEE to act in a manner that was consistent with the fundamental principles on the tariff
review process in Guatemalan law,” and that, “[b]y rejecting the distributor’s study because it
had failed to incorporate the sotality of the observations that the CNEE had made in April 2008
[before the parties’ discrepancies were even submitted to the Expert Commission], with no

regard and no reference to the conclusions of the Expert Commission, the CNEE acted arbitrarily

5! Id. 4 563.

*9 Td. ¢ 563 (emphasis in original).
1 1d. 564.

2

°? Id. 4 564.
*3 Td. ¢ 583 (emphasis added).

-53-

and in breach of the administrative process established for the tariff review.”>* As the Tribunal
noted, “the CNEE did not consider the report of the Expert Commission as the pronouncement of
a neutral panel of experts which it had to take into account in establishing the tariff,” but rather
had “used the expert report to ascertain that some of the observations it had made in April 2008
had not been incorporated in the study, regardless of whether there was a disagreement, and
irrespective of the views that had been expressed by the experts on such disagreements.”*”> In
establishing EEGSA’s tariffs, the CNEE thus “failed without any reasons to take the Expert

tote . 99326
Commission’s pronouncements into account.

97. The Tribunal further held that “the regulator’s decision to apply its own
consultant’s study [did] not comport with Article 98 of the RLGE,” and that, “in order for the
regulator’s decision to comport with Article 98, it should have [shown] that the distributor failed
to correct its study according to the pronouncements of the Expert Commission, or explained
why the regulator decided not to accept the Expert Commission’s pronouncements.” The
Tribunal found that, once the CNEE “had received the Expert Commission’s report, [it] should
have analyzed it and taken its conclusions onboard in establishing a tariff based on the Bates
White VAD study, unless it had good reasons to consider that such conclusions were inconsistent
with the regulatory framework, in which case it had the obligation to provide valid reasons to
that effect.”°?* No such reasons, however, were provided in the CNEE’s Resolution No. 144-

2008 or otherwise.*””

98. In addition, separate and apart from Resolution No. 144-2008, the Tribunal found
that the CNEE’s “preliminary review” of EEGSA’s revised VAD study “performed in less than
one day was clearly insufficient to discharge” its obligation to seriously consider the Expert

Commission’s findings, and was further evidence of “[t]he arbitrariness of the regulator’s

*4 Td. J 681 (emphasis in original).
5 1d. | 678.

*6 1d. | 678.

7 Id. 49] 679-680.

8 Id. | 683.

°° 1d. | 683.

-54-

behavior.”**° As noted above, the Tribunal explained that, “both under the regulatory framework
and under the minimum standard of treatment, the CNEE could and should have taken the time,
after careful review of the Expert Commission’s report, to implement its conclusions in the Bates
White’s study”! As the Tribunal remarked, based on the contemporaneous evidence, it could
“find no justification, other than its desire to reject the Bates White study in favor of the more
favorable Sigla’s study, for [the CNEE’s] behavior.”*? Indeed, while Guatemala had argued that
“incorporating the Expert Commission’s pronouncements in the Bates White’s study would have
taken too much time and would not have been compatible with the need to publish the tariff on
August 1, 2008,” the Tribunal found, as TECO had explained, that there was “nothing in the
regulatory framework obliging the CNEE to publish the tariff on the first day of the tariff
period,” and that, “[q]uite to the contrary, Article 99 of the RLGE provides that the tariff is
published once it has been approved and no later than nine months after the beginning of the

tariff period.”***

99. The Tribunal further observed that the CNEE itself had agreed to extend the
deadline of the Expert Commission’s report, and that it was well “aware of the complexity of the
issues raised and could not ignore that it would take more than a few days to consider the Expert
Commission’s conclusions and implement them in the VAD study.”*** The Tribunal thus held
that, by “accepting to receive the Expert Commission’s report in the week of July 24, 2008, to
then disregard it along with the Bates White study on the basis that such date did not leave
enough time to publish the tariff by August 1, 2008, the CNEE acted in breach of the

fundamental principles of due process as well as in a contradictory and aberrant manner.”>>

100. Contrary to Guatemala’s contentions, none of these issues was decided by the

Constitutional Court, nor was the evidence of the CNEE’s “preliminary review” of the Expert

5 Td. 49] 690-691.

*! See supra J 32; Award { 690.

52 Award { 690.

533 Id. Y¥] 684-685; see also TECO’s Reply 99 87-88, 142, 160, 190; TECO’s Post-Hearing Brief {ff 113.
4 Award { 686.

5 Id. | 688.

-55-

Commission’s report even submitted to the Court for its consideration. As set forth above, the
Constitutional Court simply found that, under the laws and regulations, the CNEE had sole
authority to set EEGSA’s new tariffs, and that it had not delegated that authority to the Expert
Commission, whose report was not binding.” Tt was on that basis that the Constitutional Court
considered that the CNEE had acted “in accordance with the [] Law and Regulations.”*** As the
Tribunal found, the Constitutional Court, however, did not make any findings as to whether the
CNEE had the obligation to give “serious consideration” to the Expert Commission’s report, or
whether the CNEE had the authority under amended RLGE Article 98 to set EEGSA’s new
tariffs based upon its own VAD study.”

101. Moreover, in holding Guatemala liable under Article 10.5 of the DR-CAFTA, the
Tribunal did not reverse or revise the Constitutional Court’s rulings; to the contrary, as the
Award confirms, the Tribunal accepted and incorporated those rulings into its decision.“”
Applying the applicable standard under customary international law to the facts presented, the
Tribunal nonetheless held that the process by which EEGSA’s tariff had been established
breached the minimum standard of treatment.*“! This issue was not even considered, much less
decided by the Constitutional Court.” Contrary to Guatemala’s contentions, there thus is no
contradiction between the Tribunal’s statement that its “task is not and cannot be to review the
findings made by the courts of Guatemala under Guatemalan law,” and its holding on liability.“

As the Award confirms, the Tribunal did not reverse or revise the Constitutional Court’s

5% Resolution of the Constitutional Court regarding Amparo C2-2008-7964 dated 18 Nov. 2009 (C-331);
Resolution of the Constitutional Court regarding Amparo 37-2008 dated 24 Feb. 2010 (C-345).

87 Award { 542.

+8 Resolution of the Constitutional Court regarding Amparo C2-2008-7964 dated 18 Nov. 2009, at 13 (C-331).
*° Award Wf 561, 564.

“ Td. (477, 483, 519.

“1 Id. (707-711.

5 See supra Uf 70, 94-95; Award J 563.

*43 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment {4 207, 208-209.

-56-

9344

findings, or otherwise “ignore local judicial decisions on questions of local law; rather, it

found that Guatemala had violated its international law obligations under the Treaty.

102. In any event, even if the Tribunal’s holding were inconsistent with the
Constitutional Court’s decisions—which it is not—the Tribunal was not bound by those
decisions. As the Tribunal correctly found, the decisions could not “have the effect of a
precedent or have any res judicata effect in this arbitration,” and the Tribunal thus was “not
bound by the Constitutional Court’s decisions.”*4 Indeed, as set forth above, were it otherwise,
a State would be able to use its own judicial system to insulate itself from a violation of an
international law obligation by validating its actions under national law. In addition, to the
extent that the Tribunal’s interpretation of the Constitutional Court’s decisions were wrong—
which it is not—this, as set forth above, would not provide a valid basis for annulment under

ICSID Convention Article 52(1)."”

103. Finally, Guatemala’s complaint that, in holding Guatemala liable under Article
10.5 of the DR-CAFTA, the Tribunal made several findings with respect to the regulatory
framework, which “conform with the reasons of Judge Chacén’s dissenting opinion” in one of
the Constitutional Court’s decisions, is irrelevant.*“* As the Constitutional Court’s 18 November
2009 decision reflects, although the majority opinion does not address whether the CNEE’s
application of amended RLGE Article 98 was proper, the dissenting opinion does address this
issue, finding that the CNEE was not entitled under amended RLGE Article 98 to approve its
own VAD study;*” because this issue, however, was not decided by the Constitutional Court in
its majority opinion, the Tribunal’s holding does not contradict the Court’s decisions. The mere
fact that some of the Tribunal’s analysis with respect to the regulatory framework is consistent

with the opinion of the dissenting Constitutional Court judge does not mean that the Tribunal

“4 Td. ¥.142.

“S Award (518.

6 Soe supra JJ 67, 88; TECO’s Post-Hearing Reply {] 19; TECO’s Reply {| 282.
MT See supra J 36.

*48 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 130.

* Resolution of the Constitutional Court regarding Amparo C2-2008-7964 dated 18 Nov. 2009, at 22-23, 27-
29 (C-331).

-57-

reversed or revised the Court’s decisions. To the contrary, as the Award confirms, the Tribunal

granted deference to the Constitutional Court’s decisions in its Award.*?

VI. THERE ARE NO GROUNDS TO ANNUL THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
AWARDING TECO COMPENSATION FOR THE PERIOD BEFORE THE SALE
OF EEGSA
104. As explained in TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, the Tribunal properly
found that, as a consequence of Guatemala’s breach of the Treaty, TECO suffered losses, and
awarded TECO historical damages for the period from 1 August 2008, when the CNEE
arbitrarily imposed on EEGSA the VAD calculated by the CNEE’s own consultant, Sigla, until
21 October 2010, when TECO sold its investment as a result of Guatemala’s breach, in the full

amount claimed, i.e., US$ 21,100,552.)

105. In determining the amount of damages, the Tribunal applied the methodology
agreed by the Parties, i.e., that damages should be calculated as the difference between the actual
value of EEGSA reflecting Guatemala’s unlawful conduct and a but-for scenario assessing
EEGSA’s value while assuming that Guatemala had not violated the Treaty.**? The Parties
essentially did not dispute valuation in the actual scenario,*® as that amount was reflected in the
tariffs that EEGSA was actually collecting. The Tribunal thus focused on the Parties’ valuations

in the but-for scenario. Claimant presented its but-for valuation of EEGSA based on the

*° Award ff 477, 483, 519.

35! See TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {I 64-66. The Tribunal’s denial of TECO’s damages for loss
upon the sale of its shares in EEGSA is the subject of TECO’s application for partial annulment of the Award.
See TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment § IV.

352 See Award {I 719, 742; see also TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment Jf 35-41, 64-66; Kaczmarek I {J
126-129 (CER-2); Kaczmarek II {6 (CER-5); Abdala I { 25 (RER-1). TECO’s ultimate percentage ownership
of EEGSA would then be taken into account to arrive at a damages amount.

353 See Award | 750; TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {[ 51; Abdala II { 2 (“There [were] no major
differences with [Mr. Kaczmarek] in the valuation of EEGSA in the actual scenario.”) (RER-4); Direct
Examination Presentation of Brent C. Kaczmarek, 5 Mar. 2013, Slide 13; TECO’s Post-Hearing Brief {| 165;
TECO’s Post-Hearing Reply {| 153 (“At bottom, the only disagreement that Respondent’s expert has with
Claimant’s damages analysis concerns the calculation of EEGSA’s capital expenditures in the but-for
scenario.”) (emphasis added), Guatemala’s Post-Hearing Brief {| 334 (“As explained during the Hearing, given
that the parties are essentially in agreement regarding EEGSA’s value in the actual scenario, the principal
focus of their disagreement is the but for scenario.”) (emphasis added); Guatemala’s Post-Hearing Reply { 161
(stating that the “truth is that there are no significant differences between the parties regarding EEGSA’s value
in the actual scenario, which has basically been determined by the value of the sale of EEGSA to EPM”).

-58-

testimony of its quantum expert, Mr. Kaczmarek, who, in turn, relied upon Bates White’s 28 July
2008 VAD study, which Claimant had argued would have been used to set the tariffs had

Guatemala not breached its Treaty obligations.*™*

Respondent, by contrast, relied upon its
quantum expert, Dr. Abdala, whose valuation, in turn, was based on a VAD study prepared for

the purposes of the arbitration by Guatemala’s industry expert, Mr. Damonte.**

106. The Tribunal properly held that because the study prepared by Mr. Damonte did
not incorporate all of the Expert Commission’s rulings, it could not “usefully [be] refer[red] to . .
. as a basis for assessing the but for scenario.”*°° The Tribunal also held that “Talfter careful
review of the evidence, the Arbitral Tribunal is not convinced that the Bates White 28 July study
failed to incorporate the Expert Commission’s pronouncements or that there is any reason to

- 9935
depart from such pronouncements. 357

The Tribunal thus proceeded to use Bates White’s 28
July 2008 VAD study and Mr. Kaczmarek’s analysis as the basis upon which to calculate

EEGSA’s value in the but-for scenario and to award damages.***

107. Respondent’s stated two grounds for annulment of the Tribunal’s decision on

quantum are meritless.

108. First, according to Respondent, a proper quantification of damages would have
required a “review [by the Tribunal] of each of the Expert Commission’s findings and whether a
regulator could reasonably have rejected such conclusion in exercise of its discretion.”*
Respondent asserts that the Tribunal allegedly held that the Treaty was violated solely by the

CNEE’s failure to “provide sufficient motivation for its decision” to adopt the Sigla VAD study,

* Guatemala asserts that “THG assumed in this future loss calculation that the 2008 tariffs would remain in
place unaltered until the expiration of the concession which wholly ignores the Regulatory Framework and is
irrelevant in light of its disposal of its interest to a buyer who knew that the tariffs would only apply until
2013.” Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment {| 56. This is incorrect, as TECO explained in the arbitration
and in its Memorial on Partial Annulment. See TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {J 43-46, 101.

55 See Award 716-742; see also TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {J 35-41, 64-66.
56 Award {| 727; see also TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {J 40-41, 64.

357 Award {| 731; see also TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {J 40-41, 65.

358 Award {I 728, 742; see also TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment { 66.

55° Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 18.

-59-

rather than by the decision itself, and that the Tribunal confirmed that the Expert
Commission’s rulings were not binding on the CNEE, meaning that the CNEE had “discretion as
to whether or not to incorporate each conclusion from the Expert Commission report and

company study.”°°!

Respondent then concludes that the Tribunal should have determined
whether the CNEE, in theory, could have rejected any of the Expert Commission’s decisions
consistent with the regulatory framework, rather than adopting the Expert Commission’s rulings
in their entirety for purposes of calculating EEGSA’s valuation in the but-for scenario.
Respondent asserts that, as a consequence, the Tribunal ordered Guatemala to compensate TECO
for damages caused by acts other than the allegedly limited violation of the Treaty by

Guatemala.*®

According to Respondent, this renders the Tribunal’s reasoning concerning
damages contradictory, requiring annulment of the section of the Award awarding TECO

historical damages.**

109. Contrary to Respondent’s argument, it is clear from the Award that the Tribunal
considered that, although the Expert Commission’s rulings were not binding per se, in the sense
that the CNEE was not required to automatically implement them, the CNEE had the duty to
give the Expert Commission’s rulings “serious consideration” and could depart from them only

5

if it had “valid reasons” to do so.*° Indeed, the Award states expressly that the Tribunal

concluded that “[i]t is clear that the regulator did not enjoy unlimited discretion in fixing the
tariff,”*° that the Constitutional Court’s decision (addressed further above) “does not mean . . .

that the CNEE had unlimited discretion to depart from [the Expert Commission’s report] without

569 Td. J 17 (emphasis omitted); see also id. Wl 64, 214-217 (same).
*©! See id. { 18; see also id. I 216-218 (same).

5 Id. | 18; see also id. J 219 (same).

*3 See id. {9 19-20; see also id. [ff 219-222, 234 (same).
$64 Fd. 4 19-20; see also id. {4 219-222, 234 (same).

5 Award | 565 (emphasis added); see also id. { 683 (stating that, once the CNEE “had received the Expert
Commission’s report, [the CNEE] should have analyzed it and taken its conclusions onboard in establishing a
tariff based on the Bates White VAD study, unless it had good reasons to consider that such conclusions were
inconsistent with the regulatory framework, in which case it had the obligation to provide valid reasons to that
effect”) (emphasis added).

*66 1d, | 563.

-60-

19367

valid reasons, and that, “[a]s to Guatemala’s view that the regulator was at liberty to fix the

tariff based on a VAD study that did not reflect the Expert Commission’s pronouncements, it is

also incorrect.”*°*

110. In the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal held that Guatemala violated the
Treaty when the CNEE “repudiated the two fundamental principles upon which the tariff review
process regulatory framework is premised,” namely, that, save in limited circumstances, “the
tariff would be based on a VAD calculation made by a prequalified consultant appointed by the
distributor,” and that, “in case of a disagreement between the regulator and the distributor, such
disagreement would be resolved having regard to the conclusions of a neutral Expert
Commission.”*°

111. In assessing the damages arising from Guatemala’s breach, the Tribunal stated
that Guatemala did not “establish that the regulator would have had any valid reasons to

737 and that

disregard the pronouncements of the Expert Commission regarding the asset base’
“Talfter careful review of the evidence, the Arbitral Tribunal is not convinced that the Bates
White 28 July study failed to incorporate the Expert Commission’s pronouncements or that there
is any reason to depart from such pronouncements.”*”!

112. In summary, the Tribunal concluded that (i) the CNEE had an obligation to give
serious consideration to the Expert Commission’s rulings; (ii) the CNEE could depart from the
Expert Commission’s rulings only if it had valid reasons to do so; (iii) the CNEE failed to
consider the Expert Commission’s rulings; (iv) the Bates White’s 28 July 2008 VAD study
implemented the Expert Commissions pronouncements; (v) there were no valid reasons to depart

from Bates White’s 28 July 2008 VAD study; and (vi) damages therefore should be calculated

based on the difference between EEGSA’s actual value derived from the actual Sigla VAD and

*°7 1d. 564.

568 Id. | 698.

*© Id. 665; see also TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {{ 55.
5” Award J 731 (emphasis added).

3 Td. { 731 (emphasis added); see also id. [735 (holding that the “decision of the Expert Commission on the
FRC is reasonable and consistent with the regulatory framework” and that “the regulator would have had no
valid reason to disregard such decision.”).

-61-

its but-for value derived from Bates White’s 28 July 2008 VAD study. There is nothing
contradictory about the Tribunal’s foregoing reasoning, and Respondent’s argument to the

contrary should be rejected.>”

113. Second, Respondent asserts that the Tribunal rejected Mr. Damonte’s VAD study
as a basis to value EEGSA in the but-for scenario on the ground that the study failed to
implement the Expert Commission’s ruling on the capital recovery factor (FRC), while ignoring
an alternative version of Mr. Damonte’s study in which he purportedly did implement the Expert
Commission’s ruling on the FRC#” According to Respondent, the Tribunal thereby denied

Guatemala due process, seriously departing from a fundamental rule of procedure.>”

114. Guatemala, once again, misconstrues the Tribunal’s Award. As set forth in the
Award, the Tribunal had valid grounds for refusing to use Mr. Damonte’s original or alternative
version of his study as a basis for calculating EEGSA’s but-for value and Claimant’s damages.
Indeed, Mr. Damonte’s FRC calculation was not the only reason why the Tribunal concluded
that Mr. Damonte’s VAD study could not be used as a basis to value EEGSA. Specifically, prior
to addressing the FRC, the Tribunal discussed EEGSA’s VNR (i.e., the new replacement value
of the assets of the model efficient company, to which the FRC is applied in order to obtain cash
flow payments to the distributor)°”> The Tribunal noted that the VNR calculated in Bates
White’s 28 July 2008 study amounted to US$ 1,102 million, whereas the VNR calculated by Mr.
Damonte amounted to a “lower figure” of US$ 629 million2®”° The Tribunal then remarked that,

“Talfter careful review of the evidence, the Arbitral Tribunal is not convinced that the Bates

372 Respondent’s assertion that the “situation [in this case] is similar to that in Pey Casado v. Chile, where the
committee annulled the award for contradictory reasoning and failure to state reasons,” is wrong. See
Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment {[ 221. The Pey Casado ad hoc committee annulled the award on the
ground that the tribunal, on the one hand, held that the expropriation claim was outside of the temporal scope
of the applicable investment treaty, and, on the other hand, awarded the claimants damages based on a
contemporaneous assessment of expropriation compensation conducted by the Chilean Government. See Pey
Casado v. Chile, Decision on Annulment, {| 281-285 (CL-N-143). As explained above, there is no such
contradiction in the Tribunal’s decision to award TECO historical damages.

373 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment qf 22-23, 236-241.
5 1d, 49] 22-23, 236-241.

* See Award Uf 729-732.

578 14.729.

-62-

White 28 July study failed to incorporate the Expert Commission’s pronouncements or that there
[was] any reason to depart from such pronouncements,” and that Guatemala “did not establish . .
. that Bates White failed to properly incorporate the Expert Commission’s pronouncements in its
28 July study.”°”7 The Tribunal concluded that, “[a]s a consequence, the Arbitral Tribunal will
accept the VNR proposed by Mr. Kaczmarek,”*”* rather than the VNR presented by Mr.
Damonte. Thus, even if Guatemala’s speculation that the Tribunal neglected to consider Mr.
Damonte’s alternative FRC calculation were correct, such omission was not “serious,” because
the Tribunal separately decided that Mr. Damonte’s VAD study could not be used as a basis to
value EEGSA due to Mr. Damonte’s use of an understated VNR.

115. Indeed, as also set forth in the Award, Mr. Damonte testified that, “to apply many
of the pronouncements of the Expert Commission, additional information and optimizations
impossible to achieve in the time available are required.”*” As an example, Mr. Damonte failed
to implement the Expert Commission’s ruling relating to reference prices, which impacted Mr.
Damonte’s recalculated VNR, in both his original and alternative study.**° Moreover,
Guatemala’s quantum expert, Dr. Abdala, did not even present an alternative quantification of
damages based on Mr. Damonte’s alternative VAD study.**! In light of these circumstances, it is

not surprising, and certainly not a violation of due process, for the Tribunal to have determined

*” Id. 4.731; see also TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {{{ 64-65.
578 Award | 732.
5” Td. 417 n.403 (emphasis added).

380 See TECO’s Post-Hearing Brief {| 179; see also TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {[ 41; Damonte II
q 215, Table 5 (showing that in his purported implementation of the Expert Commission’s rulings, Mr.
Damonte replaced the reference prices used by Bates White with reference prices used for the companies
DEORSA and DEOCSA, and stating that the “most important” changes he implemented in Stages B to E of
the tariff study “has been the change in prices and the change in the CRF formula”) (RER-S5).

8! See generally Abdala I (RER-1); Abdala II (RER-4); see also Abdala II {{ 92 (stating that Dr. Abdala
corrected an alleged fundamental problem in Mr. Kaczmarek’s valuation by “[r]eplacing the CRF formula with
the one corrected by Damonte”); TECO’s Post-Hearing Brief {| 175-178 (explaining that although Dr. Abdala
recognized in his report that a proper but-for valuation required calculating the value that EEGSA would have
had, assuming that its VAD had been set on the basis of all of the Expert Commission’s rulings, Dr. Abdala
admitted on cross-examination that he ignored the Expert Commission’s ruling on the FRC and, instead, used
Mr. Damonte’s FRC formula to calculate EEGSA’s but-for value).

-63-

that, “[a]fter careful review of the evidence,”**” the Bates White’s 28 July 2008 VAD study was

the proper basis for calculating damages.

116. In any event, to the extent that Respondent asserts that the Tribunal erred in
concluding that Mr. Damonte failed to implement the Expert Commission’s rulings in their
entirety, this would not constitute a basis for annulment. It is well established, and not disputed
between the Parties, that the annulment procedure under the ICSID Convention is not an appeal,
and that errors of the tribunal in the application of the law (as long as the tribunal purported to
apply the proper governing law) and mistakes of fact generally are not grounds for annulment.**?
In this case, the purported ground for annulment presented by Respondent amounts to an attempt
by Respondent to have the Committee revisit and reverse the Tribunal’s assessment of Mr.

Damonte’s testimony, which is impermissible.

117. Finally, citing to its Counter-Memorial on the Merits, Respondent asserts that
“[f]ollowing Mr. Damonte’s calculations, the resulting alleged damage for historical losses
would have been reduced” to US$5.3 million Respondent’s submission, however, identifies
the foregoing amount as global damages representing the sum of historical losses and loss of
value, **> and not as Mr. Damonte’s revised calculation for historical damages. Furthermore, in
its Counter-Memorial on the Merits, Respondent expressly states that the foregoing figure is

based on Mr. Damonte’s use of his own FRC calculation, and not the one set forth in the Expert

*® Award 731; see also TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment 4{{ 40-41, 65.

88 See INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES, BACKGROUND PAPER ON

ANNULMENT FOR THE ADMINISTRATIVE COUNCIL OF ICSID, 10 Aug. 2012, {{[ 72-75 (CL-N-147); see also
Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment { 69 (stating that the “annulment recourse is not an appeal mechanism
and the role of annulment committees is not to review the merits of an award, in order to correct its findings of
fact or law”).

384 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment {| 240 (citing Guatemala’s Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction
and Admissibility and Counter-Memorial on the Merits dated 24 Jan. 2012 | 618).

*85 Guatemala’s Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction and Admissibility and Counter-Memorial on the
Merits dated 24 Jan. 2012 { 618 (table presenting the US$5.3 million as total damages).

-64-

Commission’s ruling.**° Thus, as Claimant argued and the Tribunal expressly found, it would

have been inappropriate to calculate Claimant’s damages using that figure.

118. For all of the reasons set forth above, there is no basis to annul the Tribunal’s

decision awarding TECO historical damages in the amount of US$ 21,100,552.

VII. THERE ARE NO GROUNDS TO ANNUL THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
AWARDING TECO COSTS
119. As explained in TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, the Tribunal, applying
the principle that costs follow the event, ordered Guatemala to carry the entirety of its costs and
to reimburse TECO for 75 percent of its costs, i.e., US$ 7,520,695.39.°7 As TECO also
explained, the Tribunal’s decision on costs was fully justified also in light of Guatemala’s

egregious breach of the Treaty and its misconduct in the underlying arbitration.

120. Respondent’s request that the Committee annul the Tribunal’s decision on costs
should be denied. An ICSID tribunal’s decision awarding costs falls well within its discretion
and there are no grounds for an ICSID tribunal to annul a tribunal’s decision on costs. As the ad
hoc committee in MINE v. Guinea explained, Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, which
provides that the tribunal shall assess the expenses incurred by the parties and decide how and by
whom these expenses (as well as the fees and expenses of the tribunal and the charges by the

38° «4

Centre) shall be pai: confers a discretionary power on the Tribunal which was in particular

under no obligation to state reasons for awarding costs against the losing party.”°°° Similarly,

the ad hoc committee in CDC v. Seychelles remarked in the context of an application to annul the

*86 See id. | 617 (stating that, in calculating damages, Guatemala’s quantum experts, “[i]nstead of using the
FRC proposed by the Expert Commission, . . . used the FRC calculated by Mr. Damonte based on the Constant
Annuity method”).

°87 See TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment J 74; see also Award 779.

388 See TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {| 74; see also TECO’s Submission on Costs dated 24 July
2013; TECO’s Reply on Costs dated 7 Aug. 2013.

+8? ICSID Convention, Art. 61(2) (“In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the
parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings, and
shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the
charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.”).

*° MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, {[ 6.111 (CL-N-137).

-65-

tribunal’s decision on costs for alleged failure to state reasons under Article 52(1)(e) of the
ICSID Convention, that “it must be said that quite commonly reasoned awards do not extend
their reasoning to the area of costs” and that “[i]t therefore may be doubted whether Article
52(1)(e) was intended to embrace such an issue;” and, even assuming arguendo that it did, “we
reject the idea that annulment is either permissible or appropriate on this point.”*! Likewise,
although the ad hoc committee in the Jberdrola case criticized the tribunal’s decision on

jurisdiction and, hence, its decision to award Guatemala costs as “excessive,” it nevertheless

declined to annul that portion of the tribunal’s award in light of the “discretional nature of the
costs decision and the restricted review scope of annulment,” concluding that “this Committee is
absolutely precluded from reviewing the Tribunal’s decision on costs.”*? It is notable in this
connection that Guatemala, having obtained the foregoing ruling from the ad hoc committee in
Iberdrola, and having been represented by the same counsel in both the Jberdrola and the TECO
annulment proceedings, now argues in this annulment proceeding that this ad hoc Committee

should revisit and annul the decision on costs rendered by the TECO tribunal.

121. In fact, however, in no instance has an ad hoc committee annulled a tribunal’s

determination with respect to cost allocation (other than as a direct consequence of annulling the

award or other portions thereof).°?

122. Notwithstanding this jurisprudence constante, Respondent argues that the
Tribunal’s decision on costs should be annulled for a failure to state reasons and because it

allegedly is inconsistent with the Tribunal’s decision to apply the principle that costs follow the

4 395

event.** Not only are Respondent’s arguments legally unsound, as explained above,” but

Respondent’s arguments are factually incorrect as well.

*! CDC y. Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, J 87 (CL-N-128).

392

Iberdrola v. Guatemala, Decision on Annulment, { 94 n.53 (CL-N-153); see also id. { 145 (determining
that it is not within the ad hoc committee’s competence to review the tribunal’s decision on costs, because the
tribunal enjoys greater discretion in awarding costs and reviewing that decision would entail improperly
reviewing the tribunal’s judgment on the merits).

3 See MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, {{] 6.111-6.112 (annulling the tribunal’s award of damages
and, as a consequence of the claimant no longer being the prevailing party, annulling the award of costs as

well) (CL-N-137).
>°4 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment { 2(c); see also id. Jf 24-27, 225-230, 235.

-66-

123. First, even assuming arguendo that the requirement to provide reasons extends to
an award of costs, the Award provides more than sufficient reasons in support of the Tribunal’s
decision, as it lays out the Tribunal’s reasoning regarding costs in a clear and internally

consistent manner.*”* Specifically, the Award (i) discusses the legal basis for the Tribunal’s

397

decision on costs;"”’ (ii) summarizes the Parties’ positions on costs; 98 (iii) indicates that, upon

analyzing the Parties’ submissions, the amounts of their claimed “costs are justified and

3 (iv) states that the Tribunal decided to

400

appropriate in view of the complexity of this case;

adopt the Parties’ shared position that costs should follow the event;”~ (v) concludes that “[t]he

Claimant has been successful in its arguments regarding jurisdiction, as well as in establishing

the Respondent’s responsibility,” whereas Respondent “has been partially successful on

quantum;”""! and (vi) allocates costs on that basis.“ Thus, Respondent’s assertion that “it is

+9403

impossible to understand the reasoning of the Tribunal on costs is meritless. Indeed, other

 

°° See MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, { 6.111 (CL-N-137) (stating that Article 61(2) of the ICSID
Convention “confers a discretionary power on the Tribunal which was in particular under no obligation to state
reasons for awarding costs against the losing party”); CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, {| 87 (CL-N-
128) (stating that “it must be said that quite commonly reasoned awards do not extend their reasoning to the
area of costs” and that “[i]t therefore may be doubted whether Article 52(1)(e) was intended to embrace such an
issue”) (CL-N-128); Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/17, Award of 6
Feb. 2008 (“Desert Line v. Yemen, Award”), {| 303 (stating that the tribunal “has broad powers of discretion in
matters of arbitration costs and expenses incurred by the Parties under Article 61(2) of the ICSID
Convention”) (CL-61); CHRISTOPH SCHREUER, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY (2d ed.,
Cambridge University Press, 2009) Art. 61, p. 1235 42 (“The Convention and the attendant Rules and
Regulations give tribunals broad discretion in awarding costs and offer little guidance on how this discretion is
to be exercised.”) (CL-N-159).

6 See Award If] 769-779.

7 See id. {9 769-771.

8 See id. {9 772-774, 776.
°° 1d. 775.

4° Td. (776-777.

ld. 778.

42 Id, 4.779.

43 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 226.

-67-

investment treaty tribunals have provided a similar level of detail concerning the reasons

underlying their decisions on costs."

124. Second, Respondent asserts that Guatemala was the successful party in the
arbitration, because it “prevailed in most of the merits issues as well as in 90 per cent of the

1405

damages claim. According to Respondent, in light of Guatemala’s alleged victory, the

Tribunal’s decision that Guatemala pay 75 percent of TECO’s costs is inconsistent with the

Tribunal’s decision to apply the principle that costs should follow the event.

Contrary to
Respondent’s argument, the Tribunal assessed the Parties’ relative success in the case as follows:
“[t]he Claimant has been successful in its arguments regarding jurisdiction, as well as in
establishing the Respondent’s responsibility,” whereas Respondent “has been partially successful
on quantum.”*°” As is evident from the quoted language and the context in which it is used in

the Award, the Tribunal correctly concluded that the Party that had substantially prevailed in the

 

Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of
Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16, Award of 29 July 2008, {| 819 (setting forth the tribunal’s reasoning
on costs in a single paragraph, as follows: “Finally, the Tribunal turns to costs. To obtain justice, Claimants
had no option but to bring this arbitration forward and to incur the related costs. Although they have prevailed
on the substance of the dispute, they have failed on a number of their allegations and the amount of damages
awarded is less than the one claimed. On this basis, the Tribunal considers fair that each party bear 50% of the
costs of the arbitration proceeding (advances to ICSID) and that Respondent be condemned to pay 50% of
Claimants’ legal costs and fees as detailed in Claimants’ letter of January 25, 2008 (with appendices under tab
1 to 5), with the exception of the costs of the arbitration (lodging fee and advances to ICSID).”) (CL-39);
National Grid P.L.C. v. Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Award of 3 Nov. 2008, {[ 295 (stating that “[tJaking
into account all circumstances of the instant case and the fact that the Claimant prevailed in the jurisdiction
phase of the proceedings, but neither party has fully prevailed in the merits, the Tribunal decides that each
party shall bear its own legal costs and that the Respondent and the Claimant shall be responsible for 75% and
25%, respectively, of fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the costs of administration of the ICSID
Secretariat”) (CL-33); Desert Line v. Yemen, Award, {| 299-304 (providing a concise analysis of costs) (CL-
61); Asian Agricultural Prods. Ltd. v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, \CSID Case No. ARB/87/3,
Award of 27 June 1990, { 116 (same) (CL-82).

4°5 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 26; see also id. 228.
4° See id. J 26-27, 228-229.
“°7 Award 778 (emphasis added).

-68-

408

arbitration was Claimant, not Respondent. The Tribunal’s allocation of costs is fully

consistent with that conclusion.“

125. Third, Respondent asserts that the Tribunal failed to provide “any analysis or

ao410

demonstration . . . that TGH’s declared costs . . . were ‘reasonable, or to assess the

reasonableness of Claimant’s costs by reference to the alleged “obvious benchmark” of
Guatemala’s costs, which amounted to “approximately 50 per cent” of Claimant’s costs, “even

though Guatemala had constituted a similar legal team of international and local legal

counsel.’1!

126. Contrary to Respondent’s argument, as noted above, it is clear from the Award
that, upon consideration of the Parties’ submissions on costs, the Tribunal concluded that
TECO’s costs were “justified and appropriate in view of the complexity of this case.”"'? Indeed,
there is nothing unreasonable or surprising about the difference in the Parties’ costs, for several

reasons:

e In TECO, Guatemala used the same counsel, the same witnesses, and the majority of the
same experts as in the earlier /berdrola arbitration, which concerned the same factual
circumstances as the TECO arbitration. In fact, Guatemala’s experts conducted
essentially the same exercise in the TECO arbitration as they had previously conducted in
the Jberdrola arbitration.""? Guatemala’s counsel and experts thus piggybacked on the

“8 See id. {I 778-779.

4° See id. J 779. Respondent’s assertion that Claimant’s partial annulment application evidences that
Claimant itself “clearly believed it had ‘lost’ the arbitration” (Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment {] 26) is
not only irrelevant to the analysis provided by the Tribunal in the Award but also incorrect. See TECO Energy
2013 Annual Report (excerpt) at 48 (stating that the “ICSID Tribunal unanimously found in favor of TGH”)
(C-N-638). Claimant notes that, similar to the press article submitted as new Exhibit C-N-637 (see TECO’s
Memorial on Partial Annulment at n.438), this new exhibit is proffered as evidence of events that have
occurred since the Award, and the new exhibit thus could not have been introduced into evidence in the
underlying arbitration.

4!© Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 25; see also id. J 226 (same).
“Td. 4 226.
4! Award J 775 (emphasis added).

413 Specifically, in both arbitrations, Guatemala’s industry expert, Mr. Damonte, purported to incorporate the
rulings of the Expert Commission into the 5 May 2008 version of Bates White’s VAD study, and Guatemala’s
quantum expert, Dr. Abdala, purported to use the results of Mr. Damonte’s analysis as the basis for his
assessment of damages. Compare Expert Report of Mario C. Damonte dated July 2010 submitted by
Guatemala in the Jberdrola arbitration, { 1 of the Spanish original (indicating that Mr. Damonte task in the

-69-

work they did for the /berdrola arbitration and consequently expended less time and
expense in preparing Guatemala’s defense in the TECO arbitration than they otherwise
would have expended. Claimant’s counsel and experts, by contrast, did not have the
benefit of prior familiarity with the issues in dispute.*"

e TECO’s costs were exacerbated by Guatemala’s misconduct in the arbitration, including,
among other things, the fact that Guatemala (i) submitted a Reply on Jurisdiction despite
the Parties’ express agreement and Tribunal’s order prohibiting it from doing so, thus
compelling TECO to expend more resources to prepare an unanticipated Rejoinder; (ii)
repeatedly submitted evidence and testimony from the earlier Jberdrola ICSID
arbitration, in violation of the Tribunal’s orders, thus requiring Claimant to expend
considerable resources to make repeated applications to strike the objectionable material
from the record; (iii) objected to the production of the same category of documents that
Guatemala itself had earlier requested, thus unnecessarily complicating the document
production phase by compelling Claimant to make applications for production to the
Tribunal; (iv) withheld responsive documents from production to TECO in defiance of
the Tribunal’s orders; (v) misrepresented the record, requiring Claimant to spend
considerable effort correcting those misrepresentations; and (v) failed to provide required

 

arbitration was to recalculate Bates White’s 5 May 2008 VAD study per the rulings of the Expert Commission)
(C-572) with Expert Report of Mario C. Damonte dated Jan. 2012 submitted by Guatemala in the TECO
arbitration, {[ 2 (same) (RER-2); Expert Opinion of Manuel A. Abdala and Marcelo A. Schoeters dated 25 July
2010 submitted by Guatemala in the /berdrola arbitration, { 14 of the Spanish original (stating that Mr. Abdala
calculated damages based on Mr. Damonte’s purported implementation of the Expert Commission’s rulings)
(C-523) with Abdala I J{{ 92-95 (same) (RER-1). Compare also, e.g., Expert Report of Mario C. Damonte
dated July 2010 submitted by Guatemala in the /berdrola arbitration, [{] 426, 434, 436, 438, 440, 442 (stating
that Mr. Damonte did not evaluate certain rulings of the Expert Commission due to alleged time constraints
and lack of information) (C-572) with Expert Report of Mario C. Damonte dated Jan. 2012 submitted by
Guatemala in the TECO arbitration, {{[ 163, 176 (same) (RER-2); Expert Opinion of Manuel A. Abdala and
Marcelo A. Schoeters dated 25 July 2010 submitted by Guatemala in the /berdrola arbitration, {| 42-53, 160,
177-178 in the Spanish original (describing the model company regulatory framework, the FRC calculation
under the ToR, and EEGSA’s investment expenses) (C-523) with Abdala I {J 115-126, 61, 53-55 (same)
(RER-1). In addition, the witness of G "ss Wi ses in the TECO arbitration were identical
in certain material respects to the witness statements of these same witnesses that Guatemala submitted in the
Iberdrola arbitration. Compare, e.g., Witness Statement of Carlos Eduardo Colom Bickford dated 24 July
2010 submitted by Guatemala in the /berdrola arbitration, [| 28-56, 57-61, 80-98, 117-126 in the Spanish
original (discussing electricity distribution in Guatemala and EEGSA’s tariff review for the 2008-2013 tariff
period) (C-524) with Witness Statement of Carlos Eduardo Colom Bickford dated Jan. 2012 submitted by
Guatemala in the TECO arbitration, [| 28-52, 53-61, 75-94, 111-122 (discussing same in nearly identical
terms) (RWS-1); Witness Statement of Enrique Moller Hernandez dated 16 June 2010 submitted by Guatemala
in the /berdrola arbitration, {{] 6-24, 26-31, 33-34, 54-55, 57-63 in the Spanish original (discussing the 1998
electricity law and EEGSA’s tariff review for the 2008-2013 tariff period) (C-525) with Witness Statement of
Enrique Moller Hernandez dated Jan. 2012 submitted by Guatemala in the TECO arbitration, J] 6-24, 25-30,
31-34, 42-48 (discussing same in nearly identical terms) (RWS-2); and Witness Statement of Mercados
Energéticos dated 22 Feb. 2011 submitted by Guatemala in the /berdrola arbitration, J] 22-28 in the Spanish
original (analyzing Bates White’s 28 July 2008 VAD study) (C-553) with Witness Statement of Mercados
Energéticos dated Jan. 2012 submitted by Guatemala in the TECO arbitration, {| 22-28 (discussing same in
identical terms) (RWS-3).

44 See TECO’s Reply on Costs dated 7 Aug. 2013 4 8.

 

-70-

translations, placing the burden upon Claimant to acquire those translations or make
applications to the Tribunal.*'5

e As other arbitral tribunals have observed, in the context of investment treaty arbitration,
there is nothing surprising about the claimant incurring significantly higher costs than the
respondent, because, among other reasons, claimants carry the burden of proof, and
respondents generally are subject to budgetary constraints.*!°

127. Finally, Respondent raises various other assertions, including that, in the context

of investment treaty arbitration, it is “unusual for one party to be ordered to pay the other party’s

417

costs” absent exceptional circumstances such as party misconduct;”’ that Guatemala did not

418

engage in any misconduct in the arbitration;””” that the costs awarded to TECO constitute more

than 35 percent of the total compensation awarded to TECO;*” and that the Award is “one of the
highest costs awards ever made against a respondent state in ICSID history.”*° Respondent,
however, fails to demonstrate that these alleged circumstances constitute a basis for annulment

under the ICSID Convention.*”!

4'5 See TECO’s Submission on Costs dated 24 July 2013; TECO’s Reply on Costs dated 7 Aug. 2013; see also
TECO’s Memorial on Partial Annulment {| 74 (noting same).

418 See, e.g., Gemplus, S.A., SLP, S.A. and Gemplus Industrial, S.A. de C.V. v. United Mexican States, 1CSID
Case No. ARB(AF)/04/3 & ARB(AF)/04/4, Award of 16 June 2010 (“Gemplus v. Mexico, Award”), J 17-25
(“[T]he Claimants claim costs in the total sum of US$ 5,362,973.22. This amount significantly exceeds the
Respondent’s claim for costs, being less than 45% of the Claimants’ costs; but the Tribunal does not consider
the latter excessive for this case. It is well-known that legal costs incurred by respondent-state parties are
usually much lower than costs incurred by claimant-private parties, partly because a claimant bears a greater
burden in presenting and proving its case, partly because a state’s billing practices with its legal representatives
are different and partly, as here, where there is more than one claimant bringing claims under more than one
treaty.”) (CL-22); ADC Affiliate Ltd. and ADC & ADMC Management Ltd. v. Republic of Hungary, ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/16, Award of 2 Oct. 2006(“ADC v. Hungary, Award”), 535 (“The Tribunal rejects the
submission that the reasonableness of the quantum of the Claimants’ claim for costs should be judged by the
amount expended by the Respondent. It is not unusual for claimants to spend more on costs than respondents
given, among other things, the burden of proof.”) (CL-3); see also Deutsche Bank AG v. Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/2, Award of 31 Oct. 2012 (“Deutsche v. Sri Lanka, Award”),
589 (“The Tribunal further notes that the Respondent’s claim for costs including legal fees and expenses is
far less than that of the Claimant. This notwithstanding, the parties’ costs appear to be reasonable in the
circumstances.”) (CL-100).

417 Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment q 227.
8 Td, 227.

419 Td. 229.

°° Id, 4 24; see also id. 4 229 (similar).

2! See id. Wf 26, 227-229.

-71-

128. Guatemala agreed in the arbitration that the Tribunal had discretion to allocate
costs under the principle that costs follow the event, and did not assert that an order to cover a
Party’s costs was appropriate only in exceptional circumstances, such as the other Party’s
misconduct.” The discretion of a DR-CAFTA tribunal to award costs, including attorney’s
fees, also is expressly set forth in the DR-CAFTA.** Guatemala’s newly-invented “exceptional

circumstances” test therefore provides no basis to annul the Tribunal’s decision on costs.174

129. Further, there is no requirement under the Treaty, the ICSID Convention, or
international law that the amount of costs awarded to a party be mathematically proportional to

the amount of damages sought or awarded, or to costs awarded in other cases. As regards the

2 See Award J 776 (stating that “[bJoth parties . . . agree that, in assessing and apportioning the costs, the
Arbitral Tribunal can exercise discretion”); see also Guatemala’s Submission on Costs dated 24 July 2013
Qi 2-4 & n.2 (stating that the “ICSID Convention grants the Tribunal authority to determine arbitration costs
and how to apportion such costs between the parties,” that “[i]t is a generally accepted principle in
international arbitration that the term ‘expenses’ should be construed broadly . . . and that “international
arbitration practice has also accepted the principle that ‘the successful party should be paid its reasonable legal
costs by the unsuccessful party’ or, if the outcome is not clear, costs must be apportioned in view of the
relative success of each party’s claims’); Guatemala’s Reply on Costs dated 7 Aug. 2013 {| 30 (reiterating
Guatemala’s request that TECO be ordered to “bear the cost of the proceeding in its entirety” and not
indicating that its request was based on any “exceptional circumstances”).

423

 

See DR-CAFTA, Art. 10.26.1 (“A tribunal may also award costs and attorney’s fees in accordance with this:
Section and the applicable arbitration rules”) (CL-1).

aa See, e.g., Gemplus v. Mexico, Award, {| 17-23 to 17-26 (awarding costs to the claimants based on the
principle that costs follow the event and notwithstanding that the tribunal found that the respondent had
conducted itself in the arbitration with “propriety and professionalism” and rejected the claimants’ argument
that the respondent had engaged in procedural misconduct constituting “special factors” requiring an award of
costs) (CL-22).

5 See generally DR-CAFTA, Art. 10.26.1 (“A tribunal may also award costs and attorney’s fees in
accordance with this Section and the applicable arbitration rules”) (CL-1); ICSID Convention, Article 61(2)
(“In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the parties otherwise agree, assess the
expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those
expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of
the Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.”); see also, e.g., PSEG Global, Inc., The
North American Coal Co., and Konya Ingin Electrik Uretim ve Ticaret Ltd. Sirketi v. Republic of Turkey,
ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5, Award of 19 Jan. 2007 (“PSEG v. Turkey, Award”), {{{| 352-354 (holding that, in
light of the claimant’s partial success in the case, the respondent should cover 65 percent of the claimant’s
costs, i.e., US$ 13,553,563.80; notably, the damages awarded amounted to US$ 9,061,479.34, i.e., less than the
amount of costs awarded, and a relatively small portion of the total damages sought, which, measured at fair
market value, amounted to US$ 115 million, before interest (see id. | 284)) (CL-37); Gemplus v. Mexico,
Award, JJ 18-1 to 18-11 (awarding costs of US$ 5,450,000, representing 35% of the damages awarded of US$
15,508,381) (CL-22); Swisslion DOO Skopje v. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, ICSID Case No.
ARB/09/16, Award of 6 July 2012, J 360 (awarding costs of €350,000, representing 100% of the damages
awarded of € 350,000) (CL-N-157).

 

-72-

amount of the costs awarded to TECO, there are numerous examples of higher cost awards.*”° In

determining the amount to award to TECO, the Tribunal expressly examined TECO’s costs,
determined that they were reasonable, and held that TECO was entitled to 75 percent of its costs
in light of its success on jurisdiction and the merits. Respondent’s assertions concerning the

magnitude of the cost award, therefore, are not a basis to annul the Tribunal’s decision on costs.

130. For all of the foregoing reasons, Respondent’s request that the Tribunal’s decision

on costs be annulled should be rejected.

VII. CONCLUSION

131. For the above reasons, TECO respectfully requests that the Committee reject
Guatemala’s request for annulment of the Award and order Guatemala to pay TECO’s legal fees

and costs incurred in these proceedings.

6 See, e.g., Ceskoslovenské obchodni banka, a. s. v. Slovak Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Award
dated 29 Dec. 2004, {| 374(5) (awarding costs to the claimant of US$ 10 million) (CL-N-157); PSEG v. Turkey,
Award, {| 352-253 (awarding costs to the claimant of US$ 13,553,563.80) (CL-37); Yukos Universal Ltd. v.
Russian Federation, PCA Case No. AA 227, UNCITRAL, Final Award of 18 July 2014, {{] 1869, 1887
(awarding costs to the claimant of US$ 60 million and € 4,240,000) (CL-N-155); Deutsche v. Sri Lanka,
Award, {{f| 576-590 (awarding costs to the claimant of US$ 7,995,127.36) (CL-100); Joannis Kardassopoulos
v. The Republic of Georgia, Award, {| 687-692 (awarding costs to the claimant of US$ 7,942,297) (CL-121);
ADC v. Hungary, Award, {| 525-542 (awarding costs to the claimant of US$ 7,623,693) (CL-3); Libananco
Holdings Co. Ltd. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Award of 2 Sept. 2011, {| 557-569
(ordering the claimant to pay US $15,602,500 of respondent’s costs) (RL-43).

 

 

-73-

Respectfully submitted,

dea 4 Auta
Andrea J. Menaker
Petr PolaSek
Kristen M. Young
WHITE & CASEup

701 Thirteenth Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20005
U.S.A.

Counsel for Claimant 9 February 2015

-74-

