INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

ICSID CASE No. ARB/10/23 - Annulment Proceedings

 

TECO GUATEMALA HOLDINGS LLC

Vv.

REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA

 

 

 

 

REPUBLIC OF GUATEMALA’S COUNTER-MEMORIAL ON
TECO GUATEMALA HOLDINGS LLC’S APPLICATION FOR PARTIAL
ANNULMENT OF THE AWARD

9 February 2015

 

id

Pen Fr D>

VI.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

PAGE
INTRODUCTION. 1
SUMMARY OF GUATEMALA’S RESPONSE. 1
THE DISPUTE AND THE AWARD. 8
ISSUES OF LIABILITY 8

 

TGH’s description of the liability issues of the Arbitration is incorrect and

8

 

Summary description of the liability issues in the Arbitration......
DAMAGES AND INTEREST 14

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON THE ALLEGED “LOST VALUE” OF
EEGSA DOES NOT GIVE RISE TO ANY GROUND FOR ANNULMENT...

 

 

THE DECISION DOES NOT FAIL TO STATE REASONS..

 

The Tribunal’s decision provides reasons ....

The Tribunal’s decision contains no contradiction warranting annulment......

 

The Tribunal’s treatment of the evidence does not give rise to annulment.......

THE DECISION DOES NOT DEPART FROM ANY FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF
PROCEDURE 41

The Tribunal did not depart from any rule of procedure relating to the
treatment of evidence and standard of proo!

 
   

The Tribunal did not depart from any rule of procedure providing that a party
need not prove an all ion that is pted by the opposing party 46

The Tribunal did not depart from any rule of procedure relating to the right to
be heard 47

THE DECISION DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS ....

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON INTEREST DOES NOT INCUR IN ANY
GROUND OF ANNULMENT 49

REQUEST FOR RELIEF 52

 

IL.

INTRODUCTION

The Republic of Guatemala (Guatemala) submits this Counter-Memorial in response
to TECO Guatemala Holdings LLC’s “Memorial on Partial Annulment of the
Award,” dated 17 October 2014 (TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment or TGH’s

Memorial).'

TGH’s annulment application is an attempt to reopen and reargue its case on
damages. TGH was able to convince the Tribunal (the Tribunal) in the original
proceedings (the Arbitration) with regard to certain aspects of its damages claim, but
not others. It now seeks a second chance to prove its case where it failed the first time,
as if this Annulment Committee (the Annulment Committee or the Committee) were
a court of appeal, which it obviously is not. The Tribunal dismissed part of TGH’s
damages claim in a reasoned decision and on the basis of the evidence on the record.
That part of the Tribunal’s decision raises no ground for annulment, and cannot be

challenged just because TGH is dissatisfied with it?

Likewise, TGH cannot seek to reargue the question of interest, which the Tribunal

decided after having evaluated the evidence on the record and provided reasons.

Section II below summarises Guatemala’s response to TGH’s Memorial on Partial
Annulment. Section III provides a short description of the dispute and the Award,
correcting the many inaccuracies contained in TGH’s own account. Sections IV and
V then elaborate in more detail on the flawed nature of TGH’s annulment application.

Section VI contains Guatemala’s request for relief.
SUMMARY OF GUATEMALA’S RESPONSE

As explained in Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment,’ this case relates to the

2007/2008 tariff review process of Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala S.A. (EEGSA).

Capitalized terms not defined specifically in this document correspond to defined terms in Guatemala’s
Memorial on Annulment dated 17 October 2014.

To be clear, Guatemala’s position as set out in its Memorial on Annulment is that the Tribunal should
not have awarded TGH even the historical damages due to annullable flaws in the underlying reasoning
on liability. See Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment, paras. 20, 213-224, 234, 241. The focus here,
however, is on the Tribunal’s decision on lost value damages, which rejected TGH’s claim for lack of
evidence. Nothing that Guatemala states in the present document may be construed as an acceptance of
any part of the Award which Guatemala is challenging in its own annulment application.

See Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment, paras. 31-49.

EEGSA is a Guatemalan electricity distribution company in which TGH held shares
until October 2010, when it sold them to the Colombian company Empresas Piblicas

de Medellin (EPM).

Electricity tariffs in Guatemala are reviewed every five years. In 2007/2008 the
Guatemalan electricity regulator (Comisién Nacional de Energia Eléctrica or
National Commission of Electric Energy, the CNEE) conducted the process for the
review and determination of the tariffs that each electricity distribution company

would apply to consumers in the 2008-2013 period.

TGH claimed that the manner in which the CNEE conducted the tariff review process
related to EEGSA was inconsistent with the Regulatory Framework, and thus violated
the Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement (the CAFTA-DR).
TGH thus sought monetary compensation amounting to the difference between the

tariffs that were approved by the CNEE and the ones TGH considered pertinent.

TGH submitted two heads of damages: (i) alleged “historical losses,” i.e., the
supposed tariff revenue lost between August 2008, when the new tariffs were
approved, and October 2010, when TGH sold its shares to EPM; and (ii) alleged
future losses, or “lost value,” i.e., the supposed decrease in value of EEGSA due to
the lost tariff income from October 2010 until the end of the concession, which TGH
argued was reflected in the impaired value at which TGH sold its participation in
EEGSA. Historical losses were quantified at US$21,100,552 and the lost value losses
at US$222,484,783.*

The Tribunal awarded the historical losses but dismissed the lost value claim, which is
what TGH complains about in these proceedings. Guatemala notes that there is
nothing surprising or extraordinary in the Tribunal’s decision to dismiss the lost value
claim. TGH simply failed to prove that loss. While irrelevant, because these
proceedings are not an opportunity for TGH to reopen or reargue its claim, the
following issues among others— demonstrated the flawed nature of TGH’s claim in

the Arbitration:
(a) TGH claimed that the tariffs approved by the CNEE for EEGSA in 2008 had

impaired EEGSA’s sale value.” However, despite repeated requests from

Award, para. 717.
TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 3-4, 50, 89, 92, 94.

10

Guatemala and the Tribunal,’ TGH never provided direct evidence of how the
price of EEGSA was negotiated, to what extent it was affected by the tariffs
or even what the sales price actually was.’ TGH always said that EPM offered
a price for the whole of DECA II, the Guatemalan company through which
TGH and its partners held their participation in EEGSA and other Guatemalan
companies, but that there was no specific valuation of EEGSA during the sale
process.* Clearly, without evidence of how EEGSA’s sale price was
determined or negotiated, TGH’s claim was never more than simple

speculation.

(b) In the document production phase of the Arbitration, Guatemala requested
TGH to produce documents relating to the sale, to be able to assess EEGSA’s
valuation in that process and thus TGH’s lost value claim.? TGH answered
Guatemala’s requests with the following categorical refusal: “Claimant has not

located any documents responsive to this request that are not either privileged
o910

 

or subject to a confidentiality agreement.” Subsequently, given Guatemala’s

insistence,'' TGH submitted a privilege log that identified information on
documents that it had withheld on the basis of privilege or confidentiality .'”

After further insistence from Guatemala, * an order from the Tribunal,'* anda

See paras. 45-52.

Ibid. See also Memorial on Objections and Counter-Memorial, para. 613; Respondent's Post-Hearing
Brief, para. 358; Tr. (English), Day Two, 403:16-20, Mourre; Tr. (English), Day Two, 402:22-403:15,
Mourre; Letter from the Tribunal to the Parties, 11 March 2013, p. 2.

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 168. See also Memorial on Objections and Counter-Memorial,
para. 612.

See Letter from Nigel Blackaby to Andrea Menaker on document production, 7 November 2011, pgs.
5-6, requesting documents regarding the sale price under “Category C,” entitled “Sale of the Shares of
TECO in Deca Il.”

Letter from Andrea Menaker to Nigel Blackaby on document production, 18 November 2011, p. 2;
Letter from Nigel Blackaby to the Tribunal on document production, 29 November 2011, p. 1 and
Annex 3, which contains a list prepared by Guatemala of the documents produced by TECO in
response to Guatemala’s request for production of documents of 7 November 2011.

Letter from Nigel Blackaby to Andrea Menaker on document production, 21 November 2011, pgs. 1-2.

Letter from Andrea Menaker to Nigel Blackaby on document production, 28 November 2011, and
enclosed privilege log; Letter from Nigel Blackaby to the Tribunal on document production, 29
November 2011, p. 2.

Letter from Nigel Blackaby to the Tribunal on document production, 29 November 2011.

Procedural Order No. 1, 16 December 2011: Document Production Request by Respondent, Exhibit A,
Tribunal’s Decision column, pgs. 21-22; 27-28.

confidentiality agreement signed by the Parties,'> Guatemala managed to
obtain just two documents from that log.'° Those two documents were largely
ignored by TGH during the proceedings.'” Curiously, however, they now
appear to form the basis of TGH’s assertion that it provided evidence on how
the sale price was calculated.'* In reality those documents constitute no direct
evidence of EEGSA’s value. In relation to this issue, TGH adopted a hostile
attitude during the Arbitration and essentially disregarded the Tribunal’s order

requesting that TGH produce all relevant documents.

(c) Similarly, TGH disregarded the Tribunal’s requests for clarifications’? as to

how the 2008 tariffs were taken into account in setting EEGSA’s sale price in
2010. For example, at the final Hearing, the President of the Tribunal asked

“(H]ow was the 2008 tariff [...] taken into account in the [...] sale price”???

TGH responded in its Post-Hearing Brief (PHB) simply by reiterating its
position that “[b]ecause EEGSA’s VAD [i.e., the main component of the
tariff] was significantly decreased in 2008 [...] EEGSA’s value was

diminished.””! That was all, an empty assertion backed by no evidence.

(d) Further, as the above statement in TGH’s PHB shows, TGH made a direct
connection between the alleged value lost by EEGSA and the 2008 tariffs. But
EEGSA was an electricity distributor with a concession that, in 2008, was to

last for another 40 years, while the 2008 tariffs were to apply only up to 2013.

Confidentiality Agreement between Teco Guatemala Holdings LLC and the Republic of Guatemala, 6
January 2012.

Document produced as C3-01: Non-Binding Offer Letter from Empresas Ptiblicas de Medellin to P.
Azagra, 26 July 2010, Exhibit C-557; document produced as C1-01: Citibank Fairness Opinion,
Presentation to the Board of Directors of TECO Energy, Inc., 14 October 2010, Exhibit C-531.

Exhibit C-557 was referred to only once: Reply, para. 293. Exhibit C-531 was referred to a total of four
times, three of them in the next to last pleading in the case: Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 169,
171, 173; Reply, para. 293. Exhibit C-531 was referred to in order to justify EEGSA’s actual value and
the reasonability of TGH’s comparable companies analysis, while Exhibit C-557 was referred to
exclusively to justify the reasonability of TGH’s comparable companies analysis, as a response to
Guatemala’s argument that there were no companies comparable to EEGSA (Reply, para. 293, footnote
1427). See also paras. 50-95.

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 98-108.

Procedural Order No. 1, 16 December 2011: Document Production Request by Respondent, Exhibit A,
Tribunal’s Decision column, pgs. 27-28. Letter from Andrea Menaker to the Tribunal regarding
document production, 6 January 2012, failing to provide any documents under Category C3. The only
document TGH subsequently produced was the Non-Binding Offer Letter.

Tr. (English), Day Two, 403: 16-20, Mourre.

Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 172.

TGH failed to explain how the temporary nature of the tariffs could have had a

 

permanent adverse effect on the value of EEGSA. In other words, TG case

 

was based on the premise that the 2008 tariffs would not change for the
remaining 40-year duration of EEGSA’s concession.”* That assumption was
demonstrably wrong. Electricity tariffs in Guatemala are by definition subject
to five-year tariff reviews. In fact the very dispute at issue in the Arbitration
referred to a five-year tariff review process, which established tariffs from
2008 to 2013, but not for longer. This major conceptual error in TGH’s case

was noted by Guatemala in the proceedings,”*

and by the Tribunal in the
Award.”* Had the Tribunal awarded TGH the future losses it claimed, it would
have unfairly punished Guatemala. Guatemala would have been penalized for
an act (namely, the imposition of the same alleged low tariffs on EEGSA until

2048) that TGH simply could not prove.

(e) TGH’s whole damages case_was exaggerated _and lacked credibility. TGH
initiated the Arbitration on 20 October 2010 saying that the “long-term
sustainability” of EEGSA was endangered and that its “operational viability”
was “severely undermined.”” Yet on the very next day, 21 October 2010,
EEGSA was sold for an undisclosed sum,”° which TGH itself calculated
during the proceedings at US$498 million, a considerable amount on any view
for a supposedly “unviable” company. Further, when presenting EEGSA to
potential buyers, TGH and its partners characterized the company as nothing

less than “[o]ne of the best and most solid companies in the country.”””

As is well known, according to the General Law on Electricity of Guatemala, the tariffs were to be
reviewed every five years for the duration of the Concession. See LGE, Exhibit R-8, art. 77.
Additionally, on 15 May 1998, EEGSA and the Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM) executed an
Authorization Contract for the distribution of electricity in the departments of Guatemala,
Sacatepéquez, and Escuintla for a term of 50 years. Thus, at the time of the sale in 2010, thirty-eight
years remained of the concession contract. See Authorization Contract between EEGSA and the
Ministry of Energy and Mines, 15 May 1998, Exhibit C-31, p. 2, Fifth Term.

 

 

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 355.
Award, para. 758.

Notice of Arbitration, para. 69.

See para. 38.

DECA II Management Presentation, September 2010, Exhibit R-127, p. 22. The Spanish original reads
as follows: “EEGSA, una de las mejores y mas s6lidas empresas del pais.” See also Informative
Bulletin from Empresas Puiblicas de Medellin, 21 October 2010, Exhibit R-129.

In short, there is nothing surprising or extraordinary in the Tribunal’s decision to
reject TGH’s damages claim for the alleged lost value of EEGSA. However, all this is
irrelevant for these annulment proceedings because they are not an opportunity for

TGH to reargue its case, which is precisely what it seeks to do.

TGH says that the Tribunal did not provide reasons for rejecting its claim, but it is

sufficient to read the Tribunal’s decision to realize that reasons are provided:

. “[T]he Arbitral Tribunal finds no sufficient evidence of the existence and
quantum of the losses that were allegedly suffered as a consequence of the

sale”:28

° “There is however no sufficient evidence that, had the 2008-2013 tariffs been
higher, the transaction price would have reflected the higher revenues of the

company until 201 37;

. “[T]here [is] no evidence in the record of how the transaction price has been
determined. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore ignores what other factors might
have come into play and cannot conclude with sufficient certainty that an
increase in revenues until 2013would have been reflected in the purchase price

and to what extent”;*°

. “{T]he Arbitral Tribunal also finds no evidence that, as submitted by the
Claimant, the valuation of the company reflected the assumption that the
tariffs would remain unchanged beyond 2013 and forever. [...] The Arbitral
Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the claim is in this respect
speculative. The Respondent rightly points out that ‘it is actually impossible to

know what will happen with the tariffs in the future.””*!

Thus the reasoning is clear: the Tribunal simply considered that there was no evidence
of the loss incurred by TGH as a result of the sale, or of what such loss actually was.
As is well known, an annulment committee “cannot [...] enter, within the bounds of

its limited mission, into an analysis of the probative value of the evidence produced

 

by the parties. [...] it would not be proper for an ad hoc committee to overturn _a

Award, para. 749.
Ibid., para. 754.
Ibid., para. 754.
Ibid., paras. 755, 757.

34

36

tribunal’s treatment of the evidence to which it was referred”*; “it is in the Tribunal’s

 

discretion to make its opinion about the relevance and evaluation of the elements of
proof presented by each Party [...] the Tribunal is the judge of the probative value of

the evidence produced.”*? ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1) is clear in this respect:
Rule 34. Evidence: General Principles

(1) The Tribunal shall be the judge of the

admissibility of any evidence adduced and of its

probative value.
Clearly, TGH is dissatisfied with the Tribunal’s assessment of the evidence and the
reasons offered to reject its claim, but annulment committees “do not have the power
to review the adequacy of the reasons set forth by the tribunal in its award. Rather, the
role of the committee is limited to analyzing whether a reader can understand how the
tribunal_arrived_at_its conclusion.”** Here the Tribunal’s decision is perfectly
understandable to any neutral reader: it is based on TGH’s failure to prove the
relevant loss. This conclusion cannot be challenged pursuant to annulment under the
ICSID Convention. Likewise, the other subsidiary grounds of annulment invoked by

TGH to challenge the Tribunal’s decision of damages must also be rejected.*°

With regard to TGH’s challenge to the Tribunal’s decision on interest, TGH argues
that the Tribunal contradicted an agreement between the Parties as to the applicable
interest rate and the date on which interest should start accruing. Guatemala
categorically denies any such agreement and rejects TGH’s continuous attempt
throughout its Memorial to mislead the Committee on the existence of some sort of
acquiescence by Guatemala on this and other matters.*° Further, Guatemala notes that

an arbitral tribunal has discretionary power on how to calculate interest: “the

allocation of interest. falls within the i ower of the Tribunal in the

 

Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri v. Republic of Kazakhstan (Caso
CIADI No. ARB/05/16) Decision on Annulment, 25 March 2010, Exhibit RL-110, paras. 96, 98
(emphasis added).

Wena Hotels v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4) Decision on the Application by
the Arab Republic of Egypt for Annulment, 5 February 2002, Exhibit RL- 64, para. 65.

Caratube v. Republic of Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No. ARB/O8/12) Decision on Annulment, 21
February 2014, Exhibit RL-52, para. 102 (emphasis added).

See sections IV.B and IV.C.
TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 90-91, 101-102, 118, 121, 125, 131-133, 137.

Ill.

light of all relevant circumstances of the case.”*’ The Tribunal’s decision on interest is

a manifestation of this discretion and gives rise to no ground for annulment.
THE DISPUTE AND THE AWARD

TGH’s Memorial contains a “[s]ummary of the Dispute and the Award,”** which is
neither a summary, given its length (almost half of the whole brief), nor objective or
accurate. By contrast, Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment distinguishes the
description of the dispute from the Parties’ arguments in the Arbitration»? TGH
instead confuses fact and argument, rearguing most of its own case, in an attempt to
prepare the ground for its complaint about the damages and interest sections of the
Award. Below Guatemala corrects the inaccuracies contained in TGH’s account of the
dispute and the Award. We focus first on the issues on liability and then on damages

and interest.
ISSUES OF LIABILITY

1. TGH’s description of the liability issues of the Arbitration is incorrect
and misleading

There are many examples of TGH’s incorrect and misleading “description” of the
liability issues of the Arbitration. For example, TGH asserts that “Guatemala sought
to attract and induce foreign investment in EEGSA,” and repeatedly states that
“Guatemala represented” to TGH certain principles of the tariff review process.*° This
is not an objective description of the factual background of the dispute. It is rather a
restatement of TGH’s arguments in the Arbitration.*’ However, TGH conveniently
neglects to say that the Tribunal plainly rejected this claim, holding that TGH’s
alleged expectations were “irrelevant to the assessment of whether a State should be
held liable,” and that there was no “specific representation that the regulatory

framework would not evolve.” ”

Compania de Aguas del Aconquija and Vivendi v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3)
Decision on Annulment, 10 August 2010, Exhibit RL-111, para. 256 (emphasis added).

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 7-74.
Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment, Sections IIA and ILB.
E.g., TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 12-14.

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras, 11-15; Claimant’s Memorial, sections B through E;
Reply, sections A, B and E.

Award, paras. 618, 621.

20.

21.

Another example is TGH’s emphasis on the alleged changes in the Regulatory
Framework that took place in 2007, arguing that they “subverted” key premises of
that framework.” This is, again, argument and not description. Further, it ignores that
the Tribunal held that such “amendments [...] did not alter the fundamental principles
upon which the regulatory framework was based,’ and that TGH’s argument was
“jll-grounded” as “Guatemala never [...] represented that the regulatory framework

: ood5
would remain unchanged.”*

The same applies to TGH’s allegation that the CNEE breached, during the tariff
review process, certain “Operating Rules” agreed with EEGSA with regard to the
process that would be followed for the determination of the tariffs.*° Here, too, TGH
omits to mention that the Tribunal “[found]no evidence in the record that Operating
Rules were ever agreed between the regulator and the distributor,” and “therefore
reject[ed] the Claimant’s arguments that the CNEE arbitrarily disavowed the agreed

Operating Rules.”*”

Similarly, TGH complains about the CNEE’s dissolution of the Expert Commission,*
ignoring again that the Tribunal categorically rejected such arguments as follows: “the
Arbitral Tribunal finds that the CNEE was entitled, once its report had been

submitted, to dissolve the Expert Commission.”

Given TGH’s inaccuracies, Guatemala refers the Committee to the description of the
dispute, the Arbitration and the Award contained in its Memorial on Annulment.*? A

summary is reiterated below.
2. Summary description of the liability issues in the Arbitration

This case concerned a dispute between the regulator of the electricity sector in
Guatemala, the CNEE, and one of the electricity distributors in the country, EEGSA,

in which TGH was a shareholder. The dispute regarded the manner in which, in

E.g., TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 18, 23-24.
Award, para. 619.

Ibid., para. 629.

E.g., TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 24, 28.
Award, paras. 649, 650.

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para. 27.

Award, para. 657.

Guatemala’s Memorial on Annulment, paras. 31-66.

22.

23.

24.

25.

2007/2008, the CNEE interpreted certain aspects of the procedure for the review of
electricity tariffs, which is a process that takes place every five years in Guatemala.
The 2007/2008 process established the tariffs for the five-year period from 2008 to
2013. A new tariff review took place in 2012/2013, to determine the tariffs for the

five-year period from 2013 to 2018.

The procedure for electricity tariff reviews in Guatemala is established in the General
Electricity Law (the LGE) and its Regulations (the Regulations) (together the
Regulatory Framework).°' The CNEE, as regulator, is responsible for conducting the
process and approving the tariffs.°” The CNEE functions independently from the

Government.

The main component in the electricity tariff to be recalculated every five years is the
amount that the distributor can charge to consumers in order to cover the costs
incurred by the distributor in providing the service. This is called “Value-Added for
Distribution” (VAD, in Spanish Valor Agregado de Distribucién). The central
exercise, at each five-year review, is to reset the VAD for each distribution company.

The tariff review process starts with the CNEE’s adoption of the “methodology for

determination of the tariffs.”°*

This methodology is established in the “Terms of
Reference,” which the distribution companies (through certain consulting firms pre-
approved by the CNEE) use to prepare the “VAD studies”, also known as tariff
studies.’ These studies provide a proposal by the distribution company to the

regulator as to what VAD should be incorporated into the consumer price.

Once the VAD study is presented by the distribution company, the CNEE reviews it
and may request any necessary corrections to bring it into conformance with the
Terms of Reference.*> The distributor must incorporate the corrections,~° but in the
event of a disagreement, article 75 of the LGE provides that an expert commission

may be established to issue a report on the disagreements.” Once the expert

LGE, Exhibit R-8; RLGE, Exhibit R-36.

LGE, Exhibit R-8, arts. 4(c), 61, 71, 77; RLGE, Exhibit R-36, art. 29.
LGE, Exhibit R-8, art. 77. See also, LGE, Exhibit R-8, art. 4(c).
Ibid., art. 74; RLGE, Exhibit R-36, art. 97.

Ibid., art. 98.

Ibid.

LGE, Exhibit R-8, art. 75.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

commission issues its report, the Regulatory Framework requires the CNEE to

establish the VAD and the tariffs.**

In the 2007/2008 tariff review, EEGSA commissioned the consulting firm Bates
White, LLC (Bates White) to carry out its VAD study. Bates White presented the
VAD study on 31 March 2008 (the Bates White March 2008 Study). The CNEE, as
empowered by the Regulatory Framework, commissioned a study in parallel from
another of the pre-approved consulting firms, Sigla S.A./Electrotek (Sigla), in order to
establish a benchmark to enable it to carefully review the studies prepared by the

distribution companies.

The CNEE considered that the Bates White March 2008 Study contained numerous
irregularities and departures from the Terms of Reference, and calculated a vastly
overvalued VAD: the first version of the Study tripled the amount of the VAD of the

previous tariff review; the second version of the Study doubled the prior VAD.”

In view of the disagreements between the CNEE and EEGSA, the Parties agreed to
establish an expert commission to issue a pronouncement on the disagreements (the
Expert Commission). The report of the Expert Commission decided in favor of the
CNEE with regard to more than 50% of its conclusions,” including the important

question of the study’s lack of linkage, traceability and auditability.

After receiving the Expert Commission’s report, and in the absence of any regulatory
provision for further studies, the CNEE considered that: (a) in accordance with the
Regulatory Framework, it could not use the Bates White March 2008 Study to
establish the new tariffs; and (b) it would set EEGSA’s VAD on the basis of the tariff
study established by the independent and pre-approved consultant Sigla, as permitted
by the Regulatory Framework.®' These decisions were contained in the CNEE

Resolution 144-2008 of 29 July 2008.

EEGSA disagreed with this interpretation of the Regulatory Framework by the CNEE.
In EEGSA’s view, the CNEE could not reject the Bates White March 2008 Study and

approve tariffs calculated on the basis of another independent study. According to

Ibid., arts. 4(c), 60, 61, 71, 76; RLGE, Exhibit R-36, arts. 82, 83, 92, 98, 99.
Memorial on Objections and Counter-Memorial, paras. 331, 349; Rejoinder, paras. 160, 356.

Memorial on Objections and Counter-Memorial, para. 390; Rejoinder, para. 440; Respondent’s Post-
Hearing Brief, para. 176.

CNEE Resolution 144-2008, 29 July 2008, Exhibit R-95.

31.

32.

33.

34.

EEGSA, the Expert Commission’s report was binding. For EEGSA, this meant that
the CNEE had to allow Bates White to unilaterally prepare a revised version of its
study, incorporating the corrections indicated in the Expert Commission’s report, and
submit it to the Expert Commission for approval. The CNEE was to use that study to

calculate the new tariff.

Thus, Bates White and EEGSA submitted a new VAD study on 28 July 2008 arguing
that it incorporated all the corrections indicated by the Expert Commission’s report
(the Bates White July 2008 Study). However, the CNEE considered that this new
study was not provided for in the Regulatory Framework, and that, in any case, it did

not incorporate all the corrections indicated by the Expert Commission.”

EEGSA requested the local courts to endorse its interpretation of the Regulatory
Framework. The proceedings went as far as the highest Guatemalan court, the
Constitutional Court. The Constitutional Court issued two decisions rejecting
EEGSA’s position and upholding the legality of the CNEE’s conduct during the tariff-
review process.

In the Arbitration proceedings, TGH argued that the CNEE’s conduct during the
2007/2008 tariff review constituted a violation of the international minimum standard
of fair and equitable treatment under article 10.5 of CAFTA-DR.“ TGH argued that

such breach arose from the acts of the CNEE during the tariff review process.
The Tribunal denied the following claims by TGH:
(a) That the CNEE had violated TGH’s legitimate expectations;®

(b) That the CNEE and the Government had fundamentally altered the Regulatory

Framework;°
(c) That the CNEE manipulated the Terms of Reference;

(d) That the CNEE did not cooperate in the tariff review process;

Ibid., p. 3.

Judgment of the Constitutional Court, 18 November 2009, Exhibit R-105; Judgment of the
Constitutional Court, 24 February 2010, Exhibit R-110.

Claimant’s Memorial, section III, paras. 228-280.
Award, paras. 618, 621.

Ibid., paras. 624-638.

Ibid., paras. 639-643.

35.

36.

(e) That the CNEE had breached an agreement with EEGSA (the alleged
Operational Rules) by which it had accepted to delegate power to the Expert

Commission:
(f) That the CNEE tried to unduly influence the Expert Commission;”
(g) That the CNEE had engaged in reprisals against EEGSA;”!

(h) That the CNEE could not dissolve the Expert Commission once it had issued

its report;” and
(i) That the report of the Expert Commission was binding.”

The Tribunal’s decision that Guatemala breached the international minimum standard
of fair and equitable treatment under the Treaty was based exclusively on CNEE
Resolution 144-2008. In that Resolution the CNEE considered that, since the Expert
Commission’s report confirmed that the Bates White July 2008 Study had deviated
from the Terms of Reference, the CNEE was not bound to give any further
consideration to that Study and could use the Sigla Study instead to set the tariffs. The
CNEE did not consider that the Expert Commission’s report was binding, in the sense
that it did not require the CNEE to amend the Bates White March 2008 Study in the

manner prescribed by the report, and then use that corrected Study to fix the tariffs.

Specifically, for the Arbitral Tribunal the breach of the minimum standard of
treatment lied on the fact that Resolution 144-2008 was not sufficiently reasoned. The
Tribunal found that the CNEE had failed to provide sufficient motivation for what the
Tribunal considered was a “disregard” of the report of the Expert Commission. While
the report was not binding, the Tribunal held that the CNEE should have explained
properly why the Expert Commission’s report could not be given more relevance, and
specifically be used as a guide to correct the Bates White March 2008 Study rather
than the CNEE endorsing directly the Sigla Study. In the Tribunal’s words:

 

Ibid., para. 644.
Ibid., paras. 649, 650.
Ibid., paras. 645-652.
Ibid., paras. 712-714.
Ibid., para. 657.
Ibid., paras. 565, 670.

37.

38.

39.

In the Arbitral Tribunal’s view, in adopting
Resolution No. 144-2008, in disregarding without
providing reasons the Expert Commission’s
report, and in unilaterally imposing a tariff based
on its own consultant’s VAD calculation, the
CNEE acted arbitrarily and in violation of
fundamental principles of due process in
regulatory matters.

[...]

The CNEE, once it had received the Expert
Commission’s report, should have analyzed it and
taken _its conclusions onboard in establishing a
tariff _based_on the Bates White VAD study.
unless it had_ good reason to consider that_such
conclusions were inconsistent with the regulatory
framework, in which case it had the obligation to
provide valid reasons to that effect. However, no
such reasons were provided.” (Emphasis added.)

DAMAGES AND INTEREST

In its notice of Arbitration dated 20 October 2010, TGH asserted that the viability of
the company had been severely undermined as a result of Guatemala’s actions:

TGH has suffered severe financial damage.

EEGSA has been forced to implement extreme

measures to reduce its costs, including foregoing

planned capital expenditures and _ reducing

operational costs [...] to a degree that jeopardizes

long-term sustainability. [...] This situation has

severely undermined _EEGSA’s _ operational

viability and has had a significant financial

impact on TGH’s investment in EEGSA.”

(Emphasis added.)
The day after filing its Notice of Arbitration, i.e., on 21 October 2010, TGH and its
partners in EEGSA sold their stakes in EEGSA to the Colombian company EPM, one

of the largest public utility companies in Latin America.

However, a document obtained by Guatemala in the document production phase of
the Arbitration revealed that EEGSA’s foreign shareholders presented the company to

the buyer in September 2010 as: “[o]ne of the best and most solid companies in the

Ibid., paras. 664, 665, 683.
Notice of Arbitration, para. 69.

40.

Al.

42.

80

country.””° Other documentary evidence submitted by Guatemala indicated that TGH

continued to consider Guatemala to be a stable country to invest in.”

EEGSA was therefore neither unviable nor severely undermined nor was it
jeopardized. Nor, contrary to what TGH tells this Committee in its Memorial on
Partial Annulment, was the VAD approved by the CNEE in 2008 “economically

78

devastating.”’” Quite the contrary, in TGH’s and its partners’ own words: EEGSA

was one of Guatemala’s “best and most solid companies.””

The sale was implemented through the sale of Distribucién  Eléctrica
Centroamericana Dos, S.A. (DECA IT). DECA II was the holding company through
which TGH, Iberdrola and their partners controlled 80.8 percent of the shares of
EEGSA.*° DECA II owned 80.8 percent of EEGSA, as well as other related
companies. The DECA II partners received from EPM US$605 million for the whole
of DECA IL*!

In its presentations in the Arbitration, TGH refused to provide internal or external
valuations reflecting the price that EPM paid for EEGSA specifically. TGH
maintained that the buyer’s offer was a “global value” for a larger asset, i.e., DECA II
comprising EEGSA and the related companies, and it was impossible to identify
directly the price paid for EEGSA in this transaction. In this regard, TGH asked its

expert in the Arbitration, Mr. Kaczmarek, to estimate the implicit value of EEGSA in

DECA II Management Presentation, September 2010, Exhibit R-127, p. 22 (Emphasis in bold in the
original). The Spanish original reads as follows: “EEGSA, una de las mejores y mas sélidas empresas
del pais.” See also Informative Bulletin from Empresas Piblicas de Medellin, 21 October 2010,
Exhibit R-129.

“Price reduced in Tampa Contract”, Prensa Libre, 12 July 2010, Exhibit R-125 (Spanish original reads
as follows: “Bajan el precio en contrato de Tampa”); Press release of Teco Guatemala Holdings, LLC,
“Teco Energy Reports Third Quarter Results,” 28 October 2010, Exhibit R-134.

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, title to Section I.A.4; Claimant’s Memorial, title of Section
ILF.7.

DECA II Management Presentation, September 2010, Exhibit R-127, p. 22 (Emphasis in bold in the
original). The Spanish original reads as follows: “EEGSA, una de las mejores y més sGlidas empresas
del pais.”

 

Of the remaining 19.2 percent of EEGSA’s shares, 14 percent remained in the hands of the Guatemalan
State, and 5.12 percent in the hands of private investors. See Memorial on Objections and Counter-
Memorial, para. 241; see also Teco Energy, Inc. Board of Directors Meeting (Proposed Sale of DECA
II), 14 October 2010, Exhibit C-353.

Press release of Teco Guatemala Holdings, LLC, “Teco Guatemala Holdings LLC sells its interest in
Guatemalan electric distribution company,” 21 October 2010, Exhibit R-162.

43.

the sale of DECA II.*? Mr. Kaczmarek calculated this value as US$498 million,* and
TGH’s share at US$115 million.

As a result of the sale, TGH’s initial claim for damages, which amounted to US$285.6

million,® was reduced to 243.6 million.®° Furthermore, TGH distinguished two heads

of damages:

(a)

(b)

First, the losses allegedly incurred by TGH between August 2008, when
EEGSA’s new tariffs were approved, and October 2010, when TGH sold its
shares in EEGSA to EPM. These losses, which TGH defined as “historical
losses,” were calculated on the basis of a discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis,
comparing: (i) the revenue obtained by EEGSA considering the tariffs
approved by the CNEE in 2008 (the so-called “actual scenario”); and (ii) the
revenue that EEGSA would have earned with the higher tariffs that TGH
considered pertinent (the so-called “but-for scenario”).*’ The difference
between the two scenarios allegedly showed that EEGSA had lost some
revenue. The part of that revenue corresponding to TGH’s 24 percent
participation in EEGSA, which TGH claimed as compensation for historical

losses, was quantified at US$21,100,552; and

Second, the alleged losses from October 2010 onwards, which TGH defined as
“Jost value losses.” TGH calculated these losses comparing: (i) the value of its
participation in EEGSA as of October 2010 considering the revenue that
EEGSA would obtain until the end of the remaining 40-years of its concession
with the tariffs approved by the CNEE in 2008 (i.e., the actual scenario); and
(ii) the value of its participation in EEGSA, at the same date, considering the

revenue that EEGSA would have obtained in the same period with the higher

Claimant’s Memorial, para. 305; Kaczmarek, Appendix CER-2, para. 241.
Ibid., para. 240, Table 23 and para. 241.

Kaczmarek II, Appendix CER-S, para. 141, Table 14; TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para.

TGH’s Notice of Arbitration, para. 79.

Claimant’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief, para. 154.

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 36-37; Kaczmarek, Appendix CER-2, paras. 129, 153-
156, Chapter IX; Memorial on Objections and Counter-Memorial, paras. 591-598.

44.

90

tariffs that TGH considered pertinent (i.e., the but-for scenario).** TGH alleged
that the value of its participation in EEGSA in the actual scenario was
reflected in the price at which it sold its participation in EEGSA, i.e. US$115
million, while the DCF value in the but-for scenario amounted to
US$337,683,311.°° The difference between the two scenarios allegedly
showed that TGH’s participation in EEGSA had lost US$222,484,783”° in

value, which TGH also claimed as compensation in the Arbitration.

As is clear from the above, TGH’s claim for lost value depended on a large number of

key questions to which TGH simply did not respond with adequate evidence:

(a)

(b)

(c)

What was the actual price at which TGH sold its participation in EEGSA to
EPM)? As explained above, the sale price was a key issue for TGH given its
position that such price allegedly demonstrated, and crystallized, TGH’s losses
relating to the lost value of EEGSA.”! However, TGH only disclosed the price
paid by EPM for DECA II. The actual price received by TGH for EEGSA was
only a calculation made by TGH’s damages expert during the Arbitration, and

thus for the exclusive purpose of the litigation;

How was that price negotiated and calculated? This was important in order to
determine whether the price that TGH obtained for EEGSA was conditioned
only by the 2008 tariffs, and whether higher tariffs would have resulted in a

higher price as argued by TGH, and if so to what extent;

How could TGH assume in 2010 that the 2008 tariffs would remain unaltered
for the life of the concession when in fact those tariffs were to be revised in
2013 and then every five years until the end of the concession? This was a
fundamental issue, because for TGH the tariffs approved by the CNEE for
EEGSA in 2008 had impaired the value of EEGSA forever. However, EEGSA
held an electricity distribution concession due to expire in 2048, and the

Regulatory Framework provided for the revision of tariffs every five years. It

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 36-37; Kaczmarek, Appendix CER-2, paras. 129, 153-
156, Chapter IX; Memorial on Objections and Counter-Memorial, paras. 591-598.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 333-360; Respondent’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 161-
172; Kaczmarek, Appendix CER-S, para. 141, Table 14.

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 333-360; Respondent’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 161-
172; Kaczmarek, Appendix CER-S, para. 141, Table 14.

TGH’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief, para. 125.

4S.

46.

was simply impossible for TGH to demonstrate (because it could not predict
the future) that EEGSA’s tariffs could not increase in subsequent tariff

reviews, thus offsetting the alleged lost value caused by the 2008 tariffs.

Given that TGH did not voluntarily disclose any document showing the actual value
assigned to EEGSA by the sellers and the buyer at the sale, and how the price was
negotiated, as per points (a) and (b) above, Guatemala requested such documents
during the document production phase of the Arbitration. Those documents were key
because the bulk of TGH’s damages case was based on the alleged decrease in value

of EEGSA.

Thus Guatemala’s first letter for document production contained a section called
“Category C,” entitled “Sale of the Shares of TECO in DECA II,”” under which

Guatemala requested in particular five types of documents:

Documentation C.1. Documentation relating to
the internal or external advice received by
TECO, or by DECA II, or by other shareholders
of DECA II, including legal, financial, tax,
accounting or valuating matters, relating to the
sale of DECA II (or to the participation of TECO
in DECA II) to Empresas Publicas de Medellin,
including any preparatory or final reports
discussing legal, financial and valuation matters
of DECA II, EEGSA [and Related Companies].

Documentation C.2. Documentation relating to
discussions between the shareholders of DECA
II, or between EEGSA and said shareholders, or
between EEGSA and DECA II, or between
DECA II and its shareholders, in relation to the
sale_of DECA II to Empresas Ptiblicas de
Medellin.

Documentation C.3. Documentation relating to
the bid made by Empresas Publicas de Medellin,
including drafts or preliminary versions which
were exchanged, presented or discussed and their
annexes.

Documentation C.4. Documentation relating to
preliminary provisions, umbrella agreements,
memoranda of understanding, promises, pre-
contracts, contract drafts, exchanged between the

Letter from Nigel Blackaby to Andrea Menaker on document production, 7 November 2011, p. 5.

47.

48.

TGH’s answer and production of documents under Category C was as follows:

parties and/or their advisors and representatives
related to the preliminary talks which led to the
sale or transfer by TECO of its shares in DECA
Il, EEGSA, and/or in the Relating Companies.

Documentation C.5. Documentation relating to
notifications by TECO or DECA II to securities
authorities, lenders, guarantors, administrative or
judicial authorities and brokers, agents, sales
representatives, etc., in Guatemala or in the
United States regarding the sale operation.”* L..]
(Emphasis added.)

Documentation C.1. Claimant has_not located
any documents responsive to this request that are
not either privileged or subject to a
confidentiality agreement.

Documentation C.2. Claimant has not located
any documents responsive to this request that are
not already in the record.

Documentation C.3. Claimant has_not located
any documents responsive to this request that are
not subject to a confidentiality agreement.

Documentation C.4. Claimant has produced
responsive documents that_are not subject to_a
confidentiality agreement.

Documentation C.5. Claimant has not located
any documents responsive to this request that are
not already in the record.” [...] (Emphasis
added.)

Given this categorical refusal to produce any documents, Guatemala’s counsel

requested from TGH a privilege log identifying information on the documents that it

had withheld on the basis of privilege or confidentiality? which TGH subsequently

provided.°®

Ibid., pgs. 5-6.

Letter from Andrea Menaker to Nigel BI

ackaby on document production, 18 November 2011, p. 2.

Letter from Nigel Blackaby to Andrea Menaker on document production, 21 November 2011, pgs. 1-2.

Letter from Andrea Menaker to Nigel Blackaby on document production, 28 November 2011, and
enclosed privilege log; Letter from Nigel Blackaby to the Tribunal on document production, 29
November 2011, p. 2.

49.

50.

51.

100

101

102

103

The Tribunal then ordered TGH to produce two documents identified in the privilege
log as being confidential, which could provide information on how the sale price was
calculated, but only after the Parties signed a confidentiality agreement,” and any
other document under Category C that would lead the Tribunal to understand
precisely how the sale price had been calculated.°* The two documents were
produced; namely, documents 19 and 20 of the privilege log,” which correspond to
EPM’s Non-Binding Offer Letter for the purchase of DECA II,'®° and to Citibank’s

Fairness Opinion, provided solely to TGH, relating to the fairness of the price offered

by the buyer. tol

The two documents, to which TGH only referred indirectly in the proceedings,’ and
which alone were insufficient to provide any direct proof on EEGSA’s sale price, now

form the basis of TGH’s assertion that it provided evidence on how the sale price was

calculated.'°

Additionally, and particularly, the Non-Binding Offer Letter indicated that other
documents existed that could show a better approximation as to the factors that were
taken into account in calculating the sale price. For example, the Letter referred to
subsequent steps (which would most likely include a more detailed analysis on how

EPM arrived at the final purchase price) leading to a binding offer:

Procedural Order No. 1, 16 December 2011: Document Production Request by Respondent, Exhibit A,
Tribunal’s Decision column, pgs. 21-22; 27-28. See also Confidentiality Agreement between Teco
Guatemala Holdings LLC and the Republic of Guatemala, 6 January 2012.

Procedural Order No. 1, 16 December 2011: Document Production Request by Respondent, Exhibit A,
Tribunal’s Decision column, pgs. 20, 26-28, 30-31, 33, 39-40, 42-43, 45 regarding the need to produce
documents, or with respect to certain documents, the need to produce the respective affidavits affirming
that the documents whose production was in dispute contained protected information, indicating the
nature of such information, and identifying the persons who provided such information.

Letter from Andrea Menaker to Nigel Blackaby on document production, 28 November 2011, and
enclosed privilege log, pgs. 7-8.

Document produced as C3-01: Non-Binding Offer Letter from Empresas Ptiblicas de Medellin to P.
Azagra, 26 July 2010, Exhibit C-557.

Document produced as C1-01: Citibank Fairness Opinion, Presentation to the Board of Directors of
TECO Energy, Inc., 14 October 2010, Exhibit C-531.

Exhibit C-531 was referred to a total of four times: Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 169, 171,
173; Reply, para. 293. Exhibit C-557 was referred to only once: Reply, para. 293. Exhibit C-531 was
referred to in order to justify EEGSA’s actual value and the reasonability of TGH’s comparable
companies analysis, while Exhibit C-557 was referred to exclusively to justify the reasonability of
TGH’s comparable companies analysis, as a response to Guatemala’s argument that there were no
companies comparable to EEGSA (Reply, para. 293, footnote 1427).

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 98-108.

20

52.

53.

104

105

106

2. Stages of the Transaction

a) Evaluation and analysis on behalf of
IBERDROLA, of the present Non-Binding Offer.

b) In the event that the Non-Binding Offer is
accepted by IBERDROLA, carrying out due
diligence and on-site management meetings.

c) Presentation of a Binding Offer on behalf of

EPM, within a previously agreed upon period of
time with IBERDROLA.

d) In the event that the Binding Offer is accepted,
closing the Transaction in accordance with the
conditions previously defined between EPM and
IBERDROLA.

[..]
9. Access to Information, Due Diligence

In the event that the Non-Binding Offer is
accepted, IBERDROLA shall permit the
employees, legal representatives, accounting and
legal advisors of EPM and those hired by it to
have access to the businesses’ facilities and the
properties of the subject enterprises of The
Transaction and all financial information.
contracts, books, registries and other information
relevant _that_is reasonably requested for the
structuring of the binding offer. In the same
manner, IBERDROLA shall cooperate with such
review.'°* (Emphasis added.)

 

Despite the Tribunal’s order requesting that TGH produce all such documents,'°>

TGH failed to do so.'°

Understandably, the Tribunal showed concern at the Hearing regarding the
determination of the actual sale price of EEGSA, how it was established and
negotiated, and in particular, whether it was determined solely by the 2008 tariffs.
Accordingly, the Tribunal asked the Parties the following:

Non-Binding Offer Letter from Empresas Puiblicas de Medellin to P. Azagra, 26 July 2010, Exhibit C-
557, p. 2, sections 2 and 9.

Procedural Order No. 1, 16 December 2011: Document Production Request by Respondent, Exhibit A,
Tribunal’s Decision column, pgs. 27-28.

Letter from Andrea Menaker to the Tribunal, 6 January 2012, failing to provide any documents under
Category C3.

21

54.

55.

56.

107

108

109

PRESIDENT MOURRE: [...] And the second
question is: How was the 2008 tariff, which is in
this interview [Exhibit R-133] referred to as
being low, how was that taken into account in the
sale —in fixing the sale— the sale price to Energia
de Medellin?!”

that tariffs were reviewed every five years:

There is an exhibit which has been discussed
yesterday, which is R-133, which is the interview
of the CEO, I believe, of Energia de Medellin;
and there is a question there which says: “The
shareholders argued that there would be low
revenue and profitability due to the VAD.
Despite this issue, you decided to buy.” And the
answer is: “This is reflected in the value of the
transaction. We bought on the basis that the
current tariff model and layout is the one that
exists.” So there is an assumption that the tariff,
as established in 2008, would remain the same
for future tariff periods. And_my question is:
Why was there such an assumption, given that
the tariff is reviewed every five years?!"
(Emphasis added.)

Like any damages eventually if you were to do a
DCF versus DCF, DCF but-for and DCF actual,
then you have to control for the fact that we don’t
know the outcome in 2013, and thus there is no
reason to assume that the gap between tariffs that
we are modeling for the 2008-2013 period should
be prolonged over perpetuity, and that’s one of
the issues as well in the Sr. Kaczmarek model
because, I mean, he has just confirmed as this
cap forever.'”

Tr. (English), Day Two, 403: 16-20, Mourre.
Tr. (English), Day Two, 402:22-403:15, Mourre.
Tr. (English), Day Six, 1604:21-1605:7, Abdala.

The President of the Tribunal also asked a question specifically regarding how the

2008 tariffs could be projected into future tariff periods as being unchanged, given

Guatemala’s damages expert, Dr. Abdala, explained during the Hearing how TGH’s

assumptions that the 2008 tariffs would have a permanent effect were entirely wrong:

On 11 March 2013, after the Hearing but before the Post-Hearing Brief submissions,

the Tribunal wrote to the Parties reinforcing the importance of understanding how the

22

57.

58.

sale price was calculated and asking for evidence of the EEGSA’s value in the sale to
EPM:

The Arbitral Tribunal also reminds the parties

that the PHBs should address the questions raised

by the Arbitral Tribunal on Monday 21 and
Tuesday 22 of January [...].

The Arbitral Tribunal would also be grateful if
the parties could address in their PHBs the
following additional questions:

[...]
- Evidence of the value attributed to EEGSA in
the sale to EPM;

- Is it right to assume for the purposes of loss
assessment that the 2008-2013 tariff would
remain in place forever? If not, what are the
consequences on Teco’s claim?!"
In its PHB, TGH failed, again, to provide evidence of the sale price of EEGSA. It
repeated once more that “the sale to EPM was for the holding company DECA II, and
not for EEGSA.”""! It provided no other indication, and of course no evidence, as to
what value was ascribed to EEGSA by EPM and TGH, nor how that value was
determined. Furthermore, it confirmed that for its damages claim, TGH assumed that
the 2008 tariffs would increase over time only by inflation, i.e., they would not
increase in real terms as a result of a five-year tariff review.''? TGH concluded by
simply asserting that “[b]ecause EEGSA’s VAD was significantly decreased in 2008
[...] EEGSA’s value was diminished.”''? In other words, not only did TGH provide
no evidence as to how the sale price was really influenced by the 2008 tariffs, but it
insisted that temporary tariffs like those established in 2008 would result in a

permanent loss of value of EEGSA.

Guatemala, for its part, answered the Tribunal’s questions by reiterating what it had
highlighted as early as its Counter-Memorial, i.e., that TGH was “refus[ing] to

provide internal or external valuations reflecting the price that EPM paid for

Letter from the Tribunal to the Parties, 11 March 2013, p. 2.
Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 168

Ibid., para. 169.

Ibid., para. 172.

23

59.

60.

EEGSA.”''* With respect to the question regarding the value of TGH’s share in
EEGSA in the sale of DECA II, Guatemala indicated that it “does not have in its
possession any direct evidence of the value assigned to EEGSA in the purchase
price.”!'5 Further, in answering the question as to how the 2008 tariffs were taken into

account in establishing EEGSA’s sale price, Guatemala answered that “only the

buyers and sellers, and not Guatemala, know that for certain.” !!¢

Guatemala added that with regard to “the concerns expressed by the Tribunal as to

whether it is correct to assume for the purposes of calculation of damages the tariffs
set in the 2008-2013 period will remain fixed forever”, “[cJlearly this is not correct
given that there is potential for increases over this five-year period and in subsequent

five-year periods.”! '7 Guatemala further explained:

As was established at the Hearing, Mr.
Kaczmarek’s model not only contains projections
for the 50 years of the contract, it also assumes
that there will be automatic renewals of this
contract in perpetuity. The main problem with
this approach is that it is actually impossible to
know what will happen with the tariffs in the
future. The fact that a possible rate increase of
15% is being discussed in the 2013-2018 tariff
review shows that the “measures” really cannot
be considered beyond the five-year period.''*

TGH had another opportunity to answer the Tribunal’s concerns and Guatemala’s
position in its Reply PHB. However, TGH responded again with the bare assertion
that “[b]ecause TECO sold its shares in EEGSA in October 2010, its losses have
crystallized.”!'? In other words, TGH asserted its loss regardless of the lack of
evidence of the real value calculated for EEGSA in the sale or how such value was
influenced by the 2008 tariffs. Curiously, TGH claimed that “[t]he fact that the tariffs

may change over time does not matter.”'° Thus TGH took the untenable position

Memorial on Objections and Counter-Memorial, para. 613.
Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 358.

Ibid., para. 361.

Ibid., para. 355.

Ibid., para. 358.

Claimant’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief, para. 125.

Ibid., para. 127.

24

61.

62.

63.

that while the 2008 tariffs impacted the value of EEGSA, the fact that tariffs would

necessarily increase in the future was totally irrelevant.

In the Award, the Tribunal accepted TGH’s claim for historical losses of
US$21,100,552.!7! However, it rejected the lost value claim for lack of evidence: “the
Arbitral Tribunal finds no_ sufficient evidence of the existence and quantum of the

losses that were allegedly suffered as a consequence of the sale;”!?

“Tt]here is [...] no
sufficient evidence that, had the 2008-2013 tariffs been higher, the transaction price
would have reflected the higher revenues of the company until 2013”; there is “no
evidence in the record of how the transaction price has been determined”; the
“Arbitral Tribunal therefore ignores what other factors might have come into play and
cannot conclude with sufficient_certainty that an increase in revenues until 2013

would have been reflected in the purchase price and to what extent.”

Further, the Tribunal found “no evidence that, as submitted by the Claimant, the
valuation of the company reflected the assumption that_the tariffs would remain
unchanged beyond 2013 and forever.”!”* Thus, the claim was held to be
“speculative,”!?° as

increase of the tariffs at the end of the 2008-2013 tariff period.”!”° The Tribunal

s “there was nothing preventing the distributor from seeking an

thus concluded that “[a]s a consequence, the Arbitral Tribunal cannot accept that the
sale price to EPM was based on the assumption that tariffs would remain forever
unchanged post-2013.”!?7

On interest, the Tribunal asserted that “calculating interest on the entire amount of the
historical damages as from the first day of the tariff period would result in an unjust
enrichment of the Claimant” because “the US$21,100,552 historical losses damages

correspond to revenues that would have progressively flowed into EEGSA from

Award, para. 742.

Ibid., para. 749 (emphasis added).
Ibid., para. 754 (emphasis added).
Ibid., para. 755 (emphasis added).
Ibid., para. 757 (emphasis added).
Ibid., para. 758.

Ibid., para. 760.

 

25

64.

65.

66.

IV.

67.

128
129

130

August 2008 until October 2010, and because such amount has not been discounted to

August 2008.78

In relation to the interest rate, the Tribunal rejected TGH’s claim that the rate should
be 8.8 percent, EEGSA’s weighted average cost of capital (WACC), compounded
annually:

[A]pplying EEGSA’s WACC post-October 2010

would not make sense since the Claimant had

sold its interest in EEGSA and ceased to assume

the company’s operating risks. The Arbitral

Tribunal thus agrees with the Respondent that a

risk-free rate should be applied.
On this basis, the Tribunal reasoned that since “the loss suffered by the Claimant
corresponds to the cost of borrowing money in the United States [...] the proper
interest should be based on the US Prime rate of interest plus a 2 percent premium in

order to reflect a rate that is broadly available to the market.”!°°

The Tribunal thus concluded that damages granted should “bear pre and post-award
interest at the US Prime rate of interest plus a 2 percent premium” from the date of the
sale until full payment, and that such interest should be compounded annually. '
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON THE ALLEGED “LOST VALUE” OF
EEGSA DOES NOT GIVE RISE TO ANY GROUND FOR ANNULMENT
Article 53 of the ICSID Convention provides that “the award shall be binding on the
parties and shall not be subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except those
provided for in this Convention.” Such statement implies that ICSID awards must be
considered final in the sense that they are not subject to a review on the merits.'*

Indeed, “[a]nnulment is fundamentally different from appeal. Annulment [...]is

99133

 

concerned with [...] substantive correctness. As it is often said, “[t]he annulment

system is designed to safeguard the integrity, not the outcome, of ICSID arbitration

Ibid., para. 765 (emphasis a
Ibid., para. 766.
Ibid., para. 767.
Ibid., para. 768.
R Bishop, SM Marchili, Annulment under the ICSID Convention (2012), Exhibit RL-112, p. 20.

 

C Schreuer, “From ICSID Annulment to Appeal Half Way Down the Slippery Slope” (2011) 10 The
Law and Practice of International Courts and Tribunals 211, Exhibit RL-113, p. 212 (emphasis added).

26

68.

69.

70.

proceedings.”'™ The annulment mechanism “does not empower the Committee to

review the merits of the case.”!*°

In the words of other annulment committees: “the role of an Annulment Committee is
[...] not to correct the award.”'*° A request for annulment should avoid “any
temptation to ‘second guess’ their [the awards’] substantive result.”'*’ The function of
an annulment committee “is not a court of appeal, and that it is not the function of the
Committee to pass judgment upon the substance of the Tribunal’s decision.”'** And,
“the committee has no competence to express any view on the substantive correctness

of the Tribunal’s reasoning.”'”

TGH’s application for annulment does not accord with these fundamental principles.
As will be seen below, TGH is dissatisfied with the outcome of the Arbitration,
particularly with regard to damages. Thus TGH seeks a correction of what it sees as
mistakes made by the Tribunal in assessing the evidence provided by TGH and in
deciding on the merits of TGH’s damages claim. These are not proper grounds for

annulment.

THE DECISION DOES NOT FAIL TO STATE REASONS
1. The Tribunal’s decision provides reasons

Apart from the alleged losses incurred between 2008 and October 2010 (historical
losses), TGH also claimed losses for the period after it sold its stake in EEGSA, from
October 2010 onwards. The latter were defined as “lost value” losses, because they
were based on the alleged impaired value at which TGH sold its participation in
EEGSA to EPM. TGH now challenges the Tribunal’s decision on the lost value claim

for failure to state reasons. TGH quantified this loss by comparing: (i) the value at

L Reed, J Paulsson, N Blackaby, Guide to ICSID Arbitration (2010), Exhibit RL-114, p. 162.

Daimler Financial Services v. Republic of Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1) Decision on
Annulment, 7 January 2015, Exhibit RL-115, para. 76.

Impregilo v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17) Decision on Annulment, 24 January
2014, Exhibit RL-116, para. 118.

CDC vy. Republic of the Seychelles (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14) Decision on the Application for
Annulment of the Republic of Seychelles, 29 June 2005, Exhibit RL-58, para. 35.

Azurix v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12) Decision on Annulment, 1 September
2009, Exhibit RL-59, para. 362.

AES Summit Generation Limited v. Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2) Decision of the Ad Hoc
Committee on Annulment, 29 June 2012, Exhibit RL-53, para. 17.

27

71.

which TGH sold its participation in EEGSA in October 2010, which TGH argued was
impaired by the tariffs approved by the CNEE in 2008; and (ii) the higher value that
that it claims its participation would have had if the CNEE had approved higher tariffs
for EEGSA in 2008.'*° TGH quantified the difference between the two values, and
thus the value lost for which TGH ought to be compensated, at US$222,484,783.

It is sufficient to read the Tribunal’s decision on this point to realize that it provided

the reasons for its rejection of this claim:

(a) The tribunal first stated its general conclusion that “the Arbitral Tribunal finds
no sufficient evidence of the existence and quantum of the losses that were

allegedly suffered as a consequence of the sale.”!*!

(b) — The Tribunal then explained that it “accepts that the existing tariffs were taken
99142

into account in fixing the price of the transaction.
(c) Then, however, the Tribunal added that while “the existing tariff were [sic]
considered as a relevant factor in determining the price of the transaction [...]
[t]here is however no sufficient evidence that, had the 2008-2013 tariffs been
higher, the transaction price would have reflected the higher revenues of the

company until 2013.”!3
(d) The Tribunal also held as follows:

[T]here [is] no evidence in the record of how the
transaction price has been determined. The
Arbitral Tribunal therefore ignores what other
factors might have come into play and cannot
conclude with sufficient certainty that an increase
in revenues until 2013 would have been reflected
in the purchase price and to what extent. !**

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 36-37; Kaczmarek, Appendix CER-2, paras. 129, 153-
156, Chapter IX; Memorial on Objections and Counter-Memorial, paras. 591-598.

Award, para. 749.
Ibid., para. 752.
Ibid., para. 754.
Ibid., para. 754.

28

72.

73.

147

(e) Further, the Tribunal pointed out that it simply could not be possible that the
transaction price were based only on the 2008 tariffs, because by definition the
Regulatory Framework provided that tariffs were to be reviewed in 2013 and

every five years thereafter:

The Arbitral Tribunal also finds no evidence that,

as submitted by the Claimant, the valuation of

the company reflected the assumption that the

tariffs would remain unchanged beyond 2013 and

forever. [...] The Arbitral Tribunal agrees with

the Respondent that the claim is in this respect

speculative. The Respondent rightly points out

that “it is actually impossible to know what will

happen with the tariffs in the future.”!5
Thus, the Tribunal simply considered that there was no evidence of any loss incurred
by TGH as a result of the sale. Nor was there evidence of how to quantify such loss.
There was insufficient evidence as to how the sale price had been determined, how it
was influenced by the 2008 tariffs and whether with higher 2008 tariffs the price
would necessarily have been higher, and if so by how much. In addition, it was
simply impossible to make that assessment because by definition, tariffs had not been
fixed indefinitely by the 2008 tariff review and would be changed at the next review

in 2013.

In short, the Tribunal’s decision provided reasons and is understandable. What TGH
really complains about is that it disagrees with the assessment of the evidence
provided by the Tribunal. But, as is often stated by annulment committees, “the
committee has no competence to express any view on the substantive correctness of
the Tribunal’s reasoning.”'“° In particular, an annulment committee should not
interfere with the Tribunal’s conclusions on the sufficiency of evidence. An ad hoc
committee “cannot therefore enter, within the bounds of its limited mission, into an

analysis of the probative value of the evidence produced by the parties.” 47 Th other

Ibid., paras. 755, 757.

AES Summit Generation Limited v. Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2) Decision of the Ad Hoc
Committee on Annulment, 29 June 2012, Exhibit RL-53, para. 17.

Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri v. Republic of Kazakhstan (Caso
CIADI No. ARB/05/16) Decision on Annulment, 25 March 2010, Exhibit RL-110 para. 96 (emphasis
added).

29

74.

75.

76.

148

149

150

words, “it_would not be proper for an ad hoc committee to overturn a tribunal’s

treatment of the evidence to which it was referred.'“*

Taking issue with whether reasons are correct or adequate would turn annulment into
a re-evaluation of the record before the tribunal and thereby turn annulment into an

appeal. In the words of another committee:

[A]n examination of the reasons presented by a
tribunal cannot _be transformed into _a_re-
examination of the correctness of the factual and
legal premises on which the award is based.
Committees do not have the power to review the
adequacy of the reasons set forth by the tribunal
in its award. Rather, the role of the committee is
limited to analyzing _whether_a_reader_can
understand how the tribunal arrived _at_ its
conclusion. Broadening the scope of Article
52(1)(e) to comprise decisions with inadequate
reasons would transform the annulment
proceeding into an appeal.'” (Emphasis added.)

The case law is abundant on this point. In Enron v Argentina, for example, the

annulment committee held:

It is generally accepted that this ground of
annulment only applies in a clear case when there
has been a failure by the tribunal to state any
reasons for its decision on a particular question,
and not in a case where there has merely been a
failure by the tribunal to state correct or
convincing reasons. 150

In the words of the committee in Mine v Guinea (curiously cited by TGH in its
favour):'*!
The adequacy of the reasoning is not an
appropriate standard of review under paragraph

Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri v. Republic of Kazakhstan (Caso
CIADI No. ARB/05/16) Decision on Annulment, 25 March 2010, Exhibit RL-110 para. 98 (emphasis
added).

Caratube v. Republic of Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/12) Decision on Annulment, 21
February 2014, Exhibit RL-52, para. 102.

Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3) Decision on the Application for Annulment of the
Argentine Republic, 30 July 2010, Annex RL-117, para. 74.

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para. 97.

77.

78.

79.

80.

(1)(e), because it almost inevitably draws an ad
hoc Committee into an examination of the
substance of the tribunal’s decision, in disregard
of the exclusion of the remedy of appeal by
Article 53 of the Convention.'°?

Another committee has put it as follows:

The ground for annulment of Article 52(1)(e)

does not allow any review of the challenged

Award which would lead the ad hoc Committee

to reconsider whether the reasons underlying the

Tribunal’s decisions were appropriate or not,

convincing or not.!%3
The Tribunal’s reasons for rejecting TGH’s lost value claim were correct, but even if
they were not, it clearly provide reasons. A failure to award damages due to lack of
evidence is fully comprehensible. In such circumstances, there is no basis for

annulment.
2. The Tribunal’s decision contains no contradiction warranting annulment

TGH argues that there is a contradiction in the Tribunal’s holding on damages and
that this amounts to a failure to state reasons. According to TGH, given the Tribunal’s
decision to award damages for lost tariff revenue between 2008 and 2010 as a result
of the 2008 tariffs, it had to award damages for the rest of the tariff period, i.e., up to
2013.4 Further, TGH argues that since “[t]he Arbitral Tribunal accept[ed] that the
existing tariffs were taken into account in fixing the price of the transaction,”!® it had
to find that TGH sold at a loss due to the 2008 tariffs, and thus award lost value

losses.'°°

It must be noted that annulment for lack of reasoning is warranted only in the most

extreme case of contradictory reasoning. As held by an annulment committee, only

Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) MINE v. Government of Guinea (ICSID Case
No. ARB/84/4) Decision on the Application by Guinea for Partial Annulment, 14 December 1989,
Exhibit RL-47, para. 5.08.

Wena Hotels v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4) Decision on the Application by
the Arab Republic of Egypt for Annulment, 5 February 2002, Exhibit RL-64, para. 78.

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para. 90.
Award, para. 752.

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para. 92.

81.

82.

83.

“outright or unexplained contradictions can involve a failure to state reasons.”!*” In
the words of one annulment committee:
[When dealing with an annulment request based

on an alleged failure to state reasons, an ad hoc

committee must look beyond what may, at a first

glance, appear to be a contradiction and seek to

follow the logic and the reasoning of the award.

In other words, an award must be upheld unless

the logic is so contradictory as to be “as useful as

no reasons at all.!°* (Emphasis added.)
There are no such contradictions in the Award. First, while TGH claimed losses for
the period 2008-2010 based on lost tariff revenue, the losses between 2010 and 2013
and from 2013 onwards were based on the alleged diminished value at which TGH
sold its participation in EEGSA.'? In this respect, as explained by the Tribunal, TGH
did not provide sufficient evidence to: (i) ascertain how the sale price was determined;
(ii) what other factors apart from the 2008 tariffs may have come into play in
determining the sale price; and (iii) whether such price would have really increased

with higher tariffs for the period 2010-2013, and if so by how much.'°

In other words, the Tribunal’s holdings can be perfectly reconciled: up to October
2010, the Tribunal considered it clear that TGH had incurred losses due to
diminished revenues received by EEGSA. In October 2010, however, TGH received
a substantial amount for the sale of its shares in EEGSA and the Tribunal could no
longer ascertain whether, or to what extent, TGH actually incurred a loss. Even if the
2008 tariffs were taken into account for the sale price, other factors could also have
had an influence and there was simply no evidence that higher tariffs between 2010
and 2013 would have necessarily produced a higher sale price. Nor was there

evidence of how much higher a sales price might be.

Likewise, with regard to the period from 2013 onwards, there is no contradiction in
the Tribunal’s holding. The claim of permanent impairment to the value of EEGSA as
a result of the 2008 tariffs was simply not credible to the Tribunal, since those tariffs
MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7) Decision on

Annulment, 21 March 2007, Exhibit RL-55, para. 78.

Malicorp Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/18) Decision on Annulment, 3
July 2013, Exhibit RL-48, para. 45.

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 3-4, 50, 89, 92, 94, 95, 96, 109, 119, 121.
Award, para. 754.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

162

would be replaced by new tariffs in 2013 —likewise in 2018— and in every five-year
period thereafter. It would have been absurd if the Tribunal had found Guatemala
liable for an alleged loss from 2013 onwards due to the 2008 tariffs, considering that

by then such tariffs would no longer be in place.

In short, while the loss between 2008 and 2010 was considered by the Tribunal as
certain, from October 2010, given the sale, that loss was no longer certain and in any
case not proven. Beyond 2013 there could be no loss attributable to the measures (the

2008-2013 tariffs) as these would have ceased to be in effect.

Therefore, TGH’s alleged contradiction in the Tribunal’s holding on damages does

not exist.
3. The Tribunal’s treatment of the evidence does not give rise to annulment

TGH also argues that the Tribunal’s decision on lost value damages should be
annulled for failure to state reasons because the Tribunal “failed to address or even
acknowledge the extensive expert and documentary evidence adduced by the parties
regarding the loss of value of TECO’s interest in EEGSA,” and “failed to explain

why” a certain piece of evidence “should prevail over that evidence.”!'*!

TGH’s claim is flawed. An ICSID tribunal’s treatment of the evidence on the record
is within its discretion and is beyond the scope of annulment under the ICSID

Convention. Indeed, ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1) is clear in this respect:
Rule 34. Evidence: General Principles

(1) The Tribunal shall be the judge of the

admissibility of any evidence adduced and of its

probative value.
If an annulment committee could question why a tribunal considered one piece of
evidence more convincing than another, it would be clearly stepping into the
tribunal’s role and engaging in a full review of the evidentiary record of the case. This
would amount to second guessing the merits determinations made by the tribunal,

which a committee simply cannot do. 162

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para. 96.

See paras. 9-14.

89.

90.

91.

It is curious that TGH cites only one annulment decision to support its claim on this

point, the decision in Rumeli v Kazakhstan |?

However, TGH neglects to mention

that the Rumeli committee held it could not review the probative value that the

tribunal assigned to evidence produced in the case:

An ad hoc committee is not a court of appeal and
cannot therefore enter, within the bounds of its
limited mission, into an analysis of the probative
value of the evidence produced by the parties.
[...]it_would_not be _proper_for_an_ad_hoc

committee to overturn a tribunal’s treatment_of
the evidence to which it was referred [...] the
Tribunal took into account and considered the
Parties’ positions [...] and the Applicant’s
arguments to the contrary amount to an attempt
to appeal on questions of evidence which the
Tribunal was entitled to, and did, determine. '
(Emphasis added.)

 

A similar holding is contained in the decision on annulment in Wena v Egypt:

[I]t is in the Tribunal's discretion to make its
opinion about the relevance and evaluation of the
elements of proof presented by each Party.
Arbitration Rule 34(1) recalls that the Tribunal is
the judge of the probative value of the evidence
produced.'®

The committee in Industria Nacional de Alimentos v Peru also held that annulment

cannot be sought on the basis of the incorrect weight given by the tribunal to certain

pieces of evidence:

[T]he Ad hoc Committee does not consider it to
be its task to determine whether the test
employed by the Tribunal and the weight given
by the Tribunal to various elements were “right”
or “wrong”. [...] It is no part of the Committee’s
function, as already indicated above, to purport

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para. 97.

Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri v. Republic of Kazakhstan (Caso

CIADI No. ARB/05/16) Decision on Annulment, 25 March 2010, Exhibit RL-110, paras. 96, 98.

Wena Hotels v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4) Decision on the Application by

the Arab Republic of Egypt for Annulment, 5 February 2002, Exhibit RL- 64, para. 65.

92.

93.

94.

95.

167

168

169

to substitute its own view for that arrived at by
the Tribunal.'°

In the words of the annulment committee in Fraport v Philippines:

It is not for the ad hoc Committee to review,

within the confines of the annulment proceeding,

the consideration of the factual record by the

Arbitral Tribunal.'”
The Rumeli committee also held that an annulment committee cannot censure an
award just because the tribunal may not have cited or referenced every piece of

evidence provided by the parties:

The purpose of the reasons requirement under
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention is not
to require the tribunal to explain its consideration
and treatment of each piece of evidence adduced
by either party, surely an excessive burden for
any court or tribunal.'*

The above case law clearly demonstrates that TGH’s annulment challenge based on
the alleged incorrect manner in which the Tribunal treated or assessed the evidence is
flawed. In any case, there is nothing incorrect in the Tribunal’s treatment of the

evidence.

TGH complains that the Tribunal did not address its evidence as to how the sale price
of EEGSA had been negotiated. However, it refers to only two documents. Curiously
enough, the two documents referred to by TGH are documents that were disclosed in
the Arbitration in response to a document request by Guatemala for documents related

to the sale.’ TGH only produced these documents to comply with the Tribunal’s

Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Pert, S.A. (formerly Empresas Lucchetti, S.A. and
Lucchetti Pert, S.A.) v. Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4) Decision on Annulment, 5
September 2007, Exhibit RL-60, para. 112.

Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25)
Decision on Annulment, 23 December 2010, Exhibit RL-118, para. 84.

Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri v. Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/16) Decision on Annulment, 25 March 2010, Exhibit RL-110, para. 104.

Procedural Order No. 1, 16 December 2011: Document Production Request by Respondent, Exhibit A,
Tribunal’s Decision column, pgs. 21-22; 27-28.

96.

97.

98.

170

order. Further, during the proceedings TGH made virtually no reference to these

documents to support its case.!”

The first of these two documents is EPM’s Non-Binding Offer Letter to Iberdrola
dated 26 July 2010, in which EPM offered to purchase DECA II for US$597 million
(the Letter).'"! The Letter provides no purchase price for EEGSA, but TGH argues
that it shows that EPM had undertaken a DCF analysis of EEGSA and that such
analysis assumed no increase in tariffs for 2013 and 2014.17 According to TGH, this
document proves that the sale price was calculated without assuming a future tariff
increase, and thus is a reliable reference for the loss in value of EEGSA due to the

2008 tariffs.

However, TGH does not mention that the Letter also says that such analysis would be
subject to a proper due diligence analysis: “the approval of the final offer price on

wl73
"3 Hence

behalf of EPM’s Board of Directors [is] subject to an on-site due diligence.
the Letter provides not only no sale price of EEGSA, but also no reliable indication as
to how it would be calculated (with or without tariff increases in 2013 and thereafter).
In fact, the Letter noted that EPM would conduct a due diligence before providing a
“Binding Offer” that would be used for the final sale.'" Presumably, the due
diligence documents would have included the analysis of possible tariff increases in
2013 and thereafter, and the binding offer would have detailed these assumptions, but

TGH declined to provide any such documentation in the course of the Arbitration.'°

Rather, it chose to rely upon a non-binding offer presented months prior to the sale.

The Non-Binding Offer Letter was mentioned only once in all of TGH’s pleadings in

the proceedings. It was in its Reply Memorial, when it relied on this document to note

Exhibit C-531 was referred to in order to justify EEGSA’s actual value and the reasonability of TGH’s
comparable companies analysis, while Exhibit C-557 was referred to exclusively to justify the
reasonability of TGH’s comparable companies analysis, as a response to Guatemala’s argument that
there were no companies comparable to EEGSA (Reply, para. 293, footnote 1427).

Non-Binding Offer Letter from Empresas Piiblicas de Medellin to P. Azagra, 26 July 2010, Exhibit C-

557.

 

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para. 98.

See Guatemala’s translation of the Non-Binding Offer Letter from Empresas Publicas de Medellin to P.
Azagra, 26 July 2010, Exhibit R-126, p. | (emphasis added). Guatemala refers to its own translation of
this document filed in the Arbitration because TGH’s translation of this sentence in Exhibit C-557 is
inaccurate.

Document C3-01 became Non-Binding Offer Letter from Empresas Ptiblicas de Medellin to P. Azagra,
26 July 2010, Exhibit C-557, pgs. 1-3.

 

See paras. 45-52.

99.

100.

101.

that “EPM conducted a comparable publicly-traded company and comparable
transaction approach,” to respond to Guatemala’s argument that there were no
companies comparable to EEGSA.' TGH never said that the Non-Binding Offer
Letter somehow proved that the 2008 tariffs impacted the purchase price. Thus, even
if TGH could prove that the Tribunal disregarded this piece of evidence (which it
cannot), it would have been perfectly reasonable for the Tribunal to have done so,
since TGH did not explain in its briefs its use and particular relevance for determining

the sale price of EEGSA or how the 2008 tariffs impacted such price.

Further, the most the Letter could show is the buyer’s conservative expectations for
the 2013 tariff review, but of course it could not mean that no tariff increase would
not occur in 2013, 2018 or in any subsequent tariff review. Thus, the Letter simply
confirms how unreliable it was to consider that the sale price crystallized any loss
caused by the 2008 tariffs, since tariffs would be reviewed and could increase in 2013.
The only other evidence that TGH points to is the 14 October 2010 Fairness Opinion,
in which Citibank assessed the fairness of the price offered by EPM for DECA m.!”
Contrary to TGH’s allegations, the Fairness Opinion does not provide any evidence of
EEGSA’s sale value (it refers to DECA II). Nor does the Fairness Opinion explain
how the 2008 tariffs were taken into account in determining such value. Indeed, TGH
never even made such an argument in the course of the arbitration.!”8 Thus, the
Tribunal cannot be expected to have made such a radical inference absent an attempt

to even brief the argument.

In any event, it is obvious that the Tribunal did not disregard the Fairness Opinion as
TGH alleges, since the Tribunal made express reference to that document in its final
Award, including the fact that it was originally produced in response to Guatemala’s

request for documents. 179

Reply, para. 293, footnote 1427.

Citibank Fairness Opinion, Presentation to the Board of Directors of TECO Energy, Inc., 14 October
2010, Exhibit C-531, p. 2.

TGH submitted Exhibit C-531 with its Reply Memorial, and only discussed that document at para. 293
with respect to the validity of the comparatives analysis. The document is again mentioned in TGH’s
Post-Hearing Brief at paras. 169, 171, 173, in reference to assessing the reasonability of TGH’s expert
valuation. TGH therefore did not put forth the argument that this exhibit, or exhibit C-557,
demonstrated how the 2008 tariffs were taken into account in calculating the sale price.

 

 

 

Award, paras. 424, 426 (referenced in Abdala and Schoeters, Appendix RER-4, para. 78, Table VI).
See also Guatemala’s initial document production request: Letter from Nigel Blackaby to Andrea

37

102.

103.

104.

105.

There was other evidence on the record that demonstrated that the loss of value
claimed by TGH was flawed, but TGH does not refer to it. For example, in the
Management Presentation dated September 2010, in which TGH and its partners
presented EEGSA for sale to interested parties, EEGSA was characterized as “one of
the best and most solid companies in the country” due to inter alia, the “solidity of the
value of its shares.”'® This statement completely contradicts any suggestion that
EEGSA had permanently lost value as a consequence of the 2008 tariffs approved by
the CNEE. Another example is the Press Release following the sale, which confirmed
that EPM bought EEGSA because they considered it “the largest_and_most solid
electricity distribution and marketing company in Central America.”!*! Again, the sale

could in no way indicate a permanent lost value of EEGSA.

TGH also complains that the Tribunal did not cite the expert reports on damages
provided by the Parties.'*? This is incorrect as the Award does refer to those reports in
its section on damages, including in the section relating to the alleged lost value of

EEGSA.'*

In any event, the Tribunal did not need to refer to those reports in detail in rejecting
the lost value claim because those reports provided no contemporary evidence relating
to how the sale price of EEGSA to EPM had been determined. Nor did they provide
contemporary evidence that higher tariffs for the period 2008-2013 would have

increased that price, and if so by how much.

This was fundamental, because TGH framed its claim, as stated in its reply PHB, as
follows: “[b]ecause TECO sold its shares in EEGSA in October 2010, its losses have

crystalized” and the “measure of damage equals [...] the difference between TECO’s

 

180

Menaker on document production, 7 November 2011, Category C1 (Document was produced on 6
january 2015). It is also revealing that the Tribunal, in support of its conclusion that the claim is too
speculative (Award, para. 757), refers with agreement to paragraph 38 of Guatemala’s Counter-
Memorial on the Merits where Guatemala discusses in a series of paragraphs the abusive nature of
TGH’s claim and its speculative character. Specifically paragraph 35, which the Tribunal must have
surely examined, includes a reference to Citibank’s Fairness opinion in the form of Guatemala’s
Exhibit R-127.

 

DECA II Management Presentation, September 2010, Exhibit R-127, p. 22 (Emphasis in bold in the
original). The Spanish original reads as follows: “EEGSA, una de las mejores y mas sélidas empresas
del pais.” See also Informative Bulletin from Empresas Piblicas de Medellin, 21 October 2010,
Exhibit R-129.

 

Informative Bulletin from Empresas Ptiblicas de Medellin, 21 October 2010, Exhibit R-129.
TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 96, 98-99, 101.
Award, paras. 718, 720, 730, 750.

106.

107.

108.

109.

share of the purchase price that it received from EPM and what it would have
received had Guatemala not breached the DR-CAFTA in setting EEGSA’s VAD [i.e.,
the 2008 tariffs.J”'** Thus, it was logical that the Tribunal focused on whether there
was any evidence to prove that TGH could have sold at a higher price if the 2008-
2013 tariffs had been higher.

In its Post Hearing Brief, TGH argued that “[t]he fact that tariffs may change over
time does not matter” in determining whether TGH could prove its loss.'° How could
this be right when what TGH was selling was a participation in an electricity
distribution business with a 50-year concession of which 40 years where still
remaining, and tariffs would be reviewed every five years? How could the value of
EEGSA be calculated, and thus any loss incurred or demonstrated, without taking into
account the possibility of future tariff reviews? This and other unsubstantiated

arguments raised by TGH prompted the dismissal of its claim for lost value.

TGH also complains that the Tribunal, rather than citing other evidence, referred to a
press interview dated 23 October 2010 of the CEO of EPM, Mr. Federico Restrepo, in
which Mr. Restrepo mentioned only as a possibility that with higher tariffs EEGSA’s
sale price may have been higher. '*° TGH also argues that the Tribunal emphasized
one aspect of this interview rather than others.'*7 TGH says that “Mr. Restrepo’s
interview thus establishes, if EEGSA’s VAD and tariffs had been higher [...] EPM

would have paid a higher purchase price.”'**

It is clear that what TGH argues is that the Tribunal wrongly attributed relevance to
this interview over other evidence, and interpreted the interview incorrectly. But this
is completely irrelevant for annulment. The Tribunal was perfectly entitled to choose
the evidence that it considered to be more significant, and to interpret the evidence as

it thought appropriate.

The Tribunal’s decision was based on its own assessment of the evidence and this

cannot be reviewed in annulment. In the words of the Tribunal:

Claimant’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief, para. 125.
Ibid., para. 127.

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 95-97, 106, 119; Award, paras. 753-754.
TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para. 118.

Ibid., para. 107.

110.

189

190

[T]he Arbitral Tribunal finds no_ sufficient
evidence of the existence _and_ quantum of the

losses that __were allegedly suffered asa

consequence of the sale.

[T]he existing tariff were [sic] considered as a
relevant factor in determining the price of the
transaction. There is however no_ sufficient
evidence that, had the 2008-2013 tariffs been
higher, the transaction price would have reflected
the higher revenues of the company until 2013.
[...] [There [is] no evidence in the record of how
the transaction price has been determined. The
Arbitral Tribunal therefore ignores what_other
factors might have come into play and cannot
conclude with sufficient certainty that an increase
in revenues until 2013 would have been reflected
in the purchase price and to what extent.!”?

The Arbitral Tribunal also finds no evidence that,
as submitted by the Claimant, the valuation of
the company reflected the assumption that the
tariffs would remain unchanged beyond 2013 and
forever. |”! (Emphasis added.)

The Tribunal indeed considered all of the evidence before it. It first spent 30 pages

2

and 158 paragraphs explaining the facts," and 34 pages and 169 paragraphs
summarizing the position of the Parties on the merits based on the evidence submitted
by each Party,!° In its damages analysis on the merits, it referred, directly or by
reference to the Parties’ pleadings, to the following expert reports and witness
statements: CER-2, CER-5, RER-1, RER-2, RER-4, RER-5, CWS-2, CWS-4, CWS-
5, CWS-6, cws-s;!4 as well as to at least the following pieces of documentary
evidence: C-217, C-218, C-246, C-267, C-297, C-303, C-324, C-326, C-352, C-353,

Award para. 749.

Ibid., para. 754.

Ibid., para. 755.

Ibid., Part IV, pgs. 21-51, paras. 79-237.
Ibid., Part V1, pgs. 58-92, paras. 264-433.

Kaczmarek, Appendix CER-2; Kaczmarek II, Reply Appendix CER-5; M Abdala and M Schoeters,
Appendix RER-1; Damonte Appendix RER-2; Mr. Abdala and Mr. Schoeters Rejoinder Expert
Report, Appendix RER-4; Damonte Rejoinder, Appendix RER-5; Callahan I, Appendix CWS-2;
Giacchino, Appendix CWS-4; Gillette, Appendix CWS-5; Maté, Appendix CWS-6; Callahan Il,
Appendix CWS-8.

 

40

111.

112.

196

197

198

199

C-354, C-356, R-8, R-80, R-83, R-130, R-132, R-133, R-134, R-162.'” The Tribunal

also referred to the Hearing transcript abundantly. 196

To conclude, TGH incorrectly challenges the Tribunal’s treatment of the evidence in
the Arbitration as a failure to state reasons. TGH’s claim for annulment entails
precisely what the Rumeli annulment committee warned against, that “[a]n ad hoc
committee is not a court of appeal and cannot therefore enter, within the bounds of its
limited mission, into an analysis of the probative value of the evidence produced by
the parties,” a committee cannot “overturn a tribunal’s treatment of the evidence to
which it was referred,'°” and “t]he purpose of the reasons requirement under Article
52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention is not to require the tribunal to explain its

consideration and treatment of each piece of evidence adduced by either party, surely

an excessive burden for any court or tribunal.”!*

THE DECISION DOES NOT DEPART FROM ANY FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE

TGH argues that the Tribunal’s rejection of its claim for lost value seriously departed
from three fundamental rules of procedure: (i) the rules relating to “treatment of

evidence and burden of proof,”'”? (ii) “that a party need not prove an allegation that is

Award, paras. 716-768; See also Email from M. Calleja to G. Perez forwarding Email from M. Quijivix
to L. Maté and M. Calleja, 28 May 2008, Exhibit C-217; Email from M. Calleja to L. Giacchino,
forwarding Email from M. Quijivix to L. Maté and M. Calleja, 28 May 2008, Exhibit C-218; Expert
Commission’s Report, Exhibit C-246; Sigla Report, 28 July 2008, Exhibit C-267; Standard & Poor's,
Empresa Electrica de Guatemala S.A. Ratings Lowered to ‘BB’ from ‘BB’/in CreditWatch Neg,
Exhibit C-297; TECO Guatemala, Inc. Operations Summary for Periods Ended September 30, Board
Book Write-up, October 2008, Exhibit C-303; TECO Energy Form 10-k, 26 February 2009, Exhibit
C-324; TECO Guatemala, Inc. Operations Summary for Periods Ended March 31, Board Book Write-
up dated Apr. 2009, Exhibit C-326; Letter from EPM to Iberdrola, TPS, and EDP, 6 October 2010,
Exhibit C-352; Teco Energy, Inc. Board of Directors Meeting (Proposed Sale of DECA II), 14 October
2010, Exhibit C-353, Minutes of TECO Energy, Inc. Board of Directors meeting dated 14 Oct. 2010,
14 October 2010, Exhibit C-354; Stock Purchase Agreement between Iberdrola, TPS, EDP, and EPM,
21 October 2010, Exhibit C-356, LGE, Exhibit R-8; Notarial Act Establishing the Expert
Commission, 6 June 2008, Exhibit R-80; Letter from Jean Riubrugent, Carlos Bastos, and Leonardo
Giacchino to Carlos Colom Bickford and Luis Maté, 12 June 2008, Exhibit R-83; Press Release by
EDP, “EDP sells its stake in DECA II”, 21 October 2010, Exhibit R-130; Press Release from Iberdrola
Energia $.A., 22 October 2010, Exhibit R-132; “We won’t wave a flag. We respect people’s roots,”
Prensa Libre, 23 October 2010, Exhibit R-133; Press release of Teco Guatemala Holdings, LLC,
“Teco Energy Reports Third Quarter Results,” 28 October 2010, Exhibit R-134; Press release of Teco
Guatemala Holdings, LLC, “Teco Guatemala Holdings LLC sells its interest in Guatemalan electric
distribution company,” 21 October 2010, Exhibit R-162.

Award, paras. 273, 298, 323, 324, 330, 355, 384, 389, 395, 396, 402, 453, 601, 602, 648, 726, 739, 740,
746.

 

  

Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri v. Republic of Kazakhstan (Caso
CIADI No. ARB/05/16) Decision on Annulment, 25 March 2010, Exhibit RL-110 paras. 96, 98.

Ibid., para. 104.
TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 110, 124.

41

113.

114.

115.

116.

200

201

202

203

204

accepted by the opposing party,””” and (iii) “the right to be heard.””°' TGH is wrong

on all three counts.

1. The Tribunal did not depart from any rule of procedure relating to the
treatment of evidence and standard of proof

TGH’s allegation is that the Tribunal imposed on TGH too “onerous” an “evidentiary
burden” regarding its damages claim for lost value, and that this is a serious departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure.” TGH affirms that there is authority for the
proposition that “‘treatment of evidence and burden of proof’ is among the

fundamental rules of procedure.”?°?

However, TGH does not identify the rule of procedure that the Tribunal has allegedly
breached. TGH’s contention that “‘treatment of evidence and burden of proof’ is
among the fundamental rules of procedure” is a mere assertion.

What TGH appears to be complaining about is the “standard” of proof that the

Tribunal applied, i.e. it takes issue with the type of “evidence that would have
satisfied the Tribunal” with regard to its allegation of damages for the lost value of
EEGSA. However, it is well established that tribunals have discretion in relation to

the standard of proof to be applied:

Whichever party bears the burden of proof on a
particular issue and presents supporting evidence
“must also convince the Tribunal of [its] truth,
lest it be disregarded for want, or insufficiency,
of proof.” The degree to which evidence must be
proven can generally be summarized as a
“balance of probability,” “reasonable degree of
probability” or a preponderance of the evidence.
Because no single precise standard has been
articulated, tribunals ultimately — exercise
discretion in this area.*™*

This principle arises from the fact that each tribunal is the judge of the probative value

of evidence, as explained in Alpha Projektholding v Ukraine:

Ibid., para. 124.
Ibid., paras. 116, 120, 134.
Ibid., para. 112.

Ibid., citing Impregilo v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17) Award, 21 June 2011,
Exhibit RL-119 paras. 83, 110.

Unglaube v. Republic of Costa Rica (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/1) Award, 16 May 2012, Exhibit RL-
120 para. 34.

42

An additional question is the standard of proof —
more specifically, what level _of evidentiary
showing would be _sufficient_to prove _an
assertion [...] It is generally understood that “the
probative force of the evidence presented is for
the Tribunal to determine,” there being no “strict
judicial _rules of evidence” binding upon
international arbitral_tribunals. This general
principle is confirmed by Rule 34(1) of ICSID"s
Arbitration Rules, which provides: “The Tribunal
shall be the judge of the admissibility of any
evidence adduced and of its probative value,”*”>
(Emphasis added.)

117. Similarly, the tribunal in Soufraki v UAE held:

What weight is given to oral or documentary
evidence in an ICSID arbitration is dictated
solely by Rule 34(1) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules:

The Tribunal shall be the judge of the
admissibility of any evidence adduced and of its
probative value.

In the present instance, it is thus for this Tribunal
to consider and analyse the totality of the
evidence and determine whether it leads to the
conclusion that Claimant has discharged his
burden of proof?”

118. Another example is the award in Rompetrol v Romania:

The Tribunal is unable to accept, in full, the
position of either Party. It starts from the position
that in international arbitration — including
investment arbitration — the rules of evidence are
neither__rigid _nor__technical. If further
confirmation of that were necessary, in the
specific ICSID context, it can be found in
Articles 43-45 of the Washington Convention,
the intention behind which is plainly that a
tribunal should _possess_a_large measure of
discretion over how the relevant facts are to be
found and to be proved — a general principle
which finds strong reinforcement in the

0s Alpha Projektholding v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/16) Award, 8 November 2010, Exhibit
RL-121 para. 238.

206 Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7) Award, 7 July 2004, Exhibit RL-122,
para. 61.

43

119.

120.

121.

207

208,

209

210

Arbitration Rules, notably in paragraphs (1) and
(3) of Rule 34. The overall effect of these
provisions is that an ICSID tribunal is endowed
with the independent power to determine, within
the context provided by the circumstances of the
dispute before it, whether particular evidence or
kinds of _evidence_should be admitted or
excluded, what weight (if any) should be given to
particular items of evidence so admitted, whether
it would like to see further evidence of any
particular kind on any issue arising in the case,
and so on and so forth.2” (Emphasis added.)

Hence, contrary to TGH’s contentions, there is no “fundamental rule of procedure”
imposing a given standard of proof on a tribunal. The standard of proof is an issue
regarding which arbitral tribunals have wide discretion because they alone are

responsible for assessing the probative value of evidence.

Further, and in any case, TGH is wrong that the Tribunal imposed a too onerous an

evidentiary burden on it to prove its lost value damages. TGH relies on Gemplus v.

208

Mexico for support,” but that tribunal clearly held that the claimant bears the burden

of proof on damages:

Burden of Proof: Under international law and the
BITs, the Claimants bear the overall burden of
proving the loss founding their claims for
compensation. If that loss is found to be too
uncertain or speculative or otherwise unproven,
the Tribunal must reject these claims, even if
liability is established against the Respondent.””

In a similar manner, in Grand River v United States the tribunal held that “a claimant
has the burden of proving both the breach and the claimed loss or damage”.”'°

Likewise, in Gold Reserve v Venezuela, the tribunal held that the “Claimant bears the

Rompetrol v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3) Award, 6 May 2013, Exhibit RL-123, para. 181
TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para. 110.

Gemplus, S.A., SLP, S.A. and Gemplus Industrial, S.A. de C.V. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/04/3 & ARB(AF)/04/4) Award, 16 June 2010, Exhibit RL-124, paras. 12-56

Grand River Enterprises Six Nations, Ltd., et al. v. United States of America (UNCITRAL) Award, 12
January 2011, Exhibit RL-125, para. 237.

44

122.

123.

124.

burden of proving its claimed damages” and that “damages cannot be speculative or

merely ‘possible’”.7!!

The latter point, that speculative or uncertain damages cannot be awarded is well-
established. For example, the Iran-US Claims Tribunal in Amoco v Iran held that:
“{oJne of the best settled rules of the law of international responsibility of States is
that no reparation for speculative or uncertain damage can be awarded.””!? The same
idea is expressed in Article 36.2 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility, which
provides that “compensation shall cover any financially assessable damage including
loss of profits insofar as it is established.”?'> As the commentary to this article notes,
“[t]ribunals have been reluctant to provide compensation for claims with inherent

A 92
speculative elements.”*"*

In the present case, the Tribunal clearly found that the evidence offered by TGH to
prove its damages for the lost value of EEGSA was insufficient and that its claim was
too uncertain and speculative: “[t]he Arbitral Tribunal cannot conclude with sufficient
certainty that an increase in revenues until 2013 would have been reflected in the
purchase price and to what extent,” and “agrees with the Respondent that the claim in

this respect is speculative.”?"°

In short, the claim was too speculative and uncertain, and it was properly rejected. In
any case, the Tribunal’s approach to the standard of proof fell within its powers,
including its power to judge the probative value of the evidence. Its approach in this
regard could in no way be considered a serious departure from an unidentified

fundamental rule of procedure.

Gold Reserve Inc. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/09/1) Award, 22
September 2014, Exhibit RL-126, para. 685.

Amoco International Finance v. Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran-US Claims Tribunal Case No. 56)
Partial Award, 14 July 1987, Exhibit RL-127, para. 238.

International Law Commission, Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, United
Nations (2001), Exhibit RL-128, Art. 36.2.

United Nations, “Materials on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts”
(ST/LEG/SER.B/25), in United Nations Legislative Series (2012), Exhibit RL-129, p. 241.

Award, para. 757.

45

125.

126.

127.

128.

2. The Tribunal did not depart from any rule of procedure providing that a

party need not prove an allegation that is accepted by the opposing party
TGH claims also that the Tribunal departed from another fundamental rule of
procedure providing that “a party need not prove an allegation that is accepted by the
opposing party.”*!° TGH argues that “Guatemala conceded that, if liability were
found, TECO would have suffered damages upon the sale of its interest in
EEGSA.”!” Thus the Tribunal had to award the alleged damages relating to the fact
that it sold EEGSA at a loss.

This is a flawed allegation. Guatemala never conceded that TGH suffered any
damages. It actually argued the contrary, for example that “TGH has not suffered any

v2
loss”?!

and that “[t]he hearing demonstrated that TGH’s claim for damages is not
credible.”?!? Guatemala reviewed TGH’s damages valuation model in order to
demonstrate that even under that model there had been no losses.””” Nowhere in the
pleadings can TGH identify the statement that it attributes to Guatemala, that “if
liability were found, TECO would have suffered damages upon the sale of its interest

in EEGSA.”7!

Thus, the issue of whether TGH had suffered loss, and any quantification of such a
loss, had to be decided by the Tribunal, as there was no agreement in this respect. The
fundamental rule of procedure applicable in this scenario is provided in article 48(3)
of the ICSID Convention, which states that “[t]he award shall deal with every
question submitted to the Tribunal, and shall state the reasons upon which it is based.”
To comply with this rule, the Tribunal decided on the merits of all aspects of TGH’s

claim for damages.

Guatemala clearly explained that it did not accept that TGH had proven losses due to
the alleged lost value of EEGSA. It pointed to evidence to the contrary: that

Guatemala “does not have in its possession any direct evidence of the value assigned

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para. 124.
TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para. 124.
Rejoinder, Section VI.

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, Section V.
Ibid., paras. 362-363.

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para. 124.

46

129.

130.

225

226

227

99,222

to EEGSA in the purchase price that “it is incorrect to consider the alleged

measures as perpetual in nature for the purposes of calculating damages [...] given

the imminent possibility that a tariff increase will be granted to EEGSA in the tariff

9223

review that is under way; that in the Management Presentation dated September

2010, TGH and its partners presented EEGSA for sale to interested parties as “one of

the best and most solid companies in the country” due to inter alia, the “solidity of the

24,

value of its shares,”°** and that similarly, the Press Release following the sale

confirmed that EPM bought EEGSA because it considered it to be “the best and most

> 225

solid electricity distribution and marketing company in Central America

3. The Tribunal did not depart from any rule of procedure relating to the
right to be heard

With its allegations regarding the right to be heard, TGH again second-guesses the
Tribunal’s assessment of the probative value of the evidence on the record. In
particular, TGH complains that the Tribunal relied on Mr. Restrepo’s press interview

“without warning” and “failed to inform the parties of the central importance that it

intended to attach to this statement.””°°

Guatemala submits that there is no rule imposing upon a tribunal a duty to
communicate, consult or check with the parties as to whether they agree with or have
any comments on the analysis that it conducts or the conclusions it reaches on a piece
of evidence during deliberation. As recently held in the annulment decision in

Iberdrola v Guatemala, a tribunal has “no obligation to advance to the parties what

will be its decision” on any given point, “nor ask their opinion on the same”; “it is in

the award that the Tribunal decides.””””

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 358.
Respondent’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief, para. 161.

DECA II Management Presentation, September 2010, Exhibit R-127, p. 22 (Emphasis in bold in the
original, emphasis added). The Spanish original reads as follows: “EEGSA, una de las mejores y mas
solidas empresas del pais.” See also Informative Bulletin from Empresas Piiblicas de Medellin, 21
October 2010, Exhibit R-129.

Informative Bulletin from Empresas Puiblicas de Medellin, 21 October 2010, Exhibit R-129 (emphasis
added).

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, para. 117.

Iberdrola v. Republic of Guatemala (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/5) Decision on Annulment, 13 January
2015, Exhibit RL-130, para. 108.

47

131. Here, TGH had ample opportunity to present its case. The Tribunal even took care to
ask questions of the parties, particularly of TGH, on the issue of damages for the
alleged lost value of EEGSA. As explained above, at the hearing the Tribunal asked

as follows:

PRESIDENT MOURRE: [...] There is an exhibit
which has been discussed yesterday, which is R-
133, which is the interview of the CEO, I believe,
of Energia de Medellin; and there is a question
there which says: “The shareholders argued that
there would be low revenue and profitability due
to the VAD. Despite this issue, you decided to
buy.” And the answer is: “This is reflected in the
value of the transaction. We bought on the basis
that the current tariff model and layout is the one
that exists.” So there is an assumption that the
tariff, as established in 2008, would remain the
same for future tariff periods. And my question
is: Why was there such an assumption, given that
the tariff is reviewed every five years?

And the second question is: How was the 2008
tariff, which is in this interview [Exhibit R-133]
referred to as being low, how was that taken into
account in the sale —in fixing the sale— the sale
price to Energia de Medellin??** (Emphasis
added.)

132. Later the Tribunal sent a letter to the parties similarly asking the following questions:

The Arbitral Tribunal also reminds the parties
that the PHBs should address the questions raised
by the Arbitral Tribunal on Monday 21 and
Tuesday 22 of January (Transcripts pages 386 et
seq.).

The Arbitral Tribunal would also be grateful if
the parties could address in their PHBs the
following additional questions:

Le]

- Evidence of the value attributed to EEGSA in
the sale to EDM;

- Is it right to assume for the purposes of loss
assessment that the 2008-2013 tariff would

28 Tr. (English), Day Two, 402:22-403:20, Mourre.

48

133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

229

230

231

remain in place forever? If not, what are the

consequences on Teco’s claim?”
TGH had the opportunity to address all of these questions in two rounds of pleadings.
Beyond that, the Tribunal had no further duty to consult TGH on any aspect of its
decisions expressed in the Award. TGH certainly was not deprived of the right to be

heard on any aspect of its claim for damages.
THE DECISION DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS

TGH repeats its argument that Guatemala accepted certain aspects of its damages
claim, and thus argues that the Tribunal’s dismissal of the claim for alleged lost value
in its entirety constituted a manifest excess of powers, because the Tribunal did not
have to decide upon issues agreed between the parties.?*°

As explained above, Guatemala emphatically denies that it ever agreed to any aspect

of TGH’s claim. In fact it denied it entirely.?*!

Guatemala merely reviewed TGH’s
methodology in order to demonstrate that under that methodology, TGH could not
show any damages. This in no way constituted an agreement to TGH’s claim.
Therefore, the Tribunal did have to decide all claims for damages, including TGH’s
claim for EEGSA’s alleged lost value.

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON INTEREST DOES NOT INCUR IN ANY
GROUND OF ANNULMENT

TGH challenges the Tribunal’s decision on interest, arguing that it constitutes a
manifest excess of powers because Guatemala agreed both on the date from which
interest would start accruing, this date being 1 August 2008, and on the rate of interest
applicable, i.e. 8.8 percent corresponding to EEGSA’s WACC.*” Thus, the Tribunal

did not need to decide this issue.

This is incorrect. Nowhere did Guatemala agree that interest would start accruing as
of 1 August 2008. TGH points to no pleading from Guatemala on which that
agreement would be expressed. Further, Guatemala challenged the rate of interest as

well. For example, as stated in Guatemala’s Reply PHB, “[t]he interest rate applicable

Letter from the Tribunal to the Parties, 11 March 2013, p. 2.
TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 125-133, 137.
See sections 0 and IV.B.

TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 126-132.

49

138.

139.

140.

234

235

236

between the sale and the date of the Award is not the WAcc,”3 but “a risk-free rate,

2

such as (for example) US 10-year government bonds. 4 Hence the issue of the

interest applicable had to be decided by the Tribunal.

TGH also argues that the decision on interest constitutes a departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure. It claims that the Tribunal decided not to award
interest before the date of the sale, 21 October 2010, because otherwise that would
result in “unjust enrichment,” and the application of this “theory” had not been briefed

by the parties.?*°

As stated above there is no rule imposing upon a Tribunal a duty to communicate,
consult or check with the parties regarding its analysis or the conclusions it reaches
during deliberation. Clearly, the Tribunal’s reference to the notion of “unjust
enrichment” is a conclusion that it reached after considering and deliberating on
TGH’s claim for interest, and needed not, indeed could not, be debated with the
Parties. As recently held in the annulment decision in [berdrola v Guatemala, a
tribunal has “no obligation to advance to the parties what will be its decision” on any
given point, “nor ask their opinion on the same”; “it is in the award that the Tribunal
decides.””*° Further, TGH could have exercised its rights under Article 10.20.9(a) of

the CAFTA-DR, to be able to comment on a draft of the Award but it did not do so.

In any event, TGH’s challenge to the Tribunal’s decision on interest ignores the well-
established principle that an arbitral tribunal enjoys discretionary power on how to

calculate and allocate interest. In the words of the Vivendi IJ annulment committee:

In the matter of interest and its calculation,
the ad hoc Committee considers that no
ultra petita exists, even with regard to the
issue of determining the starting date for
the calculation of the interest due to the
Claimants, since the allocation of interest
like the evaluation of damages, falls within
the discretionary power of the Tribunal in

 

Respondent’s Reply Post-Hearing Brief, title to section V.D.
Ibid., para. 175.
TGH’s Memorial on Partial Annulment, paras. 125, 133-135.

Iberdrola v. Republic of Guatemala (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/5) Decision on Annulment, 13 January
2015, Exhibit RL-130, para. 64.

the light of all relevant circumstances of
the case.”°” (Emphasis added.)

141. Thus, the decision of the Tribunal on interest does not constitute a manifest excess of
powers, nor does it represent a serious departure from a fundamental rule of

procedure.

287 Compaiita de Aguas del Aconquija and Vivendi v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3)
Decision on Annulment, 10 August 2010, Exhibit RL-111, para. 256 (emphasis added).

VI. REQUEST FOR RELIEF

142. In light of the above, the Republic of Guatemala respectfully requests the Annulment

Committee to:

(a) Reject TGH’s annulment application in full;

(b) | Order TGH to pay Guatemala’s legal fees and costs, and all the fees and costs

of the ad hoc Committee and ICSID in these proceedings

Respectfully submitted,

Nr

Nigel Blackaby Alejandro Arenales

—2,S

Alfredo Skinner Klée Rodolfo Salazar

