International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

In the annulment proceeding between

TEINVER S.A., TRANSPORTES DE CERCANIAS S.A. AND
AUTOBUSES URBANOS DEL Sur S.A.

Claimants

and

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1

 

DECISION ON ARGENTINA’S APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Alexis Mourre, President of the ad hoc Committee
Prof. Fernando Cantuarias Salaverrry, Member of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Date of dispatch to the Parties: May 29, 2019

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Argentine Republic:

Dr. Bernardo Saravia Frias

Dr. Miguel Francisco Béo

Dra. Maria Teresa Gianelli

Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Subprocuradores del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Posadas 1641

C1112ADC Buenos Aires

Republica Argentina

Representing Teinver S.A., Transportes de
Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del
Sur S.A.:

Mr. Roberto Aguirre Luzi
Mr. R. Doak Bishop

Mr. Craig S. Miles

Mr. Eduardo Bruera

Mr. Brian Jacobi

King & Spalding LLP
1100 Louisiana, Suite 4000
Houston, TX 77002

United States of America

I.
II.
Til.

IV.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 2
THE SCOPE OF ANNULMENT 8
(1) The Parties’ Positions 8

a. Argentina’s Position 8

b. The Claimants’ Position ............ccccccscsccscesestesesteseseseseseseseseseseseseseeeseaeneane 9

c. The Committee’s Analysis ....0.0.0..ccccccceceee cscs cseeeeeeeeneeeeeeenscsteeeeeneneees 9

THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS AND THE ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE. .......... 10
A. Manifest Excess of Power: 10
(1) Legal Standard 10

a. Argentina’s Position 10

 

b. The Claimants’ Positio:

 

 

c. The Committee’s Analysi:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) Exercise of Jurisdiction 15
a. Argentina’s Position 15
b. The Claimants’ Position ...........ccccccccescssesceseseeeseeseseeseseeseseesssesseseensseensaeeees 17
c. The Committee’s Analysis... eee ceeeeeeeneeeeeeeteteteteeeeeneees 19
(3) Lack of Capacity of the Clai ’ Counsel 26
a. Argentina’s Position 26
b. The Claimants’ Position ...........ccccccccescssesceseseeeseeseseeseseeseseesssesseseensseensaeeees 28
c. The Committee’s Analysis... eee ceeeeeeeneeeeeeeteteteteeeeeneees 30
(4) Misappropriation of the SEPT Funds.............ccccccscsesesseseeseseeeseeseseesestessaneneanenees 35
a. Argentina’s Position 35
b. The Claimants’ Position ..
c. The Committee’s Analys
(5) The July 2008 Agreement 4l
a. Argentina’s Position 4l
b. The Claimants’ Position ...........ccccccccescssesceseseeeseeseseeseseeseseesssesseseensseensaeeees 44
c. The Committee’s Analysis... eee ceeeeeeeneeeeeeeteteteteeeeeneees 45
B. Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure ............c.ccccccsesseeeneseeees 49
(1) Legal Standard 49
a. Argentina’s Position 49

 

b. The Claimants’ Positio:

 

 

c. The Committee’s Analysi:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) Exercise of Jurisdiction 50
a. Argentina’s Position 50
b. The Claimants’ Position ...........ccccccccescssesceseseeeseeseseeseseeseseesssesseseensseensaeeees 52
c. The Committee’s Analysis... eee ceeeeeeeneeeeeeeteteteteeeeeneees 52

(3) Lack of Capacity of the Clai ’ Counsel 53
a. Argentina’s Position 53
b. The Claimants’ Position ...........ccccccccescssesceseseeeseeseseeseseeseseesssesseseensseensaeeees 54
c. The Committee’s Analysis ....

(4) Funding Agreement and role of Burford ..........c.ccccsccceceseseeteseeeseesestesesteneanenees 55
a. Argentina’s Position 55
b. The Claimants’ Position ...........ccccccccescssesceseseeeseeseseeseseeseseesssesseseensseensaeeees 55
c. The Committee’s Analysis ....

(5) Misappropriation of Funds Received from SEPI...........::c:scesesessesseeseeeeeeeseesees 60
a. Argentina’s Position 60
b. The Claimants’ Position ...........ccccccccescssesceseseeeseeseseeseseeseseesssesseseensseensaeeees 61
c. The Committee’s Analysis... eee ceeeeeeeneeeeeeeteteteteeeeeneees 61

Failure to State the Reasons on Which the Award is Based ...........c.cccsssseeseeeseseeees 63

(1) Legal Standard 63
a. Argentina’s Position 63
b. The Claimants’ Position ...........ccccccccescssesceseseeeseeseseeseseeseseesssesseseensseensaeeees 64
c. The Committee’s Analysis .....0.0.00cccc eee

(2) Jurisdictional finding concerning the existence of an investment...............0000 65
a. Argentina’s Position 65
b. The Claimants’ Position ...........ccccccccescssesceseseeeseeseseeseseeseseesssesseseensseensaeeees 65
c. The Committee’s Analysis... eee ceeeeeeeneeeeeeeteteteteeeeeneees 66

(3) Lack of Capacity of the Clai ’ Counsel 67
a. Argentina’s Position 67
b. The Claimants’ Position ..
c. The Committee’s Analysi:

(4) Misappropriation of Funds Received from SEPI........ccceeeeeeeeeeeneseeneeeeees 68

a. Argentina’s Position 68

iii

b. The Claimants’ Positio:

 

 

c. The Committee’s Analysi:

 

 

 

 

 

(5) The July 2008 Agreement 72

a. Argentina’s Position 72

b. The Claimants’ Position ...........ccccccccescssesceseseeeseeseseeseseeseseesssesseseensseensaeeees 72

c. The Committee’s Analysis... eee ceeeeeeeneeeeeeeteteteteeeeeneees 73

Vv. COSTS 77
A. Argentina’s Cost Submission: 11

B. The Claimants’ Cost Submission: 78

C. The Committee’s Decision On Costs .......c.cccccceccesesseseeseseeeseeescessseessseessseesssnesssneneaneneas 78

VI. DECISION 80

 

TABLE OF [SELECTED] ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINED TERMS

 

Annulment Memorial

Argentina’s Memorial on Annulment dated May 15,
2018

 

Annulment Counter-Memorial

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and
Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.’s Counter-Memorial
on Annulment dated July 30, 2018

 

Annulment Reply

Argentina’s Reply on Annulment dated October 1,
2018

 

Annulment Rejoinder

Teinver’s Rejoinder on Annulment dated December 3,
2018

 

Annulment Hearing

Hearing on Annulment held on February 5 and 6, 2019
at the World Bank in Washington D.C.

 

Award

Award rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal on July 21,
2017

 

Application for Annulment

Argentina’s application for annulment of the Award
dated November 17, 2017

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

 

Argentina/Respondent/Applicant

the Argentine Republic

 

Assignment Agreement

Assignment agreement dated January 18, 2010,
pursuant to which the Claimants assigned to Air
Comet their rights arising out of this arbitration for no
price or consideration

 

 

Claimants Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and
Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
Committee Ad hoc Committee

 

Decision on Jurisdiction

Decision on Jurisdiction dated December 21, 2012
issued in the case of Teinver S.A., Transportes de
Cercanjas S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional
Measures

Decision on Provisional Measures dated April 8, 2016
issued in the case of Teinver S.A., Transportes de
Cercanjas S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

 

Funding Agreement

 

Funding Agreement between Burford Capital Limited
and Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and

 

v

 

 

Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A., entered into on April
14, 2010

 

 

ICSID or Centre International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes
ICSID Convention Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes

between States and Nationals of Other States

 

July 2008 Agreement

Memorandum of Agreement between the Argentine State
and Interinvest dated July 21, 2008

 

 

SEPI Sociedad Estatal de Participaciones Industriales del
Reino de Espafia
SPA Agreement for the Purchase of Interinvest S.A.’s

Shares entered into between Sociedad Estatal de
Participaciones Industriales del Reino de Espajia and
Air Comet S.A. on October 2, 2001.

 

Tr. Day [#], [page:line]

English transcript of the Hearing before the Committee

 

 

TIN

 

Argentine Valuation Board (Tribunal de Tasaciones de
la Naci6n)

 

vi

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This case concerns an application by the Argentine Republic for annulment (“Argentina’s
Application” or the “Application for Annulment”) of the Award rendered in the
underlying arbitration proceedings on July 21, 2017 (the “Award”), also comprising the
Dissenting Opinion of Kamal Hossain, and the Decision on Jurisdiction dated December
21, 2012 (the “Decision on Jurisdiction”), including the Dissenting Opinion of Kamal

Hossain.

The Award related to a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” ” or “Centre”) on the basis of the Agreement between the
Government of the Argentine Republic and the Kingdom of Spain on the Promotion and
Protection of Investments, dated October 3, 1991, which entered into force on September
28, 1992 (the “Treaty” or the “BIT”), as well as the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (the “ICSID

Convention’).

The Parties are the Argentine Republic (“Argentina” or the “Applicant’), and the
Claimants in the original arbitration proceeding: Teinver S.A. (“Teinver”), Transportes de
Cercanias S.A. (“Transportes de Cercanias”) and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.

(“Autobuses Urbanos”) (collectively, the “Claimants”).

The Applicant and the Claimants are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties”,
and individually referred to as a “Party”. The Parties’ representatives and their addresses

are listed above on page (i).

The dispute in the underlying arbitration proceeding related to the Claimants’ allegations
that Argentina had violated the Treaty, international law, and Argentine law, as well as
commitments and representations made by Argentina to the Claimants, by unlawfully re-
nationalizing and taking other measures regarding the Claimants’ investments in two

Argentine airlines: Aerolineas Argentinas S.A. (“ARSA”) and Austral-Cielos del Sur S.A.

(“AUSA”) (collectively, the “Airlines” or the “Argentine Airlines”) and their

subsidiaries. Argentina also made a Counterclaim.

In the Award, the Tribunal, by majority, found that Argentina breached: (a) Art. III(1) of
the BIT by its unjustified measures in interfering with the Claimants’ rights in respect of
their investments; (b) Art. IV(1) of the BIT by failing to accord the Claimants a fair and
equitable treatment; and (c) Art. V of the BIT by unlawfully expropriating the Claimants’
investments in two Argentine airlines. The majority awarded the Claimants USD 320.7
million in damages plus pre-and-post Award compounded interest and USD 3.5 million in
legal costs and expenses. Dr. Kamal Hossain attached a Dissenting Opinion concluding
that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction, as, in his view, the Claimants failed to establish that
they were investors entitled to protection under the Treaty or the ICSID Convention. Dr.
Hossain noted that, through a series of agreements, the ultimate beneficiaries of the Award

would be a Third-Party Funder and counsel for the Claimants (not the Claimants).

Argentina seeks the annulment of the Award on three of the five grounds for annulment set
forth in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention: (i) the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers (Article 52(1)(b)); (ii) there was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure (Article 52(1)(d)); and (iii) the Award failed to state the reasons on which it is
based (Article 52(1)(e)).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On November 17, 2017, the Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement
of Investment Disputes received an application from Argentina seeking the annulment of
the Award and requesting that enforcement of the Award be stayed until the Application

was decided.

On November 22, 2017, the Secretary-General registered Argentina’s Application. The
Parties were also notified that the enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed

pursuant to Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

By letter dated December 21, 2017, the Parties were notified that, in accordance with Rules
6 and 53 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, an ad hoc Committee composed of Mr. Alexis
Mourre (a national of France), Prof. Fernando Cantuarias Salaverry (a national of Peru),
and Prof. Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez (a national of Mexico) (the “Committee”) had been
constituted. The Parties were also informed that Mr. Mourre would be the President of the
Committee and Ms. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski, Legal Counsel at ICSID,

would serve as Secretary.

As agreed by the Parties, the first session of the Committee was held on March 1, 2018, by

telephone conference (the “First Session’).

The Committee issued Procedural Order No. 1 on March 6, 2018, concerning various
procedural matters. The Parties confirmed, among others, that the 2006 ICSID Arbitration

Rules would apply to the annulment proceedings.
On May 3, 2018, Argentina requested the admission of new evidence into the record.

On May 11, 2018, the Claimants filed their observations on Argentina’s request to

introduce new evidence.

On May 15, 2018, in accordance with the procedural calendar set out in Procedural Order
No. 1, Argentina filed its Memorial on Annulment (“Annulment Memorial’),

accompanied by 90 Exhibits and 153 Legal Authorities.

On May 17, 2018, the Committee, after considering the Parties’ positions on Argentina’s
request to introduce new documents into the record, denied Argentina’s request mainly
because pursuant to section 15.3 of Procedural Order No. 1, “[i]n principle, no new
evidence shall be admitted in this proceeding”, and because in the Committee’s view
Argentina did not elaborate or provide a detailed explanation as to why the introduction of

the new evidence would be necessary.

On June 4, 2018, the Claimants submitted a request to exclude certain new evidence

introduced by Argentina in its Memorial, and for the Committee to order Argentina to

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

submit a revised Memorial removing all citation and references to those documents, as well

as any arguments relying upon the same.

On June 5, 2018, Argentina filed observations on the Claimants’ request for exclusion of

evidence.

On June 11, 2018, at the Committee’s request, the Claimants provided specific indication
of the footnotes in Argentina’s Memorial (128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 163, 164, 366 and
367) that included reference to the objected documents. Subsequently, by communication
of June 11, 2018, the Committee informed the Parties that subject to any eventual
observations by Argentina, the references made by Argentina in its Memorial on
Annulment, identified in the Claimants’ letter, shall not be taken into account by the

Committee.

On July 30, 2018, the Claimants filed a Counter-Memorial on Annulment (“Annulment
Counter-Memorial”), accompanied by Exhibits C-1216 to C-1237. A revised Counter-
Memorial on Annulment in red lined and clean versions was subsequently filed on August

21, 2018.

On October 1, 2018, Argentina filed a Reply on Annulment (“Annulment Reply”),
accompanied by 21 Exhibits and 41 Legal Authorities.

On December 3, 2018, the Claimants filed a Rejoinder on Annulment (“Annulment

Rejoinder”), accompanied by Exhibits C-1233 and C-1238.

On December 17, 2018, the Committee informed the Parties of its availability to hold a
Pre-Hearing Organizational Meeting on January 8, 2019, by telephone conference. A Draft
Agenda was subsequently sent to the Parties on December 18, 2018. On December 20,

2018, both Parties confirmed their availability on the proposed date.

On January 3, 2019, at the invitation of the Committee, the Parties informed the Committee
of their agreements on the items of the Draft Agenda for the Pre-Hearing Organizational

Meeting, concerning the organization of the Hearing on Annulment and informed the

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

Committee that the Parties were of the view that the Pre-Hearing Organizational Meeting

was no longer necessary.

On January 8, 2019, the Committee confirmed that the Pre-Hearing Organizational

Meeting, scheduled to be held on that day, had been cancelled, as agreed by the Parties.

On January 8, 2019, the Claimants filed a request for the Tribunal to authorize the
Claimants’ insolvency administrators to attend the Hearing on Annulment, scheduled to be

held on February 4 and 5, 2019 in Washington, D.C., via videoconference (i.e., Webex).

On January 9, 2019, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 2 concerning the

organization of the Hearing.

On January 11, 2019, Argentina filed observations on the Claimants’ request of January 8,

2019 for the insolvency administrators to attend the Hearing via videoconference.

On January 15, 2019, the Claimants filed a response to Argentina’s observations of January

11, 2019.

On January 16, 2019, each Party provided its list of participants for the Hearing.
Subsequently, on January 17, 2019, the Secretary of the Committee circulated a

consolidated List of Participants to the Parties and the Committee.

On January 16, 2019, Argentina filed further observations on the Claimants’ requests for
the insolvency administrators to attend the Hearing via videoconference in light of the

Claimants’ list of participants.

On January 17, 2019, the Committee directed the Claimants to submit by January 22, 2019,
a request from each of the insolvency administrators who wished to attend the Hearing via
videoconference, who would be authorized to do so. The ICSID Secretariat would make

the relevant arrangements for a secure videoconference and would inform the Parties.

On January 18, 2019, the Secretary of the Committee informed the Parties of the possibility

of holding the videoconference from a venue in Madrid, and of the related costs.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

On January 18, 2019, the Claimants informed the Committee the names of the insolvency
administrators for Teinver and Air Comet, who would be attending the Hearing in person

(instead of by videoconference).

On January 18, 2019, Argentina filed observations on the Claimants’ letter of January 18,

2019.

On the same date, the Committee invited the Parties to agree on who would bear the
additional costs of the secured platform for the videoconference, and to inform the

Committee.

On January 19, 2019, the Committee invited the Claimants to comment on Argentina’s

communications of January 17 and 18, 2019, regarding the insolvency administrators.

On January 22, 2019, the Claimants provided responses to the Committee’s inquiry as to
(i) which party shall bear the costs of securing a video conference in Madrid; (ii)
Argentina’s objections to the insolvency administrators attending the hearing unless they
act in a joint manner; and (iii) Argentina’s arguments that Air Comet’s insolvency
administrators may not attend the annulment hearing. Attached to the Claimants’ letter
were letters from Mr. Luis Arqued and Ms. Antonia Magdaleno, insolvency administrators
for Teinver, S.A., and from Messrs. Jestis Verdes and Miguel Villela Barranchina,
insolvency administrators for Transportes de Cercanias regarding their participation in the

Hearing by video conference.

On January 23, 2019, the Committee authorized the insolvency administrators Mr. Arqued,
Ms. Magdaleno, Mr. Verdes and Mr. Villela Barranchina to participate in the hearing by
video conference, and the insolvency administrator for Air Comet: Mr. Mariano Hernandez.
and his assistant, Mr. Alvaro Martinez Domingo, to participate in the hearing in person. It
was noted that Mr. Arqued might be participating in person. The Committee also decided
that the costs related to the video conference in Madrid will be covered with the funds in

the case account, subject to the Committee’s final decision on costs.

On January 30, 2019, following the Claimants’ request of January 28, 2019 and

Argentina’s observations of January 29, 2019, the Committee authorized Mr. Diego

6

Al.

42.

Fargosi, the Claimants’ co-counsel during the original arbitration proceeding, to attend the

Hearing in Washington, D.C.

On February 5 and 6, 2019, the Committee held a Hearing on Annulment at the World

Bank’s headquarters in Washington D.C. (the “Annulment Hearing”).

The following persons were present at the Hearing:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

COMMITTEE
Mr. Alexis Mourre President
Mr. Fernando Cantuarias Salaverry Member
Mr. Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez Member

ICSID SECRETARIAT

Ms. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski | Secretary of the Committee
Mr. Sebastién Canon | Intern

ARGENTINA

 

Counsel:

 

Mr. Bernardo Saravia Frias

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién

 

Ms. Maria Teresa Gianelli

 

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién

 

Ms. Marfa Alejandra Etchegorry

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién

 

Mr. Francisco Javier Garcia Elorrio

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién

 

Ms. Inda Valeria Etchechoury

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién

 

Mr. José Martin Ryb

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién

 

Mr. Nicolas Duhalde

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién

 

 

CLAIMANTS

 

Counsel:

 

Mr. Doak R. Bishop

King & Spalding

 

Mr. Roberto Aguirre Luzi

King & Spalding

 

Mr. Craig S. Miles

King & Spalding

 

Mr. Eduardo Bruera

King & Spalding

 

Mr. Brian Jacobi

King & Spalding

 

 

Ms. Carol Tamez

 

King & Spalding

 

 

 

Mr.

Diego Fargosi

 

 

 

Parties:
Mr. Luis Arqued Insolvency Administrator, Teinver
Mr. Jestis Verdes Insolvency Administrator, Transportes de Cercanias

(via VO)

 

Mr.

Miguel Vilella Barranchina

Insolvency Administrator, Transportes de Cercanias
(via VC)

 

Mr.

Mariano Hernandez

Insolvency Administrator, Air Comet

 

Mr.

Alvaro Martinez

Assistant to Air Comet’s Insolvency Administrator

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTERPRETERS
Ms. Silvia Colla English-Spanish Interpreter
Mr. Daniel Giglio English-Spanish Interpreter
Ms. Elena Howard English-Spanish Interpreter
COURT REPORTERS
Mr. David Kasdan Worldwide Reporting, LLP, English Court Reporter

 

Mr.

Paul Pelissier

DR-Esteno, Spanish Court Reporter

 

 

Mr.

Rodolfo Rinaldi

 

DR-Esteno, Spanish Court Reporter

 

 

43. On March 8, 2019, each Party filed a Statement of Costs.

44. The Committee declared the proceeding closed on April 23, 2019, in accordance with Rules
53 and 38(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Ill. THE SCOPE OF ANNUL

 

qd) The Parties’ Positions
a. Argentina’s Position

45. Argentina highlights the importance of the annulment proceedings for the integrity of the
ICSID system, and it accordingly submits that the scope of annulment proceedings should

not be construed restrictively.!

' Annulment Memorial, 4 32.

46.

47.

48.

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that the grounds for annulment provided in Article 52 of the ICSID
Convention are “narrow and limited and that a substantive, or appellate, review of ICSID
awards is foreclosed.”* The Claimants also contend that ‘[t]hese Proceedings are neither
an appeal nor a generalized review of the correctness or persuasiveness of the Tribunal’s
decision-making (though neither of these aspects is seriously contestable). Rather, the
Committee’s mandate is limited to ensuring the integrity of the underlying Arbitration.
Accordingly, for Argentina to prevail on its annulment claims, it must show that the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers; seriously departed from a fundamental rule of

procedure; or failed to state its reasons for the decisions it reached.”*

c. The Committee’s Analysis

The Committee, as a starting point, notes that there is no disagreement between the Parties
as to the fact that an annulment committee under Art. 52 of the Convention does not sit in
appeal of the arbitral tribunal’s decision. As rightly pointed out by the ICSID Updated
Background Paper on Annulment, the scope of review that an annulment committee is
entitled to perform under Article 52 is limited. Because “the drafting history of the ICSID
Convention demonstrates that assuring the finality of ICSID arbitration awards was a
fundamental goal for the ICSID system”, annulment “was designed purposefully to confer
a limited scope of review which would safeguard against ‘violation of the fundamental

principles of law governing the Tribunal’s proceedings” “

In view of the Committee, no question of interpretation of Article 52 is at stake here, and
defining the scope of the Committee’s review does not require any analysis of whether
Article 52 should be construed narrowly or broadly. Article 52 must be applied in
accordance with its clear terms, which are exclusive of any review of the substance of the

award. In substance, annulment is not an appeal allowing reconsideration of the merits of

2 Annulment Counter-Memorial, ‘ff 99-107.
3 Annulment Rejoinder, { 2.

+ICSID, Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, May 5, 2016, (“ICSID’s
Updated Background Paper on Annulment”), {71 (C-1217) (AL RA 421 bis), 1 71.

9

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

the case. As a consequence, an award may only be annulled on the limited grounds listed

in Article 52(1).

THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS AND THE ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE

Argentina has argued that the Award should be annulled on grounds of manifest excess of
powers (A), departure from a fundamental rule of procedure (B), and failure to provide

reasons (C). The Committee will address each of these annulment grounds in turn.

MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS

The Committee will first address the Parties’ contentions concerning the legal standard
that is applicable to assess whether the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers (1). The
Committee will then address each of the grounds invoked by Argentina to submit that the
Award should be annulled on that basis, namely lack of jurisdiction (2), the alleged lack of
powers of the attorneys representing the Claimants (3), the existence of a fraud relating to

the use of the SEPI funds (4), and the Award’s reliance on the July 2008 Agreement (5).
qd) Legal Standard

a. Argentina’s Position
Argentina submits that tribunals derive their power from the parties’ consent, and therefore

exceed their powers when they act beyond or in breach of such consent.>

In the instant case, Argentina contends that the Tribunal exceeded its powers with respect
to its exercise of jurisdiction by failing to apply the applicable law and to address all the

issues raised by the Parties.°

With regard to jurisdiction, Argentina contends that there is an excess of powers when a

tribunal assumes jurisdiction when jurisdiction is lacking, when it exceeds the scope of its

5 Annulment Memorial, { 35, relying on CDC Group ple v. the Republic of Seychelles, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/14
(“CDC’), Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005, {40 (AL RA 420).

© Annulment Memorial, {| 36.

jurisdiction, or when it does not exercise jurisdiction when jurisdiction exists.’ A tribunal
also exceeds its powers when it fails to apply the applicable law, or applies a law different
from the applicable law.* Finally, a tribunal exceeds its powers when it decides on issues

not submitted to it for resolution, or fails to address an issue raised by the parties.?

54. Argentina notes that in accordance with Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention, the
excess of powers must be “manifest”, that is, “obvious” or “evident”. However, Argentina
submits, by relying on Caratube, Occidental, and EDF, that assessing a manifest excess of

powers may in some cases require an extensive argumentation and analysis. '°

b. The Claimants’ Position

55. The Claimants submit that pursuant to Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention, only

instances of “manifest” excess of a tribunal’s powers may lead to an annulment.!! The

7 Annulment Memorial, §{§[ 37-40, relying on (i) ICSID’s Updated Background Paper on Annulment, {| 87 (AL RA
421 bis); (ii) Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/7 (“Soufraki”), Decision
on Annulment, June 5, 2007, { 42 (AL RA 64); and (iii) Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental
Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, {CSID Case No. ARB/06/11 (“Occidental”), Decision
on Annulment, November 2, 2015, {i 49-50 (AL RA 422); see also TECO Guatemala Holdings, LLC v. Republic of
Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/23 (“Teco”), Decision on Annulment, April 5, 2016, {77 (AL RA 423);
Caratube International Oil Company v. Republic of Kazakhstan, CSID Case No. ARB/08/12 (“Caratube”), Decision
on Annulment, February 21, 2014, {] 74-75 (AL RA 424).

8 Annulment Memorial, { 41, relying on (i) Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation)
and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O1/3 (“Enron”), Decision on Annulment,
July 30, 2010, J 218 (AL RA 398), and (ii) Tidewater Investment SRL and Tidewater Caribe, C.A. v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/5 (“Tidewater”), Decision on Annulment, December 27, 2016, 126
(AL RA 419).

° Annulment Memorial, {[ 42 [footnotes omitted].

10 Annulment Memorial, {{{ 43-45, citing, among others, (i) EDF International S.A., SAUR International S.A. and
Leon Participaciones Argentinas S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/23 (“EDF”), Decision on
Annulment, February 5, 2016, { 192 (AL RA 433); see also Tza Yap Shum v. Republic of Peru, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/07/6 (“Tza Yap Shum “), Decision on Annulment, February 12, 2015, {{ 82 (“‘manifest’ does not refer to the
gravity of the excess but to the clarity with which the excess of powers can be ascertained”) (AL RA 434); (ii) Sempra
Energy International v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16 (“Sempra”), Decision on Annulment, June
29, 2010, | 211 (AL RA 413); TECO Guatemala Holdings LLC v. Republic of Guatemala, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/10/23; Decision on Annulment, April 5, 2016, {77 (“Committee considers that an excess of powers is ‘manifest’
if it is plain on its face, evident, obvious, or clear”) (AL RA 423); and (iii) Caratube, Decision on Annulment {{ 84
(AL RA 424).

1! Annulment Counter-Memorial, { 108.

56.

57.

58.

Claimants point out that the ordinary meaning of “manifest” is “obvious or clear”, and that

Argentina agrees with such interpretation. 7

The Claimants rely on several ad hoc committees’ decisions supporting the above
interpretation and note that the ICSID Updated Background Paper on Annulment confirms
that “the ‘manifest’ nature of the excess of powers has been interpreted by most ad hoc
committees to mean an excess that is obvious, clear or self-evident, discernible without the
need for an elaborate analysis of the award.”'* Annulment Committees, in line with the
kompetenz-kompetenz principle, have affirmed that principle when annulment is sought on
jurisdictional grounds.'* The Claimants point out, in this regard, that in Lucchetti, the
committee declined to opine whether it agreed with the tribunal’s interpretation of
jurisdiction, decided that the interpretation was “tenable”, and therefore refused to annul

the award.'°

As to the application of the law, the Claimants submit that “if a tribunal discusses and
considers the proper law, its application (even if incorrect) cannot constitute a failure to
apply the applicable law unless that application is so untenable and arbitrary as to raise

legitimate questions regarding the tribunal members’ integrity.” !

Finally, as to the alleged failure of the Tribunal to address all issues raised by the Parties,
the Claimants contend that the Tribunal did address all the issues raised by the Parties, and
even if it had failed to do so with respect to certain arguments, that would not constitute a

ground for annulment. !7

2 Annulment Counter-Memorial, 109.

3 Annulment Counter-Memorial, 110.

4 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {ff 111-112.

'5 Annulment Counter-Memorial, | 113, citing Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Pert, S.A. (formerly
Empresas Lucchetti, S.A. and Lucchetti Pert, S.A.) v. Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4 (“Lucchetti”),
Decision on Annulment of September 5, 2007 4 100-101, (AL RA 444), Counter-Memorial, { 113, citing Lucchetti.

16 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {[ 116.

'7 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {| 129.

c. The Committee’s Analysis

59. Concerning first of all the exercise of jurisdiction, the starting point is that the powers of a
tribunal are defined by the boundaries of the arbitration agreement. A tribunal can therefore
not exercise jurisdiction beyond those boundaries, and it has the duty to exercise the
jurisdiction that is conferred to it by the agreement. As a consequence, exercise of
jurisdiction that is not conferred upon the tribunal is in principle an excess of powers. '®
Likewise, refusal by a tribunal to exercise the jurisdiction conferred to it by the parties is
also an excess of powers.!? However, a mere error in the tribunal’s jurisdictional findings
does not constitute a ground for annulment. Such an error also needs to be manifest. As
decided by many annulment committees, an excess of powers is manifest if it is obvious,

clear or self-evident.”° In this regard, the fact that a tribunal has relied to make its decision

'8 ICSID’s Updated Background Paper on Annulment, { 87, relying on Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and
Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002,
(“Vivendi I’) { 86; Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1CSID Case No. ARB/99/7 (“Mitchell”),
Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Award, November 1, 2006, i 47, 48 & 67; CMS Gas Transmission
Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8 (“CMS”), Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the
Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic, September 25, 2007, 47 (quoting Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen
GmbH and others v. United Republic of Cameroon and Société Camerounaise des Engrais, ICSID Case No. ARB/8 1/2
(“Klockner I’), Decision of the ad hoc Committee, May 3, 1985, 4); Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/O1/12 (“Azurix”), Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic, September
1, 2009, | 45 (quoting Kldckner I, 4); Lucchetti, Decision on Annulment, J 99; M.C.1. Power Group, L.C. and New
Turbine, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/6 (“MCT”), Decision on Annulment, October 19,
2009, | 56 (quoting Lucchetti, | 99); Occidental, | 49-51; Tulip Real Estate and Development Netherlands B.V. v.
Republic of Turkey, \CSID Case No.ARB/I 1/28 (“Tulip”), Decision on Annulment, December 30, 2015 4 55; EDF,
Y 191; Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/1 (“Total”), Decision on Annulment, February 1,
2016, | 242; Adem Dogan v. Turkmenistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/9 (“Dogan”), Decision on Annulment, January
15, 2016, 105; loan Micula, Viorel Micula and others v. Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/20 (“Micula”), Decision
on Annulment, February 26, 2016, | 125; Antoine Abou Lahoud and Leila Bounafeh-Abou Lahoud v. Democratic
Republic of the Congo, 1CSID Case No. ARB/10/4 (“Lahoud”), Decision on the Application for Annulment of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, March 29, 2016, | 118; TECO, 177.

 Thid.

2 Annulment Rejoinder, { 27, relying on Compaiiia Aguas del Aconquija S.A. et al. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/97/3 (“Vivendi IT’), Decision on Annulment, August 10, 2010, {245 (“must be ‘evident”), (“obvious
by itself”), (C-1231); Azurix, Decision on Annulment, { 68 (“obvious”), (C-291); Soufraki, Decision on Annulment,
Y 39 (obviousness”; citing Webster’s Revised Unabridged Dictionary(1913) definition of “manifest” as meaning
“‘clear,’ ‘plain,’ ‘obvious,’ ‘evident’....”), (AL RA 64); CDC, Decision on Annulment, {41 (“clear or ‘self-evident””),
(AL RA 420bis); MCI, Decision on Annulment, {49 (“self-evident”), (AL RA 445); Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim
Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/16 (“Rumeli”),
Decision of the ad hoc Committee, March 25, 2010, { 96 (“evident on the face of the award”), (C-1219); Helnan
International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/05/19 (“Helnan’”), Decision of the ad hoc
Committee, June 14, 2010, 1 55 (“obvious or clear”), (C-1224); see generally ICSID’s Updated Background Paper on
Annulment, (C-1217).

 

60.

61.

on tenable solutions adopted in several previous cases may be considered as an indication

that an excess of powers is not manifest.

Concerning the allegation that the tribunal failed to apply the proper law, the starting point
should be Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, pursuant to which the tribunal has the
duty to decide the dispute in accordance with the rules of law agreed by the parties. As a
consequence, whenever the parties have agreed on the applicable rules of law, failure to
apply the same would normally result in an excess of powers.”! Nonetheless, because
annulment committees do not sit in appeal of the tribunal’s decisions, a clear distinction
must be made between a failure to apply the proper law and an error in the application of
the same.” Here again, the requirement that an excess of powers be manifest in order to
entail annulment comes into play. While entirely disregarding the proper law would
normally constitute a manifest excess of powers, an incorrect or imperfect application of
such law would not, unless it is so egregious as to amount to a complete failure to apply

it.23

Finally, as to the arguments relating to the Tribunal’s failure to address all the issues raised
by the Parties, the Committee considers that a failure to address one or more of the Parties’
arguments could be relevant to an annulment ground based on a failure to provide reasons,
but not to an alleged manifest excess of powers. The Committee considers in this respect
necessary to distinguish between an alleged failure to address one of the parties’ claims,
which may be considered as an excess of power for failure to exercise jurisdiction, and an
alleged failure to respond to each and every argument or sub-argument raised by the parties,
which would normally not.4 The Committee will now turn to each of the grounds invoked

by Argentina to submit that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

2! Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea, 1CSID Case No. ARB/84/4 (“MINE”),
Decision on the Application by Guinea for Partial Annulment of the Arbitral Award dated January 6, 1988, December
22, 1989, 15.03.

2 Soufraki, Decision on Annulment, {[ 885.

3 Ibid, | 86.

4 Concerning failure to provide reasons: Vivendi I, Decision on Annulment { 64, (AL RA 431). Wena Hotels Limited
v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No ARB/98/4 ( Wena”), Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002 § 81, (C-
621); concerning excess of powers: CDC Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005, and (ii) Meralclad. See Tr. Day 2,
345:2 to 346:6.

14

62.

64.

65.

(2) Exercise of Jurisdiction
a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina’s avers, first of all, that the Claimants did not make any protected investment.
The Claimants, as a matter of fact, invested in Air Comet, a Spanish company. That same
Spanish company, pursuant to a Share Purchase Agreement dated October 2, 2001
(“SPA”), acquired from Sociedad Estatal de Participaciones Industriales del Reino de
Espajia (“SEPI’”), another Spanish company, shares in the Argentine company Interinvest
S.A. (“Interinvest’”), the holding of ARSA and AUSA.” Argentina therefore contends that
the alleged investment was an indirect one which does not fall under the protection of the
BIT. Any claim against Argentine should therefore have been brought by Air Comet, not

by the Claimants.”°

Argentina submits, in this regard, that the clear terms of Article I(2) of the BIT, which
defines the term “investment”, refers to goods and rights “acquired or undertaken in
accordance with the legislation of the investment’s host country’.’ As a consequence,

shares acquired in a Spanish company cannot qualify as an investment made in Argentina.

Furthermore, there was no protected investor under the Argentina-Spain BIT given that the

Claimants were not parties to the SPA.”*

Argentina also contends that for an investment to be considered as such under Article 25(1)
of the ICSID Convention, four elements must be present: (i) a contribution of money or
other assets; (ii) a certain duration; (iii) an element of risk and (iv) a contribution to the
hots State’s development (the “Salini test”). Argentina submits that the SPA did not entail
a contribution by the Claimants to the host State (Argentina), an assumption of risk by the

Claimants, or a significant contribution by the Claimants to Argentina’s development.”

25 Annulment Memorial, ‘{ 64. Argentina’s Opening, slide 10.

2% Tbid., | 66.

27 Thid., 69. Argentina’s Opening, slide 14.

8 Tbid., | 64.

2° Annulment Memorial, {{ 68. Also, Annulment Reply, { 42. Argentina’s Opening, slide 16.

15

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

Argentina relies, as evidence that the Claimants never had the quality of investors under
the BIT, on an assignment agreement dated January 18, 2010, pursuant to which the
Claimants assigned to Air Comet their rights arising out of this arbitration for no price or

consideration (“Assignment Agreement”).*°

Finally, Argentina submits that the purported investment and the arbitration were an abuse
of the ICSID system aiming at allowing Burford Capital Limited (“Burford” or the
“Funder’”), a third-party funder, to benefit from the BIT and the Convention in spite of the
fact that it does not qualify as an investor. Argentina relies, in this regard, on the Funding
Agreement dated April 14, 2010 between Burford and the Claimants (“Funding
Agreement”), and submits that under said Funding Agreement, Burford along with the
Nominated Lawyers (King & Spalding), were intended to be the principal beneficiaries of

the proceeds of any award in the case.*!

Argentina notes, in this respect, that there existed a dispute between the insolvency
administrators of Air Comet, the Claimants’ insolvency administrators, and Burford,
concerning the exact identity of the effective beneficiary of the rights arising out of the

arbitration.*?

Argentina relies on decisions made in the Phoenix** and the Venezuela Holdings* cases to
characterize the claim as an abuse of process which the Arbitral Tribunal should not have
condoned. In accepting that situation, Argentina argues, the Arbitral Tribunal manifestly

exceeded its powers.

In synthesis, Argentina contends that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by

exercising jurisdiction to adjudicate the Claimants’ claims in the absence of an investment

3 Tbid., 72. Annulment Reply, 19 47-48. Argentina’s Opening, slides 17-18.

3! [bid., {9 76-78. Annulment Reply, {ff 49-51.

® Tbid., 4 83. Annulment Reply, 153.

8 Jbid., 1 79, citing Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. Czech Republic, ICISD Case No. ARB/06/5 (“Phoenix”), Award, April
15, 2009, 113 (emphasis added) (AL RA 85).

 [bid., 179, citing Venezuela Holdings B.V. and others v. Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/27 (“Venezuela
Holdings”), Decision on Jurisdiction, June 10, 2010, {ff 169, 170, 176 (AL RA 454).

16

71.

72.

723.

and an investor protected under the Argentina-Spain BIT,* and by allowing a third party
(Burford), which was unrelated to the dispute, was not a protected investor under the BIT,
and had made no protected investment, to use the arbitration proceeding against the object

and purpose of the ICSID Convention and the principle of good faith.*°

Finally, Argentina submits that the Tribunal’s findings relating to the July 2008 Agreement
amount to a manifest excess of powers. This argument will be dealt with in Section 5

thereafter.

b. The Claimants’ Position

Concerning, first of all, Argentina’s argument that there is no protected investment under
the BIT, the Claimants submit that the Tribunal fully addressed this issue and explained
that the definition of “investment” in the BIT applies to both directly and indirectly held
assets.>”? The Tribunal further explained that, under Article 1(2) of the BIT, the term
“investment” refers to “any kind of assets, such as property and rights of every kind,
acquired or effected in accordance with the legislation of the country receiving the
investment’, and therefore include “in particular [...] shares and other forms of
participation in companies”. The Tribunal further noted that while “Article 1(2) of the
[BIT] does not explicitly include or exclude ‘indirect’ investments from its coverage... the
broad and inclusive language of this provision suggests that ‘indirect’ shareholders are

protected by the [BIT].”*8

In light of the above, the Claimants conclude that the Tribunal correctly held that the
Claimants’ shares in Interinvest, ARSA and AUSA were clearly “shares and other forms

of participation” in Argentine companies that fell within the BIT’s definition of

38 Annulment Memorial, {{ 85; Annulment Reply, 35.

%6 Tbid., 4 80. Annulment Reply, 19 49-51, 55. Argentina’s Opening, slides 27-28.

7 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {ff 191-192.

38 Annulment Rejoinder, {{ 28, citing the Decision on Jurisdiction, | 209. Tr. Day 1, 179:8.

17

74.

75.

76.

77.

“investment”, and that the fact those shares were held indirectly by the Claimants does not

allow to conclude that they are not protected investments under the BIT.*°

The Claimants further argue that many other tribunals have considered the same arguments
in the same context, including under the same BIT, and found that indirect investments are

protected.*°

In addition, a manifest excess of powers under Article 52(1)(b) requires an error that is

obvious and self-evident, and Argentina has not met that burden.*!

As to Argentina’s argument that the shares in Interinvest are in any event not an investment
because their acquisition does not meet the Salini test, the Claimants first of all submit that
the Tribunal substantially adhered to these criteria and verified that the investment

42 assumption of risk, and

complied with the conditions of contribution of assets,
contributed to Argentina’ s economic development.’ The Claimants further submit that the
Salini criteria are mere indicators for the existence of an investment, which a tribunal is
not bound to apply.** As a consequence, even if the Tribunal had not strictly adhered to

each of the Salini criteria, there would be no “manifest” error warranting annulment.*°

The Claimants further refute Argentina’s arguments concerning the existence of an abuse
of process. First, the Claimants submit that they never assigned the claims prosecuted in
the arbitration, but only the proceeds of the arbitration, and that the Tribunal rightly
concluded that this assignment did not affect their standing. As to the argument that
Burford would be the real beneficiary of the Award, the Tribunal rightly held that it was

irrelevant to its jurisdiction.*7 The Claimants submit in this respect that the Funding

3° Annulment Rejoinder, {[ 29.

49 Tr. Day 1, 180:17. Claimants’ Opening, slide 92.

41 Annulment Rejoinder, { 27.

2 Thid., 435. Claimants’ Opening, slide 94.

43 Tbid., 136.

+ Tbid., 37. Tr. Day 1, 182:10 to 184:10.

45 C. Schreuer, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY, 25:159 (2d Ed. 2009), (“Schreuer”), (C-1233).
46 Annulment Rejoinder, {{ 33.

47 Annulment Counter-Memorial, §[ 194-195. Tr. Day 1, 186:16-187:13.

18

78.

79.

80.

81.

Agreement was executed on April 14, 2010, one year after the arbitral proceedings were
instituted.** The Tribunal first correctly determined that jurisdiction is to be assessed as of

the date when the case is filed.”

The Tribunal then looked at the relevant facts, and
correctly found that both the Assignment Agreement and the Funding Agreement postdate
the filing of arbitration.*° The Tribunal concluded that Burford’s rights under the Funding

Agreement are irrelevant to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.*!

The Claimants finally contend that Arbitrator Hossain’s policy opinion that third-party
funding agreements are undesirable cannot establish a manifest excess of powers in the

Tribunal’s exercise of jurisdiction.”

c. The Committee’s Analysis

Concerning, first of all, the Tribunal’s finding that the Claimants’ indirect ownership of
shares in Interinvest qualifies as an investment under the BIT, the Committee does not find

any reason to annul the Award for manifest excess of powers.

The Committee recalls that for an error of law to be annullable, it must be manifest. As
said above, for an error to be manifest, it needs to be obvious, clear or self-evident, and
whenever the tribunal has relied to make its decision on tenable solutions that have been
consistently adopted in previous cases, there should as a matter of principle be no
annulment. For an incorrect or imperfect application of law to be annullable, it needs to be

so egregious as to amount to a complete failure to apply the law.

Turning to the Tribunal’s analysis, the Tribunal made a distinction between what it defined

53 1.54

as Respondents “derivative claim” argument,”” and its “intermediary investor” argumen

In so doing, it appears to have followed the structure of Argentina’s pleadings. The

+8 Annulment Rejoinder, 1 40.

© Tr. Day 1, 185:1 to 185:9.

50 Ty, Day 1, 185:10-17.

5! Annulment Rejoinder, J 39.

22 pbid., 139.

53 Decision on Jurisdiction, J 208 seq.
5 Thid., 1 229 seq.

82.

distinction between the two arguments is however unclear, for both appear to rely on the
fact that the Claimants had no direct rights in Interinvest. And both arguments were in fact
rejected on the same basis that an indirectly-held shareholding is a protected investment.>>
Argentina’s annulment arguments rest on the argument that the Claimants’ shareholding in
Air Comet is not an investment acquired in accordance with Argentine law pursuant to the
BIT, with no distinction between a “derivative claim” and an “intermediary investor”

claim.

The starting point of the analysis should be Article I(2) of the BIT, defining as investment
“any kind of assets, such as property and rights of every kind, acquired or effected in
accordance with the legislation of the country receiving the investment’. The Tribunal
noted the broad language of the clause and deducted that it does not exclude indirect
investments.°° The Tribunal concluded that the Claimants’ indirect nature of their
ownership of shares in Interinvest, ARSA and AUSA did not exclude such shares from the
definition of an investment under the BIT.*” The Arbitral Tribunal, in so doing, rejected
Argentina’s argument that the terms “acquired or effected in accordance with the
legislation of the country receiving the investment” mean that the investment needed to be
directly acquired in Argentina.** The Tribunal concluded that shares indirectly acquired by
the Claimants in an Argentine company and in accordance with the laws of Argentina were
protected by the BIT. The Tribunal also discussed Argentina’s arguments based on
Barcelona Traction and general international law,*? and found that they were not applicable
in the context of a BIT. It also concluded that the ICSID Convention does not reject the
possibility for the indirect shareholders of a domestic company to bring claims for the harm
caused to their investment. The Tribunal then rejected Argentina’s arguments based on

Argentine law as irrelevant to the decision on its jurisdiction,°! and rejected what it called

55 For the “derivative claim” argument, {{ 209; for the “intermediary investor” argument, | 232.

SDecision on Jurisdiction, | 209 seq.
57 Thid., | 207-238; Award, | 249.

58 phid., | 214.

8 Decision on Jurisdiction, {ff 215-221.
fbid., W 222-225.

©! Phid., W 226-228.

20

the “policy argument” according to which it would be inappropriate to award damages to

a shareholder rather than to the company that has actually suffered injury.

83. The Committee finds no manifest excess of powers in the Tribunal’s interpretation of the
BIT and of the other legal rules invoked by Argentina. Ultimately, the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction had to be assessed having regard to the BIT. The Tribunal considered that
Article I(2) of the BIT encompasses indirect investments, and in so doing it interpreted the
terms “any kind of assets” as referring to both directly and indirectly owned assets. It
follows, according to the Tribunal, that by acquiring shares in Air Comet, a Spanish
company which in turn held 99.2% of Interinvest, the Argentine holding company of
ARSA y AUSA, the Claimants made an indirect investment in said Argentine companies
and that such investment is protected by the BIT. Irrespective of whether these conclusions
are correct or not, there is no manifest error in such reasoning. Nor is there any
demonstration on the part of Argentina that such interpretation would be contrary to good

faith or inconsistent with the object and purpose of the BIT.

84. The Committee notes, in this regard, that in making its decision, the Tribunal has relied on
a number of past jurisdictional decisions, some made under the same Spain/Argentina

BIT® and others under treaties using similar language, having all concluded that

© pbid., | 233.

® Decision on Jurisdiction, {{ 210-213, citing Gas Natural SDG SA v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No
ARB/03/10, Decision on Jurisdiction, June 17, 2005 (“Gas Natural”), {ff 33-35; Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de
Barcelona S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/17,
Decision on Jurisdiction, May 16, 2006 (“Suez InterAguas”), | 49; and Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de
Barcelona S.A., and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19, Decision on
Jurisdiction, August 3, 2006 (“Suez Vivendi”), 49.

© Decision on Jurisdiction, | 228, providing as examples: CMS, Decision on Jurisdiction, | 42 (“the applicable

 

gislation.”); Azurix, Decision on Jurisdiction, December 8, 2003, 50, (C-490) (“The jurisdiction of the Centre is
determined by Article 25 of the Convention. In addition, the competence of the Tribunal is governed by the terms of
the instrument expressing the parties’ consent to ICSID arbitration. Therefore, the task of the Tribunal [at the
jurisdictional stage] is to assess whether the Claimant’s request for arbitration falls within the terms of said Article 25
of the Convention and (...) the BIT.”); Siemens v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at { 31 (“Argentina in its
allegations has not distinguished between the law applicable to the merits of the dispute and the law applicable to
determine the Tribunal's jurisdiction. This being an ICSID Tribunal, its jurisdiction is governed by Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention and the terms of the instrument expressing the parties’ consent to ICSID arbitration, namely,
Article 10 of the Treaty.”). Also, BG Group ple v Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, (“BG Group”), Final Award,
December 24, 2007, i] 203-04, (C-340). Note, that the Final Award rendered by the Tribunal was subsequently denied
enforcement on different grounds by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. The D.C.

 

 

 
   

21

85.

86.

indirectly owned assets qualify as protected investments. The Committee also notes that
Argentina did not refer to any past decision having in similar circumstances concluded to
the contrary. Although this Committee does not need to opine as to whether such past
decisions were correct or not, these circumstances lead the Committee to consider that any
possible error in the Tribunal’s conclusion that indirectly owned assets fall under Article

1(2) of the BIT would in any event not qualify as a manifest excess of powers.

Second, Argentina has averred before the Committee that the Tribunal would have
exceeded its powers by upholding its jurisdiction in spite of the fact that the investment did

not comply with the objective requirements established by the so-called Salini test.®

As an initial observation, the Committee notes that the Salini test has not been raised by
Argentina before the Tribunal as a jurisdictional argument, which is the reason why it is
not dealt with in the Decision on Jurisdiction. The argument is rather addressed in different
parts of the Award dealing with admissibility,°° where the Tribunal addresses issues of
contribution and risk in the context of a debate on the existence of other investments made
by the Claimants beyond their indirect acquisition of shares in Interinvest.* It is unclear to
the Committee why these questions are dealt with in the Award as part of a section on
admissibility. At any rate, framed as a jurisdictional question, the argument is inadmissible
before the Committee. A rightly explained by Christoph Schreuer: “a party may not present
new arguments on fact and law that it failed to put forward in the original arbitration
proceeding” .°* Because Argentina did not argue the Salini test as part of its jurisdictional
objections before the Tribunal, it cannot rely on such argument before the Committee to
submit that the Tribunal’s jurisdictional findings would amount to a manifest excess of

powers.

Circuit decided the appeal on the basis of arbitrability, finding that BG and Argentina had not agreed to submit the
arbitrability question itself to arbitration, and that the BG tribunal did not have jurisdiction to consider the matter of
its own competence. See Republic of Argentina v. BG Group ple, D.C. Cir., No. 11-7021 (January 17, 2012).

© Annulment Memorial { 68. Annulment Reply, | 42, Argentina’s Opening, slide 16.
© Award, (91 251, 253, 254, 260, 261, 262.

© Award, 250.

© The ICSID Convention, a Commentary, Second Edition, p. 932, 4 108.

22

87.

88.

Even if non-compliance with the Salini test were admissible as a jurisdictional annulment
argument (which it is not), it would in any event not succeed. Whether the argument relates
to jurisdiction or admissibility, the Claimants correctly point out® that whether the
standards established by the arbitral tribunal in the Salini v. Morocco case are mandatory
has been much debated. Christoph Schreuer writes in this respect that “it is not entirely
clear whether the tribunals regarded the criteria as essential requirements for the existence
of investments or merely as typical characteristics or indicators”,’ and that “the
development in practice from a descriptive list of typical features towards a set of
mandatory legal requirements is unfortunate. [...] To the extent that the ‘Salini’ test is
applied to determine the existence of an investment, its criteria should not be seen as
distinct jurisdictional requirements each of which must be met separately. In fact, tribunals
have pointed out repeatedly that the criteria that they applied were interrelated and should
be looked at not in isolation but in conjunction”.”! An annulment committee has in this
respect annulled an award for having elevated one of the Salini criteria to the level of a
jurisdictional requirement.’ It follows that a failure to apply the so-called Salini test would

not in itself constitute a manifest excess of powers.

The Committee is furthermore satisfied that the Salini criteria, had they been relevant to
this case, were in any event complied with. The Tribunal accordingly found that the
conditions of contribution, * risk,” and contribution to the host State’s economic
development’? had been met. As to the criteria of duration, it does not appear to have been
discussed by Argentina, but it was clearly met as well in the context of the acquisition of

two airlines, which are businesses requiring long term investments and planning.

© Annulment Rejoinder, J 33.
% The ICSID Convention, a Commentary, p. 130, [ 159.
7 Tbid., p. 133, 171.

% Malaysian Historical Salvors v. Malaysia, ICSID Case ARB/05/10, Decision on the Application for Annulment,
April 16, 2009.

% Annulment Rejoinder, | 35; Award, ¥f 251, 254.
4 Annulment Rejoinder, | 36; Award, If 253, 261, 262, 373.
75 Annulment Rejoinder, | 37; Award, If 255, 256, 315.

23

89.

90.

91.

The Committee now turns to Argentina’s arguments relating to the alleged simulation that
would be evidenced by the assignment, for no consideration, of the proceeds of the Award
to Air Comet. Argentina submits that this assignment is an acknowledgement that the
claims brought forward in the arbitration belonged in reality to Air Comet, and not to the

Claimants.”

This Assignment Agreement”’ was however entered into in January 2010, almost 9 years
after the investment and more than one year after the Request for Arbitration. The Tribunal
held that, in accordance with international case law, jurisdiction is generally to be assessed
as of the date the case is filed.”* This point has not been disputed by Argentina. As a
consequence, and as the Claimants rightly point out, the 2010 Assignment Agreement
could not affect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.” Moreover, as the Claimants also argued, the
assignment did not apply to the interests in dispute in the arbitration, but to the claim to
money that would possibly arise from the Award.*° It is therefore clear that the Claimants
continued to own their disputed rights against Argentina until the Award, and that their
standing to pursue the claims was not affected. The Tribunal finally held that any possible
illegality of the assignment would also be irrelevant to jurisdiction as long as the
investment had been legally acquired.*! The Assignment Agreement can therefore not

sustain the argument that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction, that the Claimants had no legal

standing in the arbitration, or that the arbitration was a simulation.

The Committee will now address Argentina’s argument that the Burford Funding
Agreement was the vehicle of a fraud to the ICSID system by allowing a third party, who
was not an investor, to act against Argentina.*” According to Argentina, as a consequence,

the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in accepting to entertain a claim made in bad

% Annulment Memorial, 72.
"RA 159.

8 Decision on Jurisdiction, { 255.

?°Annulment Counter-Memorial, { 195.

80

“Los cedentes acuerdan expresamente la cesién de los derechos netos de cobro que se obtengan de la demanda

presentada ante el Tribunal Internacional CIADI’, RA 159, Clause 1.
8! Decision on Jurisdiction, { 257.
® Annulment Memorial, 78.

24

faith and in fraud of Argentina’s rights.** The Committee does not find merits to the

argument.

92. First, the Funding Agreement was made between the Claimants and Burford Capital in
April 2010, which is 16 months after the Request for Arbitration. The Tribunal found that,
because it postdates the filing of the case, it is irrelevant to the assessment of both the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction and the Claimants’ standing.*+ That decision finds support in
international case law and past investment awards, as analysed by the Tribunal in its

Decision on Jurisdiction.*

93. Second, the Funding Agreement*® does not provide for any assignment in favour of the
Funder of the interests in dispute or of the proceeds of the Award. There is nothing in the
Funding Agreement that would allow concluding that Burford had become the owner of
the claims and the real claimant in the arbitration. The Claimants continued to instruct the
Nominated Lawyers. Clause 6.1 of the Funding Agreement provides in this respect that “in
consideration of the Funder’s undertakings in this Agreement, the Claimant agrees to pay
to the Funder the Recovery Amount immediately following receipt of all or any part of the
Award”. As a consequence, pursuant to this provision, the right to enforce the Award and
to collect against Argentina continues to belong to the Claimants. Clause 6.2 provides, as
a guarantee of the Funder’s right, the setting up of an escrow account on which the proceeds
of the Award would have to be paid, but this remains an inter partes arrangement that

would not in any way affect the Claimants’ standing in the arbitration. As a consequence,

83 Thid., | 79.

* Decision on Jurisdiction, {] 256-257.

85 Decision on Jurisdiction, {| 255-257, citing Case Concerning the Arrest Warrant of 11 April 2000 (Democratic
Republic of Congo v. Belgium), Judgment, February 14, 2002, I.C.J. Reports 2002, p. 3, | 26 (C-762); Vivendi 4,
Decision on Jurisdiction, November 14, 2005, {{{] 60, 61 and 63. See also Schreuer, The ICSID Convention:
Commentary (C-761) at 92 (“It is an accepted principle of international adjudication that jurisdiction will a
determined by reference to the date on which the judicial proceedings are instituted. This means that on that date all
jurisdictional requirements must be met. It also means that events taking place after that date will not affect
ju liction.””); Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, a.s. (CSOB) v. Slovak Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4,
Decision on Jurisdiction, May 24, 1999, (*CSOB”), [31 (C-539); Gustav F.W. Hamester GmbH & Co. KG v. Republic
of Ghana, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/24, Award, June 18, 2010 (“Hamester”), [96 (AL RA 73).

8° RA 160.

 

 

25

94.

95.

96.

97.

the Committee does not find support to Argentina’s submission that, based on the Funding

Agreement, the real claimant in the arbitration was Burford.

Argentina notes that the Funding Agreement gave rise to an exchange of letters between
the insolvency administrators of Air Comet and Burford as to the entitlement to the
proceeds of the Award.*’ The Committee fails to see how this exchange can be relevant to
the annulment proceedings. The Award was in fact made in favour of the Claimants, and
neither Air Comet nor Burford have any right to enforce it. Nor was there any uncertainty
in the arbitration as to who the claimant parties were. Argentina states in the Reply that this
“dispute” between Air Comet and Burford would show the serious consequences deriving
from the Tribunal’s decision to uphold its jurisdiction.** But it fails to explain what these
consequences are and why the role of a Funder should be characterized as an abuse of
process or a breach of the BIT or the ICSID Convention. Argentina also invokes the recent
release by Burford of a communication according to which it transferred its rights on the
proceeds of the Award,*? without however any explanation as to why this circumstance is

relevant to its argument that by affirming its jurisdiction the Tribunal exceeded its powers.

Based on the foregoing, the Committee concludes that there is no manifest excess of

powers in the Tribunal’s Decisions on Jurisdiction.

(3) Lack of Capacity of the Claimants’ Counsel
a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina points out that “[a]fter the original arbitration proceeding was commenced, the
three Claimant companies became subject to insolvency proceedings in Spain between late
2010 and early 2011. Subsequently, in April 2013, Claimants’ management and disposition

powers were suspended and transferred to the respective Trustees in Insolvency.”””

Argentina submits that the insolvency administrators were the persons vested with standing

to act in the arbitration proceeding, that the powers of attorney previously granted by the

*” Annulment Memorial, {{ 81-83.
88 Annulment Reply, 153.

* Annulment Memorial, 84.

° Annulment Memorial, {ff 86, 89.

26

98.

99.

100.

Claimants no longer conferred capacity to King & Spalding to represent the debtor in the
insolvency proceedings, that King & Spalding did not obtain similar powers of attorney
from the insolvency administrators, and that they therefore lacked the power to represent

them in the arbitration proceeding.*!

Argentina contends that although the Tribunal recognized that the law applicable to the
Claimants’ capacity and representation was Spanish law, it nonetheless failed to apply it
by holding that: “[I]n the circumstances of an international arbitration which has been
ongoing for a number of years, one must question whether the strict application of the

formalities of granting powers of attorney at Spanish law appropriately apply.”°”

Argentina submits in this regard that neither the 2011 or 2013 letters nor the 2015 public
deed relied upon by the Claimants meet the requirements set forth by Spanish law for the
granting of powers of attorney.” According to Argentina, the reason why King & Spalding
did not obtain powers of attorney from the insolvency administrators is that the variation
or termination of the existing powers of attorney would have put at risk the Funding
Agreement by entitling Burford to unilaterally terminate it and to receive a USD 100

million compensation,” an issue that the Tribunal would have failed to address.°°

Argentina concludes that: “in considering that King & Spalding’s attorneys had capacity
of representation for the arbitration proceeding following the suspension of Claimants’
management and disposition powers and their replacement by the respective trustees in
insolvency, the majority of the Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law, thus manifestly

exceeding its powers within the meaning of Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.”*°

°! Annulment Memorial, #{[ 86, 88, 105. Annulment Reply, {If 67-68.

° Annulment Memorial, {9 98, 100 citing Award, { 221-222. Annulment Reply, {1 58-60.
°3 Annulment Reply, Mf 70-73.

°% Annulment Memorial, {ff 106-107. Annulment Reply, ‘If 78-80.

°5 Annulment Memorial, { 108.

°6 Annulment Reply {. 81.

27

101.

102.

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants argues that Argentina’s submission is nothing more than a disagreement
with the Tribunal’s decision.*” The Tribunal found that, because the Claimants are Spanish
nationals, the law applicable to their capacity and to the powers of attorney in dispute is
Spanish law,”* in particular the Spanish Bankruptcy Law. Under that law, the Tribunal
found that “the re-organization administrators step into the shoes of the debtor upon the
commencement of liquidation proceedings/suspension of powers of administration and
disposition of assets.”°? The Tribunal also noted that “each set of re-organization
administrators had reaffirmed King & Spalding’s powers of representation and ratified

the actions taken by that firm on behalf of Claimants.” °°

The Claimants refute Argentina’s submission that, pursuant to Article 48(3) of the Spanish
Bankruptcy Law (which provides that “[a]ny power of attorney existing at the time of the
initiation of the insolvency proceedings shall be affected by the suspension or control of
financial and property-related powers”'®'), the powers of attorney were extinguished or
terminated. The correct interpretation of Spanish law is that “the powers of attorney of
company administrators (or liquidators) will be affected only to the same extent as the
powers of administration and disposition of the bankruptcy estate” .'°> Since the
insolvency administrators remain “able to perform all other acts provided such acts do not
consist in the administration or disposition of the estate”,!° including the pursuit of claims
in arbitration, the powers of attorney relating to the arbitration necessarily remain valid. In
its analysis of this matter, the Tribunal observed that when Spanish law does seek to

extinguish contractual arrangements through the operation of law, it does so expressly. !°

°” Annulment Counter-Memorial, { 143.

%8 Thid., | 144. Award, | 203.

® Award, 218.

0 Annulment Counter-Memorial, ff 144-145. Award, | 218.

©! Annulment Counter-Memorial, {i 146, citing Award, 209.

'02 Expert Report of Dr. Aurora Martinez Fl6rez, July 31, 2013, (“Expert Report of Dr. Martinez Flérez”) | 34.
63 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {{ 146.

‘04 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {{ 146, citing Award, {| 220.

28

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

The Claimants argue that, based on Spanish law, the Tribunal held that “the powers of
attorney granted to King & Spalding were initially, and have continued throughout these
proceedings to be, valid”, so that “Claimants ha{d] proved that there was no obligation at

Spanish law to produce a new power of attorney in the circumstances of this case.” !°°

The Claimants also point out that the insolvency administrators ratified the Claimants’
power of attorney by (i) letters from the insolvency administrators of all three Claimants
filed on June 16, 2011; (ii) three additional letters, one from each of the three insolvency
administrators, submitted with the Claimants’ Reply in August 2013; and (iii) public deeds
executed by the insolvency administrators, attesting to King & Spalding’s powers to act in

the arbitration, filed in October 2015. !°°

The Tribunal found on this issue that (i) “the[se] public deeds submitted by the court-
appointed receivers should be admitted into evidence in the [...arbitration]
proceedings”;'" (ii) “[t]he public deeds are relevant to a number of issues before the
Tribunal [... and] they clearly relate to the question of the validity of King & Spalding’s
powers of attorney and their authority to represent Claimants in the arbitration” ;'°. and
(iii) “the statements made in the public deeds are consistent with the previous statements

in evidence from the receivers.” '

The Claimants’ also note the Tribunal’s finding that it was reasonable to assume, based on
the public disclosure of the Funding Agreement, “that the re-organization administrators
for each of Claimants were fully aware of the Funding Agreement,” and that Burford, given

its financial stake in the matter, was aware of the Claimants’ insolvency proceedings. !!°

With respect to the 2013 Ratification Letters, the Claimants submit that only the Spanish

Bankruptcy Law applied to the Arbitration and the Tribunal was therefore correct in

65 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {{ 147, citing Award, | 223.
06 Counter-Memorial, {ff 148-150.

107

Decision on Provisional Measures, { 172.

"68 Decision on Provisional Measures, { 172.

‘09 Decision on Provisional Measures, {[ 172. Annulment Counter-Memorial, { 150

410 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {{ 153.

29

108.

109.

110.

declining to enforce Spanish Civil Procedure rules which only apply in court and to which
neither party to the Treaty had agreed.''!' The Tribunal emphasized in this respect that
“Tt]he Spanish Bankruptcy Law does not require any particular form in which the re-
organization administrators must appear in arbitral proceedings or ratify the conduct of
proceedings” .'' The Tribunal had also admitted into the record the October 2015 deeds

confirming the original June 2011 letter provided by the insolvency administrators. !!7

The Tribunal therefore correctly concluded, by applying Spanish Bankruptcy law, that the
powers of attorney granted to the Claimants’ counsel have always been valid under Spanish
law and were not extinguished by the bankruptcy filings.!' In sum, the Tribunal issued a
comprehensive, thoughtful, and correct decision rejecting Argentina’s arguments on two

separate grounds and did not manifestly exceed its powers on this issue.!!°

c. The Committee’s Analysis

The thrust of Argentina’s argument is that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by
failing to apply the relevant Spanish law rules to the question of the validity of King &
Spalding’s powers of representation after the three claimant companies versed into
receivership at the end of 2010 and at the beginning of 2011. More specifically, the Parties
disagree on the consequences of the suspension provided by Article 145 of Spanish
Bankruptcy law, and as to whether Articles 48.3 and 52.1 of the same law, as well as Article
1732(3) of the Spanish Civil Code (relating to termination of the mandate), were properly

applied.

As an initial matter, the Committee agrees that failure to apply the law agreed by the parties
may be a basis for annulment for excess of powers. This is because, as rightly pointed out

by Christoph Schreuer, “the provisions on applicable law are essential elements of the

4 [bid., 4163.

12 Award, 217.

43 Decision on Provisional Measures, { 172.
44 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {ff 155-158.
45 Thid., 154.

30

111.

parties’ agreement to arbitrate”.!‘° The Committee also holds that choice of law can be
made implicitly, in particular by common reliance on a given law.!!” In the case at hand,
both Parties have relied on Spanish law to discuss the question of representation in dispute.
As a consequence, a failure by the Tribunal to apply that law may be characterized as an
excess of powers. However, because annulment committees do not sit in appeal of the
tribunal’s decision, a clear distinction needs to be made between non-application of the
proper law and a mere error in its application: while a complete disregard of the applicable
tule of law may be an excess of power, an incorrect or imperfect interpretation or
application of such rule will as a matter of principle not. While the distinction between the
two situations may be in practice difficult to draw, the requirement that the excess of power
be manifest is of particular relevance to assist committees in deciding whether an award
should be annulled. As rightly decided by the MTD v. Chile ad hoc committee: “an award
will not escape annulment if the tribunal while purporting to apply the relevant law
actually applies another, quite different law. But in such a case the error must be
‘manifest’, not arguable, and a misapprehension (still less mere disagreement) as to the

content of a particular rules is not enough”.''®

As an initial matter, Argentina has put much emphasis!" on the first sentence of paragraph
222 of the Award, where the Tribunal says that “in the circumstances of an international
arbitration which has been ongoing for a number of years, one must question whether the
strict application of the formalities of granting powers of attorney at Spanish law
appropriately apply”. Argentina sees that statement as evidence that instead of applying
Spanish law, the Tribunal decided to disregard it in favour of a solution of its own. The
Committee, however, does not give relevance to that statement. It is unclear to what
formalities the Tribunal referred to, and what is exactly meant by their “‘strict application”.
As any rate, even if that sentence was perhaps unfortunate, it was surely superfluous to
substantiate the Tribunal’s reasoning. The basis for the Tribunal’s decision that the powers

of attorney granted to King & Spalding remained valid throughout the arbitration are to be

446 Commentary, p. 954, | 192.

47 [bid., p. 573, 4 70.

48 Decision on Annulment, March 21, 2007, 47.

419 Annulment Memorial, {{{ 100-101, 225, 258. Annulment Reply, ff 60, 77.

31

112.

113.

114.

found elsewhere in the Award. As a consequence, the Committee finds that particular

sentence to be irrelevant.

The crux of the dispute was whether, in spite of the insolvency proceedings initiated against
each of the three claimant parties at the end of 2010 and at the beginning of 2011, and in
spite of court decisions made on April 10, 2013 (Autobuses Urbanos), April 22, 2013
(Teinver), and April 23, 2013 (Transportes) to dissolve the three claimant parties, to
suspend the representative powers of their legal representatives, and to empower the
insolvency administrators to represent the bankruptcy, the Representation Contract and
powers of attorney granted by the Claimants to King & Spalding in November 2008

remained valid.

The Tribunal’s starting point was Article 52 of the Spanish bankruptcy law, according to
which “arbitration proceedings that are pending at the time of the reorganization
proceedings declaration shall continue until the award becomes final’.'° The Tribunal
noted however that pursuant to Article 51(2) of that same law, in case of a suspension of
the debtor’s powers of administration and disposition, the insolvency administrators would
have to replace the Claimants in the arbitration with no need of a specific authorization by
the court.!?! The Tribunal then noted that the three insolvency administrators each signed
an undated letter (which letters were submitted with the Reply in August 2013) ratifying
the existing powers of attorneys and stating their intention to appear before the Tribunal.
The Tribunal further states that the March 4, 2014 (merits) and November 3, 2015
(provisional measures) hearings were attended by the insolvency administrators Messrs.
Arqued, Hernandez and Martinez. !22 The Claimants submitted to the Tribunal, on October

22, 2015, the public deeds confirming the capacity of the insolvency administrators. '?3

The Tribunal then made a number of findings. First, the Tribunal relied on the opinion of

the legal expert witness presented by the Claimants to hold that Article 1732(3) of the

20 Award, { 203.
21 Award, {if 204-205.
122 Award, { 208.

123 Ibid.

32

115.

116.

Spanish Civil Code (which provides that a mandate terminates in case of insolvency or
incapacity of the debtor) “does not apply to contracts like the Representation Agreement”
between the Claimants and King & Spalding.'*4 In that same paragraph, the Tribunal also
seemed to accept that, although Article 1732(3) does not apply to the Representation
Agreement because it is “a bilateral service agreement’, it may have applied to the power
of attorney “which was granted separately”.' Oddly, however, the Tribunal had
previously ruled that the Spanish Bankruptcy law should “primarily” prevail, as lex
specialis, over Article 1732.!7° Although these two findings may seem contradictory, the
Committee understands that the Tribunal intended to say that whether the Representation
contract with King & Spalding and the powers of attorney remained valid or not is an issue

that should be resolved by reference to the Bankruptcy law.

The Tribunal then held that “Article 61(2) of the Spanish Bankruptcy law provides that
bilateral contracts to which the debtor is a party remain in effect despite the
commencement of the re-organization proceedings and their validity is not affected”, that
“the re-organization administrators [...] may request from the court the termination of a

contract if it is deemed in the interests of the insolvency proceedings”, and that “the re-

 

organization administrators have not req d the termination of the Retainer Agreement
between Claimants and King & Spalding”.'"’ As a consequence, the Representation

Contract was unaffected by the bankruptcy proceedings.

The Tribunal went on by rejecting Argentina’s contention that the powers of attorney had
terminated by effect of Article 48(3) of the Spanish Bankruptcy law, by holding that the
provision of said article - according to which the existing powers of attorney are “affected”

by the suspension - does not mean that they are terminated, but rather that “the actions of

24 Award, 219.

125 Ibid.

26 Award, | 214.
27 Award, 218.

33

117.

118.

the debtor through its counsel/authorized representative are subject to the approval of the

re-organization administrators” .'

The Tribunal held that the powers of attorney were in any event ratified by way of the
letters submitted to the Tribunal in August 2013, and decided that the objections raised by
Argentina to the legal effects of these letters are “highly formal and somewhat
arbitrary”.'?> In this regard, Argentina has submitted that in Spanish law, these letters
could not be executed unilaterally by the insolvency administrators, and should have been
authorized by the Court.!*° The Tribunal addressed these arguments by saying that “the
Spanish bankruptcy law does not require any particular form in which the re-organization
administrators must appear in arbitral proceedings or ratify the conduct of the
proceedings. The only specific instances in which court authorization is required are for
the withdrawal, acceptance or settlement of claims against the debtor’."*! The Tribunal
added that, in any event, “as they have been appointed by the court and regularly appeared
before it, it is reasonable to assume that they are not likely to engage into unauthorized
action, particularly with respect to the pursuance of this arbitration, which is known to the

court’ ,'3

Again, it is not the Committee’s role to act as an appellate body and to assess whether that
reasoning was correct in Spanish law. The relevant question here is whether in reaching its
conclusion, the Tribunal applied Spanish law. The Committee considers that it did. The
reasoning is based on an analysis of the various legal provisions at stake, in view of the
legal opinion of a Spanish law professor upon which the Claimants relied. It essentially
rests on (i) the Tribunal’s analysis of Article 61(2) of the Spanish Bankruptcy law,
according to which the Retainer Agreement between the Claimants and King & Spalding
was still in force in absence of termination, (ii) the Tribunal’s analysis of Article 48(3) of

that same law, according to which the powers of attorney had been “affected or limited”

28 Award, { 220.
29 Award, 221.
30 Award, { 198; Annulment Memorial, {| 103.
31 Award, {217
132 Award, 221.

34

119.

120.

121.

but not terminated as a consequence of the suspension, and (iii) its finding that said powers
had in any event been ratified by way of the undated letters signed by the insolvency
administrators and that said ratification was not subject in Spanish law to a specific form.
The Tribunal also found that the October 2015 public deeds were relevant to the question
of the validity of the King & Spalding’s powers of attorney and their authority to represent
the Claimants in the arbitration.'** Irrespective of whether these reasons are correct or
convincing, there is no doubt in the eyes of the Committee that in reaching its conclusions,

the Tribunal applied Spanish law. As a consequence, there is no manifest excess of powers.

(4) Misappropriation of the SEPI Funds
a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina points out that under the SPA — which is invoked by the Claimants as the basis
of their alleged investment —, Air Comet agreed to contribute USD 50 million as a capital

increase and received from SEPI about USD 803 million to be distributed as follows:

a) USD 300 million to pay the liabilities of the Argentine Airlines;

b) USD 205 million to pay any adjustments needed as per the transfer and adjustment
balance sheet;

c) USD 248 million to implement an Industrial Plan in the Argentine Airlines; and

d) USD 50 million against the payment of a promissory note payable by Interinvest.'**

Argentina contends that those funds were not used for their intended purpose, that Air

Comet failed to make most of the capital contributions it had agreed to make,'*° and that

Air Comet breached its undertakings under the SPA in detriment of the Argentine Airlines

and the Argentine Republic, and in violation of the principle of good faith.

Argentina also argues that in rejecting Argentina’s objection to jurisdiction based on the
misappropriation of funds received from SEPI and alleged lack of good faith, the Tribunal

decided that such facts would be dealt with in the merits phase of the arbitration.'*°

33 Decision on Provisional Measures, [ 172.

‘84 Annulment Memorial, {ff 112-114. Annulment Reply, { 82. Argentina’s Opening, slide 42.
85 Annulment Memorial, | 115. Argentina’s Opening, slides 43-56, 63-71, 73-81.
'36 Argentina’s Opening, slides 87-89.

35

122.

123.

124.

However, the Tribunal failed to address Argentina’s argument that the above-mentioned
conduct was a breach of the principle of good faith under international law. '*’ The Tribunal
also failed to address the failure by Air Comet to use the USD 205 million to pay ARSA's
and AUSA’s debts or liabilities. '**

To conclude, Argentina contends that “the undue use of funds contributed by SEPI and the
non-compliance with the terms of the SPA breached the principle of good faith under
international law. Accordingly, the investment invoked by Claimants could not benefit from
the protection of the BIT and such conduct triggered the inadmissibility of the claim under
international law. In granting protection to the alleged investment and admitting
Claimants’ claim, the majority of the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers within the

meaning of Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.” |”

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers in its findings

and conclusions regarding how Air Comet used the SEPI funds. '¥°

The Claimants first note that Argentina was not a party to the SPA, and therefore has no
standing to complain about an agreement to which it was extraneous. Any complaint as to
the use of funds provided by the SPA should have been raised by SEPI.'*! As found by the
Tribunal: “As in the case of USD 300 million, the evidence indicates that SEPI was aware
of how Air Comet was using the USD 248 million intended for the execution or
implementation of the Industrial Plan. Apart from applying a penalty of USD 86,957 for
failure to supply one airplane, SEPI does not appear to have invoked any contractual

remedies against Air Comet for the possible failures to comply with the terms of the SPA.

'57 Annulment Reply, {{ 11.

38 Annulment Memorial, {| 139. Argentina’s Opening, slides 58-62.

89 Annulment Reply, {{ 120.

440 Annulment Counter-Memorial, ‘{f{ 208-224. Annulment Rejoinder, {{ 79-105.
41 Claimants’ Opening, slide 109.

36

Nor did SEPI or the Spanish government seek to revoke the agreement on the basis of

possible non-compliance by Air Comet.” '?

125. The Claimants contend that the Tribunal extensively discussed and rejected Argentina’s
arguments on the misappropriation of funds. The Tribunal first explained in its Decision
on Jurisdiction that Air Comet’s alleged breaches “could not affect jurisdiction because
they would have only occurred subsequent to Claimants’ acquisition of the investment.”'

Regarding the USD 300 million, the Tribunal observed the there was no doubt that SEPI

was aware of how these funds were being used: “Although Respondent argues that the

purchase of ARSA’s debt and subrogation to ARSA’s creditor’s claims was not in
compliance with the terms of the SPA, the references above indicate that SEPI was, indeed,
aware of the purchase of the debt and subrogation by Air Comet and consented, as found
by the Spanish audit court. In these circumstances, it appears that while the acquisition
and subrogation may not have been in accordance with the SPA as originally

contemplated, the parties subsequently agreed to a different handling of the USD 300

million contributed by SEPI. There is no indication that SEPI ever complained of this or

that it sought to annul the SPA on this basis. In fact, SEPI’s position before the Tribunal

de Cuentas was that this was permitted by the SPA.”

126. As to Argentina’s complaint that the USD 248 million contributed by SEPI to carry out the

‘5 the Claimants

Industrial Plan was not applied to that end, but mostly to operating costs,
note that SEPI was aware of how the funds were being used, and that such funds were
subject to auditing. The Tribunal also found that SEPI would only release each transfer
after receiving from PriceWaterhouseCoopers (“PwC”) a certification confirming that the

previous transfer was spent in accordance with the SPA.'4°

2 Award, { 300.

43 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {{ 110, citing Award, | 267. See, Decision on Jurisdiction, {ff 324-28. Claimants’
Opening, slide 111.

4 Award, { 289.

45 Annulment Memorial, {. 126.

46 Tr, Day 1, 198:20 -201:4.

37

127.

128.

129.

c. The Committee’s Analysis

As said above, Argentina’s argument is that, because of the alleged breach of the principle
of good faith in the use of funds contributed by SEPI and of the non-compliance by Air
Comet with the terms of the SPA, “the investment invoked by Claimants could not benefit
from the protection of the BIT and such conduct triggered the inadmissibility of the claim
under international law”.'"’ The argument, therefore, does not go to the jurisdiction of the

Arbitral Tribunal. In fact, as correctly pointed out by the Claimants, '*

the alleged breaches
of the SPA all occurred after the acquisition of the investment and could not form the basis

for a jurisdictional argument.

Argentina’s argument is that the misuse of the SEPI funds by Air Comet amounted to a
fraud which should have led the Tribunal to dismiss the claim on its merits as inadmissible,
and that failing to do so was a manifest excess of powers. '*? Argentina also avers that the
Tribunal failed to address its argument relating to the use of the USD 205 million aimed at
covering the Airlines’ liabilities, and that such omission is also a manifest excess of

powers. The Committee will address each of these two arguments in turn.

Concerning, first of all, the alleged breach of the principle of good faith, Argentina relies
on the award in Churchill Mining'>° to submit that the existence of a fraud in the operation
of an investment renders an international claim arising from that investment inadmissible.
The Committee notes, in this regard, that from Argentina’s own argument, the case in
Churchill Mining was related to frauds and falsifications committed by the investor in the
intent to obtain additional mining licenses. The Committee agrees, in this respect, that the
fact for an investor to use the investment to commit a fraud to the detriment of the host
State may be considered as depriving the investment from the protection granted to it by
international law. In the Committee’s view, however, not every breach of an obligation,
whether or not contractual, is susceptible to be characterized as a fraud in international law.

In order for a breach to constitute a fraud, it needs to be wilful, and to have been

‘47 Annulment Reply, {{ 120.

48 Rejoinder, {ff 80; 109.

49 Annulment Memorial, {| 138.

50 Annulment Memorial, {fff 136-137.

38

130.

131.

132.

orchestrated to obtain an undue advantage to the detriment of the host State. In the instant
case, Argentina does not explain why the facts in dispute should be considered as such a
breach of good faith in international law, why they affected the Airlines, and why they

should lead to deprive the investors of the protection afforded to them by the BIT.

The Tribunal has, in the Award, carefully analysed the grievances of Argentina with respect

to the use of the SEPI funds.

As to the use of the USD 300 million which, in accordance with the SPA, had to be used
to pay off certain liabilities of the Airlines, Argentina complains that instead of paying off
liabilities, Air Comet purchased the debts, subrogated itself in the rights of the creditors, to
then transfer them to Interinvest which then turned them into capital contributions, thus
increasing its stockholding and thereby lowering that of Argentina in ARSA.'*! The
Tribunal found that Air Comet’s use of the funds did not violate the SPA and was not in
breach of any law.'*? That conclusion was not contradicted by its review of the Spanish
criminal proceedings, which appear to be related to allegations of tax evasion to the
prejudice of the Spanish treasury.'? Concerning, in particular, the December 9, 2013
judgment of Criminal Court of Madrid, upon which Argentina relies, !** The Tribunal found
that such judgment had made “no finding of fraud or harm, as it relates to the actual use

of the funds Air Comet received from SEPI, to the airlines, its creditors, or otherwise” .!>>

The Committee does not find any reason to question such findings. It is undisputed that,
through the assignment of the relevant credits to Air Comet and their subsequent
conversion into a capital contribution, the relevant liabilities of ARSA were indeed
extinguished. There is no evidence that such conversion ran against the SPA or any other

commitment or obligation of Air Comet, and even less that it amounts to a fraud to the

‘5! Annulment Reply, {| 87.

152 Award, if 263-315.

'53 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {{ 214.
54 Annulment Reply, 92.

'55 Award, { 320 n. 237.

39

133.

134.

135.

136.

prejudice of Argentina that could entail the inadmissibility of the claim for breach of the

principle of good faith in international law.

With respect to the allegation that the USD 248 million contributed by SEPI to carry out
the industrial plan was not used to that end but to finance operating costs, Argentina
provides no explanation as to why this would amount to a fraud to the prejudice of the
Airlines.!®° The Tribunal, in this respect, noted that SEPI was aware of the way the funds

were used and had approved it.'°7

As to the USD 50 million capital contribution, the Tribunal noted that “neither Party
indicate[d] that Air Comet was ever found to be in default of its obligations to make the
USD 50 million investment, nor that SEPI took any steps under the SPA or otherwise in
this regard”.'>* The Tribunal also noted that “in its report N° 765, the Spanish Audit Court
concluded that Air Comet had complied with its obligation to increase the capital of ARSA
by USD 50 million (albeit somewhat late)’, and that “The Tribunal de Cuentas determined
that Air Comet paid in cash approximately 25% of the amount on February 19, 2003 and
the balance by February 11, 2005”.'°° Argentina has not demonstrated, in addition, why
the alleged failure to proceed to the capital contribution would amount, beyond being a

breach of the SPA, to a fraud to the prejudice of the Airlines.

The Committee now turns to Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal failed to address its
argument that the USD 205 million contributed by SEPI to cover the Airlines’ debts were
instead used to pay for operational expenses, and that such failure is a manifest excess of

powers.

As an initial matter, the Committee considers that while a failure to decide a claim may
amount to a manifest excess of powers, the failure to address a factual or legal argument
supporting a claim normally does not. As a matter of fact, a tribunal has the obligation to

fulfil its mandate, which is to resolve the dispute brought before it by the parties by

56 Annulment Reply, {{ 102.

'57 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {{ 216.
158 Award, { 304.

59 Annulment Rejoinder, { 77.

40

137.

138.

139.

140.

deciding on their respective claims. Failing to do so may therefore amount to a manifest
excess of powers. To the contrary, the Tribunal has no obligation to address each and every

single argument or sub-argument advanced by the parties in support of their claims.

In the instant case, the alleged misuse of the USD 205 million is one of the arguments that
Argentina has put forward before the Committee to sustain its claim that the Tribunal’s
decision with respect to the SEPI fund amounts to a manifest excess of powers. As such,

even if the argument had not been addressed, there would be no manifest excess of powers.

In any event, as rightly pointed out by the Claimants, the Tribunal did address the question
and decided that these sums could be used to cover operational losses.'® Argentina’s
argument was also rejected implicitly by the Tribunal’s finding that SEPI was generally
aware of the use of funds by Air Comet and did not object to it.!°! Finally, there is no
explanation on the part of Argentina of the reason why the use of the USD 205 million to
cover operational losses instead of debts would constitute a fraud to the detriment of the

Airlines and a breach of the principle of good faith under international law.

Based on the foregoing, the Committee holds that the Tribunal did not commit a manifest
excess of powers in rejecting Argentina’s arguments based on the alleged misuse of the

SEPI funds.
(5) The July 2008 Agreement

a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina submits that the only basis for the Tribunal’s finding that Argentina breached
the BIT was its alleged non-compliance with the July 2008 Agreement.'® Such contract

was concluded between Argentina and Interinvest in the context of the delicate financial

60 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {{ 220; Annulment Rejoinder, | 77; Award, 377.
6! Award, { 300, fn 178.

162

Annulment Memorial, {| 144.

4l

situation of the Argentine Airlines,'®* and its purpose was to determine the price of the

Airlines’ shares, which were to be purchased by Argentina. '*

141. Article 6 of the July 2008 Agreement reads as follows:

“ARTICLE 6: The prices for the purchase of the stock interests in
AEROLINEAS and AUSTRAL shall be determined as follows:

(i) The purchase price for AUSTRAL’s stock interest shall be determined
based on the valuation provided by a valuation entity to be appointed therefor by

IV and the valuation to be performed at the request of the STATE OF ARGENTINA

(ii) The purchase price for AEROLINEAS’s stock interest shall be
determined based on the valuation provided by a valuation entity to be appointed
therefor by IV and the valuation to be performed at the request of the STATE OF
ARGENTINA

The STATE OF ARGENTINA shall seek the abovementioned valuations
from the Appraisal Board, which agency shall assess the value of the airlines as a
whole. Should the valuations thus performed yield different results and/or if an
agreement cannot be otherwise reached as to the price of the two stock interests, a
third valuation shall be sought from an impartial local or foreign entity of
international renown specialized in the purchase and sale and/or valuation of
international airlines; the valuation thus obtained shall be final and definitive as

between the Parties.

The valuation shall be performed using the discounted cash flow method.
Such future cash flows shall be calculated using the following assumptions: (i) the
cost of fuel at its current subsidized value of $1.85 (one Argentine peso and eighty-
five cents) per liter plus VAT; said price is to be changed using reference prices

and proportionately to price variations in the market; and (ii) the current fare for

63 Thid., 4 145.

164 Thid., 4 146.

42

142.

143.

144.

145.

domestic flights, modified proportionately to any changes projected for all other

costs.”1°

The Tribunal noted that “there had been no agreement on the transfer price for the shares
in the Airlines” and that Interinvest therefore “request[ed] the selection of a third-party
valuator, pursuant to the terms of the July 2008 Agreement.” '® Given the disagreements
between Interinvest and the Argentine State, the third valuator was however not appointed.
Thereafter, the Argentine Congress enacted a law declaring the shares of the Argentine

Airlines of public interest and subject to expropriation.'”

The Tribunal found that the Argentine Republic was liable for breaching the July 2008
Agreement by failing to comply with its obligation to purchase Interinvest’s shares in the
Argentine Airlines pursuant to the mechanism set forth under Article 6 of the July 2008
Agreement, and that such breach was a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard
established by the BIT! and an unjustified measure.'® The Tribunal also concluded that
the expropriation was unlawful, for Argentina failed to perform the procedure established
in the July 2008 Agreement and the expropriation of the shares had therefore not been

carried out in accordance with the Argentine law.!”

Argentina first submits that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to base its findings on the July
2008 Agreement, because (i) the Claimants are not party to that contract, and (ii) the breach
of the July 2008 Agreement was a contractual breach that could not be elevated to the level

of a treaty breach. '7!

Argentina further submits that “the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in completely

failing to apply the guidelines it had identified as legal principles applicable to Claimants’

'65 July 2008 Agreement, Article 6 (RA-559).

'66 Annulment Memorial, | 148, citing the Award, | 448.
161 Thid., 4 148.

168 Award, 857.

69 Thid., 1 925.

170 Annulment Memorial, {| 149.

"71 Tbid., {174 and 264.

43

146.

147.

148.

compensation. The Tribunal arbitrarily decided to adopt the valuation submitted by one of
the parties to the July 2008 Agreement—the Credit Suisse valuation submitted by
Interinvest—'" in direct contradiction to the guidelines the Tribunal itself had determined
were applicable to the case, i.e. that the value of the shares of Interinvest in the Argentine
Airlines was to be assessed in accordance with the valuation methodology set out in Article
six of the July 2008 Agreement, by means of a valuation prepared by a third independent

valuator specialised in the sector.”'

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that the question of whether a breach of the July 2008 Agreement
may also cause a violation of the FET standard is a question that pertains to the merits and

not to jurisdiction.!*

The Claimants point out that the Tribunal’s finding of a violation by Argentina of the FET
standard was not only based on its breach of Article 6 of the July 2008 Agreement. It rather
had a wider scope and included: ““Respondent’s lack of transparency in agreeing to the July
2008 Agreement, passing Law 26,412 which resulted in the TTN applying a valuation
methodology that was inconsistent with that agreed to in the July 2008 Agreement and its
arbitrary decision to expropriate the investment rather than proceed to a third-party

valuation as agreed.” !7°

The Claimants submit that other tribunals, such as the Murphy II tribunal, found that
conduct giving rise to a breach of contract may also breach the FET standard.!’° The
Claimants conclude that “the Tribunal properly and clearly held that Argentina’s conduct,
including but not limited to its breach of Article 6 of the July 2008 Agreement, violated the
FET standard. The Tribunal provided logical and sound reasons for its finding, and fully

1 Award, J 1114.

173 Annulment Reply, [143

174 Annulment Counter-Memorial, J 238

175 Thid., | 239; Award, { 1010.

176 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {| 240 (footnotes omitted).

44

149.

150.

151.

addressed Argentina’s arguments in this respect. In addition, the Tribunal found Argentina

liable under the Treaty on two additional grounds separate from the FET standard.”'”

c. The Committee’s Analysis

The Committee will first address Argentina’s argument that the alleged breach of the July
2008 Agreement was a contract breach on which the Tribunal had no jurisdiction, to then
deal with the argument that the Tribunal could not without exceeding its powers assess

damages in disregard of the procedure established by that Agreement.

Concerning, first of all, the argument that the breach of the July 2008 Agreement was a
contract breach falling outside the scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, the Committee will
as an initial matter note that the Tribunal rejected the arguments made by the Claimants,
based on the BIT’s MFN clause, to the effect that they would be entitled to rely on an
umbrella clause.'’8 That is undisputed. The Committee however finds the discussion on
this point!” to be irrelevant to the question whether the Tribunal could without exceeding
its powers find that in breaching the July 2008 Agreement, Argentine also breached the
BIT.

The fact that the Claimants could not rely on an umbrella clause may have been relevant
to the question whether a breach of a contractual obligation entered into between the parties
could be elevated to the level of a treaty breach. In the case at hand, however, the findings
of the Tribunal were based on breaches by Argentina of its treaty obligations, rather than
on its contractual conduct. In finding that the refusal by Argentina to comply with Article
6 of the July 2008 Agreement was a breach of the FET standard, the Tribunal noted that
Argentina had acted, in so doing, in its capacity as sovereign, and not merely as a
contracting party. The Tribunal first noted that “Argentina’s purpose for entering into the

July 2008 Agreement was to fulfil its obligation to guarantee the provision and continuity

"77 [id., 4 244.
"8 Award, { 892.
79 Annulment Memorial, | 177; Annulment Rejoinder, {{ 136.

45

152.

153.

of air transportation services in Argentina” .'®° The Tribunal concluded that “the July 2008

Agreement was not simply a commercial agreement”.'*!

The July 2008 Agreement was part of the legal framework established by Argentina for the
operation of the investment and the possible sale of the Airlines by Interinvest.!*? As such,
a breach by Argentina of that contract could also be a breach of Argentina’s treaty
obligations, irrespective of the existence of an umbrella clause. And this is precisely the
conclusion that the Tribunal reached by finding, with respect to the measures following the
July 2008 Agreement, that ““Respondent’s lack of transparency in agreeing to the July 2008
Agreement, passing Law 26,412 which resulted in the TTN applying a valuation
methodology that was inconsistent with that agreed to in the July 2008 Agreement and its
arbitrary decision to expropriate the investment rather than to proceed to a third-party

valuation as agreed, have all been found to be a breach of the FET obligations” .'*°

The Tribunal has therefore not elevated mere contract breaches to the international plane.
It has rather found that the facts in dispute, irrespective of whether they were also contract
breaches, were inconsistent with the state’s international obligations. The Tribunal, to that
effect, has considered that the July 2008 Agreement was part of the legal framework

applicable to the investment, '**

and that the Claimants had a legitimate expectation that
Argentina would act consistently with that legal framework.'** In so doing, the Tribunal
did not exceed its powers. As a matter of fact, a tribunal may without exceeding its powers
hold that a breach by a state of its obligations under a contract is also a breach of its
international obligations under a treaty. In so doing, a tribunal does not ignore the

distinction between contract claims and treaty claims.

80 Award, 854.

181 Tbid.

'82 Award, (91 435, 778. Acta Acuerdo (Agreement) between the Argentine State and Interinvest dated July 21, 2008
(“July 2008 Agreement’), Article 3. (C-190).

'83 Award, { 1010.
84 Award, fff 782, 850.
85 Award, fff 850-851, 854.

46

154.

155.

156.

The foregoing also disposes of Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal could not base its
findings on the July 2008 Agreement because the Claimants were not parties to that
contract and had no right to invoke that contract.'*° Although the Claimants were not part
to the July 2008 Agreement, the Tribunal found that they had a legitimate expectation that
it would be complied with as part of the general legal framework applicable to the
investment.'®” Having found that its obligations under the July 2008 Agreement were
assumed to fulfil its public obligation to guarantee the provision and continuity of air
transportation services in Argentina, and that the Claimants had a legitimate expectation
that the July 2008 Agreement would be complied with, the Tribunal could conclude
without exceeding its powers that Argentina’s refusal to comply with the procedure

established by Article 6 of said contract was also a breach of its international obligations.

The Committee will now address Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers by adopting the Credit Suisse valuation as a basis to assess damages.
The Tribunal, in this regard, held that “[T]he Tribunal considers the Credit Suisse valuation
to be the most reliable expression of the value of the Airlines as agreed by the Parties under
the July 2008 Agreement and the best evidence of the fair market value of the Airlines in

late 2008.”'*

According to Argentina, in so doing, the Tribunal disregarded the July 2008 Agreement,
upon which it has relied to find Argentina liable for breach of its FET obligations. Because
Article 6 of the July 2008 Agreement provided that the price would be established, in case
of a disagreement on the valuations submitted by the parties, on the basis on an independent
valuation, the Tribunal should have appointed an independent expert to proceed to the
valuation.'*? Argentina therefore submits that, in modifying the agreed valuation method,

the Tribunal failed to apply the international law principle according to which the damages

86 Annulment Memorial, {| 186 seq.

87 Award, {{ 850-851, 854. Annulment Counter-Memorial, {| 87.
'88 Annulment Memorial, {{ 161, citing the Award, 1112.

'89 Annulment Memorial, | 152.

47

157.

158.

159.

should replace the parties in the situation in which they would have found themselves in

absence of breach, and that by doing so it manifestly exceeded its powers. !””

The argument, however, erroneously assumes that the proper remedy should have been
the specific performance of the price fixing mechanism provided by Article 6 of the July
2008 Agreement. However, the Tribunal has rejected the Claimants’ argument that specific
performance should be ordered, and the Claimants reinstated in their investment. 191 That
part of the decision is not challenged by either party. As a consequence, the Tribunal had
to assess reparation by equivalent, i.e. by fixing damages corresponding to the fair market

value of the shares.

The question then becomes a question of the assessment by the Tribunal of the evidence
before it, which an annulment committee cannot revisit on the merits. The Tribunal, in this
respect, relied on the Credit Suisse valuation not as part of the mechanism established by
Article 6, but as reliable evidence of the fair market value of the shares at the time. The
Tribunal, in so doing, also relied on three other contemporaneous valuations by
PriceWaterHouseCoopers, Deloitte and Morgan Stanley, as well as on Compass Lexecon’s

adjusted valuation. !°?

It held that the fact that Claimants’ experts adjusted their model to
provide a proxy for the value of AUSA in 2008 assuming no breaches of the Treaty
provided a check on the reasonableness of the Credit Suisse valuation. '*? The Tribunal then
concluded that the Credit Suisse provided the most reliable valuation and was therefore an

acceptable evidence of the fair market value of the shares at the time of the taking.

Although a more detailed analysis of the Credit Suisse valuation could perhaps have been
provided in the Award, it is not up to the Committee to assess whether that decision was
correct and whether the Credit Suisse overvalued the shares. What matters is only whether
in the assessment of damages the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by relying on

the Credit Suisse report. It did not.

9 Annulment Memorial, { 159 seq.
5! Award, { 1098.

1% Award, if 1107, 1113.

"3 Award { 1113.

48

160.

161.

162.

163.

Based on the foregoing, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal did not exceed its

powers in its assessment of damages.

SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE
(1) Legal Standard
a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina submits that this ground is concerned with principles of natural justice, and with
the integrity and fairness of the arbitral process.'** Argentina gives some examples of
fundamental rules of procedure under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention: “due
process, the right of defence, the right of both parties to be heard and to submit their claim
or defence by presenting any arguments and evidence in support of their position, the right
of each party to properly respond to the arguments and evidence presented by the other
party, equality between the parties, deliberation among the members of the tribunal,
independence and impartiality of the members of the tribunal, the treatment of evidence,

the burden of proof, and the rules on legal standing, among others.” '

With regard to the seriousness of the departure that is required to entail annulment,
Argentina, relying on the Pey Casado and TECO’s annulment committees’ decisions,
contends that “the party applying for annulment must simply demonstrate the impact that
the situation could have had on the award, that is to say, that observance of the rule
departed from had the potential of causing the tribunal to render a substantially different

award from the one it actually rendered.”'*°

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that this ground of annulment is concerned with the integrity and
fairness of the arbitral process.'°” The Claimants contend that the threshold for a procedural

violation to constitute a ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID

‘4 Annulment Memorial, { 46, citing ICSID’s Updated Background Paper on Annulment, | 98 (AL RA 421).

195

Annulment Memorial, { 48.

196 Thid., {| 49-51.
57 Counter-Memorial, {ff 117-121.

49

Convention is very high, and rely on Professor Schreuer’s view that: “Even a serious
violation of a rule of procedure would not constitute a ground for annulment if the
particular rule was not fundamental. Conversely, the violation of even a fundamental rule
could not lead to annulment if the violation was not serious. All of this makes clear that
proof of a procedural impropriety in the proceedings before the tribunal will not be
enough. In particular, a simple violation of the Arbitration rules is not, by itself, a ground

for annulment.” !°8

c. The Committee’s Analysis

164. The Committee holds that this ground of annulment applies to protect the integrity and
fairness of the proceedings, in particular the fundamental principles of due process, such
as the right to be heard, the principle of equal treatment of the parties, and the independence
and impartiality of the arbitral tribunal. To the contrary, the ground of serious departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure does not allow a party to seek a review of the
substance of the award, which would convert an ad hoc committee into an appellate body.
Only serious matters of procedure can be argued under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID

Convention.

(2) Exercise of Jurisdiction
a. Argentina’s Position

165. Argentina submits that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of
procedure by (i) exercising jurisdiction in this proceeding despite the fact that the
Claimants did not discharge their burden of proof to show their capacity as investors under
the Treaty or their investment in Argentina under the terms of the BIT; (ii) allowing counsel
deprived of powers to appear before it; and (iii) allowing Burford, which is not an investor
under the BIT, to be the principal beneficiary, together with King & Spalding, of the

proceeds of the Award, '°? which in Argentina’s view was an evident abuse of process.?”

98 Counter-Memorial, { 117, citing Schreuer, (C-1233).
89 Annulment Memorial, {| 194; Annulment Reply, 166. Argentina’s Opening, slide 27.
200 Annulment Reply, 4 169. Argentina’s Opening, slide 19.

50

166. Regarding the first of the above submissions, Argentina asserts (i) that one of the
fundamental rules of procedure identified by ad hoc committees is “the treatment of
evidence and burden of proof’;?°! (ii) that the Claimants failed to discharge their burden of

proof to show their capacity as investors under the Treaty or that their investment in

202

Argentina was protected under the terms of the Treaty;“"~ and (iii) that this was also noted

by Arbitrator Hossain in his dissenting opinion.?°

167. Argentina also asserts that the Funding Agreement in this case was based on champerty,

which consists in providing funding for an action in return for a share of the proceeds if

204 205

the action is successful,“ which may be characterised as an abuse of process,“ affects

the validity of a funding agreement, thereby rendering it unenforceable, and is contrary to

international law and the object of the ICSID Convention.”

168. Argentina, relying on Phoenix v. Czech Republic, submits that arbitral tribunals have the

duty not to protect an abuse of the system of international investment protection under the

ICSID Convention or bilateral investment treaties.7°”

169. Argentina contends that Burford imposed King & Spalding in the arbitration, which also

constitutes an abuse of process.?°°

170. Argentina finally submits that the Funding Agreement releases the Funder from the

209

payment of any sums or costs awarded against the Claimants,“”” which undermines the

purity of justice or corrupts justice and must therefore be declared to be contrary to public

policy.2°

21 Annulment Memorial, { 195, citing ICSID’s Updated Background Paper on Annulment, { 99 (AL RA 421).
22 Annulment Memorial, {{{ 194, 197-203; Argentina’s Opening, slides 20-22.

23 Annulment Memorial, 201; Dissenting Opinion of Kamal Hossain attached to the Award, 15.

24 Annulment Memorial, {{ 206.

2°5 Annulment Reply, { 170; Argentina’s Opening, slides 34-35.

206 Annulment Memorial, {{ 207.

207 Argentina’s Opening, slide 30.

208 Annulment Memorial, 214; Argentina’s Opening, slides 35-36.

2 Annulment Memorial, J 217; see also, Funding Agreement, clause 2.4 (RA 160); Argentina’s Opening, slide 34.
20 Annulment Memorial, {{ 218.

51

171.

172.

173.

174.

175.

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants refute Argentina’s submission that the Tribunal seriously departed from a

fundamental rule of procedure when affirming jurisdiction over the underlying dispute.

Regarding Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal violated Argentina’s due process rights
when it rejected its objection concerning the absence of a protected investment, the
Claimants submit that this argument does not involve any question of “due process”
because Argentina’s submissions were thoroughly addressed by the Tribunal in its

Decision on Jurisdiction.7!!

As to Argentina’s submission that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule
of procedure by failing to refrain from benefiting Burford under the Funding Agreement,
the Claimants contend that the Tribunal did not take and did not have to take any position

on the validity of the Funding Agreement.”!”

c. The Committee’s Analysis

The Committee will first address Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal’s jurisdictional
findings were a serious departure from the rules applicable to the burden of proof. The
Committee will then deal with Argentina’s arguments regarding the lack of powers of King

& Spalding, and with the Funding Agreement and the role of Burford.

Concerning the argument relating to the burden of proof, the Committee considers, first of
all, that an annulment committee has no powers to revisit the assessment of evidence made
by the tribunal. Pursuant to Arbitration Rule 34(1), the tribunal is the judge of the
admissibility as well as of the probative value of the evidence, and it is not up to an
annulment committee to second-guess its findings in this regard. As rightly held by the ad
hoc Committee in CDC v. Seychelles, an error in the tribunal’s appreciation of the evidence

does not in itself constitute a ground for annulment.?!>

21 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {{f 198-202.
22 Annulment Counter-Memorial, {{{ 203-204.
213 CDC, Wf 59-61. See also Schreuer, I 52, 330-331.

52

176.

177.

178.

Argentina sustains that the Claimants did not discharge their burden of proving their quality
of investors and the existence of an investment under the BIT. As an initial matter,
Argentina does not explain which fundamental rule of procedure would have been
breached by the Tribunal in assessing the Claimants’ arguments in this regard. There does
not seem to have been any substantial difference between the Parties as to the facts that
were relevant to the assessment of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. The factual matrix was
essentially agreed. The matters in dispute were therefore of a legal nature, and essentially
bore on the interpretation of Article 1 of the BIT (and whether indirect ownership of the
shares deprived the Claimants to claim the existence of an investment), on the objective
criteria for the existence of an investment, and on the arguments relating to the lack of
powers of King & Spalding and the existence of funding on the part of Burford. On each
of these matters, the Claimants put forward their arguments, with the support of legal
evidence. The Tribunal found these arguments to be convincing. There was therefore no
reversal of the burden of proof. Argentina considers that the Tribunal erred in its
assessment of the legal questions involved by its jurisdictional objections. However, it is

not up to an annulment committee to review the tribunal’s assessment of the evidence.

Based on the foregoing, the Committee finds that there was no serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure in the Tribunal’s jurisdictional findings.
(3) Lack of Capacity of the Claimants’ Counsel

a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina contends that “in considering that King & Spalding’s attorneys had capacity of

 

ef ion for the arbitration proceeding, following the suspension of the Claimant
companies’ management and disposition powers and their replacement by the respective
trustees in insolvency, the majority of the Tribunal acted in breach of basic standing and
representation principles. This amounts to a serious departure from a fundamental rule of

procedure within the meaning of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention.”*"*

214 Annulment Reply, { 177. See also, Annulment Memorial, {{{ 220-227 and Reply, {{ 177-182.

53

179.

180.

181.

182.

215

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that the argument is no more than an attempt to review the Tribunal’s
findings on the matters in dispute, which is not within the powers of an annulment
committee.?!° In addition, Argentina has not established whether the principles of
representation relied upon by Argentina are a fundamental rule of procedure under Article

52(1)(d), or that the alleged departure was a serious one.?!°

c. The Committee’s Analysis

Argentina avers that the Tribunal’s decision that King & Spalding had valid powers of
attorney to represent the Claimants is a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure.”!’ The Committee of course accepts that false representation may be a breach
of a fundamental rule of procedure. Allowing a person that is deprived of powers to
purportedly represent a party may be a procedural breach entailing the annulment of the
award. To the contrary, a mere procedural irregularity in the release of a power of attorney

should not, under Article 52(1)(d), result in the annulment of the award.

In the case at hand, Argentina’s complaints are formal in nature. The will of the insolvency
administrators to be represented by King & Spalding in the arbitration has clearly been
confirmed in the 2013 letters. The Committee has no reason to doubt that these letters are
authentic and that they express the genuine intention of their authors. The insolvency
administrators were aware of the arbitration and of the fact that King & Spalding was
representing them, and they did not object to that situation or appoint another counsel; to
the contrary, they even appeared to several hearings in the arbitration in the presence of the
King & Spalding team. There is therefore no doubt, in the eyes of the Committee, that the

insolvency administrators intended to be represented by King & Spalding in the arbitration.

The alleged irregularities, in reality, lie in the fact that King & Spalding should, according
to Argentina, have obtained fresh powers of attorney from the insolvency administrators

after the dissolution of each of the claimant parties, and that the 2013 letters did purportedly

Annulment Rejoinder, { 69.

26 Phid., 71.
217 Annulment Memorial, [ 220 seq.

54

183.

184.

not comply with requirements of form established by Spanish law. In the Committee’s
view, in absence of any evidence that the insolvency administrators did not intend to be
represented in the arbitration by King & Spalding, a failure to comply with purported
requirements of form established by Spanish law does not establish a departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure.

(4) Funding Agreement and role of Burford
a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina first submits that the Funding Agreement amounts to a substitution of Burford
as the real party in the arbitration, and that agreements based on principles of champerty
and maintenance are an abuse of process that is contrary to public policy,”!* as well as to
international law and the ICSID Convention.?!° According to Argentina, the Tribunal failed
to verify that the Funding Agreement complied with good practices applicable to third-
party funding, so as to avoid any situation of conflicts of interest and the improper exercise
of an undue control on the arbitration.”2° As a consequence, the Tribunal’s decision to take
jurisdiction in spite of the illegal Funding Agreement was a serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure.7”!

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants object that the Tribunal did not have to take any position on the validity of
the Funding Agreement, which is irrelevant to the resolution of the dispute between the

Claimants and Argentina.”

The Claimants also submit that Argentina failed to identify
the fundamental rule of procedure at issue” and that there is no evidence that Burford

exercised any control on the arbitration.?*4

218 Annulment Memorial, {{ 217.
219 Annulment Memorial, {{{ 205-208.

0 Annul

H
H
Iment Memorial, {{{ 209-217.
H

221 Annulment Memorial, {{ 219.

222

Annulment Rejoinder, { 46.

3 Thid., 1 48.
24 Thid., 1 49.

55

185.

186.

187.

c. The Committee’s Analysis

The thrust of Argentina’s argument is that the Funding Agreement is illegal, first because
it implied a transfer to Burford of the Claimants’ interest in the arbitration,?2> and second
because it allowed Burford to exercise control over the arbitration in disregard of
recognized good practices aimed at avoiding conflicts of interest.?7°

As an initial matter, the Committee considers that the fact that the Funding Agreement may
be contrary to public policy’ or to international law and to the object and purposes of the
ICSID Convention?’ would not necessarily be in itself sufficient to entail annulment under
Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. In order for the Committee to annul the Award
on that ground, Argentina needs to identify a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure in the arbitration proceedings. The simple fact that the Funding Agreement may
be illegal or contrary to public policy does not necessarily imply a serious departure from

a fundamental rule of procedure.

The Committee also finds that Argentina has not demonstrated that the prohibition of
maintenance and champerty applies in the context of a treaty-based ICSID arbitration. Nor
has Argentina demonstrated that the best practices for third-party funding, such as those
identified by Prof Catherine Kessedjian”’ or the Code of Conduct of litigation funders,?*°
are a fundamental rule of procedure that should mandatorily be complied with in an ICSID
arbitration. The Committee accepts that disregard on the part of the funded party and the
funder of recognized good practices may in certain egregious cases be relevant to the
assessment of whether a fundamental rule of procedure applying to the arbitration was

breached. However, the applicant still has the onus of identifying the rule of procedure

25 Annulment Memorial, #{{ 205 and 209.

226 Ibid.

27 Tbid.,
28 Ibid.,
9 Ibid.,

250 Tid

., $F 211-217.

, $F 212-215.

56

applying to the arbitration that has so been breached. Argentina did not identify any such

breach in this case.

188. As to the allegation that the Funding Agreement entailed a transfer of the rights in dispute

' so that Burford would have become the real claimant party,?*? the

in the arbitration,”*
Committee considers that it is a fundamental rule of procedure that a party may not appear
on behalf of another without disclosing the representation and being empowered to that

effect. As a matter of fact, a party is entitled to know against whom it is litigating.

189. In the instant case, however, the Committee already found that the Funding Agreement did
not operate a transfer to Burford of the rights in dispute in the arbitration.?*? Article 3.1 of
the Funding Agreement states that its purpose is to “enable the Claimant to pursue its
Claim’, thus confirming the Claimants’ ownership of the claim. Article 3.2 further states
that “the Claimant may at any time without the consent of the Funder settle the claim for
any amount or on any basis”. Also, Article 6 of the Funding Agreement confirms that the
Claimants will receive the proceeds of the Award (“the Claimant agrees to pay to the
Funder the Recovery Amount immediately following receipt of all or any part of the
Award”), which confirms that the Claimants continued to own the claims in dispute at all
times during the arbitration. In sum, there is nothing in the Funding Agreement suggesting
that the rights in dispute would have been transferred to the Funder. The fact that the
Claimants agreed to pay to Burford the Recovery Amount (as defined in Schedule 2 to the
Funding Agreement), i.e. a portion of the proceeds of the Award, does not mean that
Burford had acquired ownership of the rights in dispute, and even less that it had become
the real party to the arbitration. In conclusion, the Funding Agreement has not deprived the

Claimants of their standing to pursue their claims.

231 Thid., | 209.
232 Phid., 4 205.
233 See | 92 Supra.

s7

190.

191.

192.

193.

Argentina contends, in this regard, that the Funding Agreement improperly imposed the
presence as counsel of King & Spalding, which would amount to exercising control over

the dispute.?*+

Article 5.1 of the Funding Agreement provides, in this regard, that “the Claimant, (having
taken or had (sic) the opportunity to take legal advice for itself in relation to this agreement
[...] and all other arrangements between itself), the Funder and the Nominated Lawyers,
shall promptly appoint the Nominated Lawyers to prepare the Claim, submit the Claim to
the Arbitration, prosecute the arbitration proceedings and enforce and recover any
resulting Award favourable to the Claimant’. The Nominated Lawyers are King &

Spalding.

As an initial matter, it is to be noted that the presence of King & Spalding as the Claimants’
counsel in the case predates the Funding Agreement. There can therefore be no doubt that
King & Spalding was selected by the Claimants, and not by Burford. The Committee, in
addition, fails to see why the inclusion in a funding agreement of provisions identifying
the counsel in charge of representing the funded party, and providing that there shall be no
non-agreed change in representation,”*> would amount to an abusive control of the funder
on the case. As a matter of fact, it seems entirely reasonable that funding be released in
consideration of an agreement between the funder and the funded party on the identity of
counsel in charge of the case. Also, the fact that the funded party assumes the obligation to
instruct the agreed counsel does not mean that such counsel would cease to represent that
funded party, or that that the funder would in any way take control over the case. In any
event, Argentina failed to identify the fundamental rule of procedure that these provisions

of the Funding Agreement would offend.

Argentina further contends that the Funding Agreement resulted into an undue

interference?” in the arbitration by Burford. Argentina relies,?*’ in this regard, on the fact

244 Annulment Memorial, J 274.
°35 Funding Agreement, Art. 6.3.
236 Annulment Memorial, J 216.
237 Annulment Memorial, J 215.

58

194.

that the Funding Agreement provides for the Claimants’ obligation to accept a settlement

238

agreement at certain conditions,~” that the Funding Agreement establishes a duty of

cooperation,”*? on the existence of limitations to the Claimants’ right to initiate other legal

240

proceedings, ~*” and on the fact that Burford had a right of access to information relating to

the case.”4!

Argentina, again, does not identify the fundamental rule of procedure that these provisions
of the Funding Agreement would breach. As said above, the Code of Conduct of the
Litigation Funders Association is not a fundamental rule of procedure in an ICSID
proceeding. Nor are the opinion of Prof. Catherine Kessedjian on funding good practices
or the ruling of the Paris Bar referred to by Argentina.?*? In addition, Argentina does not
show that any of the provisions of the Funding Agreement it criticizes could amount in any
way to an improper interference by Burford in the arbitration. Art. 3.2 essentially provides
for an agreement between the Funder and the Claimants that any settlement agreement for
an amount at least equal to USD 250 million shall be accepted with no need of a further
agreement on the part of the Claimants. This is no more than an agreement between the
parties to the Funding Agreement on what a reasonable settlement amount would be. The
Committee does not find in Argentina’s case any demonstration that such an agreement
deprives the Claimants of their control over the case. Likewise, the provisions relating to

the Claimants’ duty of cooperation?

essentially aim at ensuring that the Claimants will
provide King & Spalding with the necessary support and information for the claim to
succeed. If anything, these provisions demonstrate that King & Spalding was at all times
being instructed by the Claimants, not by Burford. The fact that the Claimants undertook
not to initiate other legal proceedings that could prejudice the arbitration also seems to be

entirely reasonable. Finally, the Committee fails to understand why the Funder’s right to

238 Funding Agreement, Art. 3.2 in fine.
289 Thid., Art. 4.1.

20 Thid., Art. 4.3.

241 Thid., Art. 12.1.

242.

Annulment Memorial, {| 216.

23 Funding Agreement, Art. 4.1 and 4.2.

59

195.

196.

197.

4 Annul
45 Annul
46 Annul

47 Annul

receive information relating to the case would amount into an impermissible interference

in the conduct of the Claimants’ defence by King & Spalding.

Finally, Argentina has referred to the possibility that the Funding Agreement would result
in conflicts of interest between King & Spalding and the Funder.*“* Argentina, however
did not specify to what conflicts of interests it referred to, and why they should be relevant
to the decision of the Committee. There is indeed no demonstration whatsoever by
Argentina of any conflict of interest arising from the Funding Agreement, involving either

the Claimants, King & Spalding or any member of the Tribunal.

In sum, Argentina has not identified any fundamental rule of procedure that would be
inconsistent with the Funding Agreement. It has also not provided any demonstration of
the reason why the Funding Agreement amounted to an improper or abusive control on the
case by Burford. Based on the foregoing, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal did
not depart from any fundamental rule of procedure with respect of the Funding Agreement

and the role of Burford.

(5) Misappropriation of Funds Received from SEPI
a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina submits that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of
procedure by granting protection to the investment in spite of the improper use by Air
Comet of funds received from SEPI.**> Argentina, in this respect, makes two arguments.

First, the Tribunal reversed the burden of proof regarding the capital increase of USD 50

million by imposing on Argentina the burden of proving the Claimants’ investment.?4°

Second, the Tribunal failed to deal with its argument relating to the misuse of USD 205

million received from SEPI for the payment of debts of the Airlines.4”

Iment Memorial, {{ 212-213; Argentina’s Opening, slide 35.

Iment Memorial, {{[ 228-237; Annulment Reply, ({f 183-191.

Iment Memorial, {{ 229, 232; Argentina’s Opening, slides, 104-106.
Iment Memorial, { 236.

60

198.

199.

200.

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants point out that the Tribunal explained in its Decision on Jurisdiction and in
the Award that Air Comet’s alleged breaches could not affect jurisdiction because they
would have occurred subsequent to the Claimants’ acquisition of the investment.”4* The
Claimants also aver that the Tribunal dealt in the Award with all the issues relating to the
use of funds provided by SEPI, and did not reverse the burden of proof concerning the

USD 50 million capital contribution.”

c. The Committee’s Analysis

In the Committee’s views, the arguments raised by Argentina concerning the
misappropriation of the SEPI funds do not establish a ground for annulment for breach of
a fundamental rule of procedure. Argentina’s argument rather goes to the assessment of the
evidence. An annulment committee has no powers to revisit the assessment of evidence
made by the tribunal. Pursuant to Arbitration Rule 34(1), the tribunal is the judge of the
admissibility as well as of the probative value of the evidence, and it is not up to an
annulment committee to second-guess its findings in this regard. As a consequence, as said
above,?°° an error in the assessment of the evidence is no ground for annulment under

Article 52.

Argentina first claims that the Tribunal reversed the burden of proof with respect to the
USD 50 million capital contribution. In Kléckner II, the ad hoc Committee found that the
burden of evidence is a procedural rather than a substantive issue, and that a reversal of the
burden of proof may therefore amount to a departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure.?>! In such a case, however, the departure must also be serious, meaning that it

needs to have seriously affected the other party’s right to present its case. At any rate, the

28 Annulment Counter-Memorial, J 210. See also, Award, {{ 267; and Decision on Jurisdiction, Wf 324-328.
® Annulment Rejoinder, {1 107-108.
280 See | 174 supra.

251 Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others v. United Republic of Cameroon and Société Camerounaise des
Engrais, \CSID Case No. ARB/81/2 (“Kléckner II”), Decision on Annulment, May 17, 1990, {| 6.80, unpublished and
quoted in Schreuer, 52.327.

61

201.

202.

203.

252

Committee does not need to opine on whether, as a general matter, a reversal of the burden

of proof may entail annulment, for in this case it is clear that there was no such reversal.

Argentina refers to paragraphs 303 and 305 of the Award to submit that there was a reversal
of the burden of proof with respect to this matter. At paragraph 303 of the Award (and
footnote 202), however, the Tribunal makes clear reference to the arguments and evidence
put forward by the Claimants to submit that contributions were made. Based on that
evidence, the Tribunal found that “Respondent has failed to demonstrate the alleged breach
of the SPA and that Claimants made additional capital contributions to the Airlines after
their initial investment’.>> The Tribunal, as a consequence, reached its conclusion on the
basis on arguments and evidence put forward by the Claimants. There was no reversal of

the burden of proof.

Argentina also makes the argument that the Tribunal failed to address its arguments relating
to the misuse of USD 205 million provided by SEPI to Air Comet. The Committee has
however already decided that a tribunal has no obligation to address each and every single
argument advanced by the parties in support of their claims, and that a failure to address
the alleged misuse of the USD 205 million would not amount to a manifest excess of
powers.”* For the same reasons, the same argument cannot serve as a basis for annulment
for serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. The Committee has also
found?*> that, in any event, the Tribunal did address the question and decided, explicitly

and implicitly, that these sums could validly have been used to cover operational losses.?°°

Based on the foregoing, the Committee decides that the Tribunal did not depart from a

fundamental rule of procedure in its findings relating to the SEPI funds.

Annulment Memorial, | 232.

283 Award, | 305.
254 See Yi] 135, 137 supra.
285 See Gf] 138-139 supra.
286 Award, | 377.

62

204.

205.

206.

FAILURE TO STATE THE REASONS ON WHICH THE AWARD IS BASED

Argentina alleges (i) that the Tribunal failed to provide reasons with respect to its findings
as to the existence of an investment,”°’ (ii) that the Tribunal’s reasoning is contradictory
with respect to the question of the validity of the powers of attorney,°* as well as (iii) with

respect to the SEPI funds,??

and that (iv) it failed to express reasons regarding the
international law principles on good faith.” Argentina also relies on Article 52(1)(e)
concerning the alleged failure to provide reasons on the use of the USD 205 million
received from SEPI.”°! Argentina then submits that the Tribunal failed to express reasons

262

or expressed contradictory reasons with regard to the July 2008 Agreement,” as well as

to its assessment of damages.”

(dd) Legal Standard
a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina avers that the requirement that tribunals state the reasons for their decisions is
an essential aspect of the ICSID arbitration.*™ In this regard, Argentina cites the Tidewater
annulment committee, according to which “... [t]he legitimacy of an arbitral decision to
invalidate a sovereign act would be severely undermined if the tribunal did not have to

explain why the act contradicts the law.”?6

Argentina submits that annulment committees have considered as a ground for annulment
under Article 52(1)(e), amongst others: a total absence of reasons, incoherent reasons or

reasons that do not allow to understand the solution, frivolous, contradictory, insufficient

257 Annulment Memorial, {fj 241, 242.
258 Thid., | 255.
259 Tbid., {9 262, 264.

I
261 Thid., a4 21.
282 Phid., | 279.
263 Thid., 9 295-296; 308.
264 Annulment Memorial, 4 52.
265 Annulment Memorial, 53, citing Tidewater, Decision on Annulment, | 165 (AL RA 419).

63

207.

208.

209.

266 Annul
267 Annul
268 Annul
26 Annul

or inadequate reasons, the failure to deal with a question that may affect the final decision

of that tribunal and even the failure to address certain relevant evidence.

Finally, Argentina contends that in the presence of a failure to state reasons, an annulment
committee cannot imagine or make up what could have been the tribunal’s reasons, and

should therefore annul the award.?6°

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that, as held by many annulment committees and emphasized by
commentators, the requirement to state reasons is intended to enable readers to understand
and follow the reasoning of the tribunal.”°7 Failure to state reasons therefore requires “a
finding that the tribunal failed to provide any reasons at all or, at a minimum, provided
reasons so extremely flawed that a good-faith reader cannot follow the reasoning in the
award through its conclusion.”?® Finally, tribunals have no duty to discuss each and every
question raised by the parties and must be allowed a degree of discretion regarding how

they express their reasoning.?

c. The Committee’s Analysis

The Committee considers, consistently with many committees having addressed arguments
based on Article 52(1)(e),7” that Article 52(1)(e) expresses the minimum requirement that
a good faith reader of the award can understand the motives that led the Tribunal to adopt
its decisions. In assessing whether that is the case, the award must be considered in its
entirety. The mere fact that reasons are unclear or imperfectly expressed is therefore

insufficient to annul an award. Likewise, contradictory reasons may only entail annulment

ment Memorial, {{{ 60-61.
ment Counter-Memorial, #{{ 122-123.
ment Counter-Memorial, { 125.

H
H
H
Iment Counter-Memorial, {ff 129-130.

270 See, ¢.g., MINE, 4 5.08-5.09, (AL RA 418); Vivendi I, { 64, (C-403); Wena, Decision on Annulment, {{{ 79-81,
(C-621); CDC ff 70-75, (AL RA 420 bis); Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the
Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25 (“Fraport”), Decision on Annulment, December 23, 2010 4 277, (AL RA
145); Sociedad Anénima Eduardo Vieira v. Republic of Chile, CSID Case No. ARB/04/7, Decision on Annulment, ,
December 10, 2010 4355 (AL RA 446).

64

210.

211.

212.

213.

if the contradiction is such that it becomes impossible to understand the motives that led

such tribunal to adopt its solution.

The Committee also agrees with the Claimants that a tribunal has no duty to follow the
parties in the detail of their arguments, and that the sole fact of failing to address one or
more of the same does not in itself entail annulment, unless the argument in question was
so important that it would clearly have been determinative of the outcome. Likewise, a
tribunal has no duty to address in its award all the evidence that is in the record, and failure
to do so does not entail annulment unless the evidence that such tribunal failed to address
was manifestly so important as to change the outcome of the arbitration. Apart from that
situation, it is not the role of a Committee to step into the shoes of an arbitrator and engage
into speculation as to the relevance that a piece of evidence that a tribunal did not address

would have had on the award.

Finally, the control of the existence of reasons is exclusive of any review of the award on
the merits, and a committee may not annul an award for failure to provide reasons on the

basis that the reasoning is incorrect in fact or in law.
(2) Jurisdictional finding concerning the existence of an investment

a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina submits that the Tribunal failed to explain how the Claimants’ shareholdings in
the Spanish company Air Comet could be considered to be assets in Argentina, and how
Air Comet’s shareholdings in Interinvest could be considered to be assets acquired by the
Claimants, in accordance with the definition of investment under the Argentina-Spain BIT

and the ICSID Convention.2”!

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that the Award did not fail to state the reasons on which the Tribunal

supported its finding that the Claimants had standing to bring the Arbitration. The Tribunal

271 Annulment Memorial, J 249; Reply, {{ 194.

65

214.

215.

216.

explained its reasons on this issue clearly and coherently across more than 30 paragraphs,

some of which are cited in paragraph 182 of the Claimants’ Counter-Memorial.””

The Claimants also contend that the Tribunal dedicated several pages in the Decision on
Jurisdiction and in the Award explaining and describing the Claimants’ various

“investments” in Argentina, and they provide a summary of the Tribunal’s reasoning and

 

findings on this

c. The Committee’s Analysis

Contrary to Argentina’s averment, the Tribunal’s decision as to the existence of an
investment and of an investor under the BIT is reasoned. The Tribunal explained why the
Claimants qualified as investors under the BIT.?” The Tribunal also explained, at
paragraphs 208 to 232 of the Decision on Jurisdiction, why in its view Article I(2) of the
BIT protected not only investments directly made in Argentina, but also indirect
investments. The Tribunal also discussed in the Award whether the objective requirements
of contribution and risk were met.?”> The reasoning followed by the Tribunal is exempt of
contradictions. Argentina says that the Tribunal failed to apply the Vienna Convention in
its interpretation of Article I(2) of the BIT.?”° But what matters in the context of Article
52(1)(e) is that there is an understandable explanation of how the Tribunal reached its
conclusion. There is no failure to provide reasons unless such failure makes the decision

impossible to understand, which is not the case here.

Argentina also complains that the Tribunal relied on a decision made on the basis of another
bilateral treaty.?”” However, such a circumstance does not constitute a failure to state

reasons.

22 Annulment Counter-Memorial, { 178-184.

273 Annulment Counter-Memorial, { 185.

274 Decision on Jurisdiction, {ff 207, 214, 221-32.
25 Award, ( 250-57, 267, 315, 373, 381.

26 Annulment Memorial, {¥{ 239; 246.

27 Annulment Memorial, {[ 244.

66

217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

Based on the foregoing, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did not fail to provide

reasons in its jurisdictional findings.

(3) Lack of Capacity of the Claimants’ Counsel
a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina submits that the Tribunal contradicted itself in first accepting that Spanish law
was applicable to King & Spalding’s powers of attorney, to then ignore that same law that

it had identified as applicable.?”*

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants’ position on this issue is reflected under paragraphs 101-108 supra.

c. The Committee’s Analysis

The Committee has already addressed Argentina’s argument in the context of the

discussion on manifest excess of powers.

At paragraph 118 of this Decision, the Committee found that the Tribunal’s reasoning on
the validity of the powers of attorney was “based on an analysis of the various legal
provisions at stake, in view of the legal opinion of a Spanish law professor upon which the
Claimants relied’, and that the Tribunal’s findings rested “on (i) the Tribunal’s analysis of
Article 61(2) of the Spanish Bankruptcy law, according to which the Retainer Agreement
between the Claimants and King & Spalding was still in force in absence of termination,
(ii) the Tribunal’s analysis of Article 48(3) of that same law, according to which the powers
of attorney had been “affected or limited” but not terminated as a consequence of the
suspension, and (iii) its finding that said powers had in any event been ratified by way of
the undated letters signed by the insolvency administrators and that said ratification was
not subject in Spanish law to a specific form’. The Committee also noted that “/t]he
Tribunal also found that the October 2015 public deeds were relevant to the question of

the validity of the King & Spalding’s powers of attorney and their authority to represent

28 Memorial, {fff 254-261. Reply, Mf 207-217.

67

222.

223.

224.

the Claimants in the arbitration.”””? In the eyes of the Committee, these conclusions are

reasoned and are not contradictory.

(4) Misappropriation of Funds Received from SEPI
a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina first submits that the Tribunal contradicted itself by, on the one side, stating that
the Claimants acknowledged that Air Comet did not pay the entirety of the USD 50 million
capital contribution and, on the other side, finding that Argentina had failed to prove that
Air Comet breached the SPA.”*? Argentina also avers,”*! with respect to the USD 300
million funds, that the Tribunal also contradicted itself by, on the one hand, acknowledging
that the acquisition and subrogation of the debt had not been made in accordance with the
SPA and, on the other, holding that “there is no basis to conclude that the alleged non-
compliance with the terms of the SPA has been made out nor that any deviation from the
original terms of the SPA would provide a basis for finding that the transaction was illegal
or would justify denying jurisdiction on the basis that the investment was not made in

>> 282

accordance with Argentina’s legislation Finally, Argentina complains that the

Tribunal failed to address its argument relating to the USD 205 million funds.

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants essentially submit that SEPI never complained about the use of the funds
under the SPA, and that there was no evidence that this matter was relevant to the
jurisdiction or to the merits. The Tribunal’s decision had clear record support, even if it

was not stated so expressly.?**

Regarding Argentina’s complaint that the Tribunal “did not analyse or settle the issue

concerning the use of the USD 205 million contributed to SEP’ ,”*4 the Claimants note that

2° Decision on Provisional Measures, 172.

280 Annulment Memorial, {{ 263.

281 Thid., | 264.

282 Award, {| 289.

283 Tr, Day 1, 202:22-203:7.

284 Claimants’ Opening, slide 128, citing Annulment Reply, | 96.

68

225.

226.

227.

such funds were principally used for leasing and operational expenses,”*> and submit that
the use of those funds were also subject to auditing by PriceWaterHouseCoopers under the

terms of the SPA.

The Claimants contend that Argentina had the remedy for this issue: it could have sought
a supplementary decision under Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration
Rule 49, but it chose not to avail itself of that remedy, and it cannot now seek annulment

under those same grounds here.?*°

c. The Committee’s Analysis

As an initial matter, the Committee notes that the Tribunal devoted no less than fifteen
pages of its Award”*’ to discuss in detail Argentina’s averments concerning the use of the
SEPI funds. In view of the Committee, in so doing, the Tribunal has provided a
comprehensive and detailed answer to Argentina’s arguments, which generally satisfies the
requirement under Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention that the Award be reasoned. The
Tribunal had no duty to follow the Parties in the detail of their case and a failure to address
each and every single argument put before it does not in itself amount to a failure to provide
reasons. The Committee will now address the two specific complaints articulated by

Argentina under Article 52(1)(e) of the Convention.

Concerning first of all the argument relating to the use of the USD 50 million contribution,
there is no contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning. The Tribunal’s conclusion that “the

”288 was based on its

Respondent has failed to demonstrate the alleged breach of the SPA
earlier finding that “neither Party indicates that Air Comet was ever found to be in default
of its obligation to make the USD 50 million investment, nor that SEPI took any steps under
the SPA or otherwise in this regard’, and that “the Spanish Audit Court concluded that Air
Comet had complied with its obligation to increase the capital of ARSA by USD 50 million

(albeit somewhat late). The Tribunal de Cuentas determined that Air Comet paid in cash

285 Claimants’ Opening, slide 129, citing Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 202, 212.
286 Claimants’ Opening, slide 131. Tr. Day 1, 203:8-203: 13.

287 Award, pp. 69-84.

288 Award, | 305.

69

228.

229.

230.

approximatively 25% of the amount on February 9, 2003 and the balance by February 11,
2005”.?® The Tribunal therefore explained that its finding that no breach occurred with
regard to the USD 50 million payment was based on the fact that SEPI never complained
about any breach, and that the Spanish Audit Court had found that the obligations provided
by the SPA had been complied with.

As concerns the USD 300 million funds, contrary to Argentina’s averment,”” the Tribunal
did not acknowledge that the acquisition and subrogation had not taken place in accordance
with the SPA. The exact words of the Tribunal are that “while the acquisition and
subrogation may not have been in accordance with the SPA as originally contemplated,
the parties subsequently agreed to a different handling of the USD 300 million contributed
by SEPT’.”*' Here again, the basis for the Tribunal’s finding are clear: the Tribunal found
that SEPI had acknowledged before the Tribunal de Cuentas that the way the funds had
been used was permitted by the SPA.” As a consequence, there was no basis to find that
the SPA had been breached. There was therefore no contradiction in the Tribunal’s

reasoning.

Finally, for what concerns the USD 205 million funds, Argentina’s argument is that this
amount should have been used to extinguish debts and liabilities of ARSA and AUSA, and
that they were instead used to pay off operating costs, fees and gasoline costs.” It is true
that the argument is only cursively addressed in the Award. The Tribunal noted that “SEPT
later agreed to contribute an additional USD 205 million to cover the operational losses
suffered by the Airlines between July and October 2001”,?* but says nothing concerning

the way these funds were effectively used.

The Tribunal, however, appears to have implicitly concluded that SEPI had no complaint

as to the way these funds had been used. The Tribunal, as a matter of fact, held that

289 Award, [ 304.
20 Annulment Memorial, {{ 264.
291 Award, {| 289.

292

Ibid., “SEPI’s position before the Tribunal de Cuentas was that this was permitted by the SPA”.

25 Annulment Memorial, {{ 271.
24 Award, 377.

70

231.

“Claimants’ investment was also the subject of further review by the Tribunal de Cuentas.
In Report N°765 dated July 19, 2007, the court again addressed the transfer of the USD
300 million and the various other post-closing obligations contained in the SPA. In its
conclusion, the court noted that SEPI had submitted a number of other documents, which
did not demonstrate that the debts had been finally contributed to ARSA. This appears to
have led the court to again address this subject in its next report (N°811), discussed below.
The Court did note that SEPI submitted documentation demonstrating that other
requirements under the SPA, such as Air Comet’s capital contribution of USD 50 million
to ARSA, had been performed”.»>. The Committee understands the references to the “the
various other post-closing obligations contained in the SPA” and to “other requirements
under the SPA” to cover not only the USD 300 million and USD 50 million funds, but also
the USD 205 million quantified based on Article 11 of the SPA. This means that the
Tribunal de Cuentas had no objection as to the way these funds had been used. The
Tribunal held that any breach of the SPA with respect to these payments could not affect
jurisdiction, ?°° and it also found that “there is no basis to conclude that [...] any deviation
from the original terms of the SPA would provide a basis for finding that the transaction
was illegal or would justify declining jurisdiction on the basis that the investment was not
made in accordance with Argentina’s legislation”.”®’ These findings apply to the various
funds paid by SEPI to Air Comet pursuant to Articles 9 and 11 of the SPA, including the
USD 205 million. Because the Award allows understanding the Tribunal’s findings on all
aspects of the use of the SEPI funds, there is no failure to provide reasons, including with

respect to the USD 205 million fund.

Finally, Argentina did not explain in the annulment proceedings why a departure from the
SPA concerning these payments (i.e. the use of the USD 205 million to cover operational
costs instead of debts and liabilities) would have been a breach of the principle of good
faith in international law susceptible to entail the inadmissibility of the claims. As a

consequence, any omission to deal with that argument would have been immaterial and

285 Award, | 285.
296 Award, | 267.
297 Award, | 289.

71

232.

233.

234.

235.

would not have been such as to entail the annulment of the Award for failure to provide

reasons.

Based on the foregoing, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did not fail to provide
reasons concerning the use of the SEPI funds, and that any failure to provide reasons in
respect of the USD 205 million argument would not be such as to entail the annulment of

the Award.

(5) — The July 2008 Agreement
a. Argentina’s Position

Argentina submits that “in establishing the international responsibility of Argentina for the
breach of the BIT based on the non-compliance with the July 2008 Agreement and
determining the damages flowing from such breach, the majority of the Tribunal failed to
state reasons on crucial issues and incurred irreconcilable contradictions. This warrants
annulment of the Award within the meaning of Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID

Convention.”

Argentina first avers that the Award does not allow understanding how the breach of a
contract could be a treaty breach.”°? Argentina further contends that the Tribunal’s

reasoning on the assessment of damages is completely illogical?”

and contradictory.*”!
Finally, Argentina submits that the Tribunal failed to address the criticism raised in the

arbitration to the Credit Suisse valuation.*°

b. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants submit that the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons in finding that Argentina

breached the BIT.*°? The Tribunal explained in detail the various elements of Argentina’s

28 Annulment Reply, | 231. Annulment Memorial, 4{{ 278-315. Annulment Reply, ff 231-272.
2° Annulment Memorial, {{ 288.

300 Thid., | 289.

301 Thid., 4 295, 307.

302 Phid., $9 308, 311.

393 Counter-Memorial, {fff 232-244.

72

236.

237.

conduct that gave rise to the breach of the July 2008 Agreement, why that breach also
violated the FET standard, and the Tribunal further addressed Argentina’s submission that
contract breaches cannot be equated to the FET standard,*™ as well as its findings on

quantum.*

c. The Committee’s Analysis

Concerning first of all Argentina’s averment that the Award does not allow understanding
how a breach of contract could be held to be a treaty breach, the Tribunal expressed clear

and coherent reasons.

The Tribunal has considered Argentina’s argument that not every breach of contract by a
State constitutes a violation of the duty of fair and equitable treatment. It accepted that
proposition,*°° but nonetheless held that “the July 2008 Agreement was not a simple
commercial agreement”,*"’ and therefore that “Jnterinvest and the Claimants legitimately
expected Respondent to comply with its commitment to purchase all the shares in the
Airlines at the price determined by the agreed mechanism in Article 6 of the July 2008
Agreement”.°°> The Tribunal then found that Argentina’s refusal to comply with the
procedure established by Article 6 was a breach of these legitimate expectations and further
found that its conduct “in relation to the introductory message and bill seeking approval
of the July 2008 Agreement, the adoption of Law N° 26,412, the objections as to the form
of the Credit Suisse valuation, the injunction appointing a controller over the Airlines, the
maintenance of Mr. Alak as General Manager of the Airlines and the decision to proceed
by expropriation lacked transparency and was arbitrary’.*°? The Tribunal therefore

concluded that Argentina “breached the FET standard in the Treaty” *'°

304 Thid., | 232. Award, J 854.

305 Thid., 9 92-93. Annulment Rejoinder, | 138-144. Award, | 1074-1092, 1098, 1102, 1105-07, 1109, 1111-14,
1116, 1127.

306 Award, | 854.

57 [bid.

308 Thid., | 855.
3 Thid., | 856.
80 Tbid., 857.

73

238.

239.

240.

241.

It is not for the Committee to opine as to whether these findings are correct. These findings

are however reasoned, clear, and understandable.

Argentina also contends that the Tribunal failed to provide reasons for its decision to reject
its umbrella clause argument. However, the Tribunal explained why it rejected the
argument made by the Claimants, based on the BIT’s MEN clause, to the effect that they

would be entitled to rely on an umbrella clause.*!!

For what regards the assessment of damages, Argentina’s first argument is that the
Tribunal’s reasoning is contradictory because the Tribunal could not on the one hand accept
that the function of damages is to replace the aggrieved party in the situation that would
have prevailed in the absence of breach (i.e. an assessment of the price of the shares made
by an independent valuator) and on the other hand fix damages on the basis of the valuation

proposed by Interinvest in the price fixing procedure provided by Article 6 of the SPA.*!?

The Committee finds no contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning on point. The Tribunal
concluded that “the Credit Suisse valuation [is] the most reliable expression of the value
of the Airlines as agreed by the Parties under the July 2008 Agreement and the best
evidence of the fair market value of the Airlines in late 2008” .*\ That conclusion was based
not only on an analysis of the Credit Suisse valuation, but also of third-party valuations
made in the context of the May 2008 Agreement by Deloitte, Morgan Stanley and
PriceWaterHouseCoopers.*'* The Tribunal also analysed the valuations proposed by
Compass Lexecon for the Claimants,*!> and by KPMG for Argentina, which it found
unreliable.*!© The Tribunal explained why in its view the Deloitte, Morgan Stanley,

PriceWaterHouseCoopers and Credit Suisse third-party valuations were a reliable indicator

311 Award, (91 884-892.

32 Annulment Memorial, [ 295 seq.
383 Award, (1112.

314 Tbid., | 1102.

315 Thid., | 1105.

86 Thid., | 592.

74

242.

243.

244.

of the value of the Airlines?!” and having compared them it found that the one proposed by

Credit Suisse was the best evidence of the Airlines’ fair market value in late 2008.

Argentina’s argument rests on a conceptual error: in adopting the Credit Suisse valuation,
the Tribunal did in fact not purport to enforce the July 2008 Agreement. Argentina avers
that Credit Suisse was not independent, and criticizes the Tribunal for holding that
circumstance to be irrelevant.*!* Argentina further contends that this lack of independence
did not allow the Tribunal to adopt its conclusions as being “final and binding”, as provided
by Article 6 of the July 2008 Agreement.*!? However, the Tribunal did not adopt the Credit
Suisse valuation as the final and binding valuation provided by Article 6 of the July 2008
Agreement. Nor did it, as suggested by Argentina, adopt the Credit Suisse valuation as a
substitute to the valuation provided for by Article 6 of the July 2008 Agreement.*” It rather
found, based on the other available valuations in the record, that the Credit Suisse valuation
was the best available evidence of the fair market value of the Airlines at the time of the

taking, which is different.

The Tribunal found that the FET standard had been breached. It did not decide to order
specific performance. As a consequence, in accordance with the full reparation standard in
international law, the Claimants were entitled to damages equal to the fair market value of
the Airlines at the time of the taking. The Tribunal found that fair market value was
reflected by the Credit Suisse valuation. There is no contradiction in that reasoning. Nor is

the Tribunal’s reasoning unclear and even less incomprehensible.

Whether, in assessing damages, the Tribunal over-compensated the Claimants is not a
question that an ad hoc Committee has the power to assess under Article 52 of the ICSID

Convention.

7 Jbid., | 1106.
38 Annulment Memorial, {[ 312.

319 Ibid.

320 Thid., | 314.

75

245.

246.

247.

248.

249.

Argentina also points out that the Tribunal had acknowledged the difficult financial
situation of the Airlines, which would be inconsistent with a valuation exceeding USD 300
million.*?! The Tribunal has indeed found that the Airlines were “in a very difficult
financial condition by the end of 2007 and early 2008”.*”? According to Argentina, this

finding is contradictory with the assessment of a positive fair market value.

The Committee disagrees. As an initial matter, the Tribunal found that ARSA had no value
and that only AUSA had value. Second, there is no conceptual inconsistency in finding that
acompany in a difficult situation may generate value in the future. Such a finding may well
be based on the financial assumptions concerning the future business perspectives of the
Airlines at the time of the taking, which an ad hoc committee may of course not assess or

second guess.

The Committee will finally address Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal failed to deal
with the comments and criticisms contained in the KPMG report and in the TTN valuation
report on the Credit Suisse valuation.*?* Argentina, in this respect, asserts that both reports
made a number of specific criticisms to the Credit Suisse report, which the Tribunal should

have considered and addressed.*74

The Claimants respond that the Tribunal did discuss the KPMG and TTN reports in
different parts of the Award.*?> These sections of the Award, however, do not discuss the
criticism made by KPMG and TTN to the Credit Suisse report. These sections rather
address the valuations proposed by KPMG and TTN, and explain why the Tribunal did not

find them to be reliable.*”°

The Committee, however, does not believe that this situation can entail the annulment of

the Award. As a matter of fact, as long as the award allows understanding the basis for the

21 Annulment Memorial, {{ 307.
2 Award, 750.

323

Annulment Memorial, { 308 seq.

4 Annulment Memorial, 4 310 for the KPMG report and {{ 309 for the TTN report.

5 For the KPMG report, Award, ff[ 510-511, 592-593, 823, 825, 1112-1113 (see transcript, Tr. Day 2 — 356:11 to
364:3); for the TTN report, Annulment Counter-Memorial, { 278 (referring to {| 830-834 and 1112 of the Award.
26 For KPMG report, Award, {| 592-593, dealing however with the different question whether airfare increases
matched increases on the Airlines costs. For TN, Award, J 1112.

76

tribunal’s findings (which it does), a tribunal has no duty to comment on the details of all
the evidence produced by the parties. A failure by the Tribunal to comment on certain
portions of an expert report produced by a party, which the Tribunal may have found to be
irrelevant, is therefore not such as to entail the annulment of the Award. This is all the more
so that Argentina does not allege to have relied, in its submissions before the Tribunal, on
the parts of the KPMG and TTN reports upon which it now relies to sustain that the

Tribunal failed to provide reasons.

Based on the foregoing, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did not fail to provide

reasons with respect to its assessment of the damages.

COSTS

ARGENTINA’S COST SUBMISSIONS

In its submission on costs, Argentina argues that the Claimants should bear the total
arbitration costs incurred by Argentina, including legal fees and expenses, totalling USD

884,319.88, broken down as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CONCEPT ARS USD
Translations 93,467.95 2,296.51
Airfare, accommodation, travel 1,069,319.45 27,992.66
Courier 68,014.88 1,671.13
Office supplies 7,500.00 184.28
Communication costs 1,500.00 36.86
ICSID costs - 725,000.00
PTN personnel expenses 2,981,134.97 127,138.46

 

 

 

 

77

 

 

Total 4,220,937.25 $84,319.88

 

B. THE CLAIMANTS’ CosT SUBMISSIONS
252. In their submission on costs, the Claimants request that the Committee order Argentina to
bear all the costs incurred by Claimants in this annulment proceeding, comprising

Claimants’ legal fees and expenses totalling USD 1,531,833.00, broken down as follows:

 

CATEGORY AMOUNT (IN USD)

 

Legal Fees & Expenses

 

e King & Spalding

 

Fees $1,514,322.00
Expenses $17,512.00
e TOTAL 1,531,833.00

 

 

 

 

Cc THE COMMITTEE’S DECISION ON COSTS

253. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, applicable to this proceeding by virtue of Article
52(4) of the ICSID Convention, provides as follows:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as
the parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the
parties in connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how
and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members
of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the
Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.

78

254.

255.

256.

257.

The costs of the proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the Committee, ICSID’s

administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to (in USD): 359,060.45°27

Committee Members’ fees and expenses

Mr. Alexis Mourre, USD 100,999.96
Prof. Fernando Cantuarias Salaverrry, USD 67,903.54
Mr. Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez USD 53,796.93
ICSID’s administrative fees USD 84,000.00
Direct expenses (estimated)*7* USD 52,360.02
Total USD 359,060.45

The above costs have been entirely paid out of the advances made by Argentina.*”°

The Committee considers that, Argentina having failed in all the arguments that it has
advanced in order to seek the annulment of the Award, it should bear the entirety of the
costs of the proceedings. Argentina having advanced said costs in their entirety, the

Claimants are not entitled to any payment in this respect.

As to the Parties’ legal costs and expenses, the Committee considers, for the same reasons,
that the Claimants having prevailed in the annulment proceedings, they are entitled to be
compensated for their costs. However, the Committee notes a significant disproportion
between the representation costs of each party. While the Claimants have spent USD
1,514,322 in fees, Argentina has only spent 2,981,134.97 ARS (i.e slightly more than
USD127,138.46). It is widely accepted that ad hoc committees enjoy a wide discretion in
assessing the reasonableness of the parties’ representation costs.**? In view of the

complexity of the case and the interests at stake, the Committee decides that the Claimants

*7 The ICSID Secretariat will provide the parties with a detailed Financial Statement of the case account once all
invoices are received and the account is final.

*°8 This amount includes estimated charges relating to the dispatch of this Decision (courier, printing and copying).
329 The remaining balance will be reimbursed to Argentina.

380 ICSID Convention Articles 52(4) & 61(2); Arbitration Rules 47(1)(j) & 53; Administrative and Financial
Regulation 14(3)(e). See ICSID’s Updated Background Paper on Annulment”), 65 (C-1217) (AL RA 421 bis).

79

VI.

258.

are entitled to be reimbursed of their representation costs in an amount of USD 1,000,000,
in addition to their expenses, i.e. a total amount of USD 1,017,512.

DECISION

For the reasons stated supra, the Committee decides as follows:

(1) Argentina’s request for annulment is denied;

(2) Argentina shall bear the entirety of the costs of the proceedings and shall pay to the

Claimants an amount of USD 1,017,512 on account of their representation costs;

(3) All other claims are dismissed.

80

[signed] [signed]

 

Mr. Fernando Cantuarias Salaverry Mr. Ricardo Ramirez Hernandez
Committee Member Committee Member
Date: 6 May 2019 Date: 9 May 2019
[signed]

Mr. Alexis Mourre
President of the ad hoc Committee

Date: 13/05/2019

81

