Date of dispatch to the parties: December 21, 2012

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN
Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
(CLAIMANTS)
and
The Argentine Republic

(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Judge Thomas Buergenthal, President
Henri C. Alvarez Q.C., Arbitrator
Dr. Kamal Hossain, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mrs. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Representing the Claimants Representing the Respondent

Mr. Roberto Aguirre Luzi, Partner Dra. Angelina Maria Esther Abbona
Mr. R. Doak Bishop, Partner Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacion
Mr. Craig S. Miles, Partner Argentina

Ms. Silvia Marchili, Foreign Legal Consultant Posadas 1641

Mr. Esteban Lecesse, Foreign Legal Consultant C1112ADC, Buenos Aires

Mr. Jorge Mattamouros, Associate Argentina

King & Spalding LLP
1100 Louisiana Street, Suite 4000
Houston, Texas 77002

Ms. Lorraine I. de Germiny, Associate
King & Spalding LLP

12 Cours Albert ler

Paris, France 75008

Mr. Guillermo Aguilar-Alvarez, Partner
Ms. Rocio Digon, Associate

King & Spalding LLP

1185 Avenue of the Americas

New York, New York. 10036

Prof. Joost Pauwelyn
King & Spalding LLP
7 Quai du Mont Blane
CH-1201 Geneva
Switzerland

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. Facts Relevant to Jurisdiction
a. Partie
b. Dispute
i. Acquisition of the Argentine Airline:
ii. Nature of the Dispute
II. Procedural Matters
a. Request for Arbitration and its Registration by ICSID.

b. Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal
c. Arbitral Procedure
IIL. Position of the Parties on Jurisdiction
a. Respondent’s position
b. Claimants’ position

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

IV. Analysi
a. First Jurisdictional Objection: Claimants’ Fulfillment of the Procedural Requirements of
Article X of the Treaty 12
i. Compliance with the Requirements of Article X.....c.cccceecseseeseseeeeseeteseeeseeeeeeeenenes 13
1. Position of Respondent 13
2. Position of Claimants 15
3. Analysis of the Tribunal 19
(a) The Requirements of X(1) and X(2).. 19
i. The Commencement of the 6-Month Period 20

ii. The Requirement of Formal Notification... .
iii. Determining When the Dispute Begani.........ccceececeeeeseeeeeseeteeeneeeeeeeeeeeeees
(b) Futility

 

 

 

(c) The Local Court Requirement of Articles X(2) and (3)......ccsesssesesseeeeeeeeeeeee 26

ii. The Application of the Most-Favored Nation Clause (Article IV(2)) to Dispute
Settlement Provision 28
1. Position of Respondent 29

2. Position of Claimants 31

 

3. Analysis of the Tribunal
b. The Ordinary Meaning of Article IV
(a) Jurisprudence Concerning the Application of MFN Clauses to Dispute
Settlement Provision
i. UNCTAD’s Case Taxonomy
ii. Other Interpretative Issues....
(b) The dispute settlement clause of the U.S.-Argentina BIT and the Australia-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Argentina BIT
c. Second Jurisdictional Objection: Claimants’ Standing.
i. Claimants’ Investment in Interinvest and the Argentine Airlines ...........cceeeeeees 42
1. Position of Respondent 42
2. Position of Claimants 45
3. Analysis of the Tribunal 47
(a) Respondent’s “Derivative Claim” Argument.........ccccseesesseseseesseeeeeeeeeeeteee 47

i. Article I of the Treaty AT

a

eS

VI.

ii, ICJ Case Law
iii. The ICSID Convention
iv. Argentine Law
(b) Respondent’s “Intermediary Investor” Argument
(c) Respondent’s Policy Arguments
ii. Claimants’ Other Investment:
1. Positions of the Parties
2. Analysis of the Tribunal
iii. Claimants’ Third-Party Funding Agreement and Assignment of Award Proceeds.. 55
1. Position of Respondent
2. Position of Claimants
3. Analysis of the Tribunal
(a) Existence of Jurisdiction
Third Jurisdictional Objection: Issues of State Attribution .
i. Position of Respondent
ii. Position of Claimants
iii. Analysis of the Tribunal
Fourth Jurisdictional Objection: The Legality of Claimants’ Investment ............0.see 66
i. Position of Respondent
ii. Position of Claimants
iii. Analysis of the Tribunal
1. Timing of the Alleged Ilegality .
2. Claimants’ Alleged Illegalities ...
3. Claimants’ Alleged Lack of Good Faith
Cost:
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

The Treaty

ICSID Convention

MEN clause
VCLT

Assignment Agreement

Funding Agreement

RFA
Merits

Mem.

CM

Rep.

Rej.

Exh. C-
Exh. E-
LA AR

Tr. Day [#], [page:line]

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS
Agreement between the Argentine Republic and the Kingdom of
Spain on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments

of October 3, 1991

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States, Washington D.C., 1965

Most-Favored Nation clause

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969

Credit Assignment Agreement among Teinver, Transportes de
Cercanias and Autobuses Urbanos as the assignors and Air Comet

as the assignee, dated January 18, 2010

Funding Agreement made between Claimants and Burford Capital
Limited, effective as of April 14, 2010

Claimants’ Request of Arbitration, filed on December 11, 2008
Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, filed on September 29, 2010

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdictional Objections, filed on
December 6, 2010

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, filed on
January 24, 2011

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdictional Objections, filed on
March 10, 2011

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, filed on April 27, 2011
Claimants’ Exhibits and Legal Authorities

Respondent’s Exhibits

Respondent’s Legal Authorities

Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction and Provisional Measures
Day 1: May 27, 2011

Day 2: May 28, 2011
Day 3: May 30, 2011

iii

I. Facts Relevant to Jurisdiction

a. Parties

This claim is brought by Teinver S.A. (“Teinver”), Transportes de Cercanias S.A. (“Transportes
de Cercanias”) and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. (“Autobuses Urbanos”) (collectively,
“Claimants”), all companies incorporated in the Kingdom of Spain, against the Argentine
Republic (“Respondent”), under the Agreement between the Argentine Republic and the
Kingdom of Spain on the Promotion and Protection of Investments of October 3, 1991 (the
“Treaty”).! Claimants are members of a group of companies known collectively as the Grupo
Marsans.

b. Dispute

This dispute concerns Claimants’ allegations that Respondent has violated the Treaty,
international law, and Argentine law, as well as commitments and representations made by the
Respondent to Claimants, by unlawfully re-nationalizing and taking other measures regarding
Claimants’ investments in two Argentine airlines: Aerolineas Argentinas S.A. (“ARSA”) and
Austral-Cielos del Sur S.A. (“AUSA”) (collectively, “the Argentine Airlines”).?

i. Acquisition of the Argentine Airlines

By 1991, the Spanish government, through asset purchases made by the state-owned airline
Iberia Lineas Aéreas de Espajfia, S.A. (“Iberia”), was a significant shareholder in both of the
Argentine Airlines. In 1994, Iberia incorporated a fully-owned Argentine subsidiary, Interinvest
S.A. (“Interinvest”), to serve as the holding company for the Spanish investments in the
Argentine airline industry In 1995, the Spanish government created the Sociedad Estatal de
Participaciones Industriales (“SEPI”’) to operate as the holding company for all companies fully
or partially owned by the Spanish government.’ As such, SEPI acquired Iberia’s shareholdings
in Interinvest at that time.

By mid-2001, the Argentine Airlines were experiencing financial difficulties, and ARSA filed
for bankruptcy reorganization.> In June 2001, SEPI announced that it would sell its participation
in Interinvest through a bidding process. At the time, SEPI owned 99.2% of Interinvest, and in
turn Interinvest held 92.1% of ARSA’s shares and 90% of AUSA’s shares.° Air Comet S.A.
(“Air Comet”), a Spanish subsidiary of Grupo Marsans, bid on Interinvest and won. At this time,

' The authentic language of the Treaty is the Spanish text. This Decision will generally refer to the English-
language translation (Ex. C-1(ENG)), although it will revert to the authentic Spanish text where the translation is
ambiguous or otherwise unsatisfactory.

? RFA 492, 11.

* Interinvest was incorporated in order to comply with Argentine law, which requires companies in the aeronautic
sector to be held directly by an Argentine company or national. See Merits § 25, fn. 16.

4 Merits 4 26.

* Merits 4 28, Arias Wit. § 13.

°Ex.C-1L.

Air Comet was owned by two of the three Claimants, Autobuses Urbanos (35%) and Transportes
de Cercanias (35%), as well as by two other Spanish companies, Proturin S.A. (29.8%) and
Segetur S.A. (0.2%).’ (Claimant Teinver became a shareholder of Air Comet later, that is, on
July 20, 2006, when it purchased Proturin’s and Segetur’s entire shareholdings.*)

On October 2, 2001, Air Comet and SEPI entered into a Share Purchase Agreement (“SPA”),
through which Air Comet acquired SEPI’s 99.2% interest in Interinvest (which, in turn,
maintained the interests in the Argentine Airlines noted above).”

Air Comet paid a purchase price of US$1 for the interest in Interinvest.'? Under the SPA, Air
Comet agreed, in accordance with the industrial plan it created for the Argentine Airlines, to
assume the assets and liabilities of the Airlines, to retain airline employees for two years, to
make a US$50 million capital increase, to maintain its majority interest in the corporations, to
service specified flight routes, and to expand aircraft fleets.'' For its part, SEPI agreed to assume
the airlines’ liabilities up to US$300 million, and to assume commitments resulting from the
implementation of the industrial plan up to US$248 million.'* SEPI later agreed to contribute an
additional US$205 million to cover the operational losses suffered by the airlines between July
and October 2001.'°

In December 2002, ARSA and a majority of its creditors reached a settlement on debt
restructuring, which was subsequently approved by an Argentine commercial court, as well as a
court of appeals."

ii. Nature of the Dispute

Claimants allege that Respondent has unlawfully expropriated their investment in the Argentine
Airlines.'> Claimants characterize this expropriation as consisting of two parts. The “formal”
expropriation occurred when the Argentine Congress “purposefully and explicitly” enacted the
nationalization of the companies in December 2008.'° However, this formal expropriation was

7 Claimants’ Letter of June 16, 2011, 5; RFA Ex. C-5.

® See Claimants’ letter of June 16, 2011 at 5. Since Teinver’s initial share purchase in 2006, the shareholding
structure of Air Comet has changed several times. On October 2, 2007, Teinver became Air Comet’s majority
shareholder, with the following distribution of shares: Teinver (56%), Autobuses Urbanos (22%) and Transportes de
Cereanias (22%). Id. Teinver purchased additional shares from Transportes de Cercanias on December 31, 2007,
with the following distribution of shares: Teinver (66.67%), Autobuses Urbanos (22%) and Transportes de
Cercanias (11.33%). Id. at 6. On February 8, 2008, Claimants’ respective participations shifted substantially:
Teinver (96.77%), Autobuses Urbanos (2.13%) and Transportes de Cercanias (1.1%). Id. at 6. This was the
ownership structure in place at the time that Claimants instituted this arbitration on December 11, 2008. During this
time, Air Comet has kept its shareholdings in Interinvest, which in turn has kept its shareholdings in ARSA and
AUSA. Id. at 5. On December 10, 2009, Transportes de Cercanias and Autobuses Urbanos sold their remaining
shareholdings in Air Comet to Teinver, leaving Teinver as the sole shareholder of Air Comet. Id. at 6.

° Ex. C-18.

1 Td. at § 2.

"Td. at §7.

2 Td. at § 9.

8 Merits | 41.

'4 Merits 4 46, Ex. C-526, C-530, C-531.

'S Merits 2.

'© Merits 4 357.

 

allegedly the culmination of a long process of “creeping” expropriation which started in October
2004 or earlier.'’ As such, according to Claimants, the dispute centers on two primary issues: (i)
a disagreement between the Parties as to the Argentine regulatory framework—regarding airfare
caps in particular—within which the Argentine Airlines were required to operate between 2002
and 2008, and (ii) disagreement between the Parties as to the remedy due to Claimants for the
expropriation of their shares in those airlines.'*

Il. Procedural Matters

a. Request for Arbitration and its Registration by ICSID

On December 11, 2008, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”
or “the Centre”) received a Request for Arbitration (“the Request”) against Respondent from
Claimants. The Request concerned the alleged nationalization of two commercial airlines, and
their subsidiaries, in which Claimants alleged having invested.

In the Request, Claimants invoked Argentina’s consent to dispute settlement through ICSID
arbitration provided in the Treaty, and, by way of an Most-Favored Nation (“MFN”) clause
contained in Article IV(2) of the Treaty, in the 1991 Bilateral Investment Treaty between the
United States of America and the Argentine Republic (the “U.S.-Argentina BIT”).

On December 17, 2008, ICSID, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Institution Rules”),
acknowledged receipt of the Request and transmitted a copy to the Argentine Republic and to the
Argentine Embassy in Washington D.C.

On January 30, 2009, the Acting Secretary-General of the Centre registered the Request and
notified the Parties thereof, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (“the ICSID Convention”) and
in accordance with Rules 6(1)(a) and 7(a) of the ICSID Institution Rules. The case was
registered as ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1. On that same date, and in furtherance of Rules 7(c)
and (d) of the ICSID Institution Rules, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to communicate
any agreements reached regarding the number of arbitrators and the method for their
appointment, and to constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible.

b. Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal

On April 3, 2009, Claimants requested that the Arbitral Tribunal be constituted in accordance
with the formula set forth in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention; that the Tribunal shall
consist of three arbitrators, one appointed by each Party and the third, the President of the
Tribunal, be appointed by agreement of the Parties. On that same date, ICSID acknowledged
Claimants’ letter, and further advised the Parties that pursuant to Rule 3(1) of the ICSID Rules of

" Merits | 357.
OM 499.

20.

21.

Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules”), either Party was to proceed
to name two persons, one as their party-appointed arbitrator, and the other for the position of the
President of the Tribunal. This first Party was to then invite the other Party to concur on the
proposal for the position of the President of the Tribunal, and to name its party-appointed
arbitrator.

On April 27, 2009, Claimants appointed Henri C. Alvarez, a Canadian national, as arbitrator.

On May 12, 2009, Claimants informed ICSID that Respondent had failed to appoint an arbitrator
and had made no proposals for the position of the President of the Tribunal, and in accordance
with Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 4(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules requested
that the Chairman of the Administrative Council appoint the two arbitrators that had not been
appointed. The following day, ICSID informed Respondent that unless notification was received
by May 29, 2009 that it had appointed an arbitrator, and that the Parties had reached an
agreement on the appointment of the President of the Tribunal, then ICSID was to proceed to
make the appointments in accordance with the relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention,
ICSID Arbitration Rules and the normal procedures of the Centre.

On June 1, 2009, Respondent appointed Dr. Kamal Hossain, a Bangladeshi national, as
arbitrator.

Following some exchanges between the Parties and ICSID, the Parties were informed on
December 14, 2009, that ICSID was to propose to the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative
Council the appointment of Judge Thomas Buergenthal, a United States national, as the President
of the Tribunal. The Parties were invited to provide observations to the proposed appointment
by December 21, 2009.

On December 21, 2009, both Parties informed ICSID that they did not have any observations on
the proposed appointment of Judge Thomas Buergenthal as President of the Tribunal.

On December 28, 2009, the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council appointed Judge
Thomas Buergenthal as President of the Tribunal.

By letter of January 4, 2010, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the
Secretary-General of ICSID informed the Parties and the arbitrators that the Tribunal was thus
constituted by (i) Mr. Henri C. Alvarez, QC (appointed by Claimants), (ii) Dr. Kamal Hossain
(appointed by Respondent), and (iii) Judge Thomas Buergenthal (appointed by ICSID pursuant
to Article 38 of the ICSID Convention). Further, the Tribunal was informed that Dr. Sergio
Puig, Counsel at ICSID, would serve as the Secretary to the Tribunal. He was subsequently
succeeded in this capacity by Mrs. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski, Counsel, ICSID.

c. Arbitral Procedure
The First Session of the Tribunal with the Parties was held on March 22, 2010, at the World

Bank’s Paris Conference Centre, at which the Parties confirmed their agreement that the Tribunal
had been properly constituted in accordance with the relevant provisions of the ICSID

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules, and that they did not have any objections in this
respect.

During the session, the Parties also agreed on a number of procedural matters, and that
Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits would be filed by September 22, 2010. The Tribunal then
proposed two schedules for the written and oral pleadings in this case.

On April 16, 2010, both Parties confirmed their agreement with the schedule proposed.
Respondent, however, made a reservation to its agreement, noting that should the Tribunal
decide to bifurcate, then a specific schedule for the proceedings on jurisdiction should be
established.

On April 23, 2010, Respondent informed ICSID and the Tribunal of newspaper publications, in
which it was reported that the alleged majority shareholder of some of the Claimants had
transferred part of its ICSID claim to a U.S. investment fund in exchange for a contribution to
pay the costs arising in the proceedings. Respondent requested that the Tribunal require
Claimants to provide all available information regarding the matter and the content of the
agreement that was signed with said investment fund, and to also submit all related
documentation.

On May 28, 2010, Claimants filed their response stating that they had not sold their claim as
alleged by Respondent. Claimants stressed that they had no obligation to disclose any
agreements with third parties with respect to the funding of costs in this proceeding, and that
Respondent did not argue the necessity or relevance of its request. Claimants further argued that
due to Respondent’s conduct (alleged nationalization) and refusal to pay any compensation,
Claimants’ group of companies were in a distressed financial state, and thus had no choice but to
obtain external funding in order to afford the costs of the arbitration and pursue their claim
against Respondent. Claimants lastly noted that in any instance, this financing did not affect the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

The Parties were informed on June 16, 2010 that after careful consideration of their respective
positions on the matter of obtaining third-party funding, the Tribunal had decided not to grant
Respondent’s request at this early stage as it did not consider the currently available information
on record as sufficient. However, the Tribunal added that it did not preclude granting a similar
request in the future once the main pleadings had been filed.

On September 21, 2010, the Tribunal granted an extension of the deadline for the filing of
Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits until September 29, 2010, as agreed by the Parties, noting
that Respondent would then have a one-week extension of the deadline for the filing of its
subsequent submission.

On September 29, 2010, Claimants filed their Memorial on the Merits.

On December 6, 2010, Respondent filed its Memorial on Jurisdiction, and Claimants’ Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction was subsequently filed on January 24, 2012.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

On February 4, 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No.1, ruling that Respondent’s
jurisdictional objections would be dealt with as a preliminary question, and that the proceeding
on merits was accordingly suspended. The Tribunal also decided that a second round of
pleadings on jurisdiction would be filed, with Respondent to file their Reply on Jurisdiction by
March 7, 2011, and Claimants to file their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction within thirty (30) days of
their receipt of Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction. Additionally, the Tribunal proposed two
sets of dates for the hearing on jurisdiction.

On February 9, 2011, the Respondent filed a request for the Tribunal to decide on production of
documents. Subsequently, Claimants filed observations on the Respondent’s request on
February 14, 2011, and Respondent filed a response on February 21, 2011.

On February 24, 2011, the Parties were invited to consult in regard to the schedule for the
forthcoming hearing, and to submit an agreed proposal by April 25, 2011.

On February 28, 2011, Claimants filed a reply on Respondent’s request for production of
documents.

On March 1, 2011, the Parties were informed that the Tribunal, after careful and due
deliberation, had decided not to grant Respondent’s Request for the Production of Documents at
this jurisdictional stage. It was added, however, that the Tribunal did not preclude a similar
request at a later stage.

On March 10, 2011, Respondent filed its Reply on Jurisdiction.

On April 12, 2011, Claimants filed a request for provisional measures, asserting that Respondent
had initiated measures to collect taxes that would result in Respondent’s effective acquisition of
title to Claimants’ Argentine holding company, Interinvest S.A. (“Interinvest”), and was thus
requesting that the Tribunal order Respondent to halt any court or administrative collection
proceedings against this company. Specifically, Claimants sought an interim order directing
Respondent to withdraw or otherwise cease and desist from enforcing the tax-related payment
orders that it had issued until the Tribunal rendered its award. They also requested that the
Tribunal issue an immediate order preserving the status quo ante until such time as it ruled on
this application for provisional measures. Claimants further requested that the Tribunal issue an
emergency, temporary order prohibiting Respondent from enforcing the existing tax payment
orders or from issuing any new ones.

On April 13, 2011, the Tribunal fixed a procedural calendar for the filing of the Parties’
submissions on Claimants’ request for the Tribunal to decide on provisional measures.

On April 20, 2011, Respondent submitted its observations on Claimants’ request for an
emergency, temporary order, stating that neither the ICSID Convention nor the Arbitration Rules
made provision for the issuing of emergency, temporary orders, and that in any case, the absence
of urgency was manifest in this instance. As such, Respondent requested that the Tribunal reject
the request, and in addition reserved its rights and the State’s power to levy taxes and to enforce

39.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

such rights through such channels and in such courts, tribunals and otherwise as may be
appropriate.

On April 26, 2011, Respondent requested an extension of the deadline that had been set out
during the first session for the filing of new documents.

After consulting with the Parties, on April 27, 2011, the Tribunal extended the deadline for the
Parties to submit new documents; fixed a procedural calendar for the filing of the Parties’
subsequent submissions on Claimants’ requests for provisional measures; and invited the Parties
to confer and to reach agreement on the structure, schedule and other matters regarding the
hearing.

Also on April 27, 2011, Claimants filed their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction.

On April 29, 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, denying Claimants’ request for
an emergency, temporary order, noting that the Parties would be able to fully present their
arguments in such regard during the hearing on jurisdiction. The Parties were further invited to
refrain from aggravating or extending the dispute.

On the same date, Claimants renewed their request for an emergency, temporary order, in light of
the fact that Interinvest had been served with a notice for immediate payment of taxes.
Respondent was invited to comment on Claimants’ request by May 4, 2011.

Also on April 29, 2011, Respondent filed observations on Claimants’ request for provisional
measures of April 12, 2011. Claimants filed a response on May 4, 2011.

On May 6, 2011, Claimants informed the Tribunal of the Parties’ agreement concerning the
organization of the hearing on jurisdiction, which was later confirmed by the Respondent. On
the same date, Claimants filed their Reply on their Request for Provisional Measures.

On May 13, 2011, the Parties were informed that further to their exchanges on the matter of
Claimants’ request for an emergency temporary order of April 29, 2011, the Tribunal had
determined that in view of the proximity of the hearing, there was no imminent or sufficiently
imminent threat until the hearing, and as such Claimants’ request was denied.

Also on May 13, 2011, Respondent filed a Rejoinder on Provisional Measures.

On May 27-31, 2011, the Tribunal held a hearing on jurisdiction and Provisional Measures at the
seat of the Centre in Washington D.C.

On June 8, 2011, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, posing questions to the Parties
after the hearing.

The Parties filed their answers to the questions posed by the Tribunal in accordance with the
procedural calendar that was set forth in Procedural Order No. 3, and on July 5, 2011, Claimants
made a further submission to complement their answers.

Sl.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

On August 26, 2011, Ms. Annalise Nelson was appointed Assistant to the President of the
Tribunal with the agreement of the Parties.

On August 30, 2011, Claimants filed a letter concerning the conclusion of the reorganization
proceedings of Aerolineas Argentinas S.A. in Argentina and addressing recent case law,
including the recent Decision on Admissibility and Jurisdiction in Abaclat and others v.
Argentina’, and the Order Taking Note of the Discontinuance of the Annulment Proceeding in
ATA v. Jordan.”°

On October 26, 2011, Respondent filed a letter in response to Claimants’ letter of August 30,
2011, and adjoining the expert report of Mr. Juan Antonio Cabezudo Alvarez.

On November 8, 2011, Claimants filed a letter in response to Respondent’s letter of October 26,
2011. In their letter, Claimants characterized portions of Respondent’s letter as rearguing out-of-
time its jurisdictional objection arising out of Claimants’ alleged lack of jus standi. Claimants
requested the Tribunal to strike Argentina’s belated arguments and disregard the new expert
report from Mr. Juan Antonio Cabezudo Alvarez. Claimants also noted recent case law,
including the Impregilo v. Argentina award’! and the Decision on Jurisdiction in Hochtief.

On December 15, 2011, the Tribunal informed the Parties, that it had taken note of the arguments
made in Respondent’s October 26, 2011 letter and Claimants’ November 8, 2011 letter as they
relate to the pleadings on jurisdiction, with the exception of the expert report of the Spanish
attorney, Mr. Juan Antonio Cabezudo Alvarez, attached to Respondent’s letter, and
Respondent’s arguments based thereon.

Also on December 15, 2011, Respondent requested leave from the Tribunal to file certain
dissenting opinions in recent case law. The Tribunal granted Respondent’s request on December
20, 2011.

On December 22, 2011, Respondent filed a letter attaching the above-mentioned dissenting
opinions, including those of (i) Professor Brigitte Stern in Impregilo; (ii) Mr. Chris Thomas in
Hochtief; and (iii) Professor Georges Abi-Saab in Abaclat.

On February 17, 2012, Respondent filed a letter requesting leave from the Tribunal to introduce
into the record the recently adopted decisions of the United States Court of Appeals for the

' Abaclat and others v. Argentine Republic (case formerly known as Giovanna a Beccara and others) (ICSID Case
No. ARB/07/5), Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 4, 2011 (hereinafter “Abaclat v. Argentina”),
Exhibit C-769.

2° ATA Construction, Industrial and Trading Company v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/2), Order Taking

Note of the Discontinuance of the Proceeding, July 11, 2011 (hereinafter “ATA v. Jordan”), Exhibit C-770.

2! Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17), Award, June 21, 2011 (hereinafter
“Impregilo v. Argentina”), Exhibit C-772.

» Hochtief AG v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31), Decision on Jurisdiction, October 24, 2011
(hereinafter “Hochtief v. Argentina”), Exhibit C-773.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

District of Columbia Circuit in Republic of Argentina v. BG Group ple of January 17, 2012,73
and of the arbitral tribunal in the UNCITRAL case, ICS v. Argentine Republic.**

On February 22, 2012, the Tribunal accepted Respondent’s letter of February 17, 2012, and
provided Claimants with the opportunity to respond to this letter.

On February 28, 2012, Claimants filed a letter in response to Respondent’s letter of February 17,
2012.

On March 26, 2012, Claimants filed a second request for provisional measures, alleging that
Respondent had taken unlawful actions on March 14, 2012 that irreparably threaten to harm
Claimants’ investment and the rights Claimants seek to protect in this arbitration. Specifically,
Claimants asserted that Respondent, acting through the Boards of Directors of the Argentine
Airlines and their related service companies, which Respondent now controls, announced that
they would submit Amended Financial Statements for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2008
for approval at upcoming Shareholders’ Meetings. According to Claimants, the amended 2008
financial statements would also amend previously-approved and final financial statements for the
fiscal years ending in 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2007.7

In their second request for provisional measures, Claimants sought an interim order directing
Respondent to stop any procedures aimed at approving any formal or material changes to the
financial statements of the Argentine Airlines for any year prior to 2008; to stop any procedures
aimed at approving the 2008 Amended Financial Statements; to make available to Claimants’
representatives in Interinvest, in their capacity as shareholders of the Argentine Airlines, all
information available and subject to discussion and vote in any shareholders’ meeting(s) to be
scheduled in this respect; and to authorize Claimants’ representatives in Interinvest to attend,
participate and/or exercise their voting rights in any shareholders’ meeting(s) to be scheduled in
connection with the alleged “adjustments” to the Argentine Airlines financial statements, and in
all cases free of any coercion, or physical or legal threat, until the Tribunal renders its Award.?°
Claimants also requested that the Tribunal issue an emergency temporary order preserving the
status quo ante with respect to the financial statements until such time as it ruled on this
application for provisional measures.

Also on March 26, 2012, Respondent filed a letter, with attachments, informing the Tribunal of
“some new developments of a serious nature” that had unfolded in criminal proceedings in
Spain.

On March 28, 2012, the Tribunal fixed a procedural calendar for the filing of the Parties’
submissions on Claimants’ second request for the Tribunal to decide on provisional measures
and for Claimants’ response to Respondent’s letter regarding the Spanish criminal proceedings.

3 Republic of Argentina v. BG Group plc, United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit,
January 17, 2012 (hereinafter “Argentina v. BG”), Exhibit C-775.

4 ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2010-9,
Award on Jurisdiction, February 10, 2012 (hereinafter “/CS v. Argentina”), Exhibit C-774.

Claimants’ Second Application for Provisional Measures, March 26, 2012, 4.

6 Td. at 45.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

On April 1, 2012, and following correspondence from the Parties, the Tribunal amended the
procedural calendar for the filing of the Parties’ submissions on Claimants’ second request for
provisional measures. The Tribunal directed the Parties to take no actions or steps to aggravate
the dispute or to render Claimants’ application moot pending the Tribunal’s consideration of it.

On April 4, 2012, Claimants filed a response to Respondent’s March 26, 2012 letter concerning
the “new developments” in the Spanish criminal proceedings.

On April 11, 2012, Respondent filed observations on Claimants’ second request for provisional
measures.

On April 23, 2012, Claimants filed observations in reply to their second request for provisional
measures.

On May 4, 2012, Respondent filed observations in rejoinder on Claimants’ second request for
provisional measures.

On May 24, 2012, Respondent filed further observations concerning Claimants’ second request
for provisional measures and Respondent's fourth objection on jurisdiction. On May 25, 2012,
the Tribunal invited Claimants to file a response to Respondent's submission by June 1, 2012. On
June 1, 2012, Claimants filed a response to Respondent’s submission of May 24, 2012

On September 28, 2012, Respondent directed the Tribunal’s attention to (i) the award rendered
on August 22, 2012 in Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/1); (ii) the decision rendered by a Swedish court on November 9, 2012 concerning the
award rendered on October 1, 2007 in the case RosInvestCo UK Ltd. v. The Russian Federation,
SCC Case No. V079/2005; and (iii) to a recent submission before the United States Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit in the case of Thai-Lao Lignite (Thailand) Co., Ltd & Hongsa
Lignite (Lao PDR) Co., Ltd v. Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. By letter
of October 9, 2012, Claimants, upon invitation from the Tribunal, provided their comments on
Respondent’s submission of September 28, 2012.

Ill. Position of the Parties on Jurisdiction

a. Respondent’s position

In its written and oral submissions on jurisdiction, Respondent argues the following:

i. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because Claimants failed to meet the requirements
set forth in Article X of the Treaty;

ii. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because Claimants have no legal standing to claim
for legal rights that belong to another legal person;

73.

iii. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to adjudicate certain of Claimants’ allegations that
concern the acts of non-state entities, which cannot be attributed to Respondent;
and

iv. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because the investment invoked by Claimants is
not an investment protected by the Treaty.

The Respondent requests the Tribunal to declare, pursuant to Rule 41(5) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, that the Centre has no jurisdiction and that the Tribunal has no competence

over this case and, therefore, to dismiss the claim, ordering costs and fees against Claimants, plus
interest, pursuant to Rule 47(1)(j) of the Arbitration Rules.

b. Claimants’ position

In their written and oral submissions on jurisdiction, Claimants argue the following:

The Tribunal has jurisdiction over Claimants’ claims because Claimants have
satisfied the procedural provisions of the Australia-Argentina BIT, which they
may rely on through the application of the Treaty’s MFN clause;

The Tribunal has jurisdiction, in the alternative, because Claimants have satisfied

and/or are excused for reasons of futility from the requirements set forth in Article

X of the Treaty;

iii. The Tribunal has jurisdiction over Claimants’ claims because Claimants are
legitimate parties to this arbitration;

iv. The Tribunal should defer questions of state attribution for acts of non-state
entities to the merits phase of this arbitration or, in the alternative, determine that
the acts alleged are attributable to Respondent; and

v. The Tribunal has jurisdiction over Claimants’ claims because Claimants’

investment was acquired and effected in accordance with the legislation of

Argentina and in good faith.

Claimants request the following relief: i) a declaration that the dispute is within the jurisdiction
of the ICSID Convention and within the competence of this Tribunal; ii) an order dismissing all
of Respondent’s objections to the admissibility of the dispute and dismissing all of Respondent’s
objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal; and iii) an order
that Argentina pay the costs for these proceedings,”* including the Tribunal’s fees and expenses,
and the costs of Claimants’ representation, subject to interest until the day of payment.”

2
Rep. 4 388.

?8 The Tribunal understands Claimants’ submission in paragraph 385(iii) as seeking the costs in respect of deciding

on the objections to its jurisdiction.

» Rej. 4385.

74.

75.

76.

77.

IV. Analysis

a. First Jurisdictional Objection: Claimants’ Fulfillment of the Procedural
Requirements of Article X of the Treaty

Respondent’s first jurisdictional objection to this dispute is rooted in Article X of the Treaty,
which provides that

1. Disputes arising between a Party and an investor of the other Party in
connection with investments within the meaning of this Agreement shall, as far as
possible, be settled amicably between the parties to the dispute.

2. If a dispute within the meaning of section 1 cannot be settled within six months
as from the date on which one of the parties to the dispute raised it, it shall be
submitted, at the request of either party, to the competent tribunals of the Party in
whose territory the investment was made.

3. The dispute may be submitted to an international arbitral tribunal in any of the
following circumstances:

(a) At the request of one of the parties to the dispute, when no decision has been
reached on the merits after a period of 18 months has elapsed as from the moment
the judicial proceeding provided for in section 2 of this article was initiated or

When such a decision has been reached, but the dispute between the parties
persists;

(b) When both parties to the dispute have so agreed.

According to Respondent, Claimants have failed to meet the requirements of Article X.
Specifically, Respondent alleges that Claimants have not attempted to amicably settle their
dispute in accordance with Article X(1) and (2) of the Treaty. Respondent also alleges that
Claimants have not subjected their dispute to the Argentine courts for a period of eighteen
months before seeking this arbitration, in accordance with Article X(3).

The Claimants have made two responses to this objection. First, Claimants assert that they are
entitled to invoke the Treaty’s MFN clause in Article IV(2) in order to benefit from the more
favorable dispute settlement provisions of other BITs negotiated by Argentina. Second,
Claimants assert that even if the Treaty’s MFN clause does not permit them to borrow the
dispute settlement provisions from other Argentine BITs, they have satisfied the requirements of
Article X of the Treaty, or, in the alternative, that they should be excused from Article X’s
requirements for reasons of futility.

As the Parties’ submissions concern two distinct arguments in the alternative, the Tribunal will
address each of them in turn. The Tribunal will first address the issue of Claimants’ compliance

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

with the requirements of Article X of the Treaty. The Tribunal will then assess, on an alternative
basis, the issue of the applicability of the MFN clause to Article X of the Treaty.

i. Compliance with the Requirements of Article X
1. Position of Respondent

6-month requirement

Respondent argues that Claimants resorted to the jurisdiction of ICSID without first conducting
amicable negotiations for at least six months with the Argentine Republic, even though the
fulfillment of this requirement is one of the conditions upon which Respondent’s consent to
ICSID arbitration is based.*°

Under Article X(1) and (2) of the Treaty, disputes “shall, if possible, be amicably settled” within
a term of six months.*' Article X(2) provides that the 6-month negotiation period must be
counted from the date of submission of such dispute by either party.*” According to Respondent,
the period starts to run once a party claims that there is disagreement about the facts and rights
related to the Treaty, not when the Treaty is breached.*?

Respondent asserts, moreover, that investors must give formal notice of the dispute to
Respondent’s competent authorities, in order for the government to be aware of the dispute.
This notice should describe the nature of the dispute and express the intent to commence
amicable negotiations for the purpose of resolving the conflict within the framework of the
Treaty.

Respondent contends that Claimants failed to give notice to the Argentine authorities of the
formal commencement of amicable negotiations and that these negotiations never actually took
place.** It was only on November 20, 2008 that Claimants notified Respondent of the filing of
their claim under the Treaty, when they sent a letter informing Respondent that Claimants had
decided to submit an investment dispute under the Treaty.*”

Respondent further submits that none of the documents submitted by Claimants as proof of
negotiations mention the rights provided for in the Treaty, international arbitration proceedings,
or even the Treaty’s requirement to hold amicable negotiations for a term of six months.

Although Claimants reference meetings with Argentine officials, nothing demonstrates that those
discussions were held within the context of Article X(1). To the contrary, those meetings

* Mem. 4 10.
5! Mem. § 2.
» Rep. 4 34.
* Rep. 4 36.
* Rep, 432.
* Td.

© Mem. 4 15.
7 Mem. § 13.
* Mem. § 24.

83.

84.

85.

86.

concerned the local legal framework applicable to Argentina’s commercial air transportation
: 39
industry.

Respondent notes that Claimants have submitted purported evidence, including newspaper
articles and statements by Argentine senators and congressmen, that Respondent was aware that
Claimants would resort to ICSID proceedings, but Respondent argues that this evidence is
irrelevant.” Respondent’s objection is based on Claimants’ failure to meet the 6-month
amicable settlement requirement.*' Claimants’ obligation under Article X(1) and (2) is not
fulfilled by media discussions regarding the possibility of resorting to ICSID in the event that
negotiations are unsuccessful.” Likewise, the statements made by Respondent’s congressmen
and senators regarding Claimants’ possible resort to ICSID do not constitute negotiations; such
statements are speculative and do not express the will of the National Congress or the
Respondent.?

18-month local court requirement

According to Respondent, the language of Article X(2) and (3) of the Treaty requires that
disputes must first be submitted to the domestic courts of competent jurisdiction before they can
be submitted to international arbitration. This language is mandatory, and the prior submission
of disputes to the local courts is a jurisdictional requirement which may not be set aside or
disregarded.**

Respondent disputes Claimants’ assertion that they have met this requirement, based on an
expropriation suit that was filed by the Argentine Republic against Interinvest in the Argentine
courts. According to Respondent, the expropriation lawsuit under Argentine law and the present
arbitration are clearly different, as they do not involve the same parties or subject matter."* The
purpose of the expropriation lawsuit is for the domestic court to determine the value of the
property expropriated by Argentina, while the subject of the arbitration is not only expropriation
but also allegations of unfair treatment, arbitrary measures, and failure to grant full protection
and security, which are all governed by the Treaty.

Respondent further argues that the Request for Arbitration filed with ICSID should have been
submitted only after the dispute had been submitted to the local courts for 18 months. However,
the expropriation suit commenced on February 5, 2009, while the Request for Arbitration was
filed by Claimants earlier, on December 11, 2008.8

* Mem. 421.

4 Rep. 44] 44, 45.
4 Rep. 4 45.

® Rep. 4.47.

4 Rep. 44 48, 49.
# Rep. 49.

4 Rep. 4.17.

4 Rep. 471.

47 Rep. 4.72.

4 Rep. 4 69.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

Finally, Respondent argues that Claimants’ assertion that they have satisfied the 18-month court
requirement contradicts their invocation, through the Treaty’s MFN clause, of the Argentina-
U.S. or Argentina-Australia BITs. Both of the latter BITs establish that disputes may only be
submitted to international arbitration if they have not been submitted to the local courts.”

Futility

Respondent argues that Claimants are not entitled to an excuse from the requirements of Article
X by reason of futility. Argentine law guarantees the judicial protection of the rights at issue,
and Claimants did not encounter any obstacles in the filing of judicial claims. The Argentine
courts routinely adopt final and provisional decisions in less than eighteen months, in both
ordinary and expedited summary proceedings.” Moreover, there is no basis for Claimants to
assert that they would be required to incur disproportionate court costs in pursuing a remedy
before the Argentine courts, and there is no basis on which to conclude that the Argentine courts
lack independence.*!

2. Position of Claimants

6-month requirement

Claimants assert that they have complied with the 6-month period in the Treaty, as they
submitted their request for arbitration well after six months had elapsed from the time Argentina
“instigated” the dispute.*> By December 11, 2008, the Parties had gone through more than a year
of intense negotiations and no fewer than three attempted settlement agreements.”

Claimants assert that Article X requires neither a formal notice nor express allegations of Treaty
breaches. The first part of Article X(1) of the Treaty broadly defines the term “disputes” as
“{d]isputes arising between a Party and an investor of the other Party in connection with
investments within the meaning of this Agreement.” This broad definition of disputes does not
refer to the legal basis of such disputes nor does it require that any settlement negotiations be
formally held under the Treaty or address or allege breaches of specific Treaty provisions. It
requires only that the dispute be related to an investment.**

According to Claimants, Article X(1) provides a “best-efforts” clause to attempt to settle the
dispute, and Article X(2) provides a “cooling-off’ period whereby either party can proceed to the
next stage as soon as six months have passed since the instigation or initiation of the dispute
itself.°> The sole condition for proceeding from amicable settlement attempts to the next step is
that the dispute “cannot be settled within six months from the date on which one of the parties to
the dispute instigated it.”*°

® Rep. 473.

* Rep. 4 75.

*! Rep, 44 76-84.
CM  22(ii).

3 Rei. Fl.

4 CM 476.

* Rej. 9] 5, 70-71.
5° CM 482.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

Claimants assert that the Treaty’s 6-month cooling off period starts to run as of the date on which
one of the parties to the dispute “instigated” (“promovid”) the dispute.”’ This “instigation” of a
dispute refers to the act or omission actually triggering the dispute. Thus, the 6-month period
starts to run not when a formal breach of the treaty is alleged, raised or communicated, but rather
when the disputed conduct occurs.**

Claimants note that while other treaties to which one of the Parties is a signatory may explicitly
require a notification of the dispute under the BIT before the 6-month period can began to run,
no such requirement is included in Article X of the Treaty.” Furthermore, under Article X, there
is no requirement that a claimant raise formal or explicit allegations of the Treaty breach.
Considering that the dispute is to be submitted first to local tribunals and only thereafter to
international arbitration, Article X cannot reasonably be construed to require that formal treaty
allegations be made for the “dispute” to exist.°' Furthermore, international jurisprudence holds
that it is not necessary for a State to expressly refer to a specific treaty in its exchanges with the
other State—what matters is that the exchanges “refer to the subject-matter of the treaty.”

Claimants assert that, as a matter of fact, Respondent “instigated” this dispute as early as October
2002, after it failed to implement promised relief measures for the Argentine Airlines.°
Alternatively, Claimants assert that the “dispute” began in October 2004, when Respondent
rejected Claimants’ request for an airfare increase. The dispute intensified in 2005 and 2006,
and, after lengthy negotiations, Respondent again promised relief measures. However, by
approving an insufficient airfare increase and failing to provide promised subsidies, Respondent
again breached its agreement with Claimants.

According to Claimants, the dispute continued in April 2008, when Claimants requested
Respondent to take urgent action to correct governmental measures impacting its operations,
including the approval of airfare increases or subsidies. In May 2008, Respondent, Interinvest
and the Argentine Airlines concluded an agreement to change the Airlines’ corporate structure,
increasing Respondent’s interest and granting a controlling interest to a prospective private
Argentine investor. As part of this agreement, Respondent agreed to raise domestic fares and
grant relief measures. However, Respondent failed to do so, and the deal with the prospective
investor ultimately fell through.”

On July 17, 2008, the Parties reached an agreement regarding the sale of the Argentine Airlines
to Respondent. Under the agreement, the Parties agreed that the purchase price would be

Id.

CM 487.

CM 496.

© Rej. 4.97.

&! Rej. 49.97, 113.
 Rej. | 132.

& CM 4 100.
 Rej. 4 16.

“Td.

° Rej. 17.
TCM 4 106; Rej. § 17.

97.

98.

99.

determined by independent appraisers appointed by each Party and that, if there were still a
disagreement on the price, the Parties would appoint a third independent appraiser.®* According
to Claimants, however, Respondent continued the dispute on July 24, 2008, when it submitted a
bill to Congress for the “repossession” of the Argentine Airlines. In doing so, Claimants allege,
Respondent breached the July 17, 2008 Agreement. On September 18, 2008, the Argentine
Congress passed a law approving Respondent’s repossession of the Argentine Airlines.
However, Congress determined that the amount of compensation would be calculated
exclusively by the Argentine Tribunal de Tasaciones de la Nacion, in disregard of the third-party
valuation mechanism set out in the July 2008 Agreement, thus further entrenching the dispute.”

Finally, Claimants assert that even if this Tribunal required the “dispute” between the Parties to
concern the Treaty, Claimants have met this requirement. Respondent was aware that, if the
ongoing negotiations failed, Claimants could submit an ICSID complaint. The dispute between
Claimants and Respondent was a national event and was extensively discussed in the Argentine
press starting in early 2008.” During a Congressional debate in August 2008, various
congressmen acknowledged that Claimants were preparing their ICSID arbitration under the
Treaty. Moreover, during a September 1, 2008 Congressional hearing, Claimants’
representatives confirmed they would resort to international arbitration if Respondent failed to
pay fair compensation.”

Therefore, according to Claimants, even if a “dispute” did not exist between the Parties between
2002 and 2007, the evidence demonstrates that the current dispute in connection with Claimants’
investments had been instigated, raised and formally discussed by May 2008. The evidence also
demonstrates that the Parties had attempted to solve this dispute amicably through several
negotiations that lasted more than six months, including the negotiations that surrounded the
May 15, 2008 Agreement and the July 17, 2008 Agreement.”*

18-month local court requirement

According to Claimants, the 18-month local court requirement of Article X(3) has been satisfied,
because Argentine tribunals have had the opportunity to undo the measures giving rise to this
dispute for more than eighteen months, and yet have failed to do so.” Claimants cite to multiple
actions brought before the Argentine courts. First, the Tribunal de Tasaciones, in two different
valuations, in October 2008 and in January 2009, found that the Argentine Airlines were worth
approximately negative US$832 million and negative US$770 million.’> Second, following
Interinvest’s rejection of the January 2009 valuation, Respondent initiated a lawsuit in an
Argentine court seeking the expropriation of the shares of the Argentine Airlines. That court has
not yet issued a substantive decision in the case.”°

SCM 4111.
OM 4112.
™CM 4 123.
CM 4 135.
2M 4 136.
3M ¥ 127.
OM 4 22(iii).
™ CM ¥ 140.

" Id.

10

101.

10:

103.

a

104.

S

N

Claimants acknowledge that both the Tribunal de Tasaciones’ valuation and the expropriation
lawsuit initiated by the GOA are based exclusively on Argentine law. However, these suits
relate to the same subject matter now before this Tribunal: the question of compensation for
Respondent’s take-over of Claimants’ investments.

Claimants also acknowledge that the 18-month period had not lapsed when they requested
arbitration on December 11, 2008. However, at present, Respondent’s expropriation lawsuit has
been before Argentine tribunals for well over 18 months without resulting in any substantive
decision.”* Claimants assert, as a result, that (i) Argentine courts have had more than 18 months
to decide the main issues in this dispute and that (ii) the core purpose of the local court
requirement—to give the host State the opportunity to consider and/or remedy the disputed
measures before they are brought to international arbitration—has been satisfied.” International
Jurisprudence supports the position that under these circumstances, such preconditions have been
met.

Finally, Claimants assert that their satisfaction of the 18-month local court requirement of Article
X(3) does not contradict the dispute settlement provisions of the U.S.-Argentina BIT.*' The
U.S.-Argentina “fork in the road” clause requires the investor to choose either a local court
remedy or international arbitration. However, here, it was Respondent, and not Claimants, who
initiated the local expropriation suit. According to Claimants, this position is fully in
accordance with Article X(2) of the Treaty, which makes clear that the proceedings before local
tribunals may be submitted “at the request of either party.”**

Futility

Claimants submit that even if this Tribunal were to determine that the requirements of Article X
have not been met, it would be futile to require Claimants to make further attempts at amicable
settlement or to require Claimants to resubmit the dispute to the Argentine courts for an
additional 18 months.

According to Claimants, they have attempted to amicably settle the present dispute on several
occasions from September 2002 onwards, and with even greater focus as of May 2008. In
addition to these negotiations, Claimants have also held additional negotiations with Argentina,
from October 2008 until early 2010, specifically concerning the compensation due to Claimants
for the expropriation of their investment.*°

7 CM 4 139.
® Rej. 4 161.
° Id.

 Rej. $f] 162-165.
S'Rej. F171.
2M ¥ 143.

8 Td.

OM 4 22(iv).
SCM q 158.
SCM 4 159.

105.

10

10

108.

a

_

Claimants also argue that requiring them to resubmit the dispute once they have satisfied the 18-
month local court requirement would serve no purpose whatsoever and would only add cost and
time to the proceedings.*” Furthermore, the fact that the core matter of the dispute has already
been pending for more than 18 months demonstrates that it would be futile to now require
Claimants to litigate for an additional 18 months.** Jurisprudence supports the view that when a
requirement to resort to local courts would be futile, ineffective and/or would not provide the
claimant with appropriate means of legal redress, that requirement should be waived.”

Claimants argue that in any event, the failure to comply with the 6- and 18-month waiting
periods is not a bar to jurisdiction. According to Claimants, the majority of ICSID tribunals
addressing this issue have found that such waiting periods constitute procedural, rather than
jurisdictional, requirements.”°

3. Analysis of the Tribunal
(a) The Requirements of X(1) and X(2)
Article X(1) and (2) reads as follows:

1. Disputes arising between a Party and an investor of the other Party in connection
with investments within the meaning of this Agreement shall, as far as possible,
be settled amicably between the parties to the dispute.

2. Ifa dispute within the meaning of section 1 cannot be settled within six months as
from the date on which one of the parties to the dispute raised it, it shall be
submitted, at the request of either party, to the competent tribunals of the Party in
whose territory the investment was made. [Si una controversia en el sentido del
parrafo I no pudiera ser dirimida dentro del plazo de seis meses, contando desde
la fecha en que una de las partes en la controversia la haya promovido, sera
sometida a peticién de una de ellas a los tribunales competentes de la Parte en
cuyo territorio se realizé la inversion. ]

The Tribunal agrees with Claimants that Article X(1) can fairly be interpreted as a general “best
efforts” obligation for the parties to attempt to amicably settle their dispute. However, it would
be an overly literal interpretation of Article X(2)’s “cannot be settled within six months”
language to read it as simply requiring that the Parties wait for six months after the dispute began
before they proceed to the next step in the dispute settlement process. The natural reading of
Articles X(1) and (2) together is that the Parties are obligated to make their best efforts to
amicably settle their dispute, and that they are required to do so for six months before proceeding
to the next step.

57M 4] 22(iv).
 Rej. | 182.
® Rej. 4 192.
CM 4 168.

i. The Commencement of the 6-Month Period

109. Claimants assert that the relevant moment for Article X(2) is the date on which Respondent’s

110.

111.

substantive conduct that is in dispute takes place.”' In other words, the key inquiry is when the
act or omission that triggered the dispute occurred. To reach this conclusion, Claimants point to
the use of the word “promover” in the Spanish language original of Article X(2), the relevant
portion of which reads “contando desde la fecha en que una de las partes en la controversia la
haya promovido.” They translate “promover” as “initiate,” “provoke,” “give rise to,” “cause,”
and “instigate.” From this, Claimants conclude that “promover una controversia” refers to the
“substantive conduct, acts or omissions” committed by Respondent that are at the origin of this
dispute.”? Claimants note that “promover” is different from the verbs used in the dispute
resolution preconditions of other BITs, which instead require the parties to “someter” a dispute

or define the date that a dispute “surgid.

Claimants’ interpretation does not ascribe a natural or ordinary meaning to the phrase “promover
una controversia” or “instigate a dispute.” Claimants’ argument focuses almost exclusively on
the word “promover,” while largely ignoring the meaning or importance of the word “dispute.”
While “instigate” or “initiate” or “provoke” all suggest the commencement of something, that
something in question is the dispute itself, not the acts giving rise to the dispute. Both “dispute”
and “controversia” are synonyms for “argument” or “disagreement.” As stated by the PCIJ in
Mavrommatis, “[a] dispute is a disagreement on a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal views or
of interests between two persons.””” To instigate a dispute, therefore, refers to the time at which
the disagreement was formed, which can only occur once there has been at least some exchange
of views by the parties. It does not refer to the commission of the act that caused the parties to
disagree, for the very simple reason a breach or violation does not become a “dispute” until the
injured party identifies the breach or violation and objects to it.

Claimants assert that their interpretation is not unprecedented and that other investment treaties
have similar provisions. However, the only provision Claimants have identified is NAFTA
Article 1120, which has starkly different language from Article X(2).°° NAFTA Article 1120
includes the clause “provided that six months have elapsed since the events giving rise to a
Claim.” But Article X(2) makes no mention of “the events giving rise to the claim,” and it
would be a stretch to read such a phrase into the plain meaning of “promover una controversia.”
Furthermore, to the extent that the purpose of the 6-month requirement is to grant the host state
the opportunity to redress the problem before the investor submits the dispute to arbitration,
measuring from the date that the breach occurred would not further this policy goal.°” Without

 

°' CM 487.

OM 484.

° OM 44 85, 86.

4 Rej. #4] 129-30.

°5 Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions, Judgment No. 2, 1924, P.C.LJ., Series A, No. 2, p. 11. (hereinafter
“Mavrommatis”).

°© Rej. 4 124.

°T See, e.g., Ronald S. Lauder v. The Czech Republic (UNCITRAL Case), Award of September 3, 2001, 185
(hereinafter “Lauder v. Czech Republic”), Exhibit C-329 (“[T]he waiting period does not run from the date [on]
which the alleged breach occurred, but from the date [on] which the State is advised that said breach has occurred.

20

112.

113.

114.

some exchange of views, Respondent could have no idea that an investor believed it to be in
breach.

ii. The Requirement of Formal Notification

The ordinary meaning of Article X(1) supports Claimants’ argument that they were not required
to give formal notice in order to commence settlement negotiations. Article X(1) simply defines
“disputes” as “arising between a Party and an investor of the other Party in connection with
investments within the meaning of this Agreement.” There is nothing in this language that
suggests that Claimants must formally notify Respondent that there is a dispute under the Treaty
or identify the specific provisions of the Treaty that are the basis of the dispute. All that is
required for a dispute to exist under Article X(1) is that it be “in connection with investments.”
In this regard, Claimants’ citation of Vivendi I is on point.°* Vivendi I concerned the France-
Argentina BIT, which contained an article with a similar definition of disputes as “relating to
investments made under this Agreement.” The tribunal concluded that this article “does not use
a narrower formulation, requiring that the investor’s claim allege a breach of the BIT itself.
Read literally, the requirements for arbitral jurisdiction in Article 8 do not necessitate that the
Claimant allege a breach of the BIT itself: it is sufficient that the dispute relate to an investment
made under the BIT.””

Claimants correctly point out that other BITs expressly define “dispute” with reference to the
dispute’s legal basis under those BITs. For example, the U.S.-Ecuador BIT describes disputes as
follows:

For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute between a Party
and a national or company of the other Party arising out of or relating to: (a) an
investment agreement between that Party and such national or company; (b) an
investment authorization granted by that Party's foreign investment authority to
such national or company; or (c) an alleged breach of any right conferred or
created by this Treaty with respect to an investment.'”

The U.S.-Ecuador BIT was addressed by the tribunals in Murphy'®! and Burlington,' which
determined that a dispute does not exist, and settlement of this dispute cannot be attempted, until
it has been articulated in terms of a treaty breach. Specifically, the tribunal in Murphy held that
the claimants were required to inform the respondent of their intention to hold talks for purposes
of settling their claim under the BIT.'® However, both Murphy and Burlington are

 

 

This from the purpose of the waiting period, which is to allow the parties to enter into good-faith negotiations
before initiating the arbitration.”).

°8 Compaiita de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002 (hereinafter “Vivendi I v. Argentina”), Exhibit C-403.

°° Vivendi I'v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, at § 55.

1 Rej. | 105, citing Article VI(1) of the U.S.-Ecuador BIT.

1°! Murphy Exploration and Production Company International v Republic of Ecuador, Decision onJurisdiction,
(ICSID Case No ARB/08/4), December. 15, 2010, at {| 104 (hereinafter “Murphy v. Ecuador”), Exhibit C-417.

'© Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5), Decision on Jurisdiction, June 2,
2010, at 4337 (hereinafter “Burlingtonv. Ecuador”), LA AR 6.

13 See Murphy v. Ecuador, Decision on Jurisdiction, at §§ 107-109.

21

115.

ll

ll

ll

n

a

x

ge

distinguishable based on the language of the U.S.-Ecuador BIT, and both tribunals make clear
that their determination is predicated on the treaty’s definition of “dispute.”!*

International jurisprudence also supports the general proposition that there is no requirement that
a party formally notify the other party that negotiations are occurring under a particular treaty, in
order for negotiations to be occurring with respect to a dispute. As the International Court of
Justice (“ICS”) has stated:

[I]t does not necessarily follow that, because a State has not expressly referred in
negotiations with another State to a particular treaty as having been violated by
conduct of that other State, it is debarred from invoking a compromissory clause
in that treaty. The United States was well aware that Nicaragua alleged that its
conduct was a breach of international obligations before the present case was
instituted; and it is now aware that specific articles of the 1956 Treaty are alleged
to have been violated. It would make no sense to require Nicaragua now to
institute fresh proceedings based on the Treaty, which it would be fully entitled to
do.

Because Article X and international jurisprudence are clear that, under these circumstances,
Claimants were not obligated to initiate formal negotiations under the Treaty or to notify
Respondent of their possible resort to ICSID arbitration under the Treaty, the Parties’
voluminous materials regarding discussions in the Argentine media and within the Argentine
Senate regarding the possibility of recourse to ICSID arbitration are not relevant.

iii. Determining When the Dispute Began

Considering that a formal notification of the existence of the dispute or the start of the
negotiation period was not required, the issue for the Tribunal is to identify when the “dispute”
can be considered to have begun. Considering that the Request for Arbitration was brought on
December 11, 2008, the critical date is therefore June 11, 2008, six months earlier.

It is clear from the voluminous briefing on this subject that the two sides have had differing
views on the regulation and control of the Argentine Airlines for years, and that the Parties have
had numerous communications and exchanges, that have included the highest levels of the
Argentine government.'° However, the disagreements during this period have been dynamic,
and Claimants’ arguments reflect this. Claimants have identified two “core issues” to their
dispute: 1) a disagreement over the regulatory framework that was applied to Claimants

1 See Burlington v. Ecuador, Decision on Jurisdiction at $f] 335-337 (“[T]he “dispute” to which Article V1(3)(a)
refers is one that relates to “an alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to an
investment.” Stated otherwise, as long as no allegation of Treaty breach is made, no dispute will have arisen giving
access to arbitration under Article VI.”); see also Murphy v. Ecuador, Decision on Jurisdiction, at {| 103.

'°5 Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America),
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports November 26, 1984, 8 (hereinafter “Nicaragua v.
U.S.A.”), Exhibit C-406. See also Case C i of the ion on the El

of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation), Preliminary Objections Judgment, April 1,
2011, 430, Exhibit C-554, (hereinafter “Georgia v. Russian Federation”).

106 See, e.g., CM § 103.

 

 

22

119.

120.

(regarding the airfare caps imposed upon the Argentine Airlines) and 2) a disagreement over the
compensation owed to Claimants for the expropriation of their investment (through
Respondent’s direct expropriation of Interinvest’s shares).'°’ The first issue, an alleged
“creeping expropriation” of the Argentine Airlines, purportedly began in 2004.'* The second
issue, the alleged direct expropriation of Jnterinvest’s shares in the Argentine Airlines, began
much later.

International courts and tribunals agree that for a dispute to exist, it must have crystallized into
an actual disagreement. As the ICJ held in Mavrommatis, “A dispute is a disagreement on a
point of law or fact, a conflict of legal views or of interests between two persons.” It must be
shown that “the claim of one party is positively opposed by the other.”!'° As the Maffezini
tribunal recognized, the dispute “must relate to clearly identified issues between the parties and
must not be merely academic...The dispute must go beyond general grievances and must be
susceptible of being stated in terms of a concrete claim.”"!' A diplomatic request by an investor
to a host State for further assistance does not, on its own, necessarily express disagreement on
the parties’ rights and obligations.''? Instead, only when a request “manifest[s] a disagreement
over the rights and obligations” can it be considered a dispute.''

It is clear that a disagreement between the Parties regarding the regulatory treatment of the
Argentine Airlines had developed long before the June 11, 2008 critical date, and that the Parties
had conducted substantial negotiations regarding this disagreement. Claimants assert that a
dispute has existed in this case since late 2004, when the Respondent rejected the Argentine
Airlines’ request for an increase in airfare caps.''* This dispute allegedly escalated in 2006
when, despite prior promises to increase the airfare caps, Respondent now conditioned this and
other measures on Claimants’ transfer of a percentage of their shares in ARSA.'!> It is true that
many of the discussions between the Parties took the form of a request from Claimants for
various promised regulatory changes. However, a 2004 letter from the Argentine Airlines to
Respondent makes clear their position that Respondent has failed to properly apply its

°7 CM 499.

18 Rej. G91.

1° Mavrommatis, Judgment No. 2, p. 11.

"0 South West Africa (Ethiopia v. South Africa; Liberia v. South Africa), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, 1.C.J.
Reports 1962, p. 328; Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002) (Democratic
Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda), Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2006, p. 40, para. 90.

'"! Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Decision on Jurisdiction, January 25,
2000(hereinafter “Maffezini v. Spain”), at § 94 (internal citations omitted).

"2 See Burlington v. Ecuador, Decision on Jurisdiction, at § 298 (“While Claimant’s expectation is conceivably a
diplomatic request for further assistance in connection with the indigenous opposition in the Block, this request for
ance does not express disagreement with the manner in which the Respondent has fulfilled its obligation to
provide protection and security in the Block. In and of itself, a request for assistance does not express disagreement
on the parties’ rights and obligations are, unless the surrounding context suggests otherwise, i.e. that the party whose
‘ance is requested has thus far failed to abide by its duty to assist.

See id. at 4320 (“In the view of the Tribunal, the 4 December 2002 letter is sufficient to raise a “dispute” within
the meaning of Article VI(3) of the Treaty. While the main purpose of the letter is to request assistance from
PetroEcuador with the episodes of violence and the opposition met in the Block, the tone and the context of the letter
do manifest a disagreement over rights and obligations.”

"4OM 4 101.

"SOM § 102.

 

 

   
 

23

121.

12:

123.

N

regulations.''* This demonstrates that Claimants plainly disagree with Respondent over the

application of Argentine laws and regulations to them.

It is less clear that a disagreement between the Parties regarding the expropriation of
Interinvest’s shares existed before June 11, 2008. While Claimants assert that they disagreed
with Respondent over the fair valuation of their investment by April 2008,'"” the evidence on this
is not so clear. At that point, Respondent’s first attempt to find a buyer for the Argentine
Airlines had failed, because Claimants had rejected the potential buyer’s purchase offer.''*
However, it seems difficult to characterize Claimants’ rejection of a third party’s purchase offer
as a legal dispute with Respondent, rather than simply a failed business transaction. The Parties
subsequently executed an agreement providing for Respondent to buy the shares of the Argentine
Airlines on July 17, 2008. While Claimants argue that the negotiating environment of this
agreement was hostile and threatening,''’ it is conceptually difficult to view an executed
agreement as constituting a legal dispute.'”°

The issue, therefore, is whether it is enough for purposes of Article X(2) that by June 11, 2008, a
disagreement existed concerning the regulatory treatment of the Argentine Airlines (and was
being negotiated), even if a clear disagreement regarding the valuation of Interinvest’s
(ultimately expropriated) shares in the Argentine Airlines had not yet crystallized. In other
words, are these two disagreements sufficiently related that negotiations under the first
disagreement are enough to satisfy Article X(2)?

The answer to this question is yes. International jurisprudence suggests that the subject matter of
the negotiations should be the same as the dispute that is brought before the court or tribunal. In
the recent Georgia v. Russia case, the ICJ noted that “the exchanges must refer to the subject-
matter of the treaty with sufficient clarity to enable the State against which a claim is made to
identify that there is, or may be, a dispute with regard to that subject-matter.”'?! The tribunal in
CMS, describing the existence of multiple types of sovereign actions that could constitute
disputes, noted that “as long as [these multiple different actions] affect the investor in violation
of its rights and cover the same subject matter, the fact that they may originate from different

"6 See, e.g., Merits | 124, citing an October 4, 2004 letter from the Argentine Airlines to the Argentine Secretary of
Transportation, Mr. Ricardo Jaime, in which they request an increase in the airfare caps. In this letter, the Argentine
Airlines assert that the current airfare caps imposed on them are “completely out of step with the cost increases
brought about by the fuel price increase, thereby distorting the remunerative rate concept established in Law No.
19,030, the Law on Commercial Aviation Policy.” See Ex. C-71.

"7 Rei. GOL.

"SOM ¢ 104.

'20 Later, on September 18, 2008, Congress passed a law approving Respondent’s repossession of the Argentine
Airlines, and authorized compensation to be calculated by the Tribunal de Tasaciones de la Nacién, in disregard of
the third-party valuation mechanism of the July 2008 agreement. CM 4 123. Following a disagreement between the
Tribunal de Tasaciones and Credit Suisse, Claimants’ valuator, as to the value of the Argentine Airlines, Congress
passed a law on December 22, 2008 authorizing the expropriation of the Argentine Airlines’ shares that belonged to
Interinvest. Merits 276.

"2! Georgia v. Russian Federation, Preliminary Objections, Judgment, April 1, 2011, 4 30, Exhibit C-554. See also
Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9), Award, September 15, 2003, § 14.5, Exhibit C-
297, noting that, in that case, “[t]here is no doubt that the subject matter of the two mediations was the Claimant’s
Parkview Project and the conduct of Ukrainian authorities in respect thereto. This is sufficient for the purposes of
the requirement in Article V1(2) of the BIT.”

24

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

sources or emerge at different times does not necessarily mean that the disputes are separate and
distinct.”"

Claimants have characterized the subject matter of their dispute as concerning Respondent’s
treatment of Claimants’ investments in the Argentine Airlines and Interinvest.'"* Respondent
has retorted that the subject matter of the negotiations between the Parties was merely contract
issues and matters of domestic law, which is different from the subject matter of a BIT claim.'™4
However, Respondent’s argument is really just a general assertion that the claim must be
characterized in the same terms (and possibly employing the same legal theories) when it is
being negotiated as when it is finally subjected to arbitration. Again, nothing in the text of
Article X(1)’s reference to “a dispute in connection with investments” requires that the dispute
be characterized solely in terms of Treaty violations.

Given that the formal expropriation alleged does indeed appear to be closely related to, and
follow, what the Claimants characterize as “only the culmination of a creeping expropriation”
that began in October 2004,'° it appears reasonable to conclude that these two core issues are
related to the point that they share the same subject-matter. Therefore, given that the dispute had
crystallized before June 11, 2008, and that the Parties continued to exchange views and work
towards agreement after this point, it is clear that the Claimants have satisfied the 6-month
amicable settlement period.

(b) Futility

Even if the Tribunal were to find that Claimants had not formed a “dispute” within the meaning
of Article X(1) before June 11, 2008, and had not attempted to amicably settle the dispute by the
time they filed the Request for Arbitration on December 11, 2008, the Claimants’ failure to
comply with this obligation should be excused for reasons of futility. Claimants have asserted
that further negotiations with Respondent would be futile, because they have attempted to settle
this dispute from 2002 until May 2008, and then again between October 2008 and early 2010.

ICSID tribunals have held that waiting periods may be waived when further negotiations would
be futile. For example, the tribunal in Occidental held that additional “attempts at reaching a
negotiated solution were indeed futile in the circumstances” where the investor had sought to
rebut allegations in a caducidad proceeding, to no avail, for 18 months before the caducidad
decree was finally issued.'7°

Claimants assert that they continued negotiations with Respondent between October 2008 and
early 2010.'2” These negotiations concerned a potential transaction whereby Respondent would
assume Claimants’ obligations and rights with respect to purchase orders Claimants had placed
2 CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Decision on Jurisdiction,
July 17, 2003, at 109 (hereinafter, “CMS v. Argentina”).

3 Rej. | 132.

4 Mem, §] 39-40.

25 Merits § 501.

"6 Occidental Petroleum Corporation et al. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11), Decision on
Jurisdiction, September 9, 2008, {fj 93-95, Exhibit C-439.

27M qq 159.

25

129.

130.

131.

132.

for several Airbus aircraft on the Argentine Airlines’ behalf. According to Claimants,
Respondent was interested in assuming these commitments in exchange for the termination of
these ICSID proceedings.'** Respondent has not challenged this assertion.'2” While a draft
agreement was initialed on February 8, 2009, and although Respondent later obtained financing
from the Spanish government for this agreement, Respondent ultimately did not sign the

agreement. 130

This failed transaction, the negotiations for which lasted at least six months, demonstrates that
even after Respondent had received formal notice of Claimants’ legal claims against Respondent
under the Treaty, the Parties continued to attempt but were ultimately unable to reach any sort of
amicable agreement. It is clear, therefore, that requiring Claimants to engage in any further
settlement attempts would serve no further purpose.

(c) The Local Court Requirement of Articles X(2) and (3)

Respondent also argues that Claimants have failed to comply with Articles X(2) and (3), which
require that Claimants’ dispute must be submitted to a local court of the host State for a period of
18 months before they may submit the dispute to this Tribunal.'*' In response, Claimants have
identified two different proceedings that they assert “count” for purposes of Articles X(2) and
(3): first, the valuations of the Argentine Airlines that were conducted in October 2008 and
January 2009, and second, the expropriation lawsuit that was initiated by Respondent against
Interinvest shortly after the January 2009 valuation was completed.

Respondent raises several issues with Claimants’ identified proceedings. First, Claimants’
Request for Arbitration should have been filed only after the dispute was brought before the
Argentine courts; in fact, the expropriation proceedings post-date the filing of these ICSID
proceedings. Second, the expropriation proceedings only concern local laws, not international
investment claims. Third, the parties in the expropriation proceeding—namely, Respondent and
Interinvest—are not identical to the parties to this arbitration proceeding.

The Tribunal does not agree with Respondent’s assertion that the subject matter of the
expropriation suit in domestic court is not the same as the subject matter of this arbitration. It is

28 Merits 4] 284-303; CM 4] 158-65.

29 See also Exhibit C-235, containing a February 8, 2009 draft agreement between Respondent and Interinvest. In
Section 3.1(b) of the agreement, Interinvest would be required to “desistird integra y expresamente de todos los
derechos que pudiera eventualmente invocar, como también a todas las acciones entabladas 0 en curso, fundados 0
vinculados a las medidas mencionadas en el pdrrafo anterior [la re-nacionalizacién, estatizacién, expropiacién
relativa a las empresas del Grupo AA], ast como también a cualquier tipo de solicitud de arbitraje y/o conciliacién,
demanda judicial...”.

89CM ¢ 162.

'31<9_ If a dispute within the meaning of section | cannot be settled within six months as from the date on which
one of the parties to the dispute raised it, it shall be submitted, at the request of either party, to the competent
tribunals of the Party in whose territory the investment was made.

3. The dispute may be submitted to an international arbitral tribunal in any of the following circumstances: (a) At
the request of one of the parties to the dispute, when no decision has been reached on the merits after a period of 18
months has elapsed as from the moment the judicial proceeding provided for in section 2 of this article was initiated
or When such a decision has been reached, but the dispute between the parties persists; (b) When both parties to the
dispute have so agreed.”

 

26

133.

13

135.

o

4.

an

true that the Argentine court proceedings only involved the determination of the value of the
expropriated assets, while the ICSID proceeding raises specific issues related to the validity of
the expropriation (i.e., fair and equitable treatment, arbitrary and unjustified measures, and full
protection and security). As a matter of substance, however, the goal of both suits is to make the
Claimants (and Interinvest, in the case of the Argentine proceeding) whole for the economic loss
suffered as a result of the nationalization. As the ICJ Chamber in ELSI noted,

[T]he local remedies rule does not, indeed cannot, require that a claim be
presented to the municipal courts in a form, and with arguments, suited to an
international tribunal, applying different law to different parties: for an
international claim to be admissible, it is sufficient if the essence of the claim has
been brought before the competent tribunals and pursued as far as permitted by
local law and procedures, and without success.'*”

The Tribunal also finds that the fact that the local court proceeding was brought by Respondent
against Interinvest rather than against Claimants themselves does not affect Claimants’
fulfillment of this requirement. As the ELSJ Chamber acknowledged, international legal
remedies may apply “different law to different parties” than local law remedies do, and this
should not be a barrier to the fulfillment of any local court remedy requirements. That the
domestic expropriation proceedings were brought against Interinvest, an Argentine company
owned by Claimants through Air Comet, does not prevent those proceedings from counting for
purposes of Article X(2) and (3) when the subject matter of those proceedings is the same as that
before this Tribunal.

The Tribunal notes, moreover, that the Treaty permits either party to initiate local court
proceedings for purposes of Article X. In this case, it was Respondent that initiated the dispute
against Interinvest. Therefore, the manner in which the proceedings have been cast by
Respondent in local courts should not give rise to a successful objection against the Claimants
that they failed to comply with the procedural requirements of Article X, as long as the subject
matter of the dispute under the Treaty was considered in the local proceedings, which, in this
case, it was.

Finally, while Claimants concede that the 18-month local court period had not lapsed at the time
they filed their Request for Arbitration, they are correct to note that 18 months have subsequently
passed, and the local suit remains pending. As such, the core objective of this requirement, to
give local courts the opportunity to consider the disputed measures, has been met. To require
Claimants to start over and re-file this arbitration now that their 18 months have been met would
be a waste of time and resources. '*?

'2 Case concerning Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States of America v. Italy), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports,

July 20, 1989, | 59, Exhibit C-437.
'33 See, e.g., Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Yugoslavia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1996 (II), at 613, § 26 (“For the
purposes of determining its jurisdiction in this case, the Court ... need only note that, even if it were to be assumed
that the Genocide Convention did not enter into force between the Parties until the signature of the Dayton-Paris
Agreement, all the conditions are now fulfilled to found the jurisdiction of the Court ratione personae. It is the case
that the jurisdiction of the Court must normally be assessed on the date of the filing of the act instituting
proceedings. ... The present Court applied this principle in the case concerning the Northern Cameroons (I.C.J.

 

 

27

136. For the reasons articulated above, this Tribunal finds that the Claimants have satisfied the

13

13

_

ge

requirements of Article X(1)(3) of the Treaty. However, because the Claimants invoked, in the
alternative, the application of the Treaty’s Most-Favored Nation Clause in relation to
Respondent’s first objection, the Tribunal now turns to this claim.

ii. The Application of the Most-Favored Nation Clause (Article IV(2)) to
Dispute Settlement Provisions

Article IV(2) of the Treaty provides that

In all areas governed by this Treaty, such treatment shall not be less favourable
than that accorded by each Contracting Party to investments made within its
territory by investors of a third country.

In their Request for Arbitration, Claimants invoked the MFN clause in Article IV(2), and
asserted that this clause entitles them to use “the more favorable treatment accorded to investors
under, for example, the U.S.-Argentina BIT.”"*4 In their Memorial on the Merits, Claimants
again invoke the MFN clause, reference the U.S.-Argentina BIT as an example, and assert that
they have complied with all the requirements of the U.S.-Argentina BIT in order to access ICSID
arbitration.'*° Then, in their Counter-Memorial, Claimants assert that they rely on the dispute
settlement provisions of the Australia-Argentina BIT.'*° Article 13(1) of the Australia-Argentina
BIT provides that

 

Reports 1963, p. 28), as well as in Nicaragua Jurisdiction, when it stated: ‘It would make no sense to require
Nicaragua now to institute fresh proceedings based on the Treaty, which it would be fully entitled to do.’ (I.C.J.
Reports 1984, pp. 428-429, para. 83.)"); Application of the C. ion on the Prevention and Punish of the
Crime of Genocide (Croatia v. Serbia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 2008, p. 412 (hereinafter
“Croatia v. Serbia’) § 85, Exhibit C-579 (“The Court observes that as to the first of these two arguments, given the
logic underlying the cited jurisprudence of the Court deriving from the 1924 Judgment in the Mavrommatis
Palestine Concessions case (Judgment No. 2, 1924, P.C.LJ., Series A, No. 2), it does not matter whether it is the
applicant or the respondent that does not fulfill the conditions for the Court’s jurisdiction, or both of them — as is
the situation where the compromissory clause invoked as the basis for jurisdiction only enters into force after the
proceedings have been instituted. What matters is that, at the latest by the date when the Court decides on its
jurisdiction, the applicant must be entitled, if it so wishes, to bring fresh proceedings in which the initially unmet
condition would be fulfilled. In such a situation, it is not in the interests of the sound administration of justice to
compel the applicant to begin the proceedings anew— or to initiate fresh proceedings — and it is preferable, except
in special circumstances, to conclude that the condition has, from that point on, been fulfilled.”).
4 REA 4 44,
15 Merits §§] 328-331. Article VII(2) of the U.S.-Argentina BIT provides that in the event of a dispute, the parties
“should initially seek through r and If , the investor may
choose to submit the dispute for resolution before a) the courts or administrative tribunals of the State party to the
dispute; b) in with any previ di or c) in dance with the terms of sub-
provision 3. Article VII(3), in turn, provides that if the investor has not submitted the dispute for resolution under
VII(2)(a) or (b), and that six months have elapsed from the date the dispute arose, the investor may submit the
dispute to ICSID, ICSID Additional Facility, in accordance with UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, or any other
mutually agreed arbitration rules. See Ex. C-3.
189 CM 47; see Ex. C-394.

 

 

Ee

 

28

139.

140.

141.

14

143.

N

Any dispute which arises between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party relating to an investment shall, if possible, be settled amicably.
If the dispute cannot so be settled, it may be submitted, upon request of the
investor, either to:

(a) the competent tribunal of the Contracting Party which has admitted the
investment; or

(b) international arbitration in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article.

Article 13(3), in turn, provides that the investor may choose international arbitration proceedings
through either ICSID, a tribunal governed by UNCITRAL Rules, or any other mutually-agreed
arbitration rules.

1. Position of Respondent

Respondent asserts that the MFN clause of Article IV(2) of the Treaty may not be used by
Claimants to access the dispute settlement provisions of another BIT to which Argentina and a
third State are parties, for the following reasons:

First, Respondent argues that the obligations contained in Article X—to first hold negotiations
and to submit the dispute to the Argentine courts for 18 months—are jurisdictional requirements
that may not be set aside or disregarded.'*”

Second, Respondent characterizes Article X as part of its standing, unilateral offer to arbitrate.'**
This unilateral offer must be accepted by the investor in order for there to be an arbitration
agreement, and in accepting the offer the investor is not entitled to alter the terms of
acceptance.'*” Arbitration is based on consensus, and if there is no respect for the established
conditions of Respondent’s offer, there can be no consent to arbitration.'”

Third, Respondent asserts that as a rule, MFN clauses contained in BITs are neither arbitration
agreements nor part of the treaty’s offer to arbitrate; they cannot therefore be applied to
jurisdictional matters.'*' An MEN clause may only apply to jurisdictional matters where the
State Parties have so consented. This consent, in turn, must be based on the States’ clear and
unequivocal intentions as expressed in the treaty.

Respondent concedes that arbitral tribunals have not adjudicated this issue uniformly. However,
according to Respondent, starting with Maffezini v. Spain, those tribunals applying MFN clauses
to jurisdictional matters have failed to understand that MFN clauses do not extend to dispute
settlement provisions and are not a part of offers to arbitrate.'** Nor do such decisions reflect the

'57 Mem. § 32; Rep. 4 96.
8 Mem, 4 39.

8° Mem. § 40-41.

1 Mem, § 44.

‘5! Mem, § 48; Rep. § 111.
2 Mem, 4 48.

3 Mem, 4 52.

29

144.

145.

146.

147.

majority view on the subject. Indeed, an “equal number of decisions” have rejected recourse to
dispute settlement provisions through a treaty’s MFN clause.'* Respondent also notes that
“many” States have subsequently explicitly limited the scope of the MFN treatment in their
bilateral investment treaties in order to avoid the result reached in Maffezini.'**

Fourth, Respondent argues that the ordinary meaning of the Treaty’s MFN clause does not
demonstrate the two States’ clear and unequivocal intention to apply it to the provisions on the
settlement of disputes, either in accordance with the rules on treaty interpretation in the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties (“VCLT”) or in accordance with the ejusdem generis
principle.

To the contrary, argues Respondent, substantial evidence demonstrates that the States’ intention
was for the MEN clause not to apply to matters of jurisdiction and procedure.'*” Respondent
asserts that the 18-month clause is an essential provision of the Treaty which was specifically
negotiated by Argentina and Spain, as it has been in some—but not all—of Argentina’s BITs.'**
Moreover, at the time the Treaty was concluded, both Parties had entered into other BITs that did
not contain local court preconditions. It is therefore impossible that the Parties intended for the
Treaty’s MFN clause to apply to dispute settlement provisions, because such an interpretation
would have immediately deprived Article X of all effect.’ Finally, Argentina continued to
include 18-month court provisions in subsequent BITs. Such provisions would be meaningless if
it was possible for them to be set aside by applying an MEN clause.'”

Fifth, Respondent asserts that Claimants cannot be allowed to import parts of the dispute
settlement clause of the U.S.-Argentina BIT, which contains a fork-in-the-road provision.'*! The
dispute settlement provisions of the Treaty and the U.S.-Argentina BIT are fundamentally
different and incommensurate. Under the Treaty, if the dispute is not submitted to the Argentine
courts, it may not proceed to international arbitration, whereas under the U.S.-Argentina BIT, if
the dispute is submitted to the Argentine courts, it may not subsequently proceed to international
arbitration. There is no evidence that Spain and Argentina accepted, through the application of
the Treaty’s MFN clause, such a “radical change” in their consent to international jurisdiction.

Sixth, Respondent argues that the authentic interpretation of the State Parties to the Treaty is
clear. In Maffezini, in which an Argentine investor sued Spain under the Treaty, the Kingdom of
Spain adopted the same position as the Argentine Republic is taking in the instant case regarding
the inapplicability of the MFN clause to dispute settlement provisions.'*> The unilateral
interpretation previously made by Spain has now been upheld by the Argentine Republic, thus

'4 Rep, § 132; see also Respondent's Letters of February 17 and September 28, 2012.
15 Mem, 9] 54-55.

146 Mem, $f] 57-68.

57 Mem, § 28.

‘8 Mem. § 70.

Rep. ¥ 113.

150 Rep, § 145.

'S! Mem, 9] 74-75.

'2 Rep, 124.

'S) Mem, 4 83.

30

148.

14

15

151.

152.

©

Ss

making it an authentic interpretation of the Treaty in accordance with Article 31(3) of the
VcLT.'*

Seventh, Respondent asserts that Claimants’ invocation of Article 13 of the Australia-Argentina
BIT, through application of the MFN clause in their Counter-Memorial, is not timely and must
be dismissed.'* To change the instrument upon which they are relying at this point is against the
principle of good faith and should be barred by estoppel.'*° It also severely affects Respondent’s
right to defend itself and turns the jurisdiction of this Tribunal into a moving target.'*”

2. Position of Claimants

Claimants assert that through the operation of the MFN provision in Article IV(2) of the Spain-
Argentina BIT, they may rely on the procedural rules on admissibility of investor-state claims
contained in Article 13 of the Australia-Argentina BIT, rather than the provisions set forth in
Article X of the Treaty. Article 13 of the Australia-Argentina BIT provides neither the 6-month
nor the 18-month requirements contained in the Treaty’s Article X.!°*

Claimants assert that the text of Article IV(2) of the Treaty clearly indicates that the MFN
standard can be relied on with respect to the waiting periods provided in Article X.'*” The MEN
clause is extremely broad because it encompasses “all matters” dealt with in the Treaty.’ The
third and fourth paragraphs of Article IV list exhaustively those matters that are excluded from
the scope of the MFN clause. This list does not include dispute-resolution provisions or “waiting
periods.”'*! Therefore, on the basis of expressio unius est exclusio alterius, the MEN clause
extends to all matters not expressly excluded.'

Second, according to Claimants, there is no rule that an MFN clause can only be deemed to
apply to dispute settlement provisions where there is evidence that this is the Parties’ clear and
unequivocal intention. Argentina’s reliance on this purported special presumption finds no
support in either the VCLT or international jurisprudence.’

Third, Claimants assert that the case law decided under the Treaty’s MFN clause'™ unanimously
supports Claimants’ position. In each of the four cases, the claimants invoked Article IV(2) to

'4 Rep, § 125.
'S5 Rep, | 104.
156 Rep, | 105.
'57 Rep. § 106.
158 OM 423.
9 OM 424.
10 CM 426.
1) Ig,

12 1g,

16 Rej, | 29-32.

‘4 CM § 29 et seq. Claimants make reference to Maffezini v. Spain; Gas Natural SDG SA vy. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No ARB/03/10), Decision on Jurisdiction , June 17, 2005 (hereinafter, “Gas Naturalv. Argentina”),
Exhibit C-260; Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Intergua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17), Decision on Jurisdiction, May 16, 2006 (hereinafter “Suez
InterAguasv. Argentina”), Exhibit C-400; Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and Vivendi
Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19), Decision on Jurisdiction, August 3, 2006

 

31

15

Oo

15

15

an

156.

#

displace the provisions of Article X. In each case, the tribunals emphasized the inclusive “in all
matters” language of Article IV(2). And in each of the cases, the tribunals did not deny
application of the MEN clause to the “waiting periods.”'®

. Fourth, Claimants note that a number of other arbitral tribunals have permitted claimants to

invoke MEN clauses of their applicable BITs in order to bypass waiting periods. In those cases,
despite the fact that the base BIT contained waiting periods, the tribunals granted the claimants
the more favorable treatment of other treaties.'°° According to Claimants, only three'®’ out of a
total of thirteen tribunals have rejected the invocation of an MFN clause to displace an 18-month
local court precondition to international arbitration.'** However, the MFN clauses of the
applicable BITs in Wintershall, ICS and Daimler were substantially different from that of the
present Treaty’s MEN clause, and the facts of those cases were also substantially different.'°

Claimants argue that Respondent is wrong to characterize the jurisprudence on this issue as being
sharply divided.'” Instead, Respondent included in its case survey a series of decisions which
are distinguishable from the instant case.'’! Those cases did not concern use of the MFN clause
to bypass procedural or admissibility-related waiting periods (which depend solely on the action
and filing date of the claimant). Instead, the claimants in those cases sought to use the MFN
clause to extend the Tribunal’s substantive jurisdiction.'”

. Fifth, Claimants assert that Respondent’s treaty negotiation practice demonstrates that it did not

include waiting periods in many of its BITs. Only 10 of the 50 BITs referenced in Respondent’s
Memorial provide for the 18-month period. This further confirms that such provisions are
procedural and technical in nature, and do not relate to matters of fundamental public policy for
Argentina.

Sixth, according to Claimants, Respondent has not put forth an “authentic interpretation” of the
text based on the State Parties’ subsequent practice. What Argentina is claiming is not an

 

(hereinafter “Suez Vivendiv. Argentina”), Exhibit C-255 (note that Suez Vivendi v. Argentina was consolidated with
AWG Group Ltd. v. Argentine Republic, a related arbitration brought under the UNCITRAL Rules).
165 CM 429.
165 CM 4 44.
‘© Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/14), Award, December. 8, 2008
(hereinafter “Wintershall v. Argentina”), LA AR 7; ICS v. Argentina, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2010-9, Award
on Jurisdiction, February 10, 2012; Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/1), Award, August 22, 2012 (hereinafter “Daimler v. Argentina”).
168 CM 4 51; Claimants’ Letter of February 28, 2012, at 2; Claimants’ Letter of October 9, 2012, at 1.
° CM 452, 57; Claimants’ Letter of February 28, 2012, at 2, 4; Claimants’ Letter of October 9, 2012, at 2-4.

Rej. 44.
"! According to Claimants (CM 59), these cases include Salini Costruttori SpA and Italstrade SpA v. Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/13), Decision on Jurisdiction, November 15, 2004 (hereinafter
“Saliniv. Jordan”), LA AR 21; Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24),
Decision on Jurisdiction, February 8, 2005 (hereinafter “Plamav. Bulgaria”), LA AR 11; Telenor Mobile
Communications v. Republic of Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/15), Award, September 13, 2006, (hereinafter
“Telenor v. Hungary”), Exhibit C-254; and Vladimir Berschader and Moise Berschader v. The Russian Federation
(SCC Case No. 080/2004), Award, April 21, 2006 (hereinafter “Berschader v. Russian Federation”), LA AR 19.
'™ CM 459.
"CM 471.
4 Rei. 4 60.

32

15

15

a

od

interpretation of Article IV of the Treaty, but rather an amendment to the text of Article IV.'
Even if it was an interpretation, Respondent must demonstrate an agreement and/or consistent
subsequent practice between the State Parties as to the interpretation. Respondent, however,
relies only on statements made by Spain in the context of a single dispute, the Maffezini case, in
which Spain was the respondent.'”°

Seventh, the Claimants believe there is no contradiction in using Article 7(3) of the U.S.-
Argentina BIT because of its fork-in-the-road choice between local court remedies and
international arbitration. Claimants themselves have not submitted the present dispute to the
Argentine courts; rather, it was Respondent that submitted the question of compensation to local
courts. Claimants, therefore, would not be precluded from going to international arbitration
under the U.S.-Argentina BIT.'””

Finally, Claimants assert that their invocation of the Australia-Argentina BIT is not untimely.
According to Claimants, they relied on the MFN clause even before they submitted their Request
for Arbitration.'”* Moreover, Claimants relied on the Australia-Argentina BIT for the first time
in their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction because Argentina itself only raised its objection with
respect to the 6-month waiting period for the first time in its Memorial on Jurisdiction.'”

3. Analysis of the Tribunal

b. The Ordinary Meaning of Article IV

159. Article IV, captioned “Treatment,” provides as follows:

1. Each Party shall guarantee in its territory fair and equitable treatment of
investments made by investors of the other Party.

2. In all matters governed by this Agreement, such treatment shall be not less
favourable than that accorded by each Party to investments made in its territory
by investors of a third country.

3. Such treatment shall not extend, however, to the privileges which either Party
may grant investors of a third State by virtue of its participation in:
-a free trade area;
-a customs union;
-a common market;
-a regional integration agreement; or

54g,
% Rej. 4 61.
"7 Rei. 21.
"8 Rej. 4.14. See Claimants’ letter to the President of the Argentine Republic, November 20, 2008, Ex. C-265 (“In
that sense, pursuant to Article X(4) of the Treaty, and invoking its Article IV(2) which provides investors with the
right to invoke the most favoured nation treatment that the Republic has granted to investors of other countries, as
for example to the investors of the United States or the Republic of Chile”).

Rej. | 56.

33

An organization of mutual economic assistance by virtue of an agreement
concluded prior to the entry into force of this Agreement, containing terms
analogous to those accorded by that Party to participants of the said organization.

4. The treatment accorded under this article shall not extend to tax deductions or
exemptions or other analogous privileges granted by either Party to investors of
third countries by virtue an agreement to prevent double taxation or any other tax
agreement.

160. On its face, the language of Article IV(2) is broad. It applies to “‘all matters governed by this

16

Agreement.” Its language in Spanish is no less broad: “en todas las materias regidas por el
presente Acuerdo.” “All,” or “todas,” is unambiguously inclusive. “Matters,” or “materias,” is
also broad and general. While not decisive on the issue, it is illustrative to note that other BITs
have confined the application of MFN treatment to a smaller category of activities than Article
IV(2)’s broad “all matters” language. The Argentina-Germany BIT,” for example, contains
more constrained provisions:

- Article 3(1): None of the Contracting Parties shall accord in its territory to the
investments of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party or to
investments in which they hold shares, a less favorable treatment than the
treatment granted to the investments of its own nationals or companies or to the
investments of nationals or companies of third States.

- Article 3(2): Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject nationals or
companies of the other Contracting Party, as regards its activities related to
investments, to a less favorable treatment than the one accorded to its own
nationals and companies or to nationals and companies of third States.'*!

. The MFN clause in the Italy-Jordan BIT at dispute in Salini v. Jordan also contains a more

limited scope of application:

- Both Contracting Parties, within the bounds of their own territory, shall grant
investments effected by, and the income accruing to, investors of the Contracting

'89 The Argentina-Germany BIT was at issue in Wintershall, Hochtief, Daimler and Siemens AG v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8), Decision on Jurisdiction, August 3, 2004 (hereinafter “Siemens v.
Argentina”), Exhibit C-330.

'S! Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Republic of Argentina for the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments, April 9, 1991, UNTS Vol. 1910, 171 (1996)(emphasis added). Ad Article 3 in
the Protocol to the Argentina-Germany BIT provides as follows: “(a) The following shall more particularly, though
not exclusively, be deemed “activity” within the meaning of article 3, paragraph 2: the management, utilization, use
and enjoyment of an investment. The following shall more particularly, though not exclusively, be deemed
“treatment less favourable” within the meaning of article 3: less favourable measures that affect the purchase of raw
materials and other inputs, energy or fuel, or means of production or operation of any kind or the marketing of
products inside or outside the country. Measures that are adopted for reasons of internal or external security or
public order, public health or morality shall not be deemed “treatment less favourable” within the meaning of article

34

162.

163.

Oo

164.

165.

Party no less favourable treatment than that accorded to investments effected by,
and income accruing to, its own nationals or investors of Third States.!

Likewise, the MFN clause in the U.K.-Argentina BIT at dispute in JCS v. Argentina contains a
more limited scope of application:

- Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investors of the other
Contracting Party, as regards their management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or
disposal of their investments, to treatment less favourable than that which it
accords to its own investors or to investors of any third State.'**

In the BITs referenced above, MFN treatment only applies to qualifying “investments,”
“activities related to investments,” “income accruing” to investors, or “management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal” of those investments. Such terms are narrower than
the general “matters” language contained in the Treaty. Moreover, none of these other BITs
contains the simple and expansive “all” of the Treaty.'**

Other subsections of Article IV of the Treaty contain explicit carve-outs to the application of
MEN treatment. Article IV(3) provides that MFN treatment shall not extend to the treatment
either Party extends to third states by virtue of their common participation in a free trade area, a
customs union, a common market, a regional integration agreement or an organization of mutual
economic assistance. Article IV(4) provides that MFN treatment shall not extend to the
treatment either Party extends to investors of third states concerning tax deductions or similar
provisions. The issues of jurisdiction and admissibility are absent from this list of explicit carve-
outs.

The Tribunal notes that investment arbitration jurisprudence on the ordinary meaning of MFN
provisions has not been entirely consistent, even when the same BIT is concerned. Notably, each
of the cases that has addressed Article IV(2) of the Treaty has concluded that the broad language
of the MEN clause applies to the Article X dispute resolution provisions.'** However, other

 

18 Salini v. Jordan, Decision on Jurisdiction, at | 66.

'8 ICS vy. Argentina, Award on Jurisdiction, at {| 65. As noted above, the JCS Tribunal determined that the MFN
clause of the U.K.-Argentina BIT did not apply for purposes of dispute settlement provisions, In reaching this
conclusion, the tribunal pointed to 1) the state of the law at the time the BIT was concluded and the expectation of
the parties were such that, without express language in the treaty, treatment could not have extended to dispute
resolution mechanisms (| 285-296); 2) the contextual language established that “treatment” only referred to the
“management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of” an investment (4 297-304); and 3) the phrase “in its
territory” imposes a territorial limitation that excludes international arbitration, which is in the nature of an extra-
territorial dispute settlement procedure (4{] 305-309).

1S See also Maffezini v. Spain, Decision on Jurisdiction, at 4 60 (noting that with respect to the BITs concluded by
Spain, “the only one that speaks of “all matters subject to this Agreement” in its most favored nation clause, is the
one with Argentina, All other treaties, including those with Uruguay and Chile, omit this reference and merely
provide that “this treatment” shall be subject to the clause, which is of course a narrower formulation.”).

'85 Maffezini v. Spain, Decision on Jurisdiction, at {| 64; Gas Natural v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at {4 30-
31; Suez InterAguas v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at {| 54-55; Suez Vivendi v. Argentina, Decision on
Jurisdiction, at 4] 54-55. See also Impregilo v. Argentina, Award, at § 108, in which the majority of arbitrators
determined that the broad “all matters” language of the MFN clause in the Italy-Argentina BIT extended to dispute
settlement provisions. Note, however, that one of the arbitrators, Brigitte Stern, dissented on this particular point.
Impregilo v. Argentina, Concurring and Dissenting Opinion, at 4 46 et seq.

 

35

16

167.

an

tribunals have disagreed. The Belgium/Luxembourg-Soviet Union BIT applied by the tribunal in
Berschader contained “all matters” language similar to that of the Spain-Argentina BIT.
Nonetheless, the Berschader tribunal rejected the claimant’s attempt to use the MFN clause. In
contrast with the tribunals in Maffezini, Gas Natural and the Suez cases, the tribunal in
Berschader noted that “all matters covered by the present treaty” cannot be interpreted
“literally,” because the MFN clause is not capable of being applied at all to several of the matters
covered by the BIT.'*°

Likewise, the tribunals that have adjudicated the MFN provisions of the Argentina-Germany BIT
have not uniformly interpreted the ordinary meaning of that BIT’s MEN provisions.'*’ The
tribunals in Siemens and Hochtief concluded that the language of the MFN provisions (language
that is less sweeping and more particularized than the MFN clause in the instant Treaty)
implicitly included dispute settlement provisions.'** However, the tribunals in Wintershall and
Daimler disagreed.'*” The Wintershall tribunal determined that the BIT’s MEN clause in
Article 3 “does not mention that the most-favoured-nation “treatment” as to investments, and
investment related activities, is to be in respect of “all relations” or that it extends to “all
aspects” or covers “all matters in the treaty.”””'°° The Daimler tribunal, for its part, determined
that the language of the Argentina-Germany BIT’s MFN clause was territorially limited, that
“treatment” was intended by the parties to refer only to treatment of the investment, and that the
BIT did not extend MEN treatment to “all matters” subject to the BIT."

(a) Jurisprudence Concerning the Application of MFN Clauses to
Dispute Settlement Provisions

This Tribunal is not bound by the decisions of previous tribunals, and it makes its determination
on a basis of the text of the Treaty and the factual and legal arguments put forth by the Parties.
Nonetheless, the Tribunal acknowledges that it does not adjudicate in a vacuum. The issue of
application of MFN clauses to dispute settlement provisions has been addressed by numerous
panels and in numerous factual scenarios. Moreover, both Parties have made extensive analyses
and arguments on the case law on this issue. Below, the Tribunal will identify the points on
which the different case holdings can be distinguished, and the points on which there is
analytical disagreement between tribunals.

'8 Berschader v. Russian Federation, Award, at § 192.

'87 The MEN clauses of the Germany-Argentina BIT are contained in numerous provisions. See | 158 of this
decision, supra.

188 Siemens v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at 85 et seq.; Hochtief v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at
4| 66 et seq. (note, however, the dissenting opinion of Christopher Thomas, Q.C., on this particular issue. Hochtief v.
Argentina, Separate and Dissenting Opinion, at 4] 45 et seq.

'89 Wintershall v. Argentina, Award, at § 162 et seq.; Daimler v. Argentina, Award, § 179 et seq. (note, however, the
dissenting opinion of Charles N. Brower on this particular issue). Daimler v. Argentina, Dissenting Opinion, at {| 17

 

et seq.
'°0 Wintershall v. Argentina, Award, at § 162 (emphasis added).
'! Daimler v. Argentina, Award, at § 224, 230-231, 236.

36

i. UNCTAD’s Case Taxonomy

168. As noted by Claimants, UNCTAD’s recent publication on Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment”

169.

170.

171.

categorizes the cases addressing the application of MFN clauses to jurisdiction in a way that
largely corresponds with each case’s outcome.

UNCTAD sorts the cases into two categories. In the first category, claimants “have invoked the
MEN treatment clause to override a procedural requirement that constitutes a condition for the
submission of a claim to international arbitration.”"?> UNCTAD refers to this category of cases
as concerning “admissibility” requirements. In the second category, claimants “have attempted
to extend via MFN the jurisdictional threshold, i.e., the scope of the mandate of the arbitral
tribunal, beyond that specifically set forth in the basic treaty. This use of the MFN clause would
give the arbitral tribunal jurisdiction to hear issues or disputes that the basic treaty does not
contemplate or expressly excludes.”'°* UNCTAD refers to this category of cases as concerning
“scope of jurisdiction.”

UNCTAD identifies the following cases as fitting within the “admissibility” '° category:
Maffezini, Siemens, Gas Natural, National Grid, 6 Suez InterAguas, AWG Group!” and
Wintershall. To these cases, the Tribunal would add Impregilo,'°* Hochtief ,'”
Abaclat2° ICS2°' and Daimler?” In each of these cases, the claimant was required under the
respective terms of its BIT’s dispute settlement provisions to seek a remedy before a local court
of the host State for a period of time before bringing arbitration. Each of the claimants in these
cases sought to use its BIT’s MFN clause in order to “borrow” a dispute settlement provision
from another treaty that did not contain a local court requirement as a precondition of arbitration.
With the exceptions of Wintershall, ICS and Daimler the claimants’ arguments were successful.
UNCTAD identifies the following cases as fitting within the “scope of jurisdiction” category:
Salini, Plama, Telenor, Berschader, and Tza Yap Shum. 4 Tn these cases, the claimants sought
to use the MFN clause to expand the scope of jurisdiction under their applicable BIT. In Salini,
the claimant attempted to use the MFN clause to bring in contract claims before an ICSID
tribunal. In Plama, the claimant attempted to use the MFN clause to broaden the scope of

'2 “Most Favoured-Nation Treatment,” UNCTAD Series on International Investment Agreements II at 66-67,
UNCTAD/DIAE/IA/2010/1, January 24, 2011 (hereinafter “UNCTAD MFN Treatment”), Exhibit C-563.

13 Td. at 66.

14 Td. at 67.

5 Id. at 67-73.

196 National Grid Ple v. Argentine Republic (UNCITRAL), Decision on Jurisdiction, June 20, 2006, (hereinafter
“National Grid v. Argentina”), LA AR 25.

57 See Suez Vivendi v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction.

'8 Impregilo v. Argentina, Award, at § 79 et seq. (note, again, the dissenting opinion of B. Stern on this issue).

'9 Hochtief v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at {| 59 et seq. (note, again, the dissenting opinion of C. Thomas
on this issue).

2 Abaclat v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, at {{] 568 et seq.

291 ICS y, Argentina, Award, at {| 243 et seq.

2 Daimler v. Argentina, Award, §§ 179 et seq.

203 UNCTAD MEN Treatment, at 73-79.

4 Tza Yap Shum v. The Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/6), Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence,
June 19, 2009.

 

37

17:

173.

17.

175.

2.

a

4,

on

jurisdiction beyond that of its applicable BIT, which only provided jurisdiction to resolve issues
of compensation in the case of an expropriation.2°° Similarly, in Telenor and Berschader, the
claimants attempted to use the MFN clause to broaden jurisdiction beyond their BITs, which
only provided jurisdiction over expropriation claims.” In each of these cases, the claimant’s
attempts to rely on the MFN clause were rejected by the tribunals. UNCTAD identified only one
case within this category, RosInvestCo, that departed from this trend.?””

Looking at the taxonomy above, it is clear that Claimants’ position falls within the
“admissibility” category of cases cited by UNCTAD, in which tribunals normally rule in favor of
applying the MFN clause. Claimants are seeking to apply the Treaty’s MFN clause in order to
dispense with the requirements of Article X, namely, that the Parties attempt to amicably settle
their dispute for 6 months, and that their dispute be subjected to the local courts of Argentina for
18 months.

ii. Other Interpretative Issues

In addition to looking at case law according to outcome, the Tribunal considers the interpretative
assumptions underlying tribunals’ decisions. At least one of the tribunals in the “admissibility”
cases identified by UNCTAD looked for evidence that the State parties did not intend to include
dispute settlement provisions within the scope of the MFN clause. As the tribunal in Gas
Natural stated, “Unless it appears clearly that the state parties to a BIT or the parties to a
particular investment agreement settled on a different method for resolution of disputes that may
arise, most-favored-nation provisions in BITs should be understood to be applicable to dispute
settlement.”

In contrast, tribunals in the “scope of jurisdiction” cases have taken as a starting principle that
the extension of the MFN clause to cover jurisdictional issues cannot be assumed. As the
tribunal in Plama set forth, “an MFN provision in a basic treaty does not incorporate by
reference dispute settlement provisions in whole or in part set forth in another treaty, unless the
MEN provision in the basic treaty leaves no doubt that the Contracting Parties intended to
incorporate them.” According to Plama, “an arbitration clause must be clear and
unambiguous and the reference to an arbitration clause must be such as to make the clause part
of the contract (treaty).””"°

Likewise, tribunals have differed in their views on whether dispute settlement provisions
constitute a vital protection of foreign investors. Many of the tribunals following the Maffezini

205 Plama v. Bulgaria, Decision on Jurisdiction, at §] 186-187.

2° Telenor v. Hungary, Award, at {] 81-83, Berschader v. Russian Federation, Award, at §§ 151-153.

2°” RosInvestCo UK Ltd. v. The Russian Federation, Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce,
Case No. 079/2005, Award, October 2007; see also UNCTAD MEN Treatment, at 79. The Russian Federation v.
RosInvestCo UK Ltd, Case No. T24891-07, Order, Stockholm District Court, November 9, 2011. In a default
judgment rendered November 9, 2011, the Stockholm District Court declared that the arbitration agreement, which
had arisen through the claimant’s request for arbitration under the Russia-U.K. BIT, did not give the arbitrators
jurisdiction to determine whether Russia had undertaken measures of expropriation against the claimant. .

°°8 Gas Natural Decision on Jurisdiction, at § 49.

2 Plama v. Bulgaria, Decision on Jurisdiction, at 4 223.

210 Id. at 4218. See also Berschader v. Russian Federation, Award, at 181.

38

Decision on Jurisdiction have determined that these provisions are a fundamental part of the
“treatment” or protection owed to investors:

“Notwithstanding the fact that the basic treaty containing the clause does not refer
expressly to dispute settlement as covered by the most favored nation clause, the
Tribunal considers that there are good reasons to conclude that today dispute
settlement arrangements are inextricably related to the protection of foreign
investors, as they are also related to the protection of rights of traders under

. p 992
treaties of commerce.”*"!

“From the point of view of the promotion and protection of investments, the
stated purposes of both the Argentina-Spain BIT and the Argentina-U.K. BIT,
dispute settlement is as important as other matters governed by the BITs and is an
integral part of the investment protection regime that the respective sovereign
states have agreed upon.” 2

“(T]he Tribunal considers that the critical issue is whether or not the dispute
settlement provisions of bilateral investment treaties constitute part of the bundle
of protections granted to foreign investors by host states. As the Tribunal sees the
history, first of the ICSID Convention, which created the institution of investor-
state arbitration, and subsequently of the wave of bilateral investment treaties
between developed and developing countries (and in some instances between
developing countries inter se), a crucial element — indeed perhaps the most
crucial element — has been the provision for independent international arbitration
of disputes between investors and host states. The creation of ICSID and the
adoption of bilateral investment treaties offered to investors assurances that
disputes that might flow from their investments would not be subject to the
perceived hazards of delays and political pressures of adjudication in national
courts.”

“Access to [dispute settlement] mechanisms is part of the protection offered under

the Treaty. It is part of the treatment of foreign investors and investments and of
. 2

the advantages accessible through a MFN clause. |

“Article X[’s dispute settlement provision] is a benefit conferred on investors and
designed to protect their interests and the interests of a State Party in its capacity
as a host State party to a dispute with an investor: it is a protective right that sits
alongside the guarantees against arbitrary and discriminatory measures,
expropriation, and so on!

21! Maffezini v. Spain, Decision on Jurisdiction, at § 54 (emphasis added).
2! Suez InterAguas v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at | 57 (emphasis added).

213 Gas Natural v. Argentina, De

sion on Jurisdiction, at | 29 (emphasis added).

    

214 Siemens v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at {| 102 (emphasis added).

21s

Hochtief v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at | 68 (emphasis added).

39

176.

177.

17

179.

~

The above tribunals do not share the concern expressed by Respondent, and by a few other
tribunals, that such an approach disregards the fundamental requirement that a State Party
consent to jurisdiction. For example, the tribunal in Telenor noted, “[W]hat has to be applied is
not some abstract principle of investment protection in favour of a putative investor who is not a
party to the BIT and who at the time of its conclusion is not even known, but the intention of the
States who are the contracting parties.”*'* Because consent is a basic requirement for
jurisdiction over a State, and because the terms of consent to arbitration are negotiated on an
individual basis for each BIT, these tribunals were unwilling to assume, without explicit
language by the State Parties on this point, that the jurisdictional requirements of one BIT can be
borrowed by an investor of a third State.

The position taken by each tribunal may very well be influenced to an extent by the facts before
it. The tribunals that considered whether MFN protection could extend to admissibility
requirements were not asked to extend the reach of MFN protection to provisions that would
change the arbitral forum or the scope of matters that could be subjected to arbitration. In
contrast, the tribunals that considered the latter issue were not required to assess whether MFN
protection could cover admissibility requirements.

In Plama, for example, while the tribunal held that the MFN clause could not be used to
substitute the BIT’s dispute settlement mechanism in favor of ICSID arbitration, it also
expressed a certain sympathy for the Maffezini tribunal:

The decision in Maffezini is perhaps understandable. The case concerned a
curious requirement that during the first 18 months the dispute be tried in the local
courts. The present Tribunal sympathizes with a tribunal that attempts to
neutralize such a provision that is nonsensical from a practical point of view.
However, such exceptional circumstances should not be treated as a statement of
general principle guiding future tribunals in other cases where exceptional
circumstances are not present.”!”

What the Plama tribunal characterized as Maffezini’s “curious” 18-month local court
requirement has not proved to be as “exceptional” as the Plama tribunal suggests. Since the
Plama decision on jurisdiction was issued, numerous tribunals have addressed the application of
MEN clauses to 18-month local court requirements.”'* In any case, the Plama tribunal’s dictum
suggests a view that treatment of a requirement may vary depending on the nature of that
requirement.

Moreover, the tribunal in Maffezini itself was careful to stress that its decision was bounded by
“important limits arising from public policy considerations.””'? Maffezini included within these
limits BIT clauses that provide for a specific arbitration forum, such as ICSID, and that provide

216 Telenor v. Hungary, Award, at | 95. See also Wintershall v. Argentina, Award, at { 179, which notes with
approval the tribunals that do not “regard as sufficient a consent of the Host State to international arbitration which
would be a merely presumed consent.”

2!7 Plama v. Bulgaria, Decision on Jurisdiction, at 224.

218 See, e.g., Gas Natural, National Grid, Suez Vivendi, Suez InterAguas, Impregilo, Hochtief, Abaclat.

2! Maffezini v. Spain, Decision on Jurisdiction, at § 56.

  

40

180.

181.

182.

183.

for a highly institutionalized system of arbitration with precise rules of procedure.” For the
Maffezini tribunal, such provisions cannot be replaced or bypassed.

To be sure, several tribunals have criticized the Maffezini public policy limits. The Plama
tribunal noted that Maffezini did not specify the origin or the basis of these “public policy”
considerations.”! The Salini and Wintershail tribunals asserted that the limits identified by
Maffezini did not do enough to prevent the risk of treaty shopping.*” Nonetheless, a significant
number of tribunals have either directly applied Maffezini’s four limitations or have used its
discussion as the basis for an inquiry into what public policy considerations animated the State
parties’ formulation of their MFN clauses. For example, in Plama and Berschader, the tribunals
found it significant that the BIT was concluded while the State respondents were still communist
governments, favoring limited dispute settlement and limited protections for investors.””?

In light of the above discussion, the Tribunal is cognizant of the concern articulated by numerous
tribunals that the reach of the MFN clause not extend beyond appropriate limits. The Tribunal
also acknowledges that the nature of the dispute settlement provisions that Claimants seek to
replace via the Article IV(2) MEN clause is relevant to any such determination.

In that respect, the Tribunal finds it significant that Claimants have not requested that the
Tribunal apply the MFN clause in order to replace the Treaty’s provisions on the arbitral forum
or rules. Nor have Claimants requested that the Tribunal apply the MFN clause in order to
broaden the scope of legal issues that may be adjudicated through arbitration. Instead, they have
argued that the procedural requirements of Article X, namely the negotiation and local court
requirements, may be bypassed in favor of the more procedurally limited dispute settlement
provisions of the Australia-Argentina BIT.

(b) The dispute settlement clause of the U.S.-Argentina BIT and
the Australia-Argentina BIT

As a final argument, Respondent has protested Claimants’ invocation of the U.S.-Argentina BIT
and the Australia-Argentina BIT on two grounds. First, Respondent asserts that Claimants
cannot take advantage of the U.S.-Argentina BIT’s dispute settlement provisions because there is
no advantage to take; the U.S.-Argentina BIT’s fork-in-the-road provisions (providing for either
a local court remedy or an arbitral remedy) are not better, but simply constitute a different
settlement regime. Second, Respondent argues that Claimants’ invocation of the Australia-

22 Id, at 4 63.

22 Plama v. Bulgaria, Decision on Jurisdiction, at 221.

2 Salini v. Jordan, Decision on Jurisdiction, at 4115, Wintershall v. Argentina, Award, at § 182.

3 Plama y. Bulgaria, Decision on Jurisdiction, at ] 195-97; Berschader v. Russian Federation, Award, at §§ 200,
203.

24 The relevant provisions of Article VII of U.S.-Argentina BIT, on dispute settlement include the following:
Article VII(2): “In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute should initially seek a resolution
through consultation and negotiation. If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national or company concerned
may choose to submit the dispute for resolution: (a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party | that is a
party to the dispute; or (b) in dance with any applicable, previously agreed disput or
(c) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.” Article VII(3) provides that “Provided that the national or
company concerned has not submitted the dispute for resolution under paragraph 2 (a) or (b)... the national or

 

41

184.

185.

186.

187.

Argentina BIT is inadmissible because it was untimely presented, and that modifying the dispute
settlement procedures invoked “severely affects” its right to defend its interests.

On the first point, it is clear that the U.S.-Argentina BIT (and the Australia-Argentina BIT) has
advantages that the Treaty does not; under the former, it is possible to access arbitration with
fewer procedural preconditions. Moreover, Claimants have not already selected the local court
“fork” under the U.S.-Argentina BIT. Article X(3)(a) of the Treaty is satisfied when either the
Respondent or the investor brings the suit before a local court. Here, it was the Respondent that
brought a suit against Interinvest in the Argentine courts relating to the expropriation of the
Argentine Airlines. As such, it is clear that Claimants have not already “picked” the local court
“fork,” thereby forfeiting their access to arbitration.

On the second point, the Tribunal notes that Respondent does not point to any actual or
perceived harm, nor is there any evidence that Claimants’ switch from relying on the U.S.-
Argentina BIT to relying on the Australia-Argentina BIT would have any effect on the
arguments made by Respondent. As such, the Tribunal rejects this argument.

To conclude, the Tribunal finds that Claimants may equally rely on the Article IV(2) MFN
clause of the Treaty to make use of the dispute resolution provisions contained in Article 13 of
the Australia-Argentina BIT. The broad “all matters” language of the Article [V(2) MFN clause
is unambiguously inclusive. Moreover, applying the dispute settlement provisions contained in
Article 13 of the Australia-Argentina BIT would not change the scope, the forum or the rules
applicable to this arbitration. Claimants have satisfied the requirements of Article 13 of the
Australia-Argentina BIT, which states that any dispute “shall, if possible, be settled amicably,”
and which permits an investor to submit the dispute to international arbitration in the event that it
cannot be settled. Claimants have clearly complied with this provision.

ce Second Jurisdictional Objection: Claimants’ Standing
i. Claimants’ Investment in Interinvest and the Argentine Airlines
1. Position of Respondent

Respondent argues that Claimants’ claims, which are based on the alleged violation of rights
held by Interinvest and the Argentine Airlines, are derivative and indirect in nature. As such,
argues Respondent, Claimants do not have standing to bring this claim. On one hand, Claimants
are claiming rights that are vested in third parties (namely, Interinvest and the Argentine

 

company may choose to consent in writing to the submission to the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration” to
ICSID, to the ICSID Additional Facility, in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration or to any other mutually
agreed arbitration institution. Note that Respondent’s argument could be extended to the Australia-Argentina BIT
invoked by Claimants. Article 13 of the Australia-Argentina BIT provides that “1. Any dispute which arises
between a Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party relating to an investment shall, if
possible, be settled amicably. If the dispute cannot so be settled, it may be submitted, upon request of the investor,
either to: (a) the competent tribunal of the Contracting Party which has admitted the investment; or (b) international
arbitration,” including to ICSID, in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules or to any other mutually
agreed arbitration institution.

»° Australia-Argentina BIT, art. 13, Exhibit C-394.

 

42

18:

18

19

191.

ge

9.

S

Airlines) who are not parties to this arbitration.”° On the other hand, Claimants have only

indirect shareholdings in these companies, which they hold through the Spanish intermediary
company Air Comet S.A.””

According to Respondent, Claimants bring two different indirect claims. The first of these
claims relates to Interinvest S.A.’s rights. Respondent asserts that Interinvest, an Argentine
company which is not protected under the Treaty, is the only entity with legal standing to
complain of the alleged expropriation of the Argentine Airlines’ shares.”* The second of these
claims relates to the rights of ARSA and AUSA. Here, according to Respondent, Claimants also
invoke a set of rights which are not held by them.’ The only entities with legal standing to
complain of the adoption of airfare regulatory measures are ARSA and AUSA, the parties whose
assets were affected by the measures.”*°

Respondent asserts that it did not adopt any measure to the detriment of Claimants’ own
investment. None of Claimants’ shares in Air Comet were expropriated. Furthermore, the rights
deriving from those shares were not infringed, nor was their exercise limited in any way.”"!
There is a distinction between the rights of companies and of their shareholders,”” and it would
be unjust to award compensation to a person or an entity that is not entitled to obtain redress.**

According to Respondent, Claimants’ indirect claim is inadmissible under the Treaty, which
affords no protection to indirect shareholders.** Respondent notes that while some investment
treaties refer to the “direct or indirect” control of assets or provide for the protection of both the
rights and interests of investors, the Treaty does not allow indirect claims to be filed.’*°
Moreover, in defining “investment,” the Treaty includes property and rights acquired by foreign
investors."*° It does not protect the mere shareholders’ interests in the companies in which they
have an indirect shareholding.”*”

Furthermore, Respondent asserts that Claimants’ indirect claim is inadmissible under general
international law.”** It is a general principle of law that the company’s shareholders cannot
complain of alleged violations of rights vested in the company in which they hold shares.” The
decisions rendered by the International Court of Justice have consistently maintained that, under
international law, shareholders are not entitled to assert the rights of the companies in which they
have a shareholding. In other words, derivative claims are not valid.“° Respondent notes that

26 Rep, 222.
27 Rep. § 223.
28 Mem. ¢ 108.
29 Mem. § 114.
29 Mem. § 116.
3! Mem. $f 102, 115.
2 Mem. 4123.
233 Mem. § 126.
24 Rep. 4 172.
35 Mem. § 153.
26 Mem. § 159.
37 Mem. § 160.
238 Mem § 128.
2° Mem. § 130.
4 Rep. 175.

4B

192.

193.

o

19.

195.

x

the European Court of Human Rights has also rejected the admissibility of indirect actions.”4!
Under international law, indirect or derivative claims can only be accepted where a treaty has
expressly provided for indirect or derivative actions,”

Respondent also argues that the ICSID Convention does not allow indirect or derivative claims
to be filed. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention lays down the objective criteria for a dispute to
fall within the jurisdiction of the Centre.? When the ICSID Convention was drafted, the
drafters considered allowing controlling shareholders of domestic companies to bring claims to
enforce the rights of the companies in which they held shares.“* However, the drafters
ultimately rejected this possibility. Instead, they drafted Article 25(2)(b), which provides for the
possibility of a domestic but foreign-controlled company to sue its own State when the parties
agreed that the domestic company would be treated as a national of the other State due to its
foreign control.“

It is further Respondent’s view that neither the ICSID Convention nor international investment
law or customary or general international law provide for a jurisprudence constante principle.”*°
The judicial decisions cited favorably by Claimants that concern BITs permitting indirect
shareholding are not applicable to this dispute.”4”

Respondent also urges that Claimants’ indirect claim is inadmissible under Argentine law.
Argentine law does not allow indirect claims to be filed, and the corporation is the only entity
empowered to defend its own interests.“* Respondent notes that general international law and
the Treaty require that the Tribunal apply the domestic law of the State in which the shareholder
holds interests in order to decide on the rights that may be invoked by a shareholder under
international law.” It has been recognized in ICSID decisions that domestic law is relevant for
the purposes of determining ICSID’s jurisdiction.”

Respondent makes a number of policy claims regarding Claimants’ standing. It asserts that
Claimants disregard the set of legal relationships existing among the companies which are part of
the corporate chain connecting Teinver S.A. to the Argentine Airlines, as well as those
relationships between these companies and their own creditors.”*' If the Tribunal were to order
Respondent to pay Claimants compensation, then Claimants would be allocated payments that
should have been prioritized for the Argentine Airlines’ creditors and the remaining intermediary
companies. Claimants, as the last link in this chain of creditors and shareholders, would be
unjustly enriched.”

4! Mem. ¢ 136.
2? Mem. § 141.
°8 Mem. § 165.
24 Mem. § 167.
> Mem. § 168.
46 Rep. 4 195.
7 Rep. § 204.
48 Mem. § 182.
> Rep. 4 238.
259 Rep. § 240.
35! Mem. 4] 196-98.
232 Mem. § 205.

44

196.

197.

198.

199.

200.

Furthermore, Respondent asserts that there is an actual risk of double or multiple claims, because
there is nothing to prevent Interinvest S.A. from filing an action before the Argentine courts in
parallel with the present arbitration.“ Multiple claims could potentially lead to a situation of
double recovery. In addition, allowing Claimants to file this indirect action erroneously
implies that shareholders have a right to the preservation of the value of their holdings, when in
fact, the value of stockholdings varies according to the fluctuations in corporate assets.”°>

Finally, Respondent points out that only Teinver S.A. currently owns shares in Air Comet.
Between October 2007 and December 2009, both Transportes de Cercanias and Autobuses
Urbanos transferred all of their shares in Air Comet to Teinver. As such, Transportes de
Cercanias and Autobuses Urbanos are neither direct nor indirect shareholders in the Argentine
companies.”*°

2. Position of Claimants

Claimants assert that they are not claiming rights held by Interinvest and/or the Argentine
Airlines. Rather, they are claiming in their own name and on their own behalf, on the basis of
the rights conferred on them by the Treaty and the ICSID Convention.” Claimants reiterate that
their own claims include the following actions taken by Respondent: 1) formally expropriating
Claimants’ investment in the Argentine Airlines without any compensation; 2) effectuating the
creeping expropriation of their investments in the Argentine Airlines; 3) failing to treat
Claimants’ investment in Interinvest and the Argentina Airlines fairly and equitably; 4)
impairing by unjustified and discriminatory measures the management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment, extension or disposal of Claimants’ investments in Interinvest and the Argentine
Airlines; 5) failing to provide the required protection to Claimants’ investments in Interinvest
and the Argentine Airlines; and 6) violating specific obligations entered into with respect to
Claimants’ investment in Interinvest and the Argentine Airlines.”

Claimants argue that these claims arise directly from their rights under the Treaty, that is, the
protection that Respondent owes directly to Claimants as Spanish investors in Argentina.
Claimants are thus not asserting contractual rights held by the Argentine companies in question.
Claimants are entitled to claim that Respondent’s conduct was in breach of the Treaty, regardless
of whether that conduct may also amount to a breach of Interinvest’s or the Argentine Airlines’
rights under local law.”

Claimants assert that claims by both direct and indirect shareholders for measures impacting
their shareholdings are admissible under the Treaty and the ICSID Convention, and are well
recognized in international law. First, Claimants assert that claims by shareholders for harm
caused to their shareholdings have been unanimously upheld by ICSID tribunals. While

53 Mem. § 209.

24 Mem. § 211.

55 Mem. § 212.

256 Rep. 4 154.

357 OM 220.

258. CM 4221.

259 CM 4 225, Rej. § 246.

45

20

20:

203.

N

Respondent asserts that a shareholder may not recover damages for harm caused to its “shares
and other forms of participation” in companies incorporated in the host-State, virtually all ICSID
tribunals that have decided similar objections unanimously have rejected them. Moreover,
ICSID tribunals have acknowledged that an indirect shareholder could claim damages “suffered
by a company in which it holds shares,” even though the applicable BIT did not contain the
“direct or indirect” wording.”“!

. Second, Claimants argue that claims by indirect shareholders are admissible under the wording

of the Treaty. While the Treaty does not contain “direct or indirect” language, Article I(2) of the
Treaty provides that “any kind of assets, such as property and rights of every kind [including]
shares and other forms of participation in companies” constitute qualifying investments. Under
this inclusive formulation, indirect shareholders may pursue claims for measures affecting their
“shares and other forms of participation in companies.” This conclusion was also reached by
other ICSID tribunals interpreting Article 1(2) of the Treaty." Furthermore, the object and
purpose of the Treaty is to create favorable conditions and to promote capital flow and
investment between investors of the Contracting Parties. This aim is equally pursued through
direct and indirect ownership of investments.”

Third, Claimants argue that international law does not support Respondent’s position, and that
Argentina’s reliance on ICJ case law is misplaced. According to Claimants, the question
addressed in those cases was not whether the shareholders had a cause of action under
international law, but whether, under customary international law, a State could exercise
diplomatic protection over its nationals, who are shareholders with investments affected by a
third State. The right of a particular State to exercise diplomatic protection in favor of its
nationals—even if they are shareholders in foreign companies—is irrelevant to the issue of
whether an investor has standing under a BIT to claim for measures impacting its shareholding in
local companies.”

Fourth, in Claimants’ view, Respondent misinterprets Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.
Article 25(2)(b) is not applicable to the present dispute, since the Treaty lacks any reference to
the Parties’ consent to treat a company incorporated in the host State and controlled by a foreign
investor as a foreign investor for the purposes of the Treaty. Claimants have not even attempted
to invoke 25(2)(b) as a source of jurisdiction.” Furthermore, Argentina misunderstands the
negotiating history of this provision. The issue before the drafters concerned whether to allow
local companies access to the ICSID Convention in certain situations such as when they were
owned by foreign nationals.”

20 CM 226.
261 CM 4] 246; Rej. | 229 (citing Siemens v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at 7 137).
202

M 4234.

263,

 

'M §[ 235 (citing Gas Natural v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at § 34).
264 OM 237.

265 CM 4 248-50.

266 OM 4 252.

267 OM 259.

268 Rej. § 282.

46

204.

205.

206.

207.

208.

Fifth, Claimants assert that Argentine corporate law is irrelevant to decide whether Claimants
have jus standi under the Treaty and international law. Claimants’ claims are Treaty claims, and
they do not constitute an exercise of rights under Argentine domestic law.?”

Sixth, Claimants argue that Argentina’s policy concerns are immaterial to the outcome of the
current arbitration and, in any case, are misleading and unfounded. Claimants assert that none of
Respondent’s policy objections has any support in the Treaty, the ICSID Convention or
international law, including investment case law.?” Respondent’s concerns about preferential
treatment over third parties (including creditors), double recovery and double-payment pertain to
the merits of the dispute, not to the jurisdictional stage.

Finally, Claimants assert that Transportes de Cercanias and Autobuses Urbanos are legitimate
parties to the arbitration. Transportes de Cercanias and Autobuses Urbanos transferred their
shares to Teinver on December 10, 2009, but this transfer has no impact on their standing in the
current arbitration. The relevant dates for determining ICSID jurisdiction are the dates of
consent and/or registration of the dispute.?” Transportes de Cercanias and Autobuses Urbanos
indirectly held shares in Interinvest and the Argentine Airlines both when consent was perfected
and at the time the Request for Arbitration was submitted?”

3. Analysis of the Tribunal

In maintaining that the Claimants do not have standing because they are merely “indirect”
shareholders in Interinvest and the Argentine Airlines, Respondent advances two distinct legal
arguments.” The first argument addresses the question whether Claimants, as shareholders, can
recover damages for harms that were inflicted upon the companies in which Claimants invested
(i.e., Interinvest and the Argentine Airlines), as opposed to harms that were inflicted directly
upon Claimants themselves. This will be referred to below as Respondent’s “derivative claim”
argument. Respondent’s second legal argument concerns the question whether Claimants must
be direct shareholders, in the sense that they must directly own the shares in Interinvest, rather
than through an intermediary subsidiary such as Air Comet. This will be referred to below as
Respondent’s “intermediary investor” argument.

(a) Respondent’s “Derivative Claim” Argument
i. Article I of the Treaty

According to Respondent, the Treaty provides no protection to “derivative” shareholders. While
it protects the shareholders’ direct rights arising out of the shares, it does not, in Respondent’s
view, protect the shareholders’ “mere interests” in the companies in which they have the
shareholding. Respondent asserts that while some investment treaties may provide for the

2 CM 265.
2 CM § 269.
2" CM 4 270.
2? Rej. $300.
ig

274 Rep, 4 222-23.

47

209.

21

211.

S

protection of both the rights and interests of investors, the Treaty does not provide for this
possibility. Respondent contrasts the language of Article I(2) with the analogous provision of
the U.S.-Argentina BIT, which extends protections to “a company or shares of stock or other
interests in a company or interests in the assets thereof?" Respondent also notes that the U.S.-
Argentina BIT, in contrast to the Treaty, protects investments that are “owned or controlled
directly or indirectly.”?”

While Respondent is correct to note that Article I(2) of the Treaty does not explicitly include or
exclude “indirect” investments from its coverage, the broad and inclusive language of this
provision suggests that “indirect” shareholders are protected by the Treaty. Article I(2) sets forth
the definition of “investments” that are protected under the Treaty:

The term “investments” shall mean any kind of assets, such as property and rights
of every kind, acquired or effected in accordance with the legislation of the
country receiving the investment and in particular, but not exclusively, the
following:

-shares and other forms of participation in companies;

This definition is broad and inclusive. “Investment” encompasses “any kind of assets,”
“property and rights of every kind,” and the list of qualifying investments that follows the
definition is exemplary rather than exclusive. Other ICSID tribunals interpreting the Treaty have
noted the breadth of this definition. The tribunal in Gas Natural noted that “while the ICSID
Convention does not define the term ‘investment,’ the BIT clearly does so in an inclusive way,”
and that the Treaty’s definition “follows the almost universal practice of BITs to define the
subject of the Treaty as comprehensively as possible.”?””

The other ICSID tribunals that have looked at the Treaty have found Article I(2)’s broad
language to implicitly permit the kinds of claims that Claimants have advanced. In the Suez
Vivendi and Suez InterAguas arbitrations, Argentina raised an identical argument, asserting that
the shareholder claimants had no standing to bring the dispute because they were alleging a
merely “derivative” injury based on the injury to the company in which they hold shares, rather
than a direct injury claimants had suffered. The tribunals in these cases rejected this argument,
finding that claimants had a valid “investment” under the terms of the Treaty:

“(U]nder the plain language of these BITs, the Tribunal finds that Suez’s as well
as AGBAR’s and InterAguas’ shares in APSF are “investments” under the
Argentina-France and Argentina-Spain BITs. These shareholders thus benefit
from the treatment promised by Argentina to investments made by French and
Spanish nationals in its territory. Consequently, under Article 8 of the French
treaty and Article X of the Spanish treaty, these shareholder Claimants are entitled
to have recourse to ICSID arbitration to enforce their treaty rights. Neither the

73 Mem. § 162.
276 Mem. § 152.
27 Gas Natural v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at §§] 33-34.

48

212.

213.

21

215.

#

Argentina- France BIT, the Argentina-Spain BIT, nor the ICSID Convention limit
the rights of shareholders to bring actions for direct, as opposed to derivative
claims. This distinction, present in domestic corporate law of many countries,
does not exist in any of the treaties applicable to this case.”””*

It is notable that the Suez tribunals described the Treaty as not limiting the rights of shareholders
to bring “derivative” claims. The tribunals explicitly rejected the notion that there is any
“default” under international investment law that restricts what kinds of claims can be brought.
In this respect, the tribunals refused to take their cues from domestic corporate law. Under this
logic, the fact that the Treaty does not explicitly permit “derivative” actions is irrelevant, because
the very concept of a “derivative” claim is alien to the Treaty or the ICSID Convention.

The tribunal in Gas Natural reached a similar result as the Suez tribunals, using a slightly
different reasoning. In Gas Natural, Argentina again argued that claimant, a shareholder in an
Argentine company that was granted concessions, lacked standing to bring its claim. The
tribunal disagreed. After finding claimant’s shareholdings in the Argentine company to
constitute a valid “investment” under the Treaty, it found the claimant to have standing because
“a claim asserting the impairment of the value of the shares held by Claimant as a result of
measures taken by the host government gives rise to an investment dispute within the meaning of
Article X of the BIT[.]”” The tribunal in Gas Natural accepted that a diminution in the value
of the claimant’s shares constituted an injury under the Treaty. Like the Swez tribunals, the Gas
Natural tribunal was simply not perturbed by the possibility that this claim was merely
“derivative” of an injury to the Argentine company.”*”

In light of the language of Article I(2), this Tribunal finds that the Claimants have standing based
on their investments in the Argentine Airlines. Respondent’s subsequent legal arguments, which
draw on ICJ case law, the ICSID Convention and Argentine law, assert that the “derivative”
distinction matters for purposes of interpreting the Treaty. However, none of Respondent’s
arguments, which are analyzed below, undermine the conclusions reached by this Tribunal in
light of the text of Article I(2).

ii. ICJ Case Law

Respondent asserts that general international law does not permit indirect claims brought by
shareholders for harms suffered by the companies in which they hold shares. Specifically,

278 Suez InterAguas v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at § 49; see also Suez Vivendi v. Argentina, Decision on
Jurisdiction, at | 49.

2” Gas Natural v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at §§] 34-35.

°8 The Gas Natural tribunal also implies that it is generally understood that foreign investors acquire rights under
the ICSID Convention and the applicable BIT when they purchase shares in a locally-established corporation:
“Indeed, the standard mode of foreign direct investment, followed in the present case and in the vast majority of
transnational transfers of private capital, is that a corporation is established pursuant to the laws of the host country
and the shares of that corporation are purchased by the foreign investor, or alternatively, that the shares of an
existing corporation established pursuant to the laws of the host country are acquired by the foreign investor. The
scheme of both the ICSID Convention and the bilateral investment treaties is that in this circumstance, the foreign
investor acquires rights under the Convention and Treaty, including in particular the standing to initiate international
arbitration.” (Id. at § 34).

49

21

21

21

21

220.

a

x

ge

©

Respondent points to Barcelona Traction (Belgium v. Spain), in which the ICJ held that Belgium
lacked jus standi to exercise diplomatic protection of Belgian national shareholders with respect
to measures taken by Spanish authorities that affected the Canadian company in which the
Belgian nationals held shares.

Claimants argue that Barcelona Traction is not applicable, because the case’s holding does not
concern the direct standing of shareholders, but only whether a right of a state had been violated
as a result of its nationals having suffered an infringement of their rights as shareholders.
However, in order to determine whether Belgium had a right to bring its case, the Court had to
first address the scope of the Belgian nationals’ rights as shareholders. On that issue, the Court
concluded that “Not a mere interest affected, but solely a right infringed involves responsibility,
so that an act directed against and infringing only the company’s rights does not involve
responsibility towards the shareholders, even if their interests are affected.””*!

Nonetheless, Barcelona Traction’s discussion of shareholder rights is inapposite to the
circumstances of the present case for two reasons.

First, the Court’s decision was made in the absence of the specific framework of a BIT. The
Court noted that such treaties, while not applicable to the Belgian shareholders, could give
shareholders a “direct right to defend their interests against states.”*? This indeed is the
Claimants’ case since they brought their claim under a BIT that explicitly protects investments
they have made in any kind of assets, including shares.

Second, the Court acknowledged that international law was silent on the issue of shareholder
rights. In the absence of any international authority, the Court explicitly resorted to municipal
law to provide the content of the shareholders’ rights.’** In the present case, there is no reason to
resort to municipal law when the treaty instrument provides the source of the rights asserted by
the Claimants.

The Court’s analysis in Barcelona Traction was confirmed in its 2007 judgment on preliminary
objections in Ahmadou Sadio Diallo (Guinea v. DRC), where the Court noted that foreign
investment treaties have taken primacy under international law in adjudicating the rights of
companies and their shareholders:

The Court is bound to note that, in contemporary international law, the protection
of the rights of companies and the rights of their shareholders, and the settlement
of the associated disputes, are essentially governed by bilateral or multilateral
agreements for the protection of foreign investments, such as the treaties for the
promotion and protection of foreign investments, and the Washington Convention
of 18 March 1965 on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States, which created an International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID), and also by contracts between States and foreign
investors. In that context, the role of diplomatic protection somewhat faded, as in

°8! Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Co., Ltd. (Belgium v. Spain), 1970 1.C.J. 3, 4 46 (February 1970).
°* Id. at | 90.
283 Id. at 450.

50

221.

222.

223.

224.

practice recourse is only made to it in rare cases where treaty régimes do not exist
. a?
or have proved inoperative.”

In Diallo, for the reasons explained in Barcelona Traction, the Court was compelled to resort to
the municipal law of the DRC to assess the scope of Mr. Diallo’s rights in the absence of an
applicable BIT.2*°

Contrary to Respondent’s assertions, Barcelona Traction and Diallo do not solidify any general
principle of international law on shareholder rights that should be applied to the present dispute.
Indeed, the Court has taken pains in both Barcelona Traction and Diallo to distinguish these
cases from the situation in which an investment treaty regime would apply.

iii. The ICSID Convention

Respondent argues that the ICSID Convention does not extend protections to claims by
shareholders. Specifically, Respondent asserts that the ICSID Convention’s drafters had
discussed the possibility of allowing shareholders of domestic companies to bring claims, but
that this idea was ultimately rejected in favor of Article 25(2)(b) as it currently stands.

However, there is no evidence that the ICSID Convention’s drafters rejected the possibility of
shareholders bringing “derivative” suits under the ICSID Convention. The history cited by
Respondent only concerns a very specific issue that arose in the ICSID Convention’s
negotiations concerning the nationality of claimants. As Christoph Schreuer explained in his
authoritative Commentary, while the ICSID Convention was intended for disputes between a
State and a national of another State, and not for disputes between a State and its own nationals,
the drafters were aware that the reality on the ground could be more complicated. Many States
required a foreign investor to carry out its activities under a locally incorporated company.”**
While such a company would otherwise be precluded from bringing a suit because of its
nationality, the drafters ultimately created Article 25(2)(b) as an exception to the nationality
requirement to accommodate this situation.

Therefore, to the extent that the drafters “rejected” the suggestion that the local company’s
shareholders be granted standing, it was only in this specific and limited context. Moreover, the
drafters rejected this suggestion in this specific context for practical reasons rather than because
of any general view that “derivative” actions should not be permitted under the ICSID
Convention: they noted that such an arrangement “would not be feasible where shares are widely
scattered and their owners are insufficiently organized.”?*’

284 Case Concerning Ahmadou Sadio Diallo (Republic of Guinea v. Democratic Republic of Congo), 2007 1.C.J. 1
(May 24), 88 (hereinafter “Ahmadou Sadio Diallo case”).

285 Id. see also Ahmadou Sadio Diallo case,, 2010 L.C.J. 1, 4 104. Respondents also cite to European Court of
Human Rights case law. Mem. 136, citing Agrotexim and others v. Greece, 1995 Eur. Ct. H.R. 42, {| 64-66 (LA
AR 47); Tadeusz Olezak v. Poland, European Court of Human Rights, Decision on Admissibility of 7 November
2002, 4 59 (LA AR 54). However, these cases involve an adjudication of a shareholder’s rights under a specific
instrument—the ECHR—that is simply not comparable to an investment treaty.

~ See Christoph Schreuer, The Icsid Convention: A Commentary (2™ Ed.), AR LA-63 at 296.

°87 Id. at 297.

   

 

Sl

225.

226.

a

22)

228.

ra

Finally, Article 25(2)(b) simply is not relevant to these proceedings. Claimants are nationals of
another State, not a local Argentine company. Moreover, in order for Article 25(2)(b) to apply,
the State parties to a BIT must agree to treat locally incorporated companies in this manner.
Spain and Argentina did not so agree in their Treaty or elsewhere.

iv. Argentine Law

Respondent has asserted that Argentine law does not permit “derivative” claims to be brought by
shareholders to recover for injuries done to the companies in which shareholders own shares.
However, Respondent fails to demonstrate how Argentine corporate law is relevant to the issue
of jurisdiction.

Respondent has argued that “it has been recognized that domestic law is relevant for the
purposes of determining ICSID’s jurisdiction.”*** Respondent is, of course, correct that
domestic law may be “relevant” to jurisdictional issues. However, the cases cited by Respondent
address the situation in which domestic law is used by a tribunal to determine a question of fact
in connection to a jurisdictional issue.” In none of these cases does domestic law define the
basic jurisdictional requirements. Instead, domestic law may be used by a tribunal in order to
determine whether a claimant has, as a matter of fact, satisfied the legal requirements for ICSID
jurisdiction that are set by the applicable BIT and the ICSID Convention.

Respondent itself has acknowledged that the jurisdictional requirements for this dispute are
contained in the ICSID Convention and in the applicable BIT. It stated in its Memorial on
Jurisdiction that “The question relating to the competence of this Tribunal consists, therefore, in
determining how a foreign investor may acquire ius standi. The answer to this question may be
found in the Treaty and the ICSID Convention.”””” Furthermore, investment arbitration case law
on this point is well-documented and consistent’! In BG Group pic v. Argentina, for example,
the tribunal rejected the very argument made here by Respondent. As that tribunal noted:

288 Rep. 4 240.

28 See, e.g., Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26), Award, August 2,
2006, 4] 149, 157 (hereinafter “Inceysa v. El Salvador”)(regarding the reliance upon domestic law in order to
determine whether an investment was illegal or fraudulent), LA AR 77; Camuzzi International S.A. v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/2), Decision on Jurisdiction, May 11, 2005, 4 57 (hereinafter “Camuzzi v.
Argentina”), Exhibit C-402 ( “Even though particular aspects relating to the meaning and scope of the rights relating
to the assets are governed by the law and regulations of the Argentine Republic, it must be borne in mind, as noted
above, that as regards jurisdiction the applicable law is that of the Convention and the Treaty.”); see also
Government of the Province of East Kalimantan v. PT Kaltim Prima Coal and others (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/3),
Award, December 28, 2009, § 166 (LA AR 194)(“A review of ICSID cases shows that tribunals do refer to
national law, for instance to determine whether the requirements of nationality or of the existence of an investment
are fulfilled. \n other words, depending on the ci certain jurisdicti i under Article 25 of
the ICSID Convention may sometimes have to be assessed taking into account national law.”)(emphasis added).

2 Mem. § 151.

2°! See, e.g., CMS v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at | 42 (“the applicable jurisdictional provisions are only
those of the Convention and the BIT, not those which might arise from national legislation.”); Azurix Corp. v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Decision on Jurisdiction, December 8, 2003, | 50, Exhibit C-490
(“The jurisdiction of the Centre is determined by Article 25 of the Convention. In addition, the competence of the
Tribunal is governed by the terms of the instrument expressing the parties’ consent to ICSID arbitration. Therefore,
the task of the Tribunal [at the jurisdictional stage] is to assess whether the Claimant’s request for arbitration falls
within the terms of said Article 25 of the Convention and (...) the BIT.”); Siemens v. Argentina, Decision on

   

52

Argentina’s reliance on principles of domestic corporate law must fail. BG’s
claim is made under the Argentina-UK BIT. BG is an “Investor” who has made
an “Investment” in Argentina within the definition of Article 1(a)(ii) of the treaty.
It is further uncontroverted that BG’s shares in [the local companies] are “assets”
within the meaning ascribed to the term in this award pursuant to Argentine law.
The meaning of the BIT is to be determined not by analogy with private law rules,
but from the words of [the] treaty itself and in the light of the purpose which it
sets out to achieve?”

(b) Respondent’s “Intermediary Investor” Argument

229. In addition to its “derivative claim” arguments, Respondent also argues that the Treaty does not

230.

231.

provide standing to an “indirect” shareholder who only owns shares in the allegedly injured
company through an intermediary (in this case, Air Comet).?”? Respondent suggests that because
Article I(2) does not explicitly refer to investments made “directly or indirectly,” indirectly-held
investments are not protected.

Contrary to Respondent’s assertions, nothing in the broad language of Article 1(2) of the Treaty
suggests that shares held through subsidiaries are excluded from coverage under Article 1(2).
Again, the language of Article I(2) affirmatively extends the definition of protected
“investments” to “any kind of assets” and “property and rights of every kind.” For this reason,
the Tribunal considers that Claimants’ shareholdings in the Argentine Airlines constitute
“investments” under Article I(2).

Moreover, the Tribunal’s conclusion is consistent with previous awards. In Siemens v.
Argentina, which concerned a BIT with language very similar to Article I(2) of the Treaty, the
tribunal conducted a close textual analysis of the relevant treaty provision that is instructive to
the present dispute. The claimant in Siemens was a German investor who held shares in an
intermediary company, which in turn held shares in a local company. The tribunal concluded
that the claimant’s investment was covered by the BIT, using the following reasoning:

The Tribunal has conducted a detailed analysis of the references in the Treaty to
“investment” and “investor.” The Tribunal observes that there is no explicit
reference to direct or indirect investment as such in the Treaty. The definition of
“investment” is very broad. An investment is any kind of asset considered to be

 

Jurisdiction, at 4/31 (“Argentina in its allegations has not distinguished between the law applicable to the merits of
the dispute and the law applicable to determine the Tribunal's jurisdiction. This being an ICSID Tribunal, its
jurisdiction is governed by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and the terms of the instrument expressing the
parties’ consent to ICSID arbitration, namely, Article 10 of the Treaty.”).

°° BG Group ple v Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award, December 24, 2007, §{| 203-04, Exhibit C-340.
Note, that the Final Award rendered by the Tribunal was subsequently denied enforcement on different grounds by
the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. The D.C. Circuit decided the appeal on the
basis of arbitrability, finding that BG and Argentina had not agreed to submit the arbitrability question itself to
arbitration, and that the BG tribunal did not have jurisdiction to consider the matter of its own competence. See
Republic of Argentina v. BG Group ple, D.C. Cir., No. 11-7021 (January 17, 2012).

3 Rep, Ff] 207-208.

53

such under the law of the Contracting Party where the investment has been made.
The specific categories of investment included in the definition are included as
examples rather than with the purpose of excluding those not listed. The drafters
were careful to use the words “not exclusively” before listing the categories of
“particularly” included investments. One of the categories consists of “shares,
rights of participation in companies and other types of participation in
companies.” The plain meaning of this provision is that shares held by a German
shareholder are protected under the Treaty. The Treaty does not require that there
be no interposed companies between the investment and the ultimate owner of the
company. Therefore, a literal reading of the Treaty does not support the allegation
that the definition of investment excludes indirect investments.””*

232. Several other ICSID tribunals have found indirectly-held shareholdings to constitute

233.

23

235.

o

4.

an

investments, even where the BIT does not explicitly refer to “directly or indirectly” held
investments. For example, the tribunals in Kardassopoulos v. Georgia??> Cemex v.
Venezuela,°® and Mobil v. Venezuela” addressed similar fact patterns and reached similar
conclusions to that in Siemens.

(c) Respondent’s Policy Arguments

In addition to its legal arguments regarding the issue of the “indirectness” of Claimants’
shareholdings, Respondent has advanced a number of policy arguments against Claimants’
standing in this dispute. According to Respondent, the Claimants are upsetting the hierarchy of
creditor claims against the Argentine Airlines and Interinvest, and it is inappropriate to award
damages to a shareholder rather than to the company that has actually suffered injury.
Respondent also expresses its concern that this suit could increase the risk that Respondent could
be subjected to double-payment, because Interinvest could recover through the Argentine Courts
in addition to any recovery by the Claimants under the Treaty.

Respondent’s assertions could have relevance in the merits proceeding of this case, but
Respondent fails to demonstrate why these assertions are relevant at the jurisdictional stage.
Moreover, Respondent has failed to articulate why these policy issues, as specifically applied to
the facts at hand, should affect the outcome of this jurisdictional objection. Respondent has not
attempted to demonstrate the extenuating nature of the facts here, or to differentiate the facts in
this case from the large number of other ICSID cases in which claimant shareholders were found
to have standing.

To conclude, the Tribunal finds that Claimants, as indirect shareholders, have standing to recover
for damages that were inflicted upon the companies—i.e., Interinvest and the Argentine

254 Siemens v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, at {| 137 (emphasis added).

5 Ioannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, (ICSID Case No ARB/05/18), Decision on Jurisdiction, July 6, 2007, 4]
123, Exhibit C-486, at {J 123-124 (following Siemens).

?°6 Cemex Caracas Investments B.V. and Cemex Caracas II Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/15), Decision on Jurisdiction, December 30, 2010, at {f] 149-58, Exhibit C-482.

7 Mobil Corporation and others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/27), Decision on
Jurisdiction, June 10, 2010, at $f] 162-65, Exhibit C-483.

54

236.

237.

238.

239.

Airlines—in which Claimants invested. The ordinary language of Article I(2) is designed to
protect “all assets”—including indirect shareholdings. The Tribunal also finds that Claimants
are not deprived of standing by the fact that their investments were made through their
subsidiary, Air Comet.

ii. Claimants’ Other Investments
1. Positions of the Parties

Claimants assert that they have made several qualifying investments under Article I(2) of the
Treaty, and that these investments in Argentina go beyond the ownership and control of “shares
and other forms of participation in companies.”””* Specifically, Claimants assert that they have
also made the following qualifying investments under the Treaty: (a) significant capital
contributions to expand and support the Argentine Airlines’ operations, (b) concessions to
operate in the Argentine airlines sector, (c) investment in management and know-how, (d) rights
relating to aircraft, engines, a flight simulator, etc., and (e) movable and immovable property.””

Respondent disputes that these investments qualify under Article 1(2). Specifically, Respondent
asserts that Claimants have not substantiated by evidence their capital contributions, nor would
such contributions confer any rights other than those vested in shareholders. Respondent
asserts that Claimants do not directly hold concessions to operate in the Argentine airlines sector
and that they did not invest in other property and rights already within the possession of the
Argentine Airlines at the time of investment.*”' Finally, Respondent asserts that Claimants have
not demonstrated that they actually made investments in the Argentine Airlines’ aircrafts, or that
the Argentine Airlines were the recipients of aircrafts ordered by Astra, an Irish subsidiary of
Claimants, nor would these activities constitute qualifying “investments” under the Treaty.*””

2. Analysis of the Tribunal

The Tribunal will not address Claimants’ other alleged investments at this time. The Tribunal
has concluded that Claimants’ indirect shareholdings constitute an “investment” under the
Treaty. Consequently, Claimants have standing to bring this dispute. The Tribunal may
consider Claimants’ other alleged investments at the merits stage of these proceedings.

iii. Claimants’ Third-Party Funding Agreement and Assignment of Award
Proceeds

During the hearing on jurisdiction, Respondent raised its concern that Claimants’ and Air
Comet’s recent reorganization proceedings in Spain could affect Claimants’ authorization to
bring this case°* In its post-hearing submissions, Respondent has also questioned two

28 Rej. Ff 199-202.

* CM 44 217-219; Letter of June 16, 2011, at 3.

5 Rep. 4 163.

*! Rep. 4 166.

5” Rep. 4] 164.

% See, e.g., Tr. Day 3 at 495, 505 and 578, Respondent’s Letter of June 23, 2011, 48 et seq.

55

241

241.

242.

243.

244.

S

agreements entered into by Claimants subsequent to commencing this arbitration. One of these,
a Credit Assignment Agreement among Teinver, Transportes de Cercanias and Autobuses
Urbanos as the assignors and Air Comet as the assignee (the “Assignment Agreement”), dated
January 18, 2010, concerned the assignment to Air Comet of the proceeds of a potential award in
this arbitration. The other, a Funding Agreement made between Claimants and Burford Capital
Limited, an investment company headquartered in Guernsey, and effective as of April 14, 2010
(the “Funding Agreement”), concerned the financing of Claimants’ litigation expenses in this
arbitration.

The Parties do not dispute that Air Comet commenced voluntary reorganization proceedings on
April 20, 2010. Nor do they dispute that the Claimants each commenced voluntary
reorganization roughly a year later, with Teinver on December 23, 2010, Autobuses Urbanos on
January 28, 2011, and Transportes de Cercanias on February 16, 2011.°°°

The Parties also acknowledge that Claimants concluded the Assignment Agreement, by which
Claimants agreed to assign to Air Comet proceeds of an eventual award in this case.°° In
addition, the Parties acknowledge that Claimants executed the Funding Agreement with
Burford.*°’ However, the Parties disagree as to the effects of these agreements on Claimants’
standing in this case.

1. Position of Respondent

As a procedural matter, Respondent asserts that Claimants concealed their reorganization
proceedings as late as April 12, 2011, and that Claimants were under a duty to make registration
documents and court filings available to the Tribunal and Respondent.

Respondent asserts that Claimants’ assignment to Air Comet of proceeds from an eventual award
in this case was “fraudulent,” because it was made on a date “suspiciously close” to Air Comet’s
reorganization, and “gratuitous,” because it was not backed by consideration.” Respondent
asserts that Claimants should have notified Respondent as the alleged debtor of the agreement.*!°
Moreover, Respondent argues that the agreement contravenes Spanish public policy on
collection preferences, and that consequently the parties to the agreement were required to obtain
judicial authorization from the Spanish courts in order to proceed.*"!

As for the assignment itself, Respondent maintains that Claimants assigned to Air Comet a right
they never owned, because Claimants themselves lack jurisdiction to bring this dispute and claim
a remedy. Such an assignment would violate the general principle of law under which “a person

* Claimants’ Letter of June 16, 2011, at 16-17.

5% Td., at 12, Respondent’s Letter of June 23, 2011, 49.

5% Claimants’ Letter of June 16, at 16; Respondent’s Letter of June 23, 2011, 4 17.

>” Claimants’ Letter of June 30, 2011, at 5-6; Respondent’s Letter of June 23, 2011, | 23. While the Funding
Agreement became effective on April 14, 2010, the transaction contemplated by it only closed on July 4, 2010. See
Ex. RA-160, Schedule 1 No. 3(a) and Claimants’ Letter of June 30, 2011, at 6.

5° Respondent’s Letter of June 23, 2011, 44 10, 15.

3 Td. at J 18.

3! Td. at 419.

5 Td. at 9 27.

56

245.

24,

24

24

24

an

6.

a

8.

©

can transfer no greater right than he owns[.]”*'? Moreover, Claimants’ lack of standing is clear
in light of the very text of the assignment to Air Comet and related court-filed writings, which
note that “AIR COMET is the one that is in fact affected by the expropriation since it owns
100% of Interinvest S.A., which in turn owns 100% of Aerolineas Argentinas’ shares...”*!>

Regarding Claimants’ Funding Agreement with Burford, Respondent asserts that it is Burford,
and not Claimants, that is the real party interested in this arbitration. According to Respondent,
Burford has “not only invoked that it holds a purported “common legal interest” with the
Claimants in this proceeding, but it is also the only party that would seem to be potentially
benefited in the case of a hypothetical award against Argentina in the instant case.”*!

According to Respondent, Burford does not meet the basic jurisdictional requirements under the
ICSID Convention. Burford is not an investor in Argentina, nor is it a company organized in
Spain that could invoke the Treaty relied upon by Claimants to institute this arbitration
proceeding.*!> Thus, allowing Burford to benefit from a dispute settlement mechanism
authorized under the Treaty is contrary to the object and purpose of the latter, and would
impermissibly bypass the limits of Argentina’s and Spain’s consent to arbitral jurisdiction.*"°

2. Position of Claimants

Claimants contest Respondent’s assertion that Claimants have purposefully concealed
information from this Tribunal regarding the voluntary reorganizations. Claimants assert that
they have disclosed in good faith all relevant facts during this arbitration proceeding, and that the
allegedly “concealed” reorganizations have no bearing on this Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Likewise,
the Assignment Agreement and the Funding Agreement are irrelevant to the question of the
jurisdiction of this Tribunal.*!”

According to Claimants, Respondent’s assertions are misplaced for the following reasons: (i)
Claimants’ standing to bring this arbitration is exclusively governed by the ICSID Convention
and the Treaty; (ii) under the ICSID Convention, the Treaty and international law, the relevant
date for the purposes of determining the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is the date of the institution of the
proceedings; and (iii) both the Spanish reorganization proceedings and the Assignment
Agreement post-date the institution of the proceedings.*'*

Claimants emphasize that Article 25 of the ICSID Convention defines “national of another
contracting state” as “any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State other
than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit such
dispute to conciliation or arbitration”*"” According to Claimants, this principle has been firmly

>! Respondent’s Letter of October 26, 2011, at 13.
83 Td. at 12-13.

5'4 Respondent’s Letter of June 23, 2011, 4 39.

515 Td. at 442.

5! Respondent’s Letter of October 26, 2011, at 9-10.
*'7 Claimants’ Letter of June 30, 2011, at 10.

*'§ Claimants’ Letter of June 16, 2011, at 9-11.

5!9 Td, at 8 (emphasis added).

57

250.

251.

252.

253.

254.

established by ICSID tribunals, and moreover, is a firmly established rule in international
adjudication.”

Claimants note that consent was perfected on November 20, 2008, that the Request for
Arbitration was filed on December 11, 2008, and that registration of their Request by ICSID took
place on January 30, 2009. No events between those dates would affect the Claimants’ standing
in these proceedings.*! Each of Respondent's allegations occurred after the institution of these
proceedings, and is therefore irrelevant to the issue of jurisdiction. Specifically, the Assignment
Agreement between Claimants and Air Comet was executed January 18, 2010. The Funding
Agreement between Claimants and Burford took effect on April 14, 2010. Claimants’ Spanish
reorganization proceedings occurred starting in late December, 2010.

With respect to Claimants’ Spanish reorganization proceedings, Claimants note that these
proceedings were voluntarily initiated, and that Claimants have kept the administration and
disposition powers over their assets. Claimants assert that under Spanish law, they do not
need the express authorization of their respective reorganization administrators to continue any
arbitration proceedings, including the instant one before ICSID, unless they were to withdraw, to
accept a counter-claim, or to settle the dispute." Nonetheless, their respective reorganization
administrators have provided letters demonstrating their knowledge and acquiescence to continue
this arbitration.

Claimants argue that their assignment of the rights of the net proceeds of this arbitration to Air
Comet has no bearing on Claimants’ standing to bring this arbitration. The Assignment
Agreement is a valid transaction which remains in full force and effect. Even if the Assignment
Agreement was declared null and void, such circumstance would not undermine Claimants’
standing to bring the present claim against Argentina. Claimants’ position as Argentina’s
creditor would remain unaltered, and Air Comet would be the only one affected by the
declaration of nullity.*?°

Furthermore, Claimants argue that Respondent incorrectly characterizes the Air Comet
assignment as an “assignment of a claim.” In fact, Claimants have executed an assignment of the
rights to the net proceeds that may be obtained from an eventual award against Argentina.
Claimants remain the legal holders of the claim against Argentina.”° Under the assignment, Air
Comet is to receive any proceeds that may remain after deducting all payments.*””

Finally, with respect to the Burford Funding Agreement, Claimants submit that Burford is not a
party to the arbitration. The Claimants did not sell or transfer the claim to Burford. Rather,
Burford funds the arbitration in exchange for a percentage of the recovery in the case of a
successful claim. Such financing agreements are frequently made, and Respondent has pointed

9 Td. at 8-9.

“1 Td. at 9.

2 Td, at 14.

3 dat 15.

*4 Td, at 15, Claimants’ Letter of June 30, 2011, at 16.
*5 Claimants’ Letter of June 30, 2011, at 11.

326 Ty

7 Td. at 11-12.

58

255.

256.

to no investment award or decision finding third-party funding to be illegitimate, unlawful or
inappropriate.***

3. Analysis of the Tribunal
(a) Existence of Jurisdiction

First, international case law has consistently determined that jurisdiction is generally to be
assessed as of the date the case is filed:

- The Court recalls that, according to its settled jurisprudence, its jurisdiction must
be determined at the time that the act instituting proceedings was filed. Thus, if
the Court has jurisdiction on the date the case is referred to it, it continues to do so
regardless of subsequent events.”

- [I]t is generally recognized that the determination of whether a party has standing
in an international judicial forum, for purposes of jurisdiction to institute
proceedings, is made by reference to the date on which such proceedings are
deemed to have been instituted. ... This is not only a principle of ICSID
proceedings, it is an accepted principle of international adjudication that
jurisdiction will be determined in the light of the situation as it existed on the date
the proceedings were instituted. Events that take place before that date may affect
jurisdiction; events that take place after that date do not. The ICJ developed
cogent case law to this effect in the Lockerbie case. (...) The consequence of this
tule is that, once established, jurisdiction cannot be defeated. It simply is not
affected by subsequent events. Events occurring after the institution of
proceedings (...) cannot withdraw the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the dispute.”

Second, to the extent that Respondent’s standing argument is based on the assertion that
Claimants transferred their rights or interests in this case to Burford after initiating this
arbitration, this argument is unavailing. As Schreuer notes, “ICSID Tribunals have applied [the
principle that jurisdiction is determined as of the date of filing] consistently. In some cases the
claimants had divested themselves of or had transferred the rights that had given rise to the
dispute after the institution of proceedings. Tribunals have rejected the argument that, as a
consequence, claimants in the proceedings were no longer the real parties in interest.”**! In
CSOB v. Slovakia, the claimant had, subsequently to filing the arbitration, assigned its arbitral
claims against the respondent to a third party. The tribunal in CSOB held that

*8 Claimants’ Letter of June 30, 2011, at 5-7.

°° Case Concerning the Arrest Warrant of 11 April 2000 (Democratic Republic of Congo v. Belgium), Judgment,
February 14, 2002, 1.C.J. Reports 2002, p. 3, 4 26, Ex. C-762.

5° Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3),
Decision on Jurisdiction, November 14, 2005, $f 60, 61 and 63. See also Schreuer, The Icsid Convention: A
Commentary, Ex. C-761 at 92 (“It is an accepted principle of international adjudication that jurisdiction will be
determined by reference to the date on which the judicial proceedings are instituted. This means that on that date all
jurisdictional requirements must be met. It also means that events taking place after that date will not affect
jurisdiction.”).

1 Td, at 92.

59

257.

258.

it is generally recognized that the determination whether a party has standing in
an international judicial forum for purposes of jurisdiction to institute proceedings
is made by reference to the date on which such proceedings are deemed to have
been instituted. Since the Claimant instituted these proceedings prior to the time
when the two assignments were concluded, it follows that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction to hear this case regardless of the legal effect, if any, the assignments
might have had on Claimant’s standing had they preceded the filing of the case.*”

Third, to the extent that Respondent’s characterization of the Assignment Agreement as
“fraudulent” implies that Claimants committed illegalities under Spanish law with respect to the
performance of their investment, this argument is similarly unavailing. In Hamester v. Ghana,
the respondent argued that claimant had committed illegalities in the performance of the
investment.**? Like the Treaty, the BIT in Hamester required the investment to be legally
acquired. However, the Tribunal found that subsequent illegality did not affect its jurisdiction
over claimant’s dispute.

Respondent has not countered these cases with any opposing case law, nor has it seriously sought
to distinguish the facts in the current dispute. As a factual matter, Respondent does not contest
Claimants’ assertion that consent to this arbitration was perfected on November 20, 2008, that
the Request for Arbitration was filed on December 11, 2008, and that registration took place on
January 30, 2009. Nor does Respondent assert that any of the events it alludes to occurred prior
to this time. Ordered chronologically, the subsequent events referred to by Respondent in its
pleadings occurred as follows:

e January 10, 2010: Assignment Agreement executed assigning potential
proceedings of an award under this arbitration from Claimants to Air Comet

e March 23, 2010: Reorganization proceedings of Air Comet commence

e April 14, 2010: Funding Agreement executed between Burford and Claimants
regarding the financing of this arbitration

e April 24, 2010: Agreement executed between King & Spalding, counsel for
Claimants, and Claimants

e June 21, 2010: Agreement between Air Comet and its reorganization
administrators

5% See Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, a.s. (CSOB) v. The Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4), Decision
on Jurisdiction, May 24, 1999, at 31 (hereinafter “CSOB v. Slovak Republic”), Exhibit C-539.

533 Gustav F.W. Hamester GmbH & Co. KG v. Republic of Ghana (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/24), Award, June 18,
2010, at § 96 (hereinafter “Hamester v. Ghana”), LA AR 73.

54 Td. at § 127 (“The Tribunal considers that a distinction has to be drawn between (1) legality as at the initiation of
the investment (“made”) and (2) legality during the performance of the investment. ... Legality in the subsequent
life or performance of the investment is not addressed in Article 10. It follows that this does not bear upon the scope
of application of the BIT (and hence this Tribunal’s jurisdiction) — albeit that it may well be relevant in the context
of the substantive merits of a claim brought under the BIT. Thus, on the wording of this BIT, the legality of the
creation of the investment is a jurisdictional issue; the legality of the investor’s conduct during the life of the
investment is a merits issue. Therefore, in this first step of the analysis of the case relating to jurisdiction, the
Tribunal is only concerned with allegations of fraud in the initiation of the investment, and not with the multiple
allegations of fraudulent conduct during the life of the investment. . . .”).

60

259.

260.

261.

262.

263.

e December 22, 2010: Spanish judge authorizes Air Comet’s reorganization
administrators to consent to the Burford Agreement

e December 23, 2010: Reorganization proceedings of Teinver commence

e January. 28, 2011: Reorganization proceedings of Autobuses commence

e February 16, 2011: Reorganization proceedings of Cercanias commence

Based on the fact that each of the allegations made by Respondent concerns an event—the
Claimants’ reorganizations, the Assignment Agreement and the Funding Agreement—that post-
dates the filing of the arbitration, the Tribunal finds this sufficient grounds to reject Respondents’
objection. The Tribunal will not address Respondent’s remaining allegations regarding the
Assignment Agreement and the Funding Agreement as they concern Claimants’ standing,
without prejudice to further submissions by the Parties in respect of the Respondent’s allegations
in so far as they affect the merits of Claimants’ claims, as appropriate, during the merits stage.

d. Third Jurisdictional Objection: Issues of State Attribution

In their Memorial on the Merits, Claimants have asserted that the administration of Argentine
President Nestor Kirchner was “hostile towards Claimants’ management of the Argentine
Airlines and seemed driven by a desire to ultimately “re-Argentinize” the companies.”**
Claimants assert that the administration took a number of measures that destabilized the legal
and business environment surrounding Claimants’ investment.>°°

In particular, Claimants highlight President Kirchner’s appointment of Mr. Ricardo Cirielli as
Undersecretary of Air Transportation. Claimants describe Mr. Cirielli as a powerful union leader
who had a record—both before and after his appointment—of being openly critical of Claimants’
management of the Argentine Airlines.*” Claimants assert, moreover, that during his
appointment as Undersecretary of Air Transportation, Mr. Cirielli repeatedly lent his support to
the unions and spoke out against airfare increases requested by the Argentine Airlines.

Claimants also assert that the Government of Argentina “implicitly support[ed]” strikes
organized by the Argentine Aeronautical Technical Staff Association (“APTA”) and the
Argentine Airline Pilots Association (“APLA”)8 Claimants point to a 9-day strike that was
organized by APLA and APTA in November 2005. Claimants allege that this strike severely
affected the Argentine Airlines generally and ARSA in particular, affecting around 95,000
passengers, causing nearly 380 flights to be suspended and causing a loss of approximately
US$12 million to the Argentine Airlines.*”

i. Position of Respondent

Respondent argues that Claimants have attempted to attribute responsibility to Respondent for
acts by non-state entities. According to Respondent, Claimants make the following allegations:

*S Merits 4] 164.
°° Id.
87 Id.

°8 Merits 4] 182.
5 Td. 4 170-71, 184-190.

61

264.

265.

266.

1) that Respondent is responsible under international law for the acts of two Argentine labor
unions, APTA and APLA; 2) that Respondent is responsible under international law for the acts
of these unions because they were coordinated by Mr. Ricardo Cirielli to commit acts
detrimental to the Argentine Airlines and thus force the nationalization of the companies; and 3)
that Respondent is responsible for the acts of Mr. Cirielli before he took office as Undersecretary
of Air Transportation in Argentina.*“°

Respondent asserts that it is not responsible for the acts of the two unions, which are not state
organs and do not exercise governmental authority or act on the instructions or under the
direction or control of Respondent.*' Under international law, a labor union is neither a “State
organ” nor does it exercise elements of “governmental authority” as defined in Articles 4 and 5
of the Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts of the International
Law Commission (“ILC Articles”)? Nor have Claimants met the test of attribution set forth in
Article 8 of the ILC Articles. Claimants have failed to prove the existence of an instruction or
order by Respondent to individuals or entities or the existence of the effective control by the
Government over them. Moreover, the “overall control” standard relied on by Claimants is
inappropriate to use as a standard here.** In any case, the evidence submitted by Claimants in
these proceedings does not even rise to the level of satisfying the “overall control” standard.**°

Respondent also argues that the acts committed by Mr. Cirielli prior to his appointment as
Undersecretary or following his period in public office cannot be attributed to the Argentine
Government.*** Moreover, while Claimants also seek to attribute responsibility for the acts
committed by Mr. Cirielli as a public officer based on the control that he allegedly exerted over
the labor unions, Claimants do not point out any act giving rise to the responsibility of States.*4”
The fact that Mr. Cirielli was the Secretary General of APTA before and after becoming a public
officer does not mean that APTA’s actions can be attributed to him.*“*

Finally, according to Respondent, the issue of attribution of responsibility under international
law is jurisdictional in nature.*? Claimants must prove that they have a prima facie case of
attribution of responsibility in order for the subject-matter of the attribution to be argued on the
merits of the case.**’ According to Respondent, case law has held that it is more appropriate to
examine this question at the jurisdictional stage where it becomes apparent that the State is not
involved at all or where the question of attribution may be resolved on the basis of a preliminary
analysis. This is exactly the case here.**!

4 Mem. 4 218.

1 Mem. 4 219.

+ Mem. 4] 224.

8 Rep. fq] 264-265.
4 Rep. 4] 266-269.
5 Rep. 4270.

6 Mem. 4] 221, 230.
7 Rep. 4278.

8 Rep. 4261.
Mem. § 220.

55 Rep. 4245.

55! Rep. 4 247.

62

267.

268.

269.

ii. Position of Claimants

Claimants assert that questions of state attribution should be decided in the merits phase of this
arbitration.’ Several investment law awards have held that whether state attribution is a
question of jurisdiction or of merits is not clear-cut, and depends on the given case. Here,
because the question of state attribution is closely intermingled with the merits, and because it
requires an in-depth analysis of the complex relationships between certain acts and the state, it is
appropriate to resolve these issues during the merits phase.*™*

In the alternative, Claimants argue that the acts of the unions are attributable to Respondent.
There is ample evidence that in various instances, APTA and APLA acted “on the instructions or
under the direction or control” of Respondent. Respondent maintains that the acts of the
unions can only be attributable to the GOA if the government exercised “effective control” over
them. Some tribunals have, however, rejected this “effective control” test in favor of an “overall
control” test, including the Appeals Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia and the European Court of Human Rights.**° Claimants assert that there is
ample evidence that Respondent exerted overall control over the unions, especially through Mr.
Cirielli*’ By appointing Mr. Cirielli as Undersecretary of Air Transportation while allowing
him to simultaneously retain a position as union leader, Respondent created the situation of
control over the union.*** Respondent also, at least implicitly, supported strikes organized by
APLA and APTA, including strikes in November 2005, September and October 2007, and
January 2008, which caused the Argentine Airlines significant harm.*”

Claimants assert that they do not currently seek to attribute to Respondent acts by Mr. Cirielli
made prior to his appointment as Undersecretary. Claimants simply seek to demonstrate that
the Argentine Government knowingly appointed and kept in office an Undersecretary of Air
Transportation who had previously served as the Secretary General of the powerful APTA union
and who was openly hostile to Claimants’ management of the Argentine Airlines as an element
of their allegations of unfair treatment under the Treaty at the hands of the Respondent.**!
Moreover, Respondent does not dispute that the acts by Mr. Cirielli during his tenure as
Undersecretary are attributable to Respondent.’ Citing Article 4 of the ILC Articles, Claimants
assert that such acts are attributable to Respondent, even if they amount to an abuse of power.

 

M ff 291-293.

54 OM 4 298.

555 CM 4299.

556 OM 4g] 299-300.

557 OM 4301; Rej. 9314.
558 Rej. 4314,

59 Id.

5 Rej. 4317.

5! OM 4 305; Rej. 9317.
52 CM 4 302.

58 CM 4303.

63

iii. Analysis of the Tribunal

270. The Tribunal notes that Respondent has not asserted that none of the acts alleged in Claimants’

271.

272.

N

Memorial on the Merits are attributable to the Argentine Government. Rather, Respondent’s
arguments in this regard concern only whether certain alleged acts committed by two Argentine
labor unions and by the Argentine Undersecretary of Air Transportation may be attributed to the
State.

While Respondent asserts that substantial case law supports its position that the question of
attribution is jurisdictional in nature,*™ this case law also recognizes that not all questions of
attribution are identical or involve an identical context. Case law on this subject does support the
conclusion that matters of state attribution should be adjudicated at the jurisdictional stage when
they represent a fairly cut-and-dry issue that will determine whether there is jurisdiction.

For example, the issue before the Maffezini tribunal concerned the question whether the dispute
between the claimant and respondent, a private commercial corporation established by the
Spanish government, constituted an investor-State dispute under the meaning of Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention, or whether it merely constituted a private dispute. The Maffezini tribunal
determined that the question whether the respondent could be considered a state entity was
critical to whether the tribunal could take jurisdiction over the case.“ In CSOB, and also for
purposes of determining whether the dispute constituted an investor-State dispute under Article
25, the tribunal had to determine whether the claimant was a private entity or subject to state
control.

54 Mem. 4] 220.

*6 Maffezini v. Spain, Decision on Jurisdiction, at 4 75. The tribunal noted that the issue of whether the private
commercial corporation was a state entity for purposes of determining the jurisdiction of the Centre and the
competence of the tribunal was necessarily an issue to be decided at the jurisdictional stage of these proceedings.
However, the tribunal noted that the issue of whether the actions and omissions complained of by the claimant were
imputable to the State was an issue that “bears on the merits of the dispute and can be finally resolved only at that
stage.” Id.

5 CSOB y. Slovak Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction, at | 27. In CSOB, the respondent had argued that the
claimant did not meet the requirement of Article 25(1) that a dispute must be between a Contracting State and a
national of another Contracting State. Specifically, the respondent had argued that the dispute was between two
Contracting States because the claimant was purportedly a state agency of the Czech Republic rather than an
independent commercial entity, and because the real party in interest to the dispute was the Czech Republic. The
tribunal concluded, however, that the respondent failed to sustain its contention that the Centre lacked jurisdiction
and the tribunal competence to hear the case on the ground that the claimant was acting as an agent of the State or
discharging essentially governmental activities. See also Hamester v. Ghana, Award, at 141 (“For a jurisdictional
objection to prosper, it has to be such a definitive impediment that the Tribunal has no right to entertain, or enquire
into, the dispute. If, for example, one takes the jurisdictional requirements ratione personae as set out in Article 25
of the ICSID Convention, i.e. that the dispute is a legal dispute between a Contracting State of the ICSID
Convention and investors of another Contracting State, the determinative criteria are clear and easily answered: the
two Parties must respectively be a foreign investor from a Contracting State, and a Contracting State, for jurisdiction
to exist. Here, as jurisdiction depends on the German/Ghana BIT, the Tribunal can deal with a dispute between the
German company Hamester and the Republic of Ghana. In other words, if Hamester was not a German company, or
if the case had been brought against a State other than Ghana, there would evidently have existed a clear
jurisdictional objection. Not all issues, however, are so discrete or easily answered. Many—as is the case with
attribution—entail more complex considerations, which could be characterized both as jurisdictional and relevant to
the merits (and so to be considered only if the Tribunal has jurisdiction). Moreover, each of the alleged acts is
closely connected to the question of whether Respondent has committed substantive violations of the BIT.”).

 

64

273.

274.

275.

Here it is not necessary for the Tribunal to attribute the acts of the unions and Mr. Cirielli to the
Respondent in order for this Tribunal to have jurisdiction over the dispute. The Claimants allege
actions by Argentine government institutions contrary to the Treaty, whose attribution to the
Respondent is not in dispute. Moreover, the issue of the attribution of the acts by the unions and
Mr. Cirielli is not clear-cut. As the tribunal in Hamester noted:

[I]n many instances, questions of attribution and questions of legality are closely
intermingled, and it is difficult to deal with the question of attribution without a
full enquiry into the merits. In any event, whatever the qualification of the
question of attribution, the Tribunal notes that, as a practical matter, this question
is usually best dealt with at the merits stage, in order to allow for an in-depth
analysis of all the parameters of the complex relationship between certain acts and
the State... This approach — to deal with the question of attribution as a merits
question — is particularly appropriate, in the Tribunal’s view in this case. The
Tribunal is not faced here with a situation where it is readily evident that the State
is not involved at all, or where the issue is capable of an answer based upon a
limited enquiry (akin to other jurisdictional issues).*”

Respondent argues, based on Hamester, that it is clear that Respondent is not involved at all with
these alleged acts, and that this issue can be resolved on a preliminary basis. However, the issue
is not as straight-forward as Respondent asserts.

Claimants’ assertions regarding the unions and Mr. Cirielli are closely connected to their
allegation that Respondent has violated the Treaty. Both sets of assertions concern the difficult
and fact-intensive question of whether the Argentine government tolerated or encouraged or
otherwise supported the union activities in question. In the case of the unions, Claimants assert
that Respondent’s support of the unions was part of its broader goal to renationalize the
Argentine Airlines.** In the case of Mr. Cirielli, Claimants seek to demonstrate that Respondent
knowingly appointed and kept in office an individual who was hostile to the Claimants’ presence
in Argentina.*” If the Tribunal were to resolve these issues at this jurisdictional stage, it would
do so only on the basis of the Parties’ arguments from their jurisdictional pleadings. The
Tribunal would not have the benefit of the Parties’ further pleadings on the merits or any further
evidentiary submissions that may touch upon these issues. Given the fact-intensive nature of
Claimants’ allegations, the Tribunal must postpone adjudication of this issue until the merits
phase. Consequently, Respondent’s jurisdiction objection is rejected.

Given this conclusion, it is not necessary for the Tribunal to address in detail the substance of
Respondent’s arguments regarding attribution. The Tribunal does note, however, that
Respondent has requested the Tribunal to expressly declare that the acts of labor unions are not
attributable to the Argentine Republic under Articles 4 or 5 of the ILC Articles,’”° which address,
respectively, the conduct of organs of a State and of persons or entities that are empowered by

56 Hamester v. Ghana, Award, at {§ 143-45.
38 CM 4301.
5° CM 4305.
5? Rep. 257.

65

276.

277.

the law of that State to exercise elements of government authority. Claimants have responded to
this request, arguing that they do not in fact maintain that the unions fall within Articles 4 or 5 of
the ILC Articles. Rather, to Claimants, the issue is whether they fall within Article 8 of the ILC
Articles,”' which concerns conduct of a person or group acting on the instructions of, or under
the direction or control of a State. Because the two Parties agree that Article 8, and not Articles
4 or 5, would be relevant to the analysis of the unions’ conduct,*” there is no need for this
Tribunal to make any such declaration.*”

Finally, it should be clarified that both Parties agree that the current objection on the attribution
of state acts refers to Mr. Cirielli’s acts before and after his tenure as the Undersecretary of Air
Transportation. While Claimants discuss Mr. Cirielli’s acts during office in their pleadings,>“
this issue was not within the scope of Respondent’s original objection.’ Furthermore,
Claimants assert that they do not seek to attribute liability to Respondent for Mr. Cirielli’s pre-
office acts.*” As such, the Parties do not appear to actually disagree on the issue of attribution
as it concerns Mr. Cirielli’s conduct before and after holding his office.

e Fourth Jurisdictional Objection: The Legality of Claimants’ Investment

i, Position of Respondent

In Respondent’s fourth and final objection, it asserts that Claimants’ investment is not protected
by the Treaty because of alleged illegalities connected to that investment. Specifically,
Respondent asserts that Claimants, by certain actions taken with respect to their investment, have
violated Spanish and Argentine law and have committed other misdeeds.

57 Rej. 4307

5” See also Rep. § 256.

° The Tribunal notes that while the Parties agree that Article 8 of the ILC Articles applies to the unions’ activities,
they remain at odds over the proper interpretation of the term “control” as used in Article 8. As noted above,
Respondent maintains that the rigorous standard of “effective control,” which has been used in Military and
Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States), Merits, Judgment, (“Nicaragua
Merits”) 1.C.J. Reports 1986, § 115, and Case Concerning the Application of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), 2007 ICJ Reports 1, §
396 et seq. (February 26) (LA AR 75), and which is described in the ILC Commentary at Article 8, 4, is the
appropriate legal standard. Claimants maintain, instead, that the proper standard to be applied to the unions is the
less rigorous standard of “overall control,” which has been used in Prosecutor v. Dusko Tadic, International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Case IT-94-1-A (1999), ILM, vol. 38, No. 6 (November 1999), p. 1518, at
1541, § 117 and p. 1546, 4 145, Exhibit C-504; and in Loizidou v. Turkey, Merits, ECHR, Judgment, December 18,
1996, §] 56, Exhibit C-505.

54 OM 4302.

55 Mem. §] 228.

57° OM § 304; Rej. 9317.

57” The Tribunal notes that the Parties appear to disagree on the legal standard applicable to Mr. Cirielli’s conduct
while in office. Claimants assert that ILC Article 4 is applicable to his acts (CM 4 302, Rej. § 316), while
Respondent suggests that Article 8 should apply (Rep. 4] 279). For the reasons indicated previously, and because
Mr. Cirielli’s conduct while in tenure of his position was not the subject of Respondent’s objection, the Tribunal
declines to address these arguments at this time.

  

66

278.

279.

280.

281.

282.

283.

Alleged Violations of Spanish Law

Respondent bases its allegations on a pending proceeding in Spain involving the directors of Air
Comet. Respondent alleges that subject matters of the investigation have a direct impact on and
relation to this arbitration.

Respondent bases its allegations on facts alleged by the Office of the Attorney General in an
ongoing Spanish court investigation of directors of SEPI and Air Comet, involving acts related to
the 2001 Share Purchase Agreement (“SPA”) between SEPI and Air Comet.*” According to
Respondent, the investigation concerns whether these actors were guilty of misappropriation of
public funds, fraud or illegal exaction, document forgery, fraudulent use of process, and/or
crimes against the federal treasury in connection with the SPA.**°

The SPA, which provided for the transfer of SEPI’s 99.2% shareholding in Interinvest to Air
Comet, was approved by the Spanish Cabinet and was subsequently executed on October 2,
2001. As part of the SPA, SEPI sold to Air Comet S.A. its interest in Interinvest for US$ 1
dollar, while SEPI agreed to transfer $300 million to Interinvest to service ARSA’s liabilities (in
addition to transferring other funds to Air Comet).**' Respondent alleges that instead of
complying with the terms of the SPA, Air Comet used the SEPI funds to buy the existing claims
against ARSA, with Air Comet subrogated as a creditor."

According to Respondent, the defendants in this investigation purportedly have asserted that
SEPI and Air Comet executed a supplemental private agreement, signed on October 15, 2001, in
which the parties agreed that Air Comet would subrogate the claims as described above.
However, the Spanish Office of the Attorney General believes this document may either be a
false document created after its indicated date, or, to the extent it is an authentic document, it
concems conduct that deviates from that which was authorized in the SPA by the Spanish
Cabinet.

Respondent alleges that Air Comet committed tax fraud in connection with its subrogation of
ARSA’s debt claims. Respondent asserts that Air Comet failed to declare its subrogation for tax
purposes, even though it created a taxable event under Spanish law when it acquired claims
against ARSA.*™ According to Respondent, several of the defendants in the proceeding have
already made court statements and the State Agency of the Tax Administration has issued an
expert report.”

Respondent notes that the Spanish Central Court for Investigative Proceedings No. 6 of Madrid
concluded on September 7, 2011 that the investigations in this proceeding allow the inference
that Diaz Ferran, Pascual Arias and Mata Romayo were involved in conduct that could be

578 Rep. 286.

5 Mem. 4] 254.

38 Td.

1 Rep. 282.

58 Mem. §] 257.

58 Mem. 4] 259.

54 Mem. §] 261-262.
585 Mem. ] 267.

67

284.

285.

286.

287.

288.

289.

“presumably and initially qualified as a crime against the Treasury Department committed by Air
Comet.”**° Respondent also notes that the Prosecution of the Spanish National Court has
requested a penalty of imprisonment for Mr. Diaz Ferran, Mr. Pascual Arias and Mr. Antonio
Mata Ramayo, along with a joint compensation amounting to 99 million euros.**”

In addition to this investigation, Respondent notes a number of “new developments” as of March
26, 2012 in pending Spanish criminal proceedings that directly involve Mr. Diaz Ferran and Mr.
Pascual Arias.***

First, Respondent notes that the Central Court for Investigation Proceedings No. 1 of Madrid
admitted a criminal investigation proceeding on February 2, 2012 against Mr. Diaz Ferran, Mr.
Pascual Arias and Mr. Ivan Losada (administrator of Teinver S.L.) in connection with their
management of Viajes Marsans.**”

Second, Respondent notes that Mr. Diaz Ferran and Mr. Pascual Arias are being investigated in
another proceeding by the Spanish National Court in connection with the potential commission
of procedural fraud. According to Respondent, the two men alle; llegedly submitted false
documentation to a judge in order to obtain an unfair judicial resolution.*

Third, Respondent notes that one of the Marsans Group’s creditors has brought a criminal action
against Mr. Diaz Ferran, Mr. Pascual Arias, Mr. Ivan Losada and Mr. Angel de Cabo in the
Court for Investigation Proceedings No. 8 of Madrid, concerning their actions with respect to
insolvency proceedings. According to Respondent, Mr. Diaz Ferran and Mr. Pascual Arias sold
their companies to Possibilitum Business, controlled by Mr. de Cabo, which had engaged in
illegal activities in the course of reorganization proceedings.

Fourth, Respondent points to a proceeding pending before Commercial Court No. 12 of Madrid,
and notes that the Province of Madrid’s Prosecutor (Economic Crimes Section) has requested the
court that Mr. Diaz Ferran, Mr. Pascual Arias and Possibilitum Business be declared guilty with
respect to acts taken as the de facto and de jure administrators in the reorganization of Viajes
Marsans S.A., Viajes Crisol S.A.U., Rural Tours S.A.U. and Tiempo Libre S.A.U.5”?

Fifth, Respondent notes that the Commercial Court No. 9 of Madrid found Mr. Diaz Ferran and
Mr. Pascual Arias “guilty of the bankruptcy of Seguros Mercurio S.A.”°°> Respondent notes that
the court also found Teinver and other Marsans Group companies “liable as accomplices to the
bankruptcy.”°** Specifically, Teinver and the other companies directly took part in transactions,

58° Respondent’s Letter of October 26, 2011, at 2, citing the September 7, 2011 Order of the Central Court for
Investigation Proceedings No. 6 in Madrid, Ex. AR-172, at 2.
*” Respondent’s Letter of March 26, 2012, at 2, citing Annex I.
588 See Respondent's Letter of March 26, 2012.
* Td. at 3, see also Annex II.
°°) Td. at 5; see also Annexes IV and V.
*1 Td. at 6.
* Td, at 6-8; see also Annex VII.
°° Respondent’s Letter of May 24, 2012, at 1.
4 Td. at 1-2.

68

291

291.

29!

293.

S

N

o

particularly in 2008 and 2009, intended to fraudulently remove assets owned by Seguros
Mercurio.**°

Alleged Violations of Argentine Law

Respondent notes that Air Comet was engaged in “irregular and fraudulent behavior” during the
course of ARSA’s reorganization proceedings.*°° Respondent asserts that during the
reorganization proceedings, Air Comet was both the controlling company of the airline and its
main creditor, thereby acting in an impermissible double role under Argentine law.*””

Respondent also notes that a criminal investigation has been filed in the Argentine courts against
Antonio Mata Ramayo, Diaz Ferran, Pascual Arias and others, as directors of ARSA, regarding
the “fraudulent administration” of the company.°* The investigation comprises several
components. First, and similar to the Spanish investigation above, the subjects of investigation
have been charged with causing Air Comet’s fraudulent diversion of SEPI funds intended to
settle ARSA’s liabilities.°°? Second, the investigation concerns ARSA’s December 31, 2001
balance sheet, which allegedly included bogus entries regarding SEPI’s alleged capital
contribution of ARS 1.238 million in 2001. Respondent asserts that these bogus entries resulted
in the dilution of the Argentine State’s shares in the airlines, reducing its participation below the
minimum legal threshold for active participation as a shareholder.’ Third, the investigation
concerns possible crimes committed by Mr. Mata and others in relation to Air Comet’s
subrogation of claims previously held by third-party creditors. Allegedly, Air Comet re-assigned
these claims to another company, Royal Romana Playa S.A., for valuable consideration,
allowing the latter to cast a vote in ARSA’s reorganization plan.*”!

Finally, Respondent asserts that it is irrelevant that the Commercial Court of Buenos Aires ended
ARSA’s reorganization proceedings on June 17, 2011. The termination of those proceedings
does not demonstrate that Claimants committed no illegalities with respect to ARSA’s
reorganization, and indeed, the criminal investigations in Spain and Argentina are ongoing with
respect to Claimants’ fraudulent conduct and irregularities in connection with ARSA.*

Other Alleged Misdeeds

Respondent also points to a number of “issues” with the business management of the Grupo
Marsans and of the Argentine Airlines. Respondent characterizes Marsans’ management
worldwide as “deplorable,” noting that Air Comet’s operations halted in 2009, that a number of
writs of attachment have been issued against Marsans’ owners, Diaz Ferran and Pascual Arias,
that other legal suits that have been brought against certain Marsans affiliates, and that certain

5 Td. at 2.

°° Mem. 4 269; Rep. 4 309.

7 Mem. 270-271.

8 Mem. | 272; see also RA 168.

5° Mem. §] 274.

4 Mem. § 275; Rep. $319.

4°! Mem. § 276.

42 Respondent’s Letter of October 26, 2011, at 3.
43 Id. at 1-2.

69

29:

295.

29

297.

x

a

Marsans affiliates are undergoing reorganization.’ Respondent also notes “accounting
irregularities” in the Argentine Airlines, including the commingling of assets.*”°

The Relevant Inquiry of Legality for Purposes of Jurisdiction

Respondent asserts that the Treaty only protects investments that were made and carried out in
accordance with the laws of the host state.°° The purpose of Article I(2), which defines
“investments,” is to prevent the Treaty from protecting investments that should not be
protected.*”” Moreover, there is consensus within international investment law that fraud is
prohibited according to good practices and international public policy.

Respondent does not believe that the jurisdictional issue solely concerns whether the investments
were made in accordance with Argentine law; this interpretation leads to results contrary to the
object and purpose of the Treaty.*” If the investment’s inception was the only relevant criterion
at the jurisdictional stage, this would lead to an absurd situation in which transactions that were
made legally, but were followed by “an everlasting series of illegal acts” following their creation,
nonetheless still benefit from the Treaty’s protections.*"° Moreover, it would be necessary to
consider the time at which each investment was made, which would be infeasible in most
disputes in which there are numerous investment transactions involved.*!

Respondent asserts that even if the jurisdictional test is limited to the time of the investment’s
inception (here, the acquisition by Air Comet of Interinvest), the Tribunal is not limited to
assessing only the formal act of executing the SPA.*" Rather, the Tribunal must take account of
the whole complex transaction leading to the “inception” of the investment, which includes both
the execution of the SPA and the breach of or compliance with its terms.*"?

Finally, Respondent notes that even though this Tribunal is not bound by the conclusions made
by local authorities, they may be of “substantial assistance” for the Tribunal to determine the
legality of Claimants’ investments.*'* Furthermore, the “presumption of innocence” criminal
law standard cannot be imputed into the context of international investment law, as Claimants
have argued.*!5

44 Mem. {4 279-307; Rep. | 305-308.
495 Mem. $f] 308, 312.

496 Mem. § 319.

497 Mem. § 322.

498 Mem. § 325.

4 Rep. 4] 347-48, 356.

41 Rep. 4 356.

411 Rep, 4 363.

42 Rep, § 365-66.

413 7g

414 Rep, 4] 369-71.
415 Rep, 4] 374-75, citing CM 4 331.

70

29)

29!

301

301.

8.

©

0.

Good Faith

As a final argument, Respondent asserts that an investment that “deliberately runs afoul of the
law of the state” cannot be considered to have been made in good faith.*'® Respondent points to
Claimants’ alleged breach of good faith in Air Comet’s subrogation of ARSA’s creditors’ claims
and in Air Comet’s failure to declare this subrogation to the Spanish authorities due to its
character as a taxable event.'’ Respondent also accuses the Grupo Marsans of ignoring good
faith principles “in multiple jurisdictions.”*"*

ii. Position of Claimants

Claimants argue that Respondent has failed to establish that Claimants’ investments do not
conform to Argentine or Spanish law. According to Claimants, Respondent’s allegations of
illegality are “meritless.”*"” The mere existence of investigations in Spain and Argentina
regarding Claimants’ investments does not provide grounds for the Tribunal to deny
jurisdiction.” Moreover, Respondent fails to demonstrate how the issues at play in the Spanish
investigation would render Claimants’ acquisition of its investment illegal under Argentine
law.”! Claimants assert that, in any event, the Treaty only requires that the investment be in
conformity with the host State’s law at the time of the initiation of the investment, which it did.

Alleged Violations of Spanish Law

According to Claimants, the Spanish legal investigations are not relevant to the jurisdictional
inquiry because they do not concern Claimants’ acquisition of their participation in the
Argentine Airlines. Respondent has not claimed that Claimants made their acquisition through,
for example, an act of corruption or fraud.*”? Instead, the Spanish investigations concern 1)
whether, in the performance of the SPA, SEPI should have requested prior consent of the
Spanish Cabinet before allowing Air Comet to subrogate the rights of ARSA creditors,*”* and 2)
whether Air Comet should have considered the acquisition of those credits for purposes of
corporate income tax.”

Moreover, Claimants assert that Air Comet properly used the funds provided by SEPI,*? and it
did so with SEPI’s consent.*”° Claimants state that Respondent is also mistaken in its allegation
that Air Comet gratuitously increased its patrimony with SEPI funds while failing to add them to
its asset base for Spanish corporate tax purposes. Those credits against ARSA never actually
entered into Air Comet’s patrimony. Air Comet acted in accordance with the SPA and the

416 Mem. 4f 338, 340.

417 Mem. § 342.

418 Mem. § 345.

49 CM 4316; see also Claimant’s Letter of April 4, 2012.
°° CM qf] 317, 319.

©'CM 4318

” CM 4 342.

M 4343.

4 OM 4 345.

5 CM 4 322;
”° CM 4 344.

 

  

71

30!

30:

30:

30:

301

N

3.

4.

5.

a

December 2001 Agreement in using SEPI’s funds in direct benefit of ARSA’s shareholder
(Interinvest), which in return capitalized the credits, increasing its stockholding in ARSA and
reducing the airline’s debt.””

Claimants argue that the “mere existence” of the investigations and court proceedings in Spain
and Argentina is insufficient to demonstrate an illegality.°* Claimants note that even if a
Spanish or Argentine court was to render a decision finding that Claimants had breached
domestic law when making their investments, such a decision would not be binding on this
Tribunal.” Respondent must prove its allegations of illegality before this Tribunal.

More specifically, Claimants disagree with Respondent regarding the contents of the September
7, 2011 Spanish court order. Claimants assert that the order did not make a final determination
that crimes had been committed.*” Rather, the court decided to continue with its investigation
based on its finding that a crime may have been committed against the Spanish Treasury with
respect to Air Comet’s Spanish corporate income tax for 2002."°! In that same order, however,
the court also ordered the dismissal of every other accusation against Air Comet and the other
individuals, including Diaz Ferran and Pascual Arias, which included the crimes of falsification,
unlawful exaction, procedural fraud, and misappropriation of public funds.” With respect to the
alleged crimes against the Spanish Treasury, there has been no decision on the preliminary
investigation.

According to Claimants, even assuming that Respondent had provided sufficient legal and
factual elements for the Tribunal to find a violation of Spanish law, it fails to demonstrate how
such breaches of Spanish law could amount to breaches under Argentine law, which is the only
standard under the Treaty (Art. 1(2)).44

With respect to the “new developments” alleged by Respondent, Claimants assert that these
developments have no bearing on either the inception of Claimants’ investment or on Argentine
law, and that in any case, these developments consist of “mere allegations.”**°

First, with respect to the proceedings at the Central Court for Investigation Proceedings No.1 of
Madrid regarding the alleged embezzlement by Mr. Diaz Ferran, Mr. Pascual Arias and Mr. Ivan
Losada, Claimants assert that these proceedings are totally unrelated to the jurisdiction of this
Tribunal and to the subject matter of the arbitration.**°

®7OM 4345.
#8 CM 4331.
®° CM 332.
“8° Claimants’ Letter of November 8, 2011, at 3.

 

laimants’ Letter of April 4, 2012, at 3.
44 OM § 348.

435 Claimants’ Letter of April 4, 2012, at 2.
86 Id. at 3.

72

30

30)

30!

31

311.

7.

8.

9.

S

Second, with respect to the procedural fraud claims, Claimants deny the validity of the claims as
well as Respondent’s purportedly unsupported conclusions.**”

Third, with respect to the investigation concerning the legality of operations within the
reorganization proceedings pending before the Court for Investigation Proceedings No. 8 of
Madrid, Claimants assert that neither the claims nor the reorganizations themselves have any
bearing on the present arbitration.***

Fourth, concerning the reorganization proceeding pending before Commercial Court No. 12 of
Madrid, Claimants assert that this proceeding is irrelevant to the present arbitration. Moreover,
the Prosecutor’s petition has been opposed by the interested parties and no decision has yet been
5 439

issued.

Fifth, Claimants address the Commercial Court No. 9 of Madrid’s findings that Gerardo Diaz
Ferran and Gonzalo Pascual Arias were “guilty of the bankruptcy of Seguros Mercurio, S.A.”
and that Teinver and other Marsans Group companies were liable as accomplices. Claimants
assert that the bankruptcy of Seguros Mercurio S.A. is “unrelated to Claimants’ second request
for provisional measures, the jurisdiction of this tribunal, or even the subject matter of these
proceedings.“ Moreover, the Court’s May 11, 2012 decision is not final, and Claimants
understand that such appeal will be filed in due course.

Alleged Violations of Argentine Law

Claimants assert that Argentine investigations into fraudulent management are groundless. First,
Claimants state that the funds obtained from SEPI were properly used and directly or indirectly
resulted in a benefit to ARSA and AUSA.“” Second, Claimants note that Respondent did not
disapprove of ARSA’s 2001 balance sheets, and that Respondent’s participation levels shrank
after it failed to make the necessary contributions to maintain its participation at prior levels.*
Claimants note that the Argentine proceedings remain at the preliminary investigation stage.**

Claimants also assert that Air Comet fully complied with the Argentine Bankruptcy Law with
respect to the reorganization of ARSA.“° The majority of ARSA’s trustees approved the
settlement agreement between ARSA and its creditors, and this settlement was subsequently
approved by the responsible Argentine court.“° Furthermore, the Commercial Court of Buenos
Aires ended ARSA’s reorganization proceedings on June 17, 2011. The court made no finding
that Claimants, Air Comet or Interinvest had committed irregularities or illegalities during the

 

“4 Claimants’ Letter of June 30, 2011, 18-19.
45CM 4351.
46 CM 49 352, 355.

73

31

313.

31

315.

N

w

#

n

reorganization. This decision therefore confirms that Respondent’s accusations of
“irregularities” in the context of ARSA’s reorganization are groundless.**”

Other Alleged Misdeeds

Claimants respond that Respondent has failed to demonstrate the relevance of the bankruptcy
proceedings or of the other circumstances surrounding Grupo Marsans’ financial difficulties.“*
Furthermore, Claimants assert that it was Respondent’s own failure to grant prompt and adequate
compensation and to observe its commitments that severely impacted Claimants’ group of
companies.

The Relevant Inquiry of Legality for Purposes of Jurisdiction

Claimants assert that the Treaty only requires that the investment conform to law of the host
State at the time it was “acquired or effected.’ In other words, the analysis of the Tribunal at
this stage must focus on the initiation of the investment. This assertion is also confirmed by
relevant case law.**! Claimants note that Respondent has not denied that Air Comet prevailed at
the SEPI auction and legally acquired 99.2% shares of Interinvest, and that the SPA is a legal
and binding agreement under Spanish law.*

Respondent’s allegations refer only to the performance, rather than the inception, of Claimants’
investment.*** But Respondent has failed to provide any authority in support of its assertion that
an investment must conform to the host state’s law throughout the course of its operation and not
just at the time of its commencement in order for it to fall within the protection of the Treaty. If
such a requirement existed, almost any investment could be disqualified from Treaty coverage by
pointing to technical violations of local law in the operation of the investment.*4 Furthermore,
as described above, Respondent has failed to substantiate its allegations on non-performance.***

Good Faith

Claimants assert that Respondent has not provided evidence that Claimants acted in bad faith at
the time of making the investment (or later).4°° Unlike the case law cited by Respondent, there is
no evidence of fraud on the part of Claimants at the time of the making of their investment, nor is
there evidence that Claimants have attempted to gain access to an ICSID arbitration procedure to
which they would not otherwise have been entitled.**” Respondent has simply repeated certain

7 Claimants’ Letter of August 30, 2011, at 1.
48M 4 365.

+ CM 49 366-67.

459. CM 4371.

451 Rej. $324.

482. CM 4 371; see also CM 4313.
453 CM 4] 374; see also CM 4314.
454 OM 374.

455 Rej. | 328.

456 CM 375.

457. CM 378.

14

316.

317.

318.

319.

allegations such as the allegation that Air Comet purportedly committed tax fraud under Spanish
law in its acquisition of liabilities of ARSA.***

iii. Analysis of the Tribunal

The Parties disagree on two initial legal issues regarding the above allegations. First, they
disagree over whether, under the Treaty and international investment law, all illegalities
committed by investors in connection with an investment can deprive the investor of protection
under the Treaty, or only illegalities that are related to the inception of the investment. Second,
the Parties disagree on whether, as a factual matter, the illegalities alleged to have been
committed by the Claimants occurred at the “inception” of the investment or at a subsequent
time.

1. Timing of the Alleged Illegality

As Respondent notes, it is widely acknowledged in investment law that the protections of the
ICSID dispute settlement mechanism should not extend to investments made illegally. As noted
recently by the tribunal in Hamester v. Ghana,

An investment will not be protected if it has been created in violation of national
or international principles of good faith; by way of corruption, fraud, or deceitful
conduct; or if its creation itself constitutes a misuse of the system of international
investment protection under the ICSID Convention. It will also not be protected if
it is made in violation of the host State’s law (as elaborated, e.g. by the tribunal in
Phoenix).

However, as the Treaty itself makes clear, the critical time period for determining an
investment’s legality is the time the investment was made. Articles 1(2), II and III(1) of the
Treaty address qualifying investments made by investors. Article I(2) defines “investments” as
follows:

The term “investments” shall mean any kind of assets, such as property and rights
of every kind, acquired or effected in accordance with the legislation of the
country receiving the investment{.] (emphasis added)

The application of ordinary meaning of Article I(2) to the Claimants is perfectly straightforward:
in order to qualify as an “investment” under the Treaty, Claimants’ investments must have been
acquired or effected in accordance with Argentine law, the country receiving the investment. In
other words, the relevant inquiry is whether Claimants’ entry into the investment, here its
acquisition of shares in Interinvest through Air Comet, is legal.

Other provisions of the Treaty support this interpretation. Article II(1), which concerns the
promotion and acceptance of investments, states that “[e]Jach Party shall encourage, to the extent

possible, investments made in its territory by investors of the other Party and shall accept those

ay.
459 Hamester v. Ghana, Award, § 123.

75

320.

321.

32!

S

N

investments in accordance with its legislation.” (emphasis added) Article III(1), which addresses
the protection of investments, requires each party to “protect within its territory investments
made, in accordance with its legislation, or the investors of the other Party[.]” (emphasis added).

Case law addressing BITs with similar language also supports this interpretation. The Germany-
Ghana BIT at issue in Hamester contained similar language to the Treaty, and the tribunal ruled
that only the inception of the investment was relevant for its jurisdictional inquiry:

The Tribunal considers that a distinction has to be drawn between (1) legality as
at the initiation of the investment (“made”) and (2) legality during the
performance of the investment. Article 10 legislates for the scope of application
of the BIT, but conditions this only by reference to legality at the initiation of the
investment. Hence, only this issue bears upon this Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
Legality in the subsequent life or performance of the investment is not addressed
in Article 10. It follows that this does not bear upon the scope of application of
the BIT (and hence this Tribunal’s jurisdiction) — albeit that it may well be
relevant in the context of the substantive merits of a claim brought under the BIT.
Thus, on the wording of this BIT, the legality of the creation of the investment is a
jurisdictional issue; the legality of the investor’s conduct during the life of the
investment is a merits issue.

Similarly in Fraport, the respondent in that dispute had asserted that in order for the claimant to
maintain jurisdictional standing under the Germany-Philippines BIT, the investment must not
only be in accordance with the domestic law at the commencement of the investment but must
also continually remain in compliance with the domestic law. While the tribunal ultimately
agreed with the respondent that the investment was illegally acquired, **' the tribunal rejected the
respondent’s interpretation regarding the continuation of the investment. It noted,

The language of both Articles 1 and 2 of the BIT emphasizes the initiation of the
investment. Moreover the effective operation of the BIT regime would appear to
require that jurisdictional compliance be limited to the initiation of the
investment. If, at the time of the initiation of the investment, there has been
compliance with the law of the host state, allegations by the host state of
violations of its law in the course of the investment, as a justification for state
action with respect to the investment, might be a defense to claimed substantive
violations of the BIT, but could not deprive a tribunal acting under the authority
of the BIT of its jurisdiction.“

Even in Inceysa, a case in which the tribunal determined that the claimants had committed
numerous fraudulent acts, the tribunal’s inquiry was directed towards the inception of the

49 Hamester v. Ghana, Award, at § 127 (emphasis added).

46! Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case No.

ARB/03/25), Award, August 16, 2007 (hereinafter “Fraport v. Philippines”), LA AR 84. This award was
subsequently annulled, but the annulment decision was based on different grounds. See Fraport v. Philippines,
Decision on Annulment, December 23, 2010, LA AR 145.

4© Fraport v. Philippines, 2007 Award at 4 345.

76

323.

o

324.

325.

investment: “[T]Jhe foreign investor cannot seek to benefit from an investment effectuated by
means of one or several illegal acts and, consequently, enjoy the protection granted by the host
state, such as access to international arbitration to resolve disputes, because it is evident that its
act had a fraudulent origin and, as provided by the legal maxim, “nobody can benefit from his
own fraud.“ All of the Inceysa tribunal’s factual findings of fraud concerned the inception of
the investment, including the claimant’s presentation of false information as part of its bid
tender, false representations made during the bidding process, false documents submitted as part
of its bid, and a hidden relationship with another bidder in contravention of the bidding rules."

In addition, the Tribunal notes that the relevant law for purposes of determining whether the
investment was legally made is the law of the host State. Several of Respondent’s arguments
concern allegations of illegality under Spanish law. In support of these arguments, Respondent
asserts that “the general principles that endorse the non-protection of illegal investments or
investments made in bad faith ... are not limited to the law of the host State, but also to the laws
of other countries that may be involved.“ Once again, however, Article I(2) of the Treaty,
which refers to investments “acquired or effected in accordance with the legislation of the
country receiving the investment,” makes clear that the relevant law for this issue is the
legislation of Argentina.

2. Claimants’ Alleged Illegalities

Respondent has failed to demonstrate that Claimants, as a factual matter, committed illegalities
in the process of acquiring their investment in the Argentine Airlines. In this respect, the onus is
on Respondent. While Claimants must make a prima facie showing that their investment comes
within the protections of the Treaty,“ Respondent has not, with this objection, raised any issue
of fact to counter Claimants’ showing.*”

As Claimants note, Respondent has not denied that Air Comet prevailed at the SEPI auction and
legally acquired 99.2% shares of Interinvest, and that the SPA is a legal and binding agreement

463 Inceysa v. El Salvador, Award, at § 242 (emphasis added).

464 Td at | 236.

465 Mem. § 340.

466 See, e.g., Salini v. Jordan, Decision on Jurisdiction, {| 151 (“In conformity with [substantial] jurisprudence, the
Tribunal will accordingly seek to determine whether the facts alleged by the Claimant in this case, if established, are
capable of coming within those provisions of the BIT which have been invoked.”).

467 4 number of tribunals have held that a respondent bears the burden of proof with respect to the facts alleged in its
jurisdictional objections. See, e.g., Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3), Decision on
Jurisdiction, April 18, 2008, 4] 75, Exhibit C-523. (“It will be seen that the jurisdictional objection entails issues of
fact (whether the investments were and are under Mr. Patriciu’s dominant control; whether the origin of the
investment funds was Romanian), and issues of law (what effect such factual circumstances would have on the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear a complaint by the investor). The issues of fact are ones which the Respondent bears
the burden of proving according to the requisite standard, in order to sustain the claims of law it bases on them. The
Parties are in dispute over both the issues of fact and the issues of law.”); Desert Line Projects LLC v. The Republic
of Yemen (ICSID Case No. ARBO5/17), Award, February 6, 2008, 105 (LA AR 83) (“the Respondent has not
come close to satisfying the Arbitral Tribunal that the Claimant made an investment which was either inconsistent
with Yemeni laws or regulations or failed to achieve acceptance by the Respondent.”); Hamester v. Ghana, Award
at | 132 (“Having carefully considered all the evidence, the Tribunal considers that the Respondent has not fully
discharged its burden of proof” with respect to respondent’s allegation of illegality in the inception of the
investment).

  

77

326.

327.

328.

329.

under Spanish law.** Instead, Respondent relies on the argument that account must be taken of
the whole complex transaction leading to the “inception” of the investment—i.e., the SPA and its
“related legal acts, including the breach of or compliance with its terms.“

However, Respondent’s reliance on the whole of the SPA “transaction” is misplaced. The SPA
is a contract between SEPI and Air Comet to effectuate an exchange of benefits, liabilities and
obligations. Some of the commitments made by the parties relate to the transfer of share
ownership in Interinvest.*”” However, the SPA’s other commitments concern not only SEPI’s
assumption of liabilities and other economic commitments of the Argentine Airlines, but also
obligations as diverse as management structures, the size of the Argentine Airlines’ aircraft fleet,
the air routes to be taken by the Argentine Airlines, and employee headcount.‘”! Each of these
commitments, whether they are related to the transfer of shares or not, represents a promise to
perform once the contract has been executed. As such, any question of whether either party has
complied with or breached any of these terms of the SPA is a question of performance. Any
breach that occurs later does not retroactively invalidate, render illegal or otherwise undermine
the integrity or binding nature of the SPA itself; rather, it triggers a party’s legal liability under
the SPA.

As discussed above, the relevant jurisdictional inquiry is whether Claimants acquired or made
their investment in compliance with Argentine law. Here, Claimants made their investment by
entering into the SPA. There is no evidence on the record that Claimants failed to comply with
any Argentine laws or committed any illegalities in entering the SPA. No evidence suggests that
either Claimants or SEPI were not authorized to sign the agreement, that Claimants committed
fraud or made a critical omission in how they represented themselves during the bidding process,
or that Claimants engaged in any corruption or failure to comply with bidding or other
procurement requirements.

Consequently, this Tribunal finds that each of Respondent’s allegations concerns either
Claimants’ performance under the SPA (i.e., Claimants’ subrogation of ARSA’s creditors’
claims) or other events subsequent to the acquisition of their investment. Respondent’s
allegations regarding whether Claimants wrongly approved of ARSA’s 2001 balance sheets,
whether Claimants’ role in ARSA’s reorganization violated Argentine law, and whether the
Marsans Group “deplorably managed” its investments, are all issues arising subsequently to
Claimants’ acquisition of their investment.

3. Claimants’ Alleged Lack of Good Faith

As a final argument, Respondent asserts that Claimants breached good faith principles when Air
Comet subrogated ARSA’s creditors’ claims and when it failed to declare this subrogation to the

468 CM 4313.
4 Rep, ff] 365-366.
4 Ex, C-18, §§ 1-6.

47 See Ex. C-18, §§ 7,9.

78

330.

331.

332.

responsible tax authorities.” Respondent also generally accuses Grupo Marsans of ignoring
good faith principles “in multiple jurisdictions.”*”*

None of these alleged acts relate to the acquisition of Claimants’ investment, but rather post-date
the making of the investment. Moreover, the cases cited by Respondent held that the relevant
inquiry for whether an investment breaches good faith principles is determined with respect to
the acquisition of their investment. In Inceysa, the case upon which Respondent principally
relies, the tribunal found that the claimant’s numerous fraudulent representations violated the
fundamental rules of the bidding process and constituted a breach of good faith.’ Unlike the
present case, Inceysa concerned the claimant’s acts with respect to the acquisition of its
investment. Likewise, in Phoenix, the tribunal found that the claimants had made no actual
“economic investment” but rather “simply a rearrangement of assets within a family to gain
access to ICSID jurisdiction to which the initial investor was not entitled.”*”* Phoenix is simply
not on point to the circumstances of the present dispute. Therefore, Respondent has failed to
demonstrate that Claimants did not act in good faith in acquiring their investment.

In conclusion, for the reasons stated above, the Tribunal rejects Respondent’s fourth objection.
The Tribunal notes that certain of the allegations raised under this objection may affect the
merits of the claim and that it will be open to the Parties to make further submissions in respect
of these allegations as appropriate during the merits stage of the Arbitration.

Vv. Costs

Both Parties have requested the Tribunal to order costs and fees, plus interest, against the
opposing Party. The Tribunal reserves this question for subsequent adjudication.

4? Mem. § 342.

43 Mem. § 345.

44 Inceysa v. El Salvador, Award, at {§ 236-37.

“5 Phoenix Action v. Czech Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5), Award, 15 April 2009, LA AR 85, at 140.

79

VI. Decision on Jurisdiction

333. For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal declares that:
1) The Objections to Jurisdiction are rejected;

2) It joins to the merits the determination of Respondent’s responsibility for the acts of non-
state entities.

[signed]

Judge Thomas Buergenthal
President of the Tribunal

[signed] [signed]
Henri C. Alvarez Q.C. Dr. Kamal Hossain
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Subject to the attached
separate opinion

80

