INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
(CLAIMANTS)

and

The Argentine Republic
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

DECISION ON PROVISIONAL MEASURES

Members of the Tribunal
Judge Thomas Buergenthal, President
Mr. Henri C. Alvarez Q.C., Arbitrator

Dr. Kamal Hossain, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mrs. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Date of Decision April 8, 2016:

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

Representing Claimants

Mr. R. Doak Bishop,

Mr. Craig S. Miles,

Mr. Roberto Aguirre Luzi

Ms. Silvia Marchili

Ms. Isabel Fernandez de la Cuesta
KING & SPALDING LLP

1100 Louisiana Street, Suite 4000
Houston, Texas 77002

United States of America

Ms. Margrete Stevens

KING & SPALDING LLP

1700 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W.
Suite 200

Washington, D.C. 20006-2706
United States of America

Representing Respondent

As of December 23, 2015:

Dr. Carlos Francisco Balbin
PROCURADOR DEL TESORO DE LA NACION
ARGENTINA

Posadas 1641

1112, Buenos Aires

Argentina

Until December 22, 2015:

Dra. Angelina Maria Esther Abbona
PROCURADORA DEL TESORO DE LA NACION
ARGENTINA

Posadas 1641

1112, Buenos Aires

Argentina

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION 1
Il. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND .......cccccc eee eeeeneneeeeseseeeseseeeetseenensseseseaeaeenenenenees 1
Ill. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 7
IV. THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES ON THE CLAIMANTS’ APPLICATION....... 25
A. Claimants’ Application 25
B. Respondent’s Response 29
C. Claimants’ Reply 33
1. Immunity Under The ICSID Convention........ccceeceeeseeeeeseeseeteseeeeeeeeeeeeeenes 33
2. The Complaints 34
3. Claimants’ Request For Provisional Measures .........:.cccsscesseeeseeeseseeeeeeeeeeenes 36
D.  Respondent’s Rejoinder 4l
1. There Is No Right Sought To Be Protected In Connection With Claimants’
Claim Before ICSID 4l
2. There Is No Risk Of Irreparable Harm For Claimant...........c.ccscssseseeeeeeees 44
3. There Is No Urgency Or Danger In The Delay For Claimants ............cceeee 46
E. The Parties’ Oral Submissions ..0.....0.....cccescessecsesseeseseeseesesseeseeseeseesssnssnseneeseeaeeneesee 47
V. ANALYSIS AND DECISION 62
A. Claimants’ Requests On The Merits........cccccsecssseeseseeessesseseesseesseeeseesseeseeeeeenenes 63
B. Provisional Measures Requested by Claimants ...........ccccsssesecseseeseseeeseeeseeeeeenees 66
1. The Rights To Be Protected By Provisional Measures...
2. The Right To ICSID Arbitration Conducted In Good Faith ..0...... cece 72
3. The Right To Exclusivity Of ICSID ProceedingS..........cccccsseeeseeeeeeeeeeeeees 74
4. The Right To The Preservation Of The Status Quo And The Non-aggravation
Of The Dispute
5. The Right To I i 81
6. The Right To An Enforceable Award Under Article 53 Of The ICSID
Convention 85
7. Irreparable Harm 86
8. Urgency 87
C. Decision 89

 

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

L INTRODUCTION

1. This decision addresses an Application for Provisional Measures submitted by
Claimants on 29 July 2015 (“Claimants’ Application”) in respect of criminal complaints
made by entities of Respondent against Claimants and their subsidiary, Air Comet, S.A.U.
(“Air Comet”), the legal representatives of these companies and their Spanish court-
appointed receivers, Claimants’ counsel in these proceedings, as well as Claimants’ third-
party funder, and the criminal investigation commenced by the Office of the Public

Prosecutor of Argentina on the basis of these complaints.

IL. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

2. On 29 July 2015, Claimants submitted their Application.!

3. On 30 July 2015, the Tribunal acknowledged receipt of Claimants’ Application and
invited Respondent to comment on it within eight business days from its receipt of the
electronic version of the Spanish translation of this document. The Spanish translation was

received from Claimants on 31 July 2015.

4. By communication of the Secretary of the Tribunal dated 3 August 2015, and in
accordance with the Tribunal’s directions of 30 July 2015, the deadline for the filing of

Respondent’s response to Claimants’ Application was scheduled for 12 August 2015.

5. On 12 August 2015, Respondent filed its Response to Claimants’ Application
(“Respondent’s Response”). In its prayer for relief, Respondent requested that the Tribunal

dismiss Claimants’ Application and requested leave to submit a decision of the Argentine

 

' This is Claimants’ third application for provisional measures. The first request for provisional measures was
submitted by Claimants on 12 April 2011 and it was decided by Procedural Order No. 4 dated 3 October 2012.
The second request for provisional measures was submitted by Claimants on 26 March 2012 and it was decided
by Procedural Order No. 5, dated 3 October 2012.

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

Federal Court of Appeals and a report filed in the criminal proceedings in Spain against one

of Claimants’ ultimate shareholders.”

6. On 8 September 2015, the Tribunal invited Claimants* to (i) file observations on
Respondent’s request of 12 August 2015, concerning the admissibility of new evidence; and
(ii) if they so wished, to submit a reply to Respondent’s Response, both by 15 September
2015.

7. On 15 September 2015, Claimants submitted a letter informing the Tribunal of the
filing by the Argentine Attorney General of the Treasury (the “Treasury Attorney General”)
and the head of the Office of the Prosecutor for Economic Crimes and Money Laundering
(the “PROCELAC”) of a criminal complaint against Claimants, Burford Capital, Ltd.
(“Burford”), Air Comet, King & Spalding LLP (“King & Spalding”), and Fargosi &
Asociados (the “PROCELAC Complaint”), together with a number of supporting documents.

8. In light of the above, Claimants requested that the Tribunal: (i) grant a 10-day
extension of the deadline for the filing of their reply to Respondent’s Response and
Respondent’s request for admissibility of new evidence; (ii) order that Respondent
immediately produce a copy of the PROCELAC Complaint (the “Production Request”,
incorporated into Claimants’ Application); and (iii) schedule a hearing on Claimants’

Application.

9. On 16 September 2015, the Tribunal informed the Parties that the deadline for the
filing of Claimants’ response to Respondent’s letter of 12 August 2015 was suspended until

the Tribunal issued directions on Claimants’ Production Request. The Tribunal also

 

2 dent’s R q 81. The d the Respondent sought leave to submit are: “...the decision
rendered by the Federal Court of Appeals in Contentious-Administrative Matters of the City of Buenos Aires
in the local expropriation proceeding, and the accusation report filed by the Prosecutor's Office in the criminal
proceedings pending in Spain for fraudulent concealment of assets and other crimes, which account of the facts
and crimes was admitted by Mr. Diaz Ferran and the other accused parties in such proceeding on July 1, 2015.”
3 The majority of the Tribunal uses the term “Claimants” as it has been defined since the beginning of these
proceedings, i.e. Teinver $.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

requested that Respondent advise the Tribunal by 18 September 2015 whether and how
quickly it could provide a copy of the PROCELAC Complaint to Claimants.

10. Also on 16 September 2015, Respondent informed the Tribunal that “the Argentine
Treasury Attorney General’s Office has already transmitted to the head of PROCELAC the
Tribunal’s request for a copy of the PROCELAC Complaint filed by such body, which copy
is not in the possession of this representation. Any responses provided by the PROCELAC

in this respect will be duly transmitted to the Tribunal.”*

11. On 23 September 2015, the Tribunal invited (i) Respondent to inform the Tribunal by
25 September 2015, whether it had received any response from the PROCELAC on the
Tribunal’s request for a copy of the PROCELAC Complaint; and (ii) Claimants to provide a
response by 29 September 2015. The Tribunal also confirmed its availability to hold a
hearing in Washington, D.C. on 3 and/or 4 November 2015. It further invited the Parties to
confirm their availability by 28 September 2015, should the Tribunal determine that a hearing

on Claimants’ Application was required.

12. On 24 September 2015, Respondent submitted PROCELAC’s response on the
Tribunal’s request for a copy of the PROCELAC Complaint dated 18 September 2015. In
its response, the head of PROCELAC indicated that because the PROCELAC Complaint had
been filed with the court, pursuant to Article 204 of Argentina’s Code of Criminal Procedure

(the “ACCP”), no copy of such complaint could be provided.

13. On that same date, both Parties confirmed their availability to hold a hearing on

Claimants’ Application during 3 and/or 4 November 2015, in Washington, D.C.

14. On 29 September 2015, Claimants submitted their response to Respondent’s

communication of 24 September 2015.

“ Respondent’s letter dated 16 September 2015, pp. 3-4.

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

15. On 2 October 2015, the Tribunal acknowledged receipt of the Parties’ respective
submissions of 24 and 29 September 2015, and took note that the Parties had confirmed their
availability on the proposed hearing dates. It further (i) requested that Respondent produce
a copy of the PROCELAC Complaint; (ii) requested Claimants to confirm whether their letter
of 29 September 2015 constituted their Reply in Claimants’ Application or whether they still
wished to submit a full Reply; and (iii) requested Claimants to respond to Respondent’s
request for the admission of the two new documents set out in paragraph 81(c) of

Respondent’s Response.

16. On 6 October 2015, Claimants submitted their reply to the Tribunal’s letter of
2 October 2015, noting that they wished to submit a full Reply, for reasons of expediency,
and not opposing the incorporation into the arbitral record of the two new documents set out

in paragraph 81(c) of Respondent’s Response of 12 August 2015.

17. On that same date, Respondent submitted its reply to the Tribunal’s letter of 2 October
2015, reiterating its inability to produce the PROCELAC Complaint and providing details
permitting identification of the relevant domestic court to which the PROCELAC Complaint

had been submitted.

18. By letter of 8 October 2015, the Tribunal acknowledged receipt of the Parties’
respective letters of 6 October 2015. It further acknowledged receipt on 6 October 2015, of
the Spanish translation of Claimants’ letter of 29 September 2015, and on 7 October 2015,
of the English translation of Respondent’s letter of 6 October 2015.

19. In the same letter, the Tribunal (i) set deadlines for a second round of written
submissions, (ii) scheduled a hearing on Claimants’ Application for 3 November 2015, at the
seat of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (the “Centre”) in
Washington, D.C. (the “Hearing”), (iii) provided the hearing schedule and related logistics

information, and (iv) reminded the Parties that Respondent’s share of the sixth advance

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

payment requested by the Centre on 18 May 2015 remained outstanding. The Tribunal

ordered:

(a) Claimants to file a Reply to Claimants’ Application by 14 October 2015, with
the Spanish translation to follow by 16 October 2015;

(b) Respondent to file its Rejoinder to Claimants’ Application, including any
comments that it might have with regard to Claimants’ letter of 29 September
2015, and/or any other correspondence on this matter, by 23 October 2015,
with the English translation to follow by 27 October 2015; and

(c) both Parties to inform the Tribunal and opposing counsel by 16 October 2015,
of the names and affiliations of all representatives who will attend the

Hearing.

20. In accordance with this schedule, on 14 October 2015, Claimants filed their Reply to
Claimants’ Application. On 15 October 2015, Claimants filed a corrected version of their
Reply to Claimants’ Application (“Claimants’ Reply”), together with a complete version of
the PROCELAC Complaint and related file materials which they had been able to obtain

from the court.

21. On 16 October 2015, both Parties submitted their respective lists of participants for
the Hearing.

22. On 22 October 2015, Claimants submitted a letter to the Tribunal attaching three
public deeds executed by Claimants’ court-appointed receivers in Spain, as a new exhibit,

Exhibit C-1200.

23. On 23 October 2015, the President of the Tribunal invited Respondent to submit any
observations that it might have on Claimants’ letter of 22 October 2015, and Exhibit C-1200

attached to it, within two business days from its receipt of the Spanish translation of said

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

letter. Respondent would then have one business day to provide the English translation of

its observations.

24. On that same date, the President of the Tribunal supplemented the Tribunal’s
directions of 8 October 2015, by providing further logistical instructions to the Parties in

preparation for the Hearing.

25. Also on 23 October 2015, Respondent filed its Rejoinder to Claimants’ Application
(“Respondent’s Rejoinder”) and Claimants provided a Spanish translation of their letter of

22 October 2015.

26. On 26 October 2015, Claimants provided an English translation of the relevant parts
of their Exhibit C-1200, filed with their letter of 22 October 2015.

27. On 27 October 2015, Respondent provided an English translation of its Rejoinder.
On that same date, Respondent submitted to the Tribunal a letter with its observations on

Claimants’ letter of 22 October 2015 and Exhibit C-1200.

28. On 28 October 2015, Respondent provided an English translation of its letter of
27 October 2015.

29. On 3 November 2015, the Tribunal held the Hearing on Claimants’ Application in
Washington, D.C. In addition to the Members of the Tribunal and the Secretary of the

Tribunal, present at the hearing were:

For the Claimants:

Mr. Guillermo Aguilar Alvarez King & Spalding
Mr. Roberto Aguirre Luzi King & Spalding
Mr. R. Doak Bishop King & Spalding
Ms. Ashley Grubor King & Spalding
Ms. Silvia Marchili King & Spalding
Mr. Craig S. Miles King & Spalding
Ms. Margrete Stevens King & Spalding

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

Mr. Diego Fargosi

Mr. Luis Arqued Alsina
Mr. Christopher Bogart
Mr. Mariano Hernandez

Mr. Alvaro Martinez

(V.C. from Madrid, Spain):

Mr. Esteban Leccese

Mr. Jestis Verdes Lezana

Mr. Miguel Vilella Barrachina

Mr. Edorta Etxarandio

Mr. José Carlos Gonzalez Vazquez
Mr. Ramon Soler Amaro

For Respondent:

Ill.

30.

arbitration on behalf of Respondent, the Republic of Argentina, submitted a complaint

pursuant to Article 177(1) of the Argentine Criminal Code (“ACC”) to the office of the Public

5 The majority of the Tribunal is of the view that a detailed review of the factual background related to the
criminal proceedings, which are the cause of Claimants’ request for provisional measures, is necessary in order

Dr. Angelina Abbona
Mr. Horacio Diez

Mr. Carlos Mihanovich
Ms. Mariana Lozza

Mr. Sebastian Green

Ms. Soledad Romero

Ms. Magdalena Gasparini
Mr. Nicolas Duhalde

Mr. Manuel Dominguez Deluchi
Mr. Eduardo Barcesat
Mr. Gabriel Bottini

Mr. Nicolas Sykes

FACTUAL BACKGROUND*®

On 23 February 2015, the Treasury Attorney General, who has conduct of the

Estudio Fargosi & Asociados
Teinver

Burford Capital

Air Comet

Air Comet

King & Spalding
Transportes de Cercanias
Transportes de Cercanias
Teinver

Autobuses Urbanos del Sur
Autobuses Urbanos del Sur

Procuradora del Tesoro

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacion
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacion
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacion
Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacion
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacion
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacion
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacion
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacion
Asesor

Asesor

Aerolineas Argentinas S.A.

to permit the Parties to know the basis for this decision.

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

Prosecutor of the Nation (Procuradora General de la Nacién) against the legal
representatives and/or officers or directors of the following companies: Burford, Claimants’
third-party funder; the Claimant Teinver S.A.; Air Comet, Claimants’ subsidiary; the
Claimant Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.; and the Claimant Transportes de Cercanias S.A.
(the “TAG Complaint”).6 The TAG Complaint alleged that the parties it named had
committed fraud pursuant to Article 174(5) of the ACC. The TAG Complaint stated that the
Treasury Attorney General’s office had learned of the alleged fraudulent conduct within the

context of these arbitration proceedings.

31. At the heart of the TAG Complaint are two agreements: the Credit Assignment
Agreement, dated 18 January 2010, between Claimants as the assignors and Air Comet as
the assignee of the collection rights that may arise out of Claimants’ claim in these
proceedings (the “Assignment Agreement”); and the Funding Agreement, dated 14 April
2010, between Claimants and Burford concerning the financing of Claimants’ litigation
expenses in this arbitration (the “Funding Agreement”).’? The TAG Complaint also referred
to the fact that during the course of 2013 the Treasury Attorney General’s office had learned
that the voluntary insolvency proceedings of Claimants (which had commenced in late 2010
and early 2011) had progressed to liquidation proceedings and been entrusted to the
administration of court-appointed receivers.’ The TAG Complaint goes on to state that as a

result of this new judicial occurrence, Respondent had raised, as a new defense to Claimants’

6 See Exhibit RA-686.

7 These agreements, respectively Exhibits RA-159 and RA-160, were addressed in the Tribunal’s Decision on
Jurisdiction of 21 December 2012.

8 As recorded in the Decision on Jurisdiction, Air Comet commenced voluntary insolvency proceedings on
20 April 2010 and on 22 December 2010, the Spanish court supervising its insolvency suspended Air Comet’s
powers of administration. The Claimants subsequently commenced voluntary insolvency proceedings on
22 December 2010 (Teinver $.A.), 28 January 2011 (Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.) and 16 February 2011
(Transportes de Cercanias S.A.). The suspension of the powers of administration and disposition of Claimants
and their liquidation proceedings were ordered by the Spanish court on 10 April 2013 (Autobuses Urbanos del
Sur $.A.), 29 April 2013 (Transportes de Cercanias $.A.) and 26 April 2013 (Teinver S.A.).

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

claim in this arbitration, that Claimants’ counsel lacked legal standing since the powers of

attorney originally granted to them had been terminated by Claimants’ insolvency.”

32. The TAG Complaint alleges that the Funding Agreement entails a fraud against the
groups of creditors of the companies that make up the “Marsans Group”, which includes each
of Claimants and Air Comet. It alleges that after the signature of the Assignment Agreement,
Air Comet commenced voluntary insolvency proceedings a few days after Claimants and
Burford executed the Funding Agreement. It also alleges that at the time of the Funding
Agreement, Claimants had already planned their voluntary insolvency proceedings at the end
of 2010 and the beginning of 2011. As a result of these agreements and conduct, the TAG
Complaint alleges that the potential compensation sought in these arbitration proceedings by
Claimants was excluded from the insolvency proceedings, which amounts to a fraud on the

creditors, which include Respondent by way of its shareholdings in the Argentine Airlines.!°

33. Although the TAG Complaint does not refer to them in its initial “Purpose” section,
the complaint goes on to make allegations involving the court-appointed receivers!! and

counsel for Claimants!” in its subsequent sections. The TAG Complaint suggested that there

° With their reply on the merits, Claimants submitted letters from each of the administrators and receivers for
Claimants in which the authors give their names and say they are making an appearance before the Tribunal
and make certain declarations. Among the statements made by the receivers is that they ratify all acts performed
on behalf of Claimants from the beginning of the arbitration to the date of signature of their letter and they ratify
the power of attorney originally granted by each Claimant to counsel. Although the statements were signed by
the relevant receivers, they were not dated. In the proceedings before the Tribunal, the Respondent took the
position that the letters from the receivers were not in proper form and were not valid documents.

'© See Exhibit RA-686, pp 6-7.

"! See TAG Complaint, Exhibit RA-686, pp 4-5, 8. At p 8, the TAG Complaint states that “the trustees in
insolvency of the four companies of the “Marsans Group” have taken part (criminal involvement) in the scheme
behind the agreement of 14 April 2010, which is considered here as the corpus delicti. Indeed, it is not
admissible for the trustees in insolvency to consent to an agreement which, as explained above, provides that
the payments in favour of the Funder (BURFORD CAPITAL LTD) should be made outside the framework of
the insolvency proceedings - thus committing fraud against the estate in insolvency - before any payment is
made to any other creditor.” [Exhibit RA-686, p. 11 (Spanish version)]

"2 Reference is made to Claimants’ counsel, King & Spalding LLP, in several places in the TAG Complaint.
Amongst others, see Exhibit RA-686, p 6, where the TAG Complaint states that while King & Spalding LLP is
not a formal party to the Funding Agreement, it is expressly mentioned as the legal firm in charge of the claim
before this Tribunal. It goes on to state that the Funding Agreement entails committing fraud against the
respective groups of creditors of the companies that make up the “Marsans Group”, which includes Claimants

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

had been connivance between Claimants, their legal counsel and their funder which affected
the creditors in the insolvency proceedings of Claimants and other members of the “Marsans

Group” in Spain and Argentina.!*

34, The TAG Complaint also stated that although the requirements for a completed crime
had not yet been satisfied, as there had not yet been a disposition of assets or economic harm,
it requested the investigation of the crimes referred to as attempted crimes. It also alleged
that the fraudulent conduct it describes was designed to mislead both this Tribunal and the

Argentine Republic.

35. The relief contained in the TAG Complaint included, inter alia, a request that it be
forwarded to the PROCELAC. It also requested that the matter be forwarded to the Federal
Criminal Court for the City of Buenos Aires (the “Federal Court”) in order for the relevant

criminal investigation to be conducted.'*

36. On 3 March 2015, Respondent wrote to the Tribunal to request leave to submit into
the record a copy of the TAG Complaint. The request was made on the basis that the
“..criminal complaint is closely intertwined with certain facts at stake in this arbitration and
is intended to prevent the Argentine Republic - in the hypothetical case that this tribunal
found it must pay compensation - from making a payment to detriment of the legitimate
creditors in Claimants’ insolvency proceedings. If such were the case, the Argentine
Republic would be making a wrong payment and would therefore be forced to pay twice.

v5

This will result in an irreparable harm to Argentina.

 

in these proceedings and their subsidiary, Air Comet, as the alleged assignee of the claim. The TAG Complaint
also alleges that King & Spalding LLP acted without proper authorization or valid powers of attorney and
suggests that letters filed by King & Spalding LLP, allegedly on behalf of Claimants’ insolvency receivers
confirming their authorization of King & Spalding LLP’s representation of Claimants, were not in an
appropriate form and constituted a case of “document fraud”: see Exhibit RA-686, pp 7-8. [Exhibit RA-686,
p. 8 (Spanish version)]

3 See Exhibit RA-686, p 9 (English version). [Exhibit RA-686, p. 12-13 (Spanish version)]

4 Exhibit RA-686, p 13 (English version). [Exhibit RA-686, p. 19 (Spanish version)]

'5 See Respondents letter of 3 March 2015, p 1. The letter went on to state that the TAG Complaint referred
“*..in essence to the agreement entered into between Claimants and Air Comet S.A.U. on 18 January 2010 and

 

 

10

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

37. On 17 March 2015, Claimants responded to Respondent’s letter of 3 March 2015. In
their letter, Claimants stated that they had not seen the alleged criminal complaint since a
copy had not been provided to them, nor was it publicly available. As a result, Claimants
reserved their rights to request production of the document and to request relief from the
Tribunal, including provisional measures with a view to preventing Respondent from further
aggravating the dispute. Nevertheless, Claimants stated that in the interest of a rapid
resolution of the arbitration, they did not object to the submission of the TAG Complaint into

the record.'¢

38. In their letter, Claimants went on to make a number of further comments, including
the fact that both the Funding Agreement and the Assignment Agreement had previously
been addressed before the Tribunal, that both agreements are valid and post-dated Claimants’
acquisition and management of the Argentine Airlines and the expropriation of Claimants’
investment of 2008. As a result, Claimants stated that the agreements impugned by
Respondent were immaterial to both the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and the merits of

Claimants’ claims.!”

39. In light of Claimants’ position with respect to the submission of the TAG Complaint,

the Tribunal granted leave, on 18 March 2015, for the submission of the TAG Complaint.

40. On 13 May 2015, Respondent submitted the TAG Complaint.'*

the agreement entered into between Claimants and Burford Capital Ltd on 14 April 2010.” Further, the letter
stated that the facts in question had been raised before the Tribunal at the hearing on the merits and in subsequent
communications and were relevant to the Tribunal’s decision. The letter also stated that at the hearing on the
merits, the Respondent had brought to the Tribunal’s attention that it would file a complaint with the Argentine
judicial authorities in respect of the potential commission of a crime.

'6 See Claimants’ letter of 17 March 2015.

"7 See Claimants’ letter of 17 March 2015, pp 2-3. The Claimants went on to suggest that the motive for the
filing of the TAG Complaint was for political reasons and was not related to any issue of substance nor based
ona legitimate motive relating to the merits of the arbitration: see pp 3-4.

'8 See Respondent’s letter of 13 May 2015. In its letter accompanying the TAG Complaint, the Respondent
contested a number of statements made by Claimants in their letter of 17 March 2015 and made reference to
the obligation to file criminal complaints in connection with what it referred to as the deceitful or fraudulent
operations relating to the management of the Argentine Airlines. In this regard, it referred to a criminal

ll

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

Al. On 29 July 2015, Claimants submitted their Application. In their Application,

Claimants alleged that Respondent had recently:

© Threatened criminal prosecution against Claimants’ and Air Comet, $.A.U.
(“Air Comet”)’s legal representatives for their participation in this arbitration,
including the execution of the Assignment and Funding Agreements;

* Threatened King & Spalding with criminal prosecution for its role in
representing Claimants in this arbitration;

© Threatened Burford Capital Limited (“Burford”), the capital provider in this
arbitration under arrangements repeatedly recognized by the competent
Spanish courts, and Burford’s directors personally with criminal prosecution;

* Issued a formal Petition for Investigation in that regard necessitating the
retention of Argentine criminal defense counsel and interfering with freedom
of travel to Argentina;

* Summoned its Attorney General before a domestic criminal court to answer
preliminary accusations of failing to discharge her obligations by not earlier
investigating Claimants; and

* Engineered media coverage about this matter, including a particularly
inflammatory article labelling King & Spalding and Burford as a “fraudulent
ring” and calling Claimants’ submissions to this Tribunal the product of a
“vultures and crows committee.”!?

In addition, Claimants submitted that the Tribunal had previously ordered, on a number of
occasions, that the Parties refrain from taking any steps that would aggravate or extend the
dispute and that Respondent’s conduct violated those previous orders and warranted

immediate relief.”

42. In their Application, Claimants went on to respond to Respondent’s allegations,
including those relating to the Funding Agreement and the Assignment Agreement, as well

as counsel’s authority to represent Claimants in this arbitration. In respect of the latter,

igation commenced in October 2002 in connection with the alleged commission of the crime of fraudulent
ration of the Argentine Airlines, amongst other legal proceedings.

'° Claimants’ Application, pp 1-2 (footnotes omitted).

2 Claimants’ Application, pp 2-3. In this regard, Claimants referred to the following: Procedural Order No. 2;
Tribunal’s letter of 13 May 2011; Tribunal’s letter of | April 2012; Procedural Order No. 4; and Procedural
Order No. 5.

  

12

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

Claimants explained that after the commencement of Claimants’ voluntary insolvency
proceedings in late 2010 and early 2011, the court-appointed administrators had, in April
2013, taken over the administration of Claimants’ affairs and since then had been giving
instructions to counsel for Claimants in their capacity as court-appointed insolvency receivers
or trustees.?!_ Claimants’ Application went on to contest that there was any basis for the
allegations set out in the TAG Complaint. Claimants also alleged that an article which had
appeared in the Argentine newspaper, Pdgina 12, on 12 April 2015, reflected that it had
received direct access to information that is a part of a confidential criminal investigation and
in evidence in this arbitration. Claimants alleged that access had been obtained from
Respondent and requested an order directing Respondent to refrain from further aggravating

the dispute by disclosing details regarding the arbitration to the press.

43. Claimants went on to allege that they were entitled to provisional measures on the
basis that Respondent had caused them irreparable harm that would not adequately be
repaired by an award of damages. They also asserted that Respondent’s conduct reflected
that it had no intention of complying with an eventual award in these proceedings and that
Respondent’s conduct violated Articles 26 and 53 of the ICSID Convention and constituted

a new breach of its treaty obligations.””
44. In their request for relief, Claimants requested provisional measures:

(i) Enjoining Argentina from aggravating the dispute between the Parties;
(ii) Ordering Argentina to refrain from altering the status quo;

(iii) Ordering Argentina to refrain from harassing Claimants through baseless
domestic litigation and unlawful resort to the media; and

(iv) Ordering Argentina to cease and desist from its criminal investigation, which
violates Article 26 of the ICSID Convention.

21 Claimants’ Application, pp 4-5. These facts and the related issues were covered in considerable detail in
evidence and argument at the hearing on the merits and in the Parties’ submissions.

» Claimants’ Application, p 14. The Claimants went on to submit that this conduct further supported their
request for the payment of compound interest on any amounts awarded to them until full payment.

23 Claimants’ Application, pp 16-17.

13

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

45. On 12 August 2015, Respondent submitted its Response to Claimants’ Third
Application for Provisional Measures (the “Respondent’s Response”). In its Response,
Respondent reviewed the requirements for the granting of provisional measures and
submitted that Claimants had failed to meet at least three of the five requirements for the

granting of such measures.”*

46. | Among the requirements which Respondent said Claimants had not met, was the
requirement of a right to be protected in connection with this arbitration. In this regard,
Respondent noted that in their Application, Claimants had stated that the allegations raised
in the TAG Complaint would have no effect on the ultimate outcome of the arbitration.?°
Respondent went on to cite a number of arbitral awards holding that the rights to be preserved
in a request for interim measures must relate to the requesting party’s ability to have its claims
and requests for relief in the arbitration fairly considered and determined and for any award
granted to be effective and capable of being enforced. Respondent submitted that, in this
case, the TAG Complaint would not impair Claimants’ right to have their claims heard and

determined by the Tribunal given the current stage of the proceedings.

47. Further, Respondent submitted that although the facts in the TAG Complaint at issue
are related to these arbitration proceedings, this did not permit an inference that the
exclusivity of the arbitration proceedings under Article 26 of ICSID Convention, or the rights
of Claimants under Article 53 of the ICSID Convention are in jeopardy. In this regard,
Respondent referred to ICSID awards which had held that the exclusivity of ICSID

proceedings does not extend to criminal proceedings.”°

48. Respondent went on to submit that the TAG Complaint did not give rise to a risk of

irreparable harm to Claimants and that the latter had failed to specify which right related to

?4 Respondent’s Response, pp 3-5. The Respondent noted that Claimants had requested provisional measures
on two previous occasions and that the measures had been denied by the Tribunal.

25 Respondent’s Response, pp 5-6.

26 Respondent’s Response, pp 6-8 and sources cited there.

14

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

the arbitration might be threatened by the TAG Complaint. It also submitted that the making
of a criminal complaint was a sovereign act relating to criminal liability of individuals who

were outside the scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

49. Respondent also referred to Article 177(1) of the ACC which, in its view, had
required the Treasury Attorney General to make the TAG Complaint. Respondent also
submitted that the TAG Complaint had been made to the PROCELAC which was now
responsible for assessing whether a preliminary investigation should be commenced and that
it was only upon completion of its assessment that the office of the Public Prosecutor would
determine, in its own discretion, whether to implement any relevant measures and conduct a
preliminary investigation. According to Respondent, it was only upon completion of that
investigation that, in the event that there was sufficient evidence, the TAG Complaint would

be referred to the relevant judicial authorities.”

50. Respondent also went on to point out that in the event that the Argentine judicial
authorities determined that there was a sufficient basis to initiate a criminal investigation,
then the Argentine Constitution and legal system provided abundant guarantees of the

accused’s procedural rights.

51. In addition, Respondent submitted that there was no urgency to justify the granting
of provisional measures. In this regard, Respondent submitted that if the TAG Complaint
gave rise to the commencement of a criminal proceeding, this would not amount to a case of
urgency since the procedure would take time. Respondent submitted that whatever the result,
the decision in the criminal proceedings would not be issued before the Tribunal rendered its

final award in this arbitration.?*

27 Respondent’s Response, pp 13-15.
28 Respondent’s Response, pp 23-25.

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

52. In its request for relief, Respondent requested that Claimants’ Application be

dismissed with costs.”?

53. On 14 September 2015, the general prosecutor in charge of the PROCELAC,
Mr. Carlos Gonella, filed the PROCELAC Complaint before the Federal Appeals Chamber
against all of the parties named in the TAG Complaint as well as Claimants’ counsel in this
arbitration, King & Spalding and Fargosi & Asociados, and all of the court-appointed
receivers in the insolvencies of Claimants and Air Comet for fraud pursuant to Article 174(5)
of ACC. In addition, a complaint pursuant to Article 1 of Law 14,034, for promoting political
or economic sanctions against the State, was made against all of those persons involved in
the alleged fraud who were Argentine citizens. The filing of the PROCELAC Complaint was
announced at a joint, televised press conference held by the Treasury Attorney General and

the head of PROCELAC on the same day.

54, The filing of the PROCELAC Complaint by the PROCELAC and the press
conference were brought to the Tribunal’s attention by way of Claimants’ letter to the

Tribunal of 15 September 2015.7”

55. In their letter to the Tribunal, Claimants alleged that the PROCELAC Complaint had
personally named the individual lawyers representing Claimants and was an attempt to use
domestic criminal laws to circumvent the arbitration and put pressure on Claimants, their

funder and their lawyers to drop the claims in this arbitration. Claimants also submitted that

2° Respondent’s Response, pp 26-27. In addition, the Respondent sought leave to submit the decision of the
Federal Court of Appeals in Contentious-Administrative Matters of the City of Buenos Aires in the local
expropriation proceeding and a copy of the report of the Spanish prosecutor’s office in respect of the fraudulent
concealment of assets and other crimes alleged against Mr. Diaz Ferran, one of the ultimate shareholders of
Claimants.

*° See Claimants’ letter of 15 September 2015 together with attachments consisting of: an extract from the
PROCELAC website which contained a video of the press conference; a notice published by the PROCELAC;
various press articles which had reported on the Criminal Complaint and press conference; and a copy of the
presentation slides used by the Treasury Attorney General and the head of PROCELAC at the press conference.
The slides set out the corporate organization of Claimants and their holdings in the Argentine Airlines, the
relationships between counsel, Claimants and Burford, relevant provisions of Articles 172 and 174 of the ACC
and the relevant article of Law 14,034.

 

16

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

contrary to Respondent’s Response, the head of PROCELAC had indicated that the case
would move quickly such that a decision could be expected within three months.*! In light
of the new criminal complaint (the PROCELAC Complaint) and press conference, Claimants
requested an extension of the deadline to file their Reply on their Application and a hearing

on the matter.

56. As described previously, the Tribunal extended the deadline for Claimants’ Reply and
requested that Respondent advise it as to whether and how quickly it could provide a copy
of the PROCELAC Complaint to Claimants. In its response of 16 September 2015,
Respondent advised that it did not have a copy of the PROCELAC Complaint and had
forwarded a copy of the Tribunal’s request to the PROCELAC.

57. On 24 September 2015, Respondent advised that it had been advised by the
PROCELAC that since the PROCELAC Complaint had been filed with the court, pursuant
to Article 204 of the ACC no copy of the PROCELAC Complaint could be provided.

Respondent attached to its letter a copy of the PROCELAC’s response to that effect.*?

58. On 29 September 2015, Claimants wrote to the Tribunal to request that Respondent
produce a copy of the PROCELAC Complaint and order Respondent to, amongst other
things, suspend the criminal complaints (the TAG Complaint and the PROCELAC
Complaint, together referred to as the “Complaints”) and to stop what it said was

Respondent’s unlawful conduct.*?

59. On 2 October 2015, the Tribunal requested that Respondent provide a copy of the
PROCELAC Complaint and set deadlines for the submission of Claimants’ Reply and

Respondent’s Rejoinder.

5! See Claimants’ letter of 15 September 2015, pp 2-3 and the sources cited there.

%2 See Respondent's letter of 24 September 2015 and PROCELAC’s note of 23 September 2015.

% See Claimants’ letter of 29 September 2015. In their letter, Claimants provided further information and detail
regarding the Criminal Complaint as well as argument in support of Claimants’ Application. The Claimants
also provided a copy of the transcript of the press conference of 14 September 2015.

17

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

60. On 6 October 2015, Claimants wrote to the Tribunal to advise that they had beenmight
be able to obtain a copy of the PROCELAC Complaint which they would file with their
Reply.

6l. On 13 October 2015, Mr. Marijuan, the Federal Prosecutor in the Public Prosecutor’s
office to whom the matter had been assigned, issued a Request for Letters Rogatory addressed
to the appropriate court of first instance in the city of Washington D.C., requesting certified

copies of the record in this arbitration.*4

¥ See copy and translation of the Request for Letters Rogatory issued by Federal Prosecutor Marijuan, Exhibit

C-1215. The Request states that it attaches a copy of the PROCELAC Complaint which it states was filed on

14 September 2015. The Request states, in part, as follows:
Through said complaint, [the Prosecutor in charge of the PROCELAC] requested the
investigation of the alleged fraudulent maneuvers carried out against the Argentine state
by the legal representatives, officers and executives of the companies “Burford Capital
Ltd.”, “Teinver $.L.”, “Air Comet $.A.U.”, “Auto Urbanos del Sur S.A.”, and “Transportes
de Cercanias $.A.”. In this respect, it is hereby made known that the procedural subject
matter of the investigation referred hereto are different maneuvers in relation to a series of
agreements entered into by the above mentioned companies, and the submission of certain
documentational allegedly apocryphal before the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID), aiming at the misappropriation of funds arising from a
possible conviction against the Argentine republic under the arbitration process filed before
the above mentioned organization, pursuant to the expropriation of the controlling capital
stock of the companies “Aerolineas Argentinas S.A.” and “Austral Lineas Aéreas S.A.”.
Said maneuvers would aim at prejudicing those creditors in the bankruptcy proceedings of
the companies’ claimant before the ICSID; which proceedings are filed before the
Kingdom of Spain; and which, at the same time, would prejudice public funds, as the State
could end up paying a compensation amounting to USD 1,036,200,000 to those who would
not be the legitimate creditors thereof, being potentially exposed to the risk of being forced
to pay for such compensation twice.

 

Having said that, and in order to set a legal framework to the Request herein, I make known
that based on the records appearing on the case file, King & Spalding law firm - legal
representative of the companies’ claimant before the ICSID - would have submitted invalid
documents in the arbitration proceedings to certify its legal capacity, in an attempt to lead
the Arbitration Court to error, thus making an award that would oblige the Argentine state
to make a payment to the detriment of itself and of the creditors of the failed companies.

18

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

62. On 14 October 2015, Claimants submitted their Reply. Claimants attached a copy of
the PROCELAC Complaint dated 14 September 2015, which they were able to obtain on
October 9, 2015 in the afternoon.*>

63. The PROCELAC Complaint is filed by the General Prosecutor in charge of the
PROCELAC and the Coordinator of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Division of
PROCELAC. It states that it is a criminal complaint against the legal representatives,
executives, and/or directors of Burford, the three Claimants and Air Comet. It also names
specifically King & Spalding and each of the individual lawyers as well as a paralegal who
have participated in this arbitration as well as the lawyers of Claimants’ Argentine counsel’s
law firm, Fargosi & Asociados. The PROCELAC Complaint also names the insolvency
administrators of each of Claimants and Air Comet as well as “any other individual or legal
entity that is identified in the course of the investigation that should be carried out due to the
crime of fraud against the public administration (Art. 174, subsection 5 of the Criminal Code
[Codigo Penal, C.P.]) and, for those previously identified who are Argentine citizens, for
promoting political or economic sanctions against the State (Art. 1, Law 14,034)...”.°°

64. By way of background, the PROCELAC Complaint referred to the TAG Complaint

as follows:

The PTN indicated in its presentation that the persons involved were the legal
representatives, executives, or directors of the Burford, Teinver, Air Comet,
Autobuses Urbanos and Transportes de Cercanias companies. In addition, it detailed

35 See Exhibit C-1198. The PROCELAC Complaint itself, produced as part of a larger file with Claimants’
Reply, consists of 30 pages and was signed by PROCELAC’s General Prosecutor, Mr. Carlos Gonella. It
appears to have been received by the Secretariat of the Federal Appeals Court on 14 September 2015 and
received by Office No. 9 of the Federal Prosecution Service on 14 September 2015. In addition, it appears that
the PROCELAC Complaint was assigned by a federal judge to Federal Criminal Prosecution Office No. 9 on
15 September 2015. Further, the file attached as Exhibit C-1198 also contained a note from Federal Prosecutor
Guillermo Fernando Marijuan dated 21 September 2015. As described further below, Prosecutor Marijuan’s
note, in its description of the Complaints submitted to his office, expressly refers only to the legal
representatives, officers and management of Burford, Teinver S.L., Air Comet, Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
and Transportes de Cercanias $.A. According to the Respondent, Prosecutor Marijuan’s description of the
Complaints narrowed the scope of the investigation which he has undertaken. This is disputed by Claimants
and reviewed by the Tribunal in its analysis below, in Section IV.E of this Decision.

36 See Exhibit C-1198, pp 1-2 (footnotes omitted).

19

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

the maneuver subject to the complaint describing a series of agreements made
between the referred to companies and the presentation of certain documentation,
possibly apocryphal, to the International Center for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes (hereinafter, “ICSID”). All of this, with the purpose of illegally
appropriating the sums arising from a possible ruling against the Argentine republic,
in the framework of the arbitration that it pursues before the referred to body, arising
from the expropriation of the controlling share package of Aerolinas [sic] Argentinas
S.A. (hereinafter, “Aerolineas”) and Austral Lineas Areas [sic] S.A. (hereinafter
“Austral’”).

This maneuver would have the purpose of harming the interests of the creditors
in the insol iquidati dings of the i ies before the
ICSID — proceedings that they pursue in the Kingdom of Spain, but, in addition, the
national public treasury, which may be liable for paying an indemnity that would
amount to the sum of USD 1,036,200,000 to those who would not be its legitimate
creditors. To this should be added that, in these circumstances, the Argentine
republic would be exposed to the risk of paying the referred to indemnity for a
second time.

Specifically, the PTN asserted that “should the counterclaim not be considered
favorably by the ICSID tribunal, it would be an attempt to oblige the Argentine state
to make a clearly fraudulent payment to the legitimate creditors, a circumstance that
the Argentine state cannot allow.” It also stated that the “accused are trying, by
means of a fraudulent maneuver to avoid the rightful intervention of Spanish justice
in the various insolvency procedures in order — by means of a ruse — to induce the
Arbitrational tribunal into an error and to thereby obtain an improper benefit.”

It adds that “in the case of transferring future sums of money arising from a
favorable decision for the complainants in the arbitrational proceedings we would
be witnessing a consummated crime when the financial damage to the bankruptcy
creditors is verified of the companies identified above” and that “added to this would
be the damages that the State would undoubtedly experience, if it were to pay a
hypothetical indemnity established in a ruling, to those who were not the legitimate
creditors, and thereby being exposed to a situation that would involve the principle
that states that he who pays badly should pay twice.”

  

Along with the complaint, the PTN included a copy of various documents,
presentations, and resolutions relating to the file being processed before the ICSID
and reports in relation to the universal proceedings being pursued in Spain.”

As part of its description of the relevant events, the PROCELAC Complaint reviews

the corporate structure of Claimants, the amounts of the claim and counter-claim and

57 Exhibit C-1198, pp 2-4 (emphasis in original). The PROCELAC Complaint also notes that the PROCELAC
has received a witness statement from Mr. Eduardo Barcesat, who appeared as counsel on behalf of the
Respondent in the arbitral proceedings and that it would request that the office of the Public Prosecutor obtain
duly certified copies of the bankruptcy proceedings of Claimants and Air Comet in Spain, copies of all the
criminal proceedings registered against the ultimate, personal shareholders of Claimants and certified copies of

the ICSID file in these proceedings.

20

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

Respondent’s defence in this arbitration that Claimants’ claim is of a “derived or indirect
nature” and refers to Mr. Eduardo Barcesat’s witness statement to the effect that Claimants
lack capacity to sue since they were “not contracting parties, as defined by Article 25 of the
ICSID regulations [sic], and that in the application of Article 42, subsection 2 of the same
regulations,” the provisions of the domestic legal system of the state receiving the investment

applied.**

66. The PROCELAC Complaint goes on to review the Assignment Agreement and the
Funding Agreement and concludes that in the event Respondent were required to make a
payment to Claimants pursuant to an award in the arbitration, the claims of the creditors of
Claimants would be evaded and Respondent would be exposed to the possibility of having
to make a double payment.*? The PROCELAC Complaint also states that due to the
insolvency of Claimants, the powers of attorney authorizing King & Spalding to represent
Claimants had become invalid. It also suggests that the letters from the insolvency

administrators of Claimants*® were possibly “apocryphal documents” or signed by the

38 Exhibit C-1198, pp 12-13. The PROCELAC Complaint goes on to state that Air Comet was the principal,
direct shareholder of Interinvest which, in turn, is the parent company of the Argentine Airlines and that the
liquidation stage of its insolvency commenced in 2011. The PROCELAC Complaint speculates that this might
be why Claimants commenced the arbitration, rather than Air Comet. It goes on to suggest that the object of
such a maneuver was to evade the rights of the creditors of Air Comet. The PROCELAC Complaint also goes
on to state that although the Respondent had put forward an objection to jurisdiction on the basis of Claimants’
lack of ability to sue, the matter had not yet been addressed in the arbitration.
*9 In this regard, the PROCELAC Complaint relies on the witness statement of Mr. Barcesat which it quotes as
follows:

This mechanism consists of an ostensible fraud against the Argentine republic given that

were there to be a possible payment in favor of the claimants, the amounts would not be

received by the group of creditors of the respective bankruptcy files but rather by Burford

Capital LTD... In addition, if the Argentine republic paid incorrectly it would not only be

exposed to a double payment, but also to pay the fine that Spanish bankruptcy law applies

when a payment is made in favor of a single creditor to the detriment of the rest of the

creditors.
[T]here is a procedural fraud and it puts the national treasury at risk of having to pay the

amount of the award, plus another as a punitive measure in favor of the verified creditors

in bankruptcy proceedings in Spain.
See Exhibit C-1198, pp 15-16.
4° Exhibits C-842, C-843 and C-844.

21

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

insolvency administrators in excess of their powers. The PROCELAC Complaint suggests
that the letters from the administrators could be either null and void or, perhaps, reflect
possible connivance of the insolvency administrators with Claimants in order to evade
Claimants’ creditors and detrimentally affect Respondent.*! The PROCELAC Complaint
also addressed the question of the immunities provided for under the ICSID Convention,
Articles 21 and 22, noting that in the circumstances of this case any protection afforded by
these articles would not be an impediment for proceeding with the charges described since
these put the public order of Respondent at threat. The PROCELAC Complaint also referred
to certain arbitral awards which have held that states have the right and duty to investigate

crimes, independent of the existence of an ICSID arbitration.”

67. As will be described in the next section, in their Reply, Claimants took into account
the contents of the PROCELAC Complaint and responded to Respondent’s Response. In

addition, they repeated and expanded upon the measures requested in their Application.

68. Included in the file that Claimants were able to obtain from the Public Prosecutors’
office, was a note signed by the Federal Prosecutor assigned to the PROCELAC Complaint,
Mr. Marijuan, acknowledging receipt of the PROCELAC Complaint and notifying it to the
Coordinator of the Bankruptcy Division of PROCELAC and requesting the referral of
PROCELAC Preliminary Investigation File No. 890. That note reads in relevant part as

follows:

“| Exhibit C-1198, p 17. In addition, the PROCELAC Complaint goes on to state that the authorization by the
court in the Air Comet insolvency for Air Comet’s insolvency administrators to approve the Funding Agreement
was of no effect since, according to it, that agreement as well as the powers of attorney authorizing King &
Spalding LLP to represent Claimants should have been authorized by the court in charge of Claimants”
insolvencies. See Exhibit C-1198, pp 10-19.

Further on, the PROCELAC Complaint alleges that in order to validate their legal capacity “.. representatives
of King & Spalding would have included in the case file invalid documents that accredit said capacity, in an
attempt to induce the arbitrational tribunal into an error, and in this manner obtain a ruling that obliges the
Argentine state to make a payment to its detriment and to the detriment of the creditors, leading to the referred
to criminal concept.” See Exhibit C-1198, p 23.

*? Exhibit C-1198, pp 27-28 and the sources cited there.

 

22

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

I. Received, provide for its entry into the IT system FiscalNet and proceed with
the prosecution in accordance with article 196 of the Argentine Procedural
Criminal Code.

I. An investigation on the criminal complaint submitted by Dr. Carlos Gonella,
Attorney- General and head of the Economic and Money Laundering
Attorney- General’s Office (PROCELAC), which consists of the alleged
fraudulent manoeuvres conducted against the National State by the legal
representatives, officers or directors of “Burford Capital LTD”, “Teinver
S.L.”, “Air Comet $.A.U.”, “Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.” and
“Transportes de Cercanias S.A.” is being carried out.

In order to describe the manoeuvres subject to the criminal complaint, several
entered into the at i ions among
have been detailed and certain documentation allegedly apocryphal submitted
before the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID) has been presented. Such manoeuvres have the purpose of obtaining
sums resulting from a potential award against the Argentine Republic
illegally; all this within the framework of the arbitration conducted before the
abovementioned centre for the expropriation of the controlling shares of
“Aerolineas Argentinas S.A.” and “Austral Lineas Aéreas $.A.”.
Said manoeuvres may have the purpose of damaging the creditors in the
bankruptcy proceedings of Claimants before the ICSID - proceedings
conducted in the Kingdom of Spain - which, in turn, may also damage the
national public treasury, as it may end up paying a compensation of
USD 1,036,200,000 to those illegitimate creditors and exposing itself to a risk
of having to pay the potential compensation twice.

Ill. The purpose of this proceeding having been identified, be it notified to the
Coordinator of the Bankruptcy Division of the Economic Money Laundering

Attorney-General’s Office (PROCELAC) and request the referral of the
Preliminary Investigation No. 890 and its corresponding documentation.3

69. On 22 October 2015, Claimants submitted three public deeds executed in Spain by
the court-appointed receivers acting on behalf of Claimants in the various insolvency
proceedings in Spain, all before notaries public. In the public deeds, the court-appointed

receivers in each of the insolvency proceedings of Claimants deposed to the following:

8 See Federal Prosecutor Marijuan’s note dated 21 September 2015, included in Exhibit C-1198. Although not
referred to in Claimants’ Reply nor the Respondent’s Rejoinder, this note and its interpretation were the object
of argument and discussion at the Hearing, as described below.

“4 These were submitted by Claimants as Exhibit C-1200 in these proceedings.

23

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

They confirmed their identity and powers to act on behalf of the respective
Claimants in their capacity as court-appointed receivers, and attached

evidence of their appointment.

They confirmed that they executed the letters submitted in these proceedings
as Exhibits C-842, C-843 and C-844, which confirmed and ratified the powers
of attorney granted to King & Spalding to act as counsel for each of Claimants
in the arbitration. They refer to the letters by their exhibit numbers in the
arbitration and confirm the dates on which those letters were executed by

them.

They confirmed the terms and effects of the letters filed as Exhibits C-842, C-
843 and C-844 and that King & Spalding has acted at all times with valid
powers of attorney to represent Claimants in the arbitral proceedings and

continue to be in force.

They confirm they were aware of the PROCELAC criminal investigation and
deny fully the allegations made in both the TAG Complaint and PROCELAC
Complaint and, in particular, deny that the individuals accused have attempted
to defraud Claimants’ creditors in the arbitral proceedings or before the

Argentine Public Administration.

They confirm that the Funding Agreement executed by Burford and Claimants

is in force and has not been affected by the insolvency proceedings, nor by

45 Exhibit C-1200 is made up of a series of deeds notarized by notaries public in Spain, which must be read
together. Each Claimant is represented in Spain by two court-appointed receivers. In the first deed, one of the

court-appointed recei

rs for each of Claimants made declarations on his own behalf and on behalf of his co-

 

court-appointed receiver. In notarizing this deed, notary public Manuel Gerardo Tarrio Berjano noted that he
had not been presented with documents to confirm the representation of the deponents’ co-court-appointed
receiver and that the notarized deed was subject to the subsequent ratification of those receivers. In a second
deed, notary public Tarrio confirms the ratification by two of the other co-court-appointed receivers who
appeared personally before him to confirm their ratification. Ina third deed, notary public Francisco Regalado
Marichalar notarized the ratification of the first deed by the third co-receiver who appeared before him in Bilboa.

24

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

the initiation of the liquidation stage or by the current regime of suspension

of faculties of the insolvent Claimants.
70. On 23 October 2015, Respondent submitted its Rejoinder.

71. On 27 October 2015, Respondent wrote to the Tribunal to object to the admission of
Exhibit C-1200 on the basis that it was untimely and, therefore, inadmissible. While
reserving its rights to respond more fully, Respondent noted that the objection to the validity
of counsel’s powers of attorney had been raised some time ago and that despite this, the
notarial deeds from Claimants’ court-appointed receivers had only been produced on the eve
of the Hearing. Further, and in any event Respondent submitted that the deeds submitted
could not cure the deficiencies in the powers of attorney since the deeds did not reflect the
intervention of the judge or judges overseeing the relevant insolvency proceedings and did
not permit determining in any conclusive manner the dates on which the letters identified as

Exhibits C-842, C-843 and C-844 had been issued.

IV. THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES ON THE CLAIMANTS’
APPLICATION

A. Claimants’ Application

72. At the time of filing their Application, Claimants contended as the basis for their
request that Respondent had threatened criminal prosecution against them, their
representatives, lawyers and their funder. The basis for and scope of Claimants’ Application

was expanded as events unfolded.

72. In their Application as filed on 29 July 2015, Claimants first identified a series of
actions of Respondent that motivated the request. Second, Claimants argued that
Respondent’s ongoing allegations about improprieties in the Spanish insolvency proceedings
were baseless. Third, they addressed Respondent’s letter of 13 May 2015, which was said to
aggravate the dispute between the Parties and threaten the status quo of this arbitration.

Fourth, Claimants considered that the TAG Complaint was groundless and made numerous

25

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

false statements. Finally, Claimants submitted that Respondent’s dissemination of its

misleading and groundless accusations to the Argentine media further aggravated the dispute.
74. The actions underlying Claimants’ Application were that Respondent had:

. Threatened criminal prosecution against Claimants’ and Air Comet’s legal
representatives for their participation in this arbitration, including the

execution of the Assignment Agreement and the Funding Agreement;

. Threatened King & Spalding with criminal prosecution for its role in

representing Claimants in this arbitration;

. Threatened Burford, the capital provider in this arbitration under
arrangements repeatedly recognized by the competent Spanish courts, and

Burford’s directors personally with criminal prosecution;

. Issued a formal Petition for Investigation (the TAG Complaint) in that regard
necessitating the retention of Argentine criminal defense counsel and

interfering with freedom of travel to Argentina;

. Summoned [the Treasury] Attorney General before a domestic criminal court
to answer preliminary accusations of failing to discharge its obligations by not

earlier investigating Claimants; and

. Engineered media coverage about this matter, including a particularly
inflammatory article labelling King & Spalding and Burford as a “fraudulent
ring” and calling Claimants’ submissions to this Tribunal the product of a

“vultures and crows committee.”4°

“6 Claimants’ Application, pp. 1-2 (internal citations omitted).

26

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

75. In Claimants’ view, such conduct violates international law and it is entirely within

the powers of the Tribunal to order Respondent to cease and desist from continuing it.*”

76. Claimants contended that Respondent’s actions appear to have a single end: to enable
it to mount a smear campaign in front of the Tribunal to attempt to raise some sort of
suspicion about Claimants’ legitimacy and King & Spalding’s authority to represent

Claimants in this arbitration.“*

In this regard, they noted that the Funding Agreement’s
validity and enforceability has been recognized, inter alia, in all three of Claimants’
respective insolvency proceedings.*? Moreover, Claimants affirmed that the insolvency
proceedings in Spain and all the issues regarding Claimants’ assignment of rights to a portion
of the proceeds of any award rendered in this arbitration to their subsidiary, Air Comet, have
been conducted in strict accordance with the Spanish Bankruptcy Law and in a fully
transparent manner. Hence, Respondent’s allegations about improprieties in the Spanish

insolvency proceedings are baseless.*”

77. Claimants also asserted that Respondent’s letter of 13 May 2015, which had not been

authorized by the Tribunal, aggravated the dispute and threatened the status quo of the

51

arbitration.°' Respondent’s letter of 13 May 2015 was said to aggravate the dispute in two

ways: (i) by continuing Respondent’s irrelevant allegations about the legality of the
Assignment Agreement and the Funding Agreement; and (ii) by presenting new, improper
claims on the merits, that Claimants’ underlying investments were illegal.*

78. Claimants also submitted that the TAG Complaint is groundless and makes numerous
false statements. Claimants argued that, even at face value, the TAG Complaint does not

provide the alleged factual basis that would warrant an investigation of a potential fraud

“7 Claimants’ Application, p. 2.

*8 Claimants’ Application, p. 3.

* Claimants’ Application, p. 6.

5° Claimants’ Application, pp. 3-7.

51 Claimants’ Application, p. 7. That letter attached a copy of the TAG Complaint filed by the Treasury Attomey
General with the PROCELAC.

2 Claimants’ Application, p. 7.

27

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

against this Tribunal, the Argentine Republic, its authorities, or any party at all. Rather, it
simply describes facts that are well known by this Tribunal, and that the Treasury Attorney
General happens to disagree with, including legitimate actions carried out by Claimants
during this arbitration, such as the execution of the Assignment Agreement and the Funding

Agreement.*?

79. Claimants also submitted that Respondent had disseminated misleading and
groundless accusations to the Argentine media and further aggravated the dispute. Claimants
cited a “particularly inflammatory” article labeling King & Spalding and Burford as a
“fraudulent ring” and calling Claimants’ submissions to this Tribunal the product of a
“vultures and crows committee.” In Claimants’ view, the fact that the article falsely accuses
King & Spalding, specifically naming Claimants’ counsel, and Burford, provides evidence
of “the irreparable damage that the Treasury Attorney General’s and the [newspaper’s]
irresponsible behavior has already caused.” On that basis, Claimants requested that the
Tribunal order Respondent to refrain from further aggravating this dispute by disclosing any

details regarding this arbitration to the press.**

80. In their Application, Claimants referred to their previous requests for provisional
measures to sustain that the Tribunal has the power under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention
and [Article] 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules to order provisional measures to ensure
compliance with its earlier orders.*> Further, Claimants relied on a decision of the tribunal
in Quiborax S.A., Non-metallic Minerals S.A. and Alan Fosk Caplin v. Plurinational State
of Bolivia® to assert that they are “entitled to provisional measures because, as explained
above, Argentina has caused irreparable harm that would not be adequately repaired by an

987

award of damages.

5 Claimants’ Application, p. 8. See also id., pp. 9-11.

5 Claimants’ Application, pp. 12-13.

55 Claimants’ Application, fn. 48.

56 ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2 (“Quiborax v. Bolivia”)

57 Claimants’ Application, p. 13-14 and the various sources cited there.

28

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

81. Claimants also contended that Respondent’s letter of 13 May 2015 and the TAG
Complaint improperly attempted to prolong this arbitration and further aggravated the dispute
between the Parties in five ways. First, by raising issues that the Parties have already fully
briefed and argued at the proper procedural stages and, hence, Respondent should not be
allowed to unilaterally initiate a new round of substantive briefing at this late stage. Second,
by using the TAG Complaint to make misleading allegations about conduct that, even if true
(quod non), would not impact the ultimate resolution of this arbitration. Third, by making
clear that it has no intention of complying with an eventual award in these proceedings, a
declaration which violates Articles 26 and 53 of the ICSID Convention, constitutes a new
breach of Argentina’s treaty obligations, and further supports Claimants’ request for
compound interest. Fourth, by threatening the status quo by harassing Claimants with
domestic litigation. Finally, by irresponsibly leaking or communicating to the press details

regarding this arbitration.**

B. Respondent’s Response

82. Respondent submitted its Response on 12 August 2015.

83. In its Response, Respondent asserted that Claimants’ Application failed to meet the
requirements of the ICSID Convention and international law for the granting of provisional

measures.*?

84. Respondent submitted that Claimants’ Application only identified one of several

requirements” for the granting of provisional measures, namely irreparable harm, and states

58 Claimants’ Application, pp. 14-16.

5 Respondent’s Response, {| 13.

6 Respondent’s Response, if] 15-16 (“the legal grounds on which an ICSID Tribunal may recommend
provisional measures are stated in Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 39, and the relevant
requirements have been developed by international case law, to wit: (a) existence of a right to be protected in
connection with a main case; (b) danger as a result of delay (emergency); (c) risk of irreparable harm; (d) prima
‘facie existence of a basis of competent jurisdiction and admissibility of the claim; and (e) the judgment on the
merits must not be anticipated. Said requirements must be met irrespective of the content of the provisional
measure required. As stated by the tribunal in CEMEX y. Venezuela, even the so called ‘principle of non-
aggravation’ cannot supplant the requirements of Article 47”).

 

 

29

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

some general assertions on the facts supporting Claimants’ request. In Respondent’s view,
Claimants failed to link such facts with the requirements to be met for the granting of such

measures and also failed to submit any supporting evidence.*!

Respondent also submitted
that Claimants had provided no evidence supporting their assertions that it had threatened

Claimants’ legal representatives or leaked information regarding the arbitration to the press.”

85. On that basis, Respondent submitted that the Tribunal should analyze Claimants’

Application on the basis of the TAG Complaint.

86. Respondent then provided an analysis of three out of a total of five requirements
which Claimants had failed to prove: (i) the provisional measures sought are intended to

protect Claimants’ right(s) in connection with their claim before ICSID;% (ii) there is risk of

-65

irreparable harm for Claimants;® and (iii) there is urgency or danger in delay for Claimants.°°

87. According to Respondent, Claimants had failed to explain the right which is the
subject matter of their claim before ICSID whose protection is sought by way of their request
for provisional measures. In addition, Claimants state in their Application that the TAG
Complaint does not undermine the rights which are the subject matter of their claim in this
arbitration.°’ Respondent cites Claimants’ Application where it states that “even if they were

true (quod non) the allegations raised in the [TAG Complaint] would have no effect on the

ultimate outcome of this arbitration.”°*

6! Respondent’s Response, {] 18.

© Respondent’s Response, {j 19. In addition, the Respondent submitted that since Claimants asserted that it had
already caused them irreparable harm, this was now a fait accompli and an application secking a
recommendation for provisional measures was pointless. See Respondent’s Response, §| 18.

Respondent's Response, {| 19.

 Respondent’s Response, {fj 21-31.

6 Respondent’s Response, {fj 32-55.

6 Respondent’s Response, {¥] 72-80.

§ Respondent’s Response, §] 21.

& Respondent's Response, §] 21.

30

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

88. Respondent also cited a number of decisions by other ICSID tribunals, such as in
Plama Consortium Limited vy. Republic of Bulgaria’? and Caratube International Oil
Company LLP v. Republic of Kazakhstan”, which, according to it, have rejected provisional
measures similar to those requested by Claimants here, given the inexistence of a right to be

protected in connection with the main case.”!

89. Further, according to Respondent, the TAG Complaint, upon which Claimants’
Application was based, does not impair either the exclusivity of the ICSID arbitration
proceeding under Article 26 of the Convention, or the potential use of Article 53. In this
regard, Respondent relied on the decisions in Quiborax v. Bolivia, Convial Callao S.A. and
CCI - Compaiia de Concesiones de Infraestructura S.A. v. Republic of Peru,” and Lao
Holdings N.V. v. Lao People’s Democratic Republic’? to note that although criminal
proceedings can be related to an ICSID arbitration, that does not per se threaten the
exclusivity of the arbitration proceedings under Article 26 of the ICSID Convention. The
exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings applies only to investment disputes and, hence, it does

not extend to criminal proceedings.”*

90. With respect to irreparable harm, Respondent submitted that there is no such risk for

Claimants because (a) the TAG Complaint does not constitute a risk of irreparable harm,’°

16

(b) the TAG Complaint was made in compliance with a legal duty,’° and (c) there are

sufficient guarantees of the fairness of any court proceedings which may be commenced.”

91. According to Respondent, the petition for a criminal investigation could not be

deemed to give rise to a risk of irreparable harm because: a criminal investigation which

® ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24 (“Plama v. Bulgaria”).

7 ICSID Case No. ARB/08/12 (“Caratube v. Kazakhastan I”).
7! Respondent’s Response, {{j 23-25 and the sources cited there.
7 ICSID Case No. ARB/10/2 (“Convial Callao v. Peru’).

3 ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/6 (“Lao Holdings v. Lao”).

74 Respondent’s Response, {fj 26-29.

5 Respondent’s Response, fj 33-41.

7 Respondent’s Response, fj 42-55.

7 Respondent’s Response, fj 56-71.

31

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

would normally take years could hardly amount to an impairment considering that all
procedural stages have been completed in the arbitration; the Parties and the purpose of this
arbitration proceeding are different from those of the criminal investigation; and criminal
prosecution is a sovereign act relating to the criminal liability of individuals who, by
definition, are outside the scope of the Centre’s jurisdiction and the competence of this

Tribunal.”

92. Further, Respondent submitted that the TAG Complaint was made in compliance with
a legal duty. According to Argentina’s domestic law, any and all public officers or employees
who, in the performance of their duties, may be aware of or become acquainted with the
commission of any crime liable to be prosecuted, are under a duty to report such crime,
proprio motu. The TAG Complaint was made in compliance with this duty imposed upon
the Treasury Attorney General’s Office and, therefore, upon its public officers and
employees. Accordingly, the TAG Complaint had been submitted within the framework of
the laws in force, which provide that the independent office of the PROCELAC be the
addressee of any complaints in order to assess the commencement of any preliminary

investigations in respect of institutionally significant events.”

93. Respondent also submitted that in the event the TAG Complaint gave rise to a
criminal investigation, the proceeding would be governed, and the individuals affected would

be protected, by guarantees afforded by Argentina’s National Constitution and the

80

international instruments to which Argentina is a party.*® Respondent also asserted that in

the Spanish legal system there are similar guarantees and recalls that in the criminal

proceeding in Spain for concealment of assets, Mr. Diaz Ferran, together with other accused

78 Respondent’s Response, {| 33-41.

7 Respondent’s Response, {if 42-55. The Respondent further noted that the tribunal in the case of Lao Holdings

v. Lao recognized the government’s sovereign right to enforce its criminal laws, the power to pursue a criminal

investigation of any acts which may constitute a crime in its own territory, as well as to investigate whether the
have made i in accordance with the legal set forth in the applicable general

laws.

8 Core principles governing the criminal procedure in Argentina include due process of law guarantee, the

principles of legality, innocence, and the non-retroactive nature of criminal laws. Respondent’s Response, § 59.

32

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

parties, pleaded guilty at trial of the crimes attributed to them and they accepted sentences
for such offenses. Furthermore, the guarantees of due process and the right to defense in the

local expropriation trial were also respected.*!

94. Finally, Respondent submitted that Claimants had failed to explain the urgency which
would justify granting any provisional measures. Whatever the outcome of the TAG
Complaint, Respondent submitted that a decision on it would not be issued before the
Tribunal renders its final award in this arbitration. Therefore, according to Respondent, there
is clearly no urgency or danger in the delay for Claimants.*? Relying on the decision of the
International Court of Justice in the Asylum Case, Respondent submitted that the danger of
being made subject to an ordinary court proceeding does not constitute a case of urgency, nor
does any right exist to request protection against the ordinary action of justice, given that
such an action would entail hindering the application of the law, and it would therefore
amount to a guarantee of immunity. Therefore, as found in Caratube v. Kazakhstan I, no
provisional measures which unduly infringe the sovereign right of any State to carry out

criminal proceedings should be granted.**

Cc. Claimants’ Reply

95. With their Reply, Claimants submitted a copy of the PROCELAC Complaint and
modified and expanded their Application in light of it. In their Reply, Claimants covered
three principal topics: (i) immunity under the ICSID Convention; (ii) the Complaints; and

(iii) Claimants’ request for provisional measures.

1. Immunity Under The ICSID Convention

96. — Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention grant immunity against legal process to

persons appearing in ICSID arbitration proceedings with respect to acts performed by them

8! Respondent’s Response, fj 56-71.
® Respondent’s Response, {| 73.
®3 Respondent’s Response, fj 77-80.

33

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

in the exercise of their functions. Claimants submitted that this includes them, their
representatives and their legal counsel. Claimants relied on the decisions in Caratube v.
Kazakhstan I and Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey*+ and submitted
that immunity granted by Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention is applicable even
without a specific order of an ICSID tribunal. According to Claimants, the right and duty to
investigate crime cannot mean that by starting a criminal investigation, a State may baulk an

ICSID arbitration.*°

97. Claimants submitted that in the present case, Respondent had initiated criminal
investigations into an alleged fraud perpetrated by Claimants and their representatives and
agents in this proceeding. According to Claimants, there is no doubt that all of these
individuals are “persons appearing in proceedings under this Convention” in the terms of
Article 22 of the ICSID Convention. Furthermore, the underlying acts for which these
individuals are being investigated are directly related to their participation in this ICSID
arbitration, either as Claimants’ representatives (i.e., the receivers), funder (Burford) or
lawyers and paralegals (members of the law firms King & Spalding and Fargosi &
Asociados). Finally, Claimants submitted that the PROCELAC Complaint is based on facts
and allegations before this Tribunal. Therefore, all of the acts mentioned in the PROCELAC
Complaint are covered by the immunity against legal process under Article 22 of the ICSID
Convention and the Tribunal should, therefore, order Respondent to cease and desist its

criminal investigations.*°

2. The Complaints

98. Claimants submitted that Respondent has aggravated the dispute by initiating
criminal proceedings against them, their counsel, and their third-party funder on the basis of

the arguments and evidence that Respondent has placed before the Tribunal in these arbitral

8 ICSID Case No. ARB/06/08 (“Libananco v. Turkey”).

85 Claimants’ Reply, ff 13, 17.

86 Claimants’ Reply, §{| 18-20. The Claimants also submitted that ICSID tribunals have interpreted the
immunities and privileges under Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention in broad terms.

34

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

proceedings.*’ Based on a preliminary review of the PROCELAC Complaint, Claimants
noted that it alleges that Claimants, their court-appointed receivers, their funder, their
counsel, and any other individual or juridical person that may be identified during the
criminal investigation, may have committed two crimes: fraud against the Argentine public
administration (Article 174(5) of the ACC), and, pursuant to Law 14,034, the crime of
“fostering political or economic sanctions against the State,” specifically targeting the

Argentine nationals that currently represent Claimants in this arbitration.**

99. With respect to the latter, Claimants submitted that if the mere appearance of
Argentine nationals as Claimants’ counsel is a crime subject to the very severe penalties
under Argentine law, then Claimants submitted that their right to pursue their investment
claims under the BIT and freely design their legal strategy is unlawfully restricted by
Argentine law. According to Claimants, Respondent cannot argue at the same time that
Argentine law governs this dispute and also that Claimants are not entitled to be assisted by
Argentine lawyers. Hence, Claimants submitted that the Tribunal should adopt the necessary
measures to allow them to continue presenting their case in the manner they deem fit, and
protecting their right to freely choose counsel in this arbitration and in any ensuing
proceedings to enforce a potential award and to preserve the immunity provided in Articles

21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention.®

100. Claimants then addressed and contested a number of the allegations that the
PROCELAC Complaint contains.” They also argued that the allegations of the
PROCELAC’s prosecutor not only contradict applicable international law, such as the ICSID
Convention, but also contradict Argentine law because Law 14,034 should be considered

repealed under Argentina’s current constitutional regime.”!

*7 Claimants’ Reply, | 22.
88 Claimants’ Reply, | 28.
® Claimants’ Reply, | 30.
% Claimants’ Reply, {ff 34-44.
°! Claimants’ Reply, 431.

35

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

101. In sum, according to Claimants, both the TAG Complaint and the PROCELAC
Complaint represent an abuse of Argentina’s domestic criminal process for the purpose of
avoiding the payment of compensation required under international law for the admitted
expropriation of Claimants’ investment in Argentina. They further represent an attempt to
intimidate Claimants, their court-appointed receivers, their attorneys, their funder, and even

this Tribunal, to illicitly influence the final award.»

3. Claimants’ Request For Provisional Measures

102. Claimants asserted that the Tribunal has the power to issue the provisional measures
requested and noted that Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID

Arbitration Rules set forth the requirements of an application for provisional measures.”

103. Claimants submitted that Article 47 of the ICSID Convention allows the Tribunal to
grant provisional measures based on two, and only two, criteria: (a) the “provisional measures
should be taken to preserve the rights of either Party;” and (b) the “circumstances must so
require it.” According to Claimants, the latter standard has been interpreted as meaning that

the provisional measures be both “necessary” and “urgent.”**

104. In particular, Claimants asserted that the requested provisional measures (i) would be
taken to preserve Claimants’ rights,”° (ii) are necessary to preserve them and avoid significant

harm,” and (iii) it is urgent that the Tribunal issue them.”

105. With respect to preservation of their rights, Claimants submitted that by launching
the criminal proceedings, Respondent was unlawfully seeking to prevent Claimants from

pursuing their BIT claim and eventually enforcing this Tribunal’s final award. Relying on

° Claimants’ Reply, | 46.
°° Claimants’ Reply, ff 47-49.
°4 Claimants’ Reply, | 50.
°S Claimants’ Reply, {ff 52-62.
% Claimants’ Reply, {ff 63-75.
7 Claimants’ Reply, {ff 76-79.

36

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

the findings in Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine®’ and City Oriente Limited v. Republic of Ecuador
and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador),? Claimants noted that
provisional measures are appropriate to preserve a tribunal’s mission to determine finally the
issues between the parties and to protect a party from actions that prejudice the
implementation of an eventual award. Provisional measures are thus necessary to preserve

Claimants’ right to access to justice and to enforce their rights under the BIT.!°

106. According to Claimants, other rights affected by Respondent’s criminal accusations
include the obstruction of their right to present an effective defense (i.e., without improper
interference from Respondent), and Claimants’ right to access to legal counsel, both of which
have been acknowledged by the Quiborax v. Bolivia and Libananco v. Turkey tribunals.'°!
In addition, the provisional measures are necessary to preserve Claimants’ rights to the status
quo (and restoration thereof) and to the non-aggravation of the dispute. Claimants also
submitted that Respondent’s conduct increased its damages by way of expenses incurred in
relation to the criminal defense in Argentina, reputational moral damages, and further

breaches to the fair and equitable treatment standard provided for in the BIT.'

107. In respect of irreparable harm, Claimants maintained that there is no stand-alone
requirement to prove irreparable harm for granting provisional measures. Referring to the
Tribunal’s reasons in Procedural Order No. 4, Claimants said that the only requirement is to
demonstrate urgency and necessity. In this regard, Claimants submitted that necessity means
that provisional measures must be required to avoid harm or prejudice, including harm caused
to the integrity of ICSID arbitration proceedings, being inflicted upon the applicant.
Claimants noted that the alleged requirement that harm must be “irreparable” is not found in

Article 37 of the ICSID Convention or Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules and that many

°8 ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18.

° ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21 (“City Oriente v. Ecuador”).
‘© Claimants’ Reply, 4 52-54.

‘©! Claimants’ Reply, 455.

‘© Claimants’ Reply, 4 57-61.

37

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

tribunals have found that the harm at risk need only be significant. They also submitted that
a number of tribunals have found that a direct relationship between criminal proceedings and
an ICSID arbitration may justify the preservation of a claimant’s rights in ICSID arbitrations

by way of provisional measures.!°?

108. According to Claimants, the provisional measures are necessary to protect their

ability to pursue their claims before the Tribunal for the following reasons:

. Respondent’s criminal proceedings and the international media campaign it
has staged have created an atmosphere designed to hinder Claimants’ ability
to pursue their claims before the Tribunal by exerting undue pressure on
Claimants to desist from the claim, on their counsel to desist from representing
their clients in this arbitration, and on their funder, Burford, to cease to

provide funds to Claimants.

. If the requested measures are not granted, Respondent may continue to exert
such pressure during any future annulment or enforcement proceedings, given
that Respondent has stated that the criminal proceedings it has initiated might

take years.

. Respondent’s measures threaten the status quo of the arbitration and threaten
to aggravate and extend the dispute. The measures also disregard the
immunities provided for in Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention. The
use of Argentina’s court system to antagonize the Parties and unduly
intimidate Claimants to desist from their complaint in this arbitration is

sufficient to demonstrate irreparable harm.

. Respondent’s conduct complained of undermines the integrity of the arbitral

proceedings, which cannot be compensated by a monetary award.

'©3 Claimants’ Reply, 463, 65 and the various sources cited there.

38

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

. The criminal proceedings are exclusively based on arguments and
submissions made before this Tribunal. In this regard, Respondent is
undermining the integrity of the process by having recourse to an alternative
forum in violation of Articles 26 and 53 of the ICSID Convention. The
criminal investigation against Claimants’ counsel and funder are intended to
deprive Claimants of the legal expertise and capital required to advance their

claims in this arbitration.

. The due process rights of Claimants, their representatives, counsel and funder
would be compromised in the domestic criminal proceedings despite
Respondent’s assurances. In this regard, Claimants’ concerns are said to be
illustrated by Respondent’s refusal to produce a copy of the PROCELAC

Complaint when requested to do so by the Tribunal.

. Respondent’s statements with respect to the time required for the criminal
investigations to take place are not accurate. Within two months of
Respondent’s Response, the PROCELAC has concluded its investigation and

has proceeded to file a complaint with the Public Prosecutor.

. Suspending the criminal proceedings would not disproportionately burden
Respondent. While Claimants would suffer irreparable harm if the
provisional measures are not granted, Respondent would not incur any
meaningful harm. Further, the Spanish creditors in Claimants’ insolvency
proceedings have no legal basis for a double recovery. Any payment by
Respondent would be made pursuant to an award issued by an ICSID tribunal
and it is unlikely that the Spanish authorities would consider that Respondent

was in breach of any legal obligation for complying with any such award. !°*

‘64 Claimants’ Reply, 474-75.

39

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures
109. On the question of urgency, Claimants argued that, according to ICSID jurisprudence,
such as in Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of Tanzania,! “urgency”
simply means that the provisional relief cannot await the outcome of the award on the merits.
Claimants state that Respondent’s argument that the criminal proceedings will take
considerable time assumes that no adverse consequences or harm will arise unless and until
the parties investigated are either indicted or convicted. However, the mere fact that the
criminal investigation has given rise to a formal complaint before the Argentine courts while
Claimants’ Application was pending indicates that the granting of interim measures cannot
await the issuance of an award on the merits. Claimants submit that contrary to Respondent’s
characterization of its criminal proceedings, these are not a legitimate exercise of a State’s
police powers. Rather, the criminal investigation is intended to deprive Claimants of the
legal expertise and capital to advance their claims in arbitration and to, ultimately, avoid

complying with the final award.'°°

110. Finally, Claimants submitted that this criminal proceeding is not a legitimate exercise
of a State’s police powers. Rather, the criminal investigation is tailored to deprive Claimants
of the legal expertise and capital to advance their claims before this Tribunal and ultimately

to avoid complying with the final award.'°”

111. As indicated previously, Claimants modified and extended the scope of the relief
requested in their Application. They revised their request for relief to request the award of
the following provisional measures:

(i) confirm that Argentina’s conduct is in violation of Article 22 of the ICSID
Convention;

(ii) order Argentina to restore the status quo ante by ceasing and desisting the
criminal investigation;

5 ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22 (“Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania”).
16 Claimants’ Reply, 76-77.
‘67 Claimants’ Reply, 476-79.

40

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

(iii) order Argentina to refrain from further harassing Claimants, their counsel,
and their funder through baseless domestic proceedings and unlawful resort to the
media;

(iv) enjoin Argentina from otherwise further aggravating the dispute between the
Parties;

(v) order Argentina to pay the costs of this provisional measures proceeding;

(vi) order Argentina to pay the cost of Claimants’, their representatives’,
counsel’s, and funder’s cost of defense in the local criminal proceedings;

(vii) order Argentina to pay Claimants damages for moral and reputational injuries
inflicted on their counsel and funder; and

(viii) order Argentina to provide satisfaction to Claimants.

Additionally, if Argentina fails to comply with the Tribunal’s order regarding (ii),
(iii) and (iv), Claimants request a finding in the final award that Argentina has further
violated the Treaty’s obligation to afford fair and equitable treatment.!°*

D. Respondent’s Rejoinder

112. In its Rejoinder, Respondent repeated its position that Claimants’ Application does
not meet the requirements for the provisional measures to be granted. In particular, it
submitted that (i) the provisional measures requested are not intended to protect a right of
Claimants in connection with their claim before ICSID;!” (ii) there is no risk of irreparable

harm for Claimants;!'° and (iii) there is no urgency or danger in the delay for Claimants.!!!

1. There Is No Right Sought To Be Protected In Connection With Claimants’
Claim Before ICSID

113. In this regard, Respondent submitted that (1) there is no threat to exclusivity, status

quo, non-aggravation of the dispute or integrity of the proceeding;!'? and (2) immunity does

not mean impunity.!!°

108 Claimants’ Reply, § 80-81.

© Respondent’s Rejoinder, 4 11-40.
"© Respondent’s Rejoinder, 4 41-83.
""! Respondent’s Rejoinder, 4 84-98.
2 Respondent’s Rejoinder, 4 11-22.
"3 Respondent’s Rejoinder, 4] 23-40.

4l

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

114. Respondent asserted that in their Application, Claimants had failed to identify the
rights that are the subject of their claim before ICSID whose protection they seek by way of
Claimants’ Application. Further, Claimants had stated in their Application that the TAG
Complaint challenged by them did not undermine those rights.''* Without identifying the
rights whose protection they sought, Claimants in their Application merely stated that the
criminal complaint in question undermined the integrity of the arbitration in violation of
Articles 26 and 53 of the ICSID Convention.''> According to Respondent, Claimants simply
state that “Argentina’s criminal proceedings do not constitute a legitimate exercise of a
State’s police powers,” but fail to provide any evidence to support their assertion. In this

regard, Claimants had failed to meet their burden of proof.'!

115. In respect of the element of necessity pleaded by Claimants, Respondent maintained
that generally stating that a criminal investigation affects the status quo aggravates the
dispute and undermines the integrity of the proceeding is not sufficient for a provisional
measure to be granted.'!’ Relying on the decision of the tribunal in Churchill Mining and
Planet Mining Pty Ltd. v. Republic of Indonesia,''® Respondent argued that without any
concrete element of intimidation, harassment or otherwise abusive behavior, provisional
measures cannot be justified. In Respondent’s view, Claimants in this case have not met
their burden of proof, since merely claiming that being the subject of a criminal investigation

is intimidating does not suffice to obtain protection through provisional measures.!!?

116. Finally, Respondent cited the findings of tribunals to the effect that when issuing

provisional measures the State’s sovereignty should not be unduly encroached.'?°

"4 Respondent’s Rejoinder, 11.

"15 Respondent’s Rejoinder, § 12.

Respondent’s Rejoinder, | 14.

"17 Respondent’s Rejoinder, {ff 15-16.

48 ICSID Case No. ARB/12/14 and ARB/12/40 (“Churchill Mining v. Indonesia’).
"19 Respondent’s Rejoinder, {16-19 and the sources cited there.

'20 Respondent’s Rejoinder, ff 20-21 and the sources cited there.

116

 

42

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

117. With regard to the question of immunity, Respondent asserted that the immunity
provided for in Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention is functional, i.e., ratione
materiae, and not ratione personae, as Claimants incorrectly plead in their Reply.
Respondent cited the decision of the International Court of Justice in the Case concerning the
Arrest Warrant of 11 April 2000 to support its assertion that the invocation of arguments of

immunity to obtain impunity cannot be admitted.'?!

118. Respondent distinguished between personal immunity (granted to Heads of State
from the jurisdiction of foreign courts while in office) from functional immunity (granted
only with respect to specifically identified acts). It then relied on the wording of Article 21
of the ICSID Convention and cited the preparatory work of the Convention where it was
noted “that parties would in fact be immune only in respect of acts done before the tribunal
as parties to the dispute.” Thus, in Respondent’s view, the acts of persons appearing in ICSID
proceedings that are not performed “in the exercise of their functions” fall outside the scope

of the immunities set forth in Article 22 of the ICSID Convention.!

119. According to Respondent, the Complaints instituted by the Argentine Treasury
Attorney’s General Office and PROCELAC are related to the Funding Agreement between
Burford and Claimants, as well as to the possible commission of the crime of attempted fraud.
It maintained that the subject matter of the Complaints does not relate to an event that took
place before the Tribunal. Rather, the TAG Complaint was based on the Funding Agreement,
which Respondent discovered during these proceedings and submitted in evidence, and on
the exchange of communications between Burford and the court-appointed receivers of Air
Comet, which allegedly came to the knowledge of Respondent and was submitted in the
arbitration proceedings with the Tribunal’s leave in early 2015.'> Consequently, the subject

of the criminal proceedings did not take place before the Tribunal but is, in fact, external to

'21 Respondent’s Rejoinder, {f{ 2, 24.

22 Respondent's Rejoinder, 4 27-29.

23 Respondent’s Rejoinder, § 32 and the source cited there. The Respondent goes on to allege that Claimants
attempted to keep these circumstances secret.

43

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

these arbitration proceedings. Further, Claimants’ reliance on Caratube v. Kazakhstan I
(concerning witness intimidation) and Libananco v. Turkey (where there was a breach of the
lawyer-client privilege by intercepting communications between Libananco Holdings Co.
Limited and its counsel) is factually inapposite in light of the different circumstances of this

case. '4

120. Finally, Respondent submitted that during the hearing on jurisdiction, Claimants did
not claim that there had been violation of immunities, nor question the independence of the
Argentine judiciary, when two witnesses (Mr. Diaz Ferran and Mr. Pascual Arias, the
ultimate shareholders of Claimants) reported that they had been summoned before Argentine
criminal courts in another investigation. On this basis, Claimants’ Application is at odds
with their previous position and cannot be accepted because it violates the principle of good

faith and more specifically the prohibition of venire contra factum proprium.'?>

2. There Is No Risk Of Irreparable Harm For Claimants

121. Respondent contended that (1) the Complaints do not pose a risk of irreparable
harm;!?¢ (2) the Complaints were made in compliance with a legal duty;!2” and (3) court

proceedings are sufficiently guaranteed.'?*

122. According to Respondent, the Complaints do not pose a risk of irreparable harm, nor
do they jeopardize Claimants’ ability to develop their claims before this Tribunal, contrary
to Claimants’ assertions. Respondent says that Claimants’ allegations have not been proved
or even alleged on a concrete basis, but are merely generic statements with no supporting

documentation or evidence. Further, Respondent said that the Complaints are only the first

'24 Respondent’s Rejoinder, §f] 31-36.

Bs ‘Respondent’ 's Rejoinder, {| 37-39. The Respondent noted that the criminal proceedings in question were at
a“... much more advanced stage than the [Complaints] on which the [Application] is based.” The criminal
investigation in question was stated to be those before National Criminal Court No. 27, Secretariat 124 of the
City of Buenos Aires (which appear to have been commenced in 2002 in relation to the alleged [...]

'26 Respondent’s Rejoinder, §f] 46-57.

27 Respondent’s Rejoinder, §f] 58-65.

28 Respondent’s Rejoinder, §f] 66-83.

 

44

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

step in the beginning of criminal investigations. The investigations themselves are still to be
carried out, and the courts have to decide whether there is sufficient merit for the respective
criminal cases to continue their course.'? In Respondents view, it is not reasonable to seek
the suspension of a criminal investigation before the clarification of the events under

investigation.

123. Respondent also submitted that provisional measures are, by definition, temporary
and meant to cease upon the issuance of the award that settles the dispute. Claimants’
submissions appeared to request the issuance of a measure whose effects persist beyond the
award, which is clearly inadmissible. Further, Claimants request specific relief on the merits,
such as compensation and moral damages, which are not appropriate in an application for

provisional measures.!*°

124. With regard to the second defence, Respondent stated that the TAG Complaint was
simply aimed at informing the relevant authorities of the possible commission of a crime
requiring public prosecution of which it had become aware, and the Public Prosecutor’s
Office considered that there was sufficient evidence to initiate the appropriate preliminary
investigation.'*! Claimants’ submission that the legal and factual issues raised in the TAG
Complaint are closely related to the issues that have been extensively discussed in this
arbitration are opportunistic and contradict Claimants’ original position when they first
became acquainted with the complaint: “the criminal complaint that Attorney General
Abbona filed on February 23, 2015 - whatever its content may be - has nothing to do with

99132

the merits of this arbitration. Respondent contended that such criminal proceedings do

not affect the exclusivity of the ICSID proceedings under Article 26 of the ICSID

Convention.!*3

29 Respondent’s Rejoinder, 4/47.
'30 Respondent’s Rejoinder, {ff 46-50.
'3! Respondent’s Rejoinder, $f 58-60.
'32 Respondent’s Rejoinder, § 62.

'33 Respondent’s Rejoinder, | 64.

45

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

125. In respect of its third defence, Respondent referred again to the lack of objection by
Claimants concerning the criminal proceedings in Argentina involving Messrs. Diaz Ferran
and Pascual Arias and which were referred to during the hearing on jurisdiction and
considered this to be sufficient to dismiss Claimants’ Application.'** Further, Respondent
submitted that the current status of the PROCELAC Complaint is that it is still within the
preliminary investigation stage. Therefore, the investigation into the possible commission of
criminal offenses has no impact on the resolution of this arbitration and there is no urgency

to justify the issuance of provisional measures.'°

126. Respondent also reiterated that the criminal proceedings will be based on the
guarantees enshrined in the Argentine Constitution and international instruments with
constitutional status. Hence, the guarantees to achieve an independent and impartial

administration of justice are protected under Argentine law.'*°

Finally, according to
Respondent, Claimants can rely upon another due process guarantee, which relates to the
possibility of resorting to a system of subsidiary protection of rights - the Inter-American
system of human rights protection, once all internal avenues of protection of their

fundamental rights and freedoms are exhausted, and of obtaining a favorable judgment.'>”

3. There Is No Urgency Or Danger In The Delay For Claimants

127. Respondent submitted that Claimants’ conduct in this arbitration confirms that the
measures requested are not urgent. Claimants’ Application was submitted nearly four months
after the TAG Complaint that motivated such requests was filed in February 2015.'*
Respondent also noted that during the proceedings on provisional measures, Claimants

requested that deadlines be extended and a hearing be held. Respondent asserted that these

'4 Respondent’s Rejoinder, {¥ 67-68.
'35 Respondent’s Rejoinder, {¥ 69-73.
'36 Respondent’s Rejoinder, 4 75-82.
'37 Respondent’s Rejoinder, 4 82-83.
'38 Respondent’s Rejoinder, §f 84, 88.

46

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

facts show that the provisional measure requested is not “urgent” for this Tribunal to grant
it.39

128. Respondent also suggested that Claimants had misrepresented its position by
contending that it allegedly stated that the TAG Complaint would not give rise to a “criminal
complaint” in the near future. Respondent said that what it asserted was that it was to be
expected that a “decision” on the TAG Complaint would not be issued before the Tribunal

renders its final award.'“°

129. Finally, Respondent noted that Claimants again referred to the International Court of
Justice decision in the Asylum case for “the principle that ‘urgent cases’ do not include the
danger of regular prosecution” and stated that Claimants had not demonstrated that the

exception to that principle, that arbitrary action had been substituted for the rule of law.'4!

130. Hence, according to Respondent, the measures requested by Claimants do not meet
the “urgency” requirement that must be satisfied for a provisional measure to be granted by

this Tribunal.

E. The Parties’ Oral Submissions

131. In their oral submissions, Claimants clarified and expanded upon their previous
written submissions, taking into account Respondent’s Rejoinder. By way of overview,
Claimants stated that while they recognized that a State has authority to investigate and
prosecute real crime, it has no right to abuse its criminal process for an improper purpose
such as harassing or intimidating counsel or parties by trying to undermine the integrity of

the arbitration and the award.'?

'39 Respondent’s Rejoinder, { 89.

'40 Respondent’s Rejoinder, 4 93-94, 96.
'1 Respondent’s Rejoinder, 4] 96-97.

'# Hearing transcripts (“TR”), p 15.

47

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

132. Claimants emphasized what they said are the mistaken premises of the criminal
proceedings and the lack of merit of the TAG Complaint, the PROCELAC Complaint and
the investigation commenced by the Public Prosecutor. In this regard, Respondent’s
fundamental premise that it might have to pay Claimants or their creditors twice is false since
the creditors have brought no other claims against Argentina and the only form in which they

can obtain compensation is through Claimants in this arbitration.'#

133. Claimants also addressed each of the criminal allegations raised in the Complaints,
noting that each of them was intimately linked to the arbitration and matters before the
Tribunal. In this regard, Claimants say that the claims against their Argentine counsel for a
breach of Article 1 of Law 14,034 were clearly stated in the PROCELAC Complaint to be
purely on the basis of their participation as counsel before the Tribunal in these proceedings
and would deny Claimants in this case, and in any other case, access to local law expertise
and have a chilling effect on the exercise of ICSID arbitration rights in general.'*4 Claimants
also submitted that Law 14,034 could not have been intended to apply in the circumstances
of this case and that pursuing complaints against Claimants’ Argentine counsel on this basis
constituted a violation of international law, the United Nations Convention on Human Rights

and Article 22 of the ICSID Convention, amongst others.

134. With respect to the allegations of fraud contained in the Complaints, Claimants
submitted that each of these was based on arguments or evidence before the Tribunal and the
subject of its inquiry. In this respect, Claimants say that the PROCELAC Complaint bases
one of its allegations of fraud on the fact that Claimants have brought a derived or indirect
claim which is inadmissible under the BIT. The PROCELAC Complaint also notes that
although Respondent put forward this argument in the arbitration proceedings in the
jurisdictional phase, the issue has yet to be resolved “...even though it is an essential point

'8 TR, pp 16-17. The Claimants suggested that the Respondent is not seeking to protect the creditors but,

rather, to avoid compensating them.
'4-TR, pp 19, 53-58; PROCELAC Complaint, Exhibit C-1198, pp 22, 24. The Claimants refer to the complaint
relating to Law 14,034 as the peace time equivalent of an allegation of treason.

48

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

of the allegedly illegal manoeuvre that is intended against the Argentine Republic and the
bankruptcy creditors.”!4> Claimants point out that this issue was considered and rejected as
a basis to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in the Decision on Jurisdiction at paragraphs 208 through

214.

135. With respect to the allegations of fraud based on the Funding Agreement and the
Assignment Agreement, Claimants submit that these agreements were found by the Tribunal,
in the Decision on Jurisdiction, not to have affected the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and were
currently before the Tribunal which had received substantial evidence that the agreements in
question had been approved by Air Comet’s and Claimants’ insolvency receivers and

approved by the Spanish courts.!4°

In addition, Claimants said that the court-appointed
receivers have repeatedly confirmed their approval and the continuing validity of the Funding
Agreement, most recently in their sworn notarized declarations submitted as Exhibit C-
1200.'47 With respect to the Assignment Agreement, Claimants submitted that it clearly only
assigned the proceeds of an eventual award to Air Comet, after payment of fees owed to
Burford and counsel and did not transfer any claims or right to a claim, which remained with
Claimants. They also noted that the Assignment Agreement had been disclosed in the

insolvency proceedings and it has not been challenged in any court or by any creditor.'4*

136. Finally, with respect to King & Spalding’s authorization to represent Claimants,
Claimants submitted that this issue was also squarely before the Tribunal and there was
substantial evidence before it in support of the ongoing validity of the relevant powers of

attorney, including repeated statements from Claimants’ court-appointed receivers.!*”

'45 TR, pp 39-40, 78-79; PROCELAC Complaint, Exhibit C-1198, pp 11-13.

'46- TR, pp 23, 40-48.

'47 TR, p 46; Claimants’ demonstrative slides 34-36.

448 TR, pp 46-47.

' TR, pp 20-22, 48-53; Claimants’ demonstrative slides 42-47. Claimants also said that Respondent’s
suggestion, at Exhibit C-1198, p 23, that “...the legal representatives of King & Spalding would have included
in the case file invalid documents that accredit said capacity, in an attempt to induce the arbitral tribunal into
error, and in this manner obtain a ruling that obliges the Argentine state to make a payment to its detriment and
to the detriment of the creditors, leading to the referred criminal concept...” is completely contradicted by the
sworn, notarized statements of Claimants’ court-appointed receivers, Exhibit C-1200. The Claimants also

 

49

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

137. With respect to each of these issues, Claimants submitted that they were properly
before the Tribunal and that by commencing the criminal proceedings, Respondent was
attempting to supersede or impede the Tribunal’s determination of these issues, thereby
demonstrating that the criminal proceedings relate to the arbitration and violate the principle

of exclusivity of ICSID jurisdiction set out in Article 26 of the ICSID Convention.'*”

138. Claimants also submitted that the Complaints and the criminal investigation
commenced by the Federal Prosecutor breached a number of their protected rights, including
their right to enforce their rights under the BIT through ICSID arbitration conducted fairly
and in good faith, the right to the exclusivity provided for in Article 26 of the ICSID
Convention, the right to have the Tribunal determine its own jurisdiction and the merits of
the case, the right of immunity of counsel, representatives and agents under Article 22 of the
ICSID Convention, the preservation of the status quo and non-aggravation of the dispute,
and the right to an enforceable award under Article 53 of the ICSID Convention. Claimants
submitted that all of these rights related to the integrity of the arbitration proceedings, which

151

the Tribunal had the authority to control in its inherent jurisdiction. Claimants also

emphasized that Respondent, through the joint press conference held by the Treasury
Attorney General and the head of PROCELAC had unnecessarily and improperly publicized
the Complaints, thereby aggravating the dispute and harming Claimants, their counsel, their
court-appointed receivers and their funder.'**

139. In their oral submissions, Claimants further developed their claim and relief requested
in respect of the immunity provided by Article 22 of the ICSID Convention. In this regard,

Claimants submitted that Argentina is bound by Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention

submitted that the criminal chamber of the Spanish Audiencia Nacional of 7 September 2015, Exhibit C-1210,
recognized the legal representation of Claimants by King & Spalding in these proceedings.

150 TR, pp 77-79; Claimants’ opening statement slides 61-68, 81.

‘51 TR, pp 25-28, 70-79.

'3 TR, pp 26-27, 32-33; PowerPoint presentation used at the press conference and transcript of the press
conference. In addition, Claimants emphasized that the press conference had been televised and made
accessible on the PROCELAC’s website.

 

50

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

and that each of Claimants, their court-appointed receivers, their counsel and their funder
were covered by the immunity provided for in Article 22 of the ICSID Convention from legal
process, including the Complaints and criminal investigation. Claimants also submitted that
the Complaints and the criminal investigation breached Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID
Convention by targeting protected individuals with respect to acts performed by them in the
exercise of their functions in pursuit of the arbitration. According to Claimants,
Respondent’s conduct in pursuing the Complaints and criminal investigation was intended to
intimidate and coerce Claimants, their court-appointed receivers, their counsel and their
funder and to derail the arbitration and frustrate the enforcement of the final award. This
conduct justifies the granting of the provisional measure requested to order Respondent to
cease and desist from pursuing the criminal investigation as well as the permanent injunction

requested in this regard.

140. In addition, Claimants submitted that they had the legitimate expectation that their
BIT arbitration with Respondent would proceed as provided by the ICSID Convention,
including the immunity afforded by Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention. Claimants
submitted that Respondent’s breach of the expectation, protected by the terms of the BIT,

was justiciable as such.'*

141. Claimants submitted that each of them, their court-appointed receivers, their counsel
and their funder'*+ were covered by the immunity afforded by Article 22 of the ICSID
Convention on the basis of the clear language in that article as “persons appearing in
proceedings under [the Convention] as parties, agents, counsel, advocates, witnesses or

experts.” Further, Claimants submitted that, contrary to Respondent’s argument, the

  

'33 TR, pp 59-60; Claimants’ demonstrative slides 57, 69.

'S With respect to Claimants’ funder, Burford, Claimants submitted that as an “agent” of Claimants, it was
covered in the same manner as the escrow agent was found to covered by immunity under Article 22 of the
ICSID Convention in the tribunal’s Decision on Preliminary Issues, dated 23 June 2008, in the Libananco v.
Turkey case. According to Claimants, they were required to turn to a litigation funder after the Respondent's
uncompensated expropriation of their investment in order to permit them to pursue the arbitration. See TR, pp
60-61.

Sl

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

Complaints and criminal investigation specifically targeted acts performed in pursuit of the
arbitration and reviewed the criminal offences alleged in the Complaints. According to
Claimants, the allegations contained in the Complaints and the subject of the criminal
investigation repeatedly refer to this arbitration and matters before the Tribunal, including
Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction based on an indirect or “derivative” claim, the Funding
Agreement which was executed exclusively in pursuit of the arbitration and King &

Spalding’s authority to represent Claimants in the arbitration.'*>

142. As concerns the relief sought by Claimants, at the Hearing they refined their request

as follows:

As provisional measures:

i, Declare that Argentina has breached the rights to be protected (e.g.,
Claimants’ right to good-faith ICSID arbitration, including immunity under
Articles 21/22, preservation of the status quo, and non-aggravation of the
dispute)

ii, Order Argentina to (a) restore the status quo ante by ceasing and desisting the
criminal investigation and (b) refrain from further aggravating the dispute

In the final award:

i, Permanently enjoin Argentina from criminally prosecuting Claimants and
their representatives, counsel and funder, for actions taken in relation to this
Arbitration

ii, Order Argentina to pay the costs of this provisional measures proceeding

iii. Order Argentina to pay the cost of Claimants’ and their representatives’,
counsel’s and funder’s cost of defense in the local criminal proceedings

iv. Order Argentina to pay Claimants damages for moral and reputational injuries
inflicted on their representatives, counsel and funder!’

143. Further, Claimants explained the relief requested in the following terms:

So, first, as interim relief, we request that [the Tribunal] make a declaration that
Argentina has violated each of the rights at issue... and then, second, as interim

'55 TR, pp 61-67; Claimants’ demonstrative slides 60-68.
‘56 Claimants’ demonstrative slide 99.

52

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

relief, we request that [the Tribunal] order Argentina to cease and desist from the
criminal proceedings, and order it, once again, not to further aggravate or extend the
dispute until such time as the Tribunal issues its Final Award.

Now, that is all that we are seeking... as immediate, urgent interim relief, and we
ask that [the Tribunal] issue an order to that effect as soon as possible.

Now, the remaining requests... can all be deferred and be incorporated into the Final
Award. And these include, perhaps most importantly, a request that [the Tribunal]
convert the interim injunction into a permanent one that would forever bar Argentina
from criminally prosecuting Claimants, their agents, counsel, and funder for actions
taken during the course of and in relation to this arbitration for which we had ICSID
immunity.

In addition, the Award should include all costs of this Provisional Measures hearing,
reimbursement by Argentina of the attorney's fees that Claimants, their
representatives, counsel, and funder have incurred in defending against the criminal
accusations in Argentina, and damages for moral and reputational injury to
Claimants, their representatives, counsel, and funder, and all these additional
damages should also include a compound post-Award interest.!57

144. By way of a general response to the various aspects of the relief requested in
Claimants’ Application, Respondent submitted that requests for a declaration of a breach of
international law and any request for compensation was beyond the appropriate scope of an
application for interim measures. According to Respondent, such requests were issues on
the merits of an award, and not intended to be addressed in an application for interim
measures.'** In addition, Respondent submitted that Claimants’ request that the Tribunal
make a finding of a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard under the BIT in the
event that Respondent did not comply with a number of the provisional measures requested
was also clearly beyond the scope of an application for interim measures. In this regard,

Respondent noted that Claimants were requesting new substantive relief in this arbitration

'57 Claimants’ demonstrative slide 99; TR, pp 85-87. The Claimants then went on to provide argument and
refer to various decisions in support of both the interim and permanent relief sought. In respect of the remedy
of satisfaction, which Claimants had set out in their request for relief in their Reply, they submitted that this
was properly due for the various breaches of international law committed by the Respondent, including the
breach of the right to immunity under Article 22 of the ICSID Convention, the right to an arbitration conducted
in good faith, the right to preservation of the status quo, and the right to fair and equitable treatment under the
BIT. They went on to state that insofar as the remedy of satisfaction was concerned, Claimants believed that a
declaration of the Respondent's breaches would be sufficient remedy: see TR, pp 86-87.

158 TR, p 152.

53

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

and that such new claims cannot be introduced by a claimant after the submission of its reply
on the merits without the authorization of the tribunal, which had not been requested or

obtained in this case.!?

145. Respondent repeated its position that there was no factual or legal basis for the

provisional measures requested by Claimants.

146. Respondent went on to submit that there were serious indicia in materials before the
Tribunal to permit a reasonable suspicion that prima facie criminal conduct had occurred to
the detriment of the mass of creditors in the Spanish insolvency proceedings affecting
Claimants and to the detriment of the interest of Argentina. According to Respondent, the
facts and conduct giving rise to this suspicion were completely outside of the realm of the
arbitration proceedings and, therefore, were not protected by the immunities provided for in

the ICSID Convention.

147. Respondent also addressed the process pursuant to which the Complaints and the
criminal investigation would be handled under Argentine law and the due process guarantees

afforded by independent courts consistent with constitutional guarantees.

148. Respondent also addressed the principles and rules of international law applicable in
this case and Claimants’ failure to meet the requirements for the grounding of provisional
measures in this case, including the lack of an interest to be protected, the lack of urgency

and the failure to demonstrate a risk of irreparable harm.!°°

149. In respect of the reasons which led the office of the Treasury Attorney General to file
the TAG Complaint, Respondent stated that the basis for its reasonable suspicion of criminal

conduct had been discovered in the arbitration proceedings when it learned that Claimants

'S9 TR, pp 153-154. In addition, the Respondent submitted that by requesting relief on the merits and
compensation for the breaches alleged by Claimants, the latter had demonstrated that, in fact, any damage or
harm that they might suffer was compensable by damages and, therefore, not irreparable.

‘6 TR, pp 100-102.

54

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

had assigned their right to collect on an eventual favorable award in this arbitration to Air
Comet, after deduction of costs for their legal advisors, consultants and experts. Respondent
noted that Claimants’ funder, Burford, was not a party to this agreement and that Claimants
and Air Comet were preparing a scenario conducive to the signing of the Funding Agreement.
The Funding Agreement was then entered into, without the participation of Air Comet.
Respondent said that pursuant to the terms of the Funding Agreement, Claimants turned to
King & Spalding and Burford to take the necessary measures to ensure that the funds
recovered in an eventual award in Claimants’ favor would be deposited into an escrow
account, satisfactory to Burford, located outside the United States. Thereafter, if Claimants
receive any award proceeds, these shall be paid immediately to the nominated lawyers or the
escrow account from which Claimants and Burford direct that the recovery amount due to
Burford shall be paid as soon as practicable and then other outstanding invoices owed to
counsel and consultants shall be paid, with the remainder going to Claimants. Respondent
submitted that this structure established by the Assignment Agreement and the Funding
Agreement was intended to elude the mass of creditors in the various insolvency proceedings
affecting the Grupo Marsans, to which Claimants and Air Comet belong. They also noted
that Mr. Diaz Ferran, one of the ultimate shareholders of Claimants, and other individuals,
have been convicted of concealment of assets and a conspiracy to defraud in the insolvency

proceedings affecting Grupo Marsans.'*!

150. Respondent said that it learned of the Assignment Agreement and Funding
Agreement only by chance, in the context of the arbitration, and that they were not filed or
disclosed by Claimants. Rather, Respondent said that Claimants refused to provide a copy

of the Assignment Agreement when Respondent first requested a copy of it in April 2010.'

'61 TR, pp 106-113.

'@ Qn 23 April 2010, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal require that Claimants provide all available
information with respect to a report in a newspaper article in which it was reported that Grupo Marsans had
ceded part of its claim against Argentina to an investment fund in return for US $25 million to cover legal
expenses. In response, on 28 May 2010, Claimants stated that they had not sold their claim as alleged and that
no such transaction had occurred or was contemplated. They also objected to the request on the basis that they
had no obligation to disclose agreements with third parties with respect to the funding of their costs of the

55

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

Further, Respondent said that the Funding Agreement was submitted in these proceedings by
it, not Claimants.'® Respondent said that Claimants were not transparent in this regard and
with respect to other information and documents of which it has learned in the court

proceedings in Spain or by chance during the course of the arbitration hearing.

151. Respondent also pointed to the attempts by Claimants to extend or ratify the original
powers of attorney granted to King & Spalding as adding to the well-founded nature of its
suspicion of the commission of criminal conduct. In this regard, Respondent said that the
three letters submitted by Claimants in 2013 (Exhibits C-842, C-843 and C-844) were
manifestly flawed since they were not in public form, not dated and not approved or filed
with the court and yet it was only shortly before the hearing on provisional measures that the
court-appointed receivers sought to submit notarized statements confirming the powers of
attorney and ratifying the representation of Claimants by King & Spalding. In any event,
Respondent maintained that the notarized statements from the court-appointed receivers
(submitted as Exhibit C-1200) were still deficient in that they did not show a date certain of
the issuance of the letters and they do not show any approval or intervention by the judges in

the insolvency proceedings. '°

arbitration and noted that the Respondent had not supported its request for the production of documents by
demonstrating their necessity or otherwise complying with the usual requirements for production of documents.
The Claimants also submitted that the question of financing of their costs did not affect the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal: see Claimants letter of 28 May 2010. The Tribunal subsequently declined to order the production of
the documents requested by the Respondent at that early stage of the proceedings: see the instructions of the
Tribunal conveyed by the Secretariat's message of 16 June 2010.

‘6 Tt appears that the Assignment Agreement and the Funding Agreement were filed in the Air Comet
insolvency proceedings and were acknowledged and approved by the administrators/receivers in Air Comet’s
insolvency. These then applied to the relevant court for approval of the Funding Agreement and specifically
referred to the Assignment Agreement in their request. The court subsequently approved the
administrators/receivers’ consent to the Funding Agreement. It appears that the Funding Agreement was
submitted in evidence in these proceedings by the Respondent who obtained a copy from the Spanish lawyer
representing the Argentine Airlines as creditors in the insolvency proceedings of Air Comet and Claimants.

‘6! In this regard, the Respondent mentioned the insolvency proceedings of Claimants and correspondence
between the court-appointed receivers of Air Comet and Burford filed in the insolvency proceedings in Spain:
TR, pp 109-110. The Respondent also questioned whether Claimants’ court-appointed receivers had informed
the court of the Respondent’s counter-claim which would constitute another liability against the business of the
Grupo Marsans: see TR, p 110.

‘6S TR, pp 119-121.

56

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

152. Asa result, Respondent said that the office of the Treasury Attorney General had a
well-founded suspicion that criminal conduct had occurred. Further, according to
Respondent, the relevant facts and conduct, such as the signing of the Funding Agreement,

are outside the scope of the arbitration.'°

153. Respondent also further explained the legal duty on the office of the Treasury
Attorney General to report any crimes liable to prosecution observed by public officials or
employees.!*’ In accordance with that obligation, the office of the Treasury Attorney General
had submitted its complaint to the office of the Prosecutor General and, specifically, the
PROCELAC which is the specialized agency with the technical capability to investigate a
possible economic crime. It was then up to the PROCELAC to conduct an investigation of
the facts and information contained in the TAG Complaint and to draw up its conclusions

and present them to the appropriate federal court.'®*

154. Respondent went on to explain and emphasize that the scope of the investigation that
would be conducted as a result of the TAG Complaint and the PROCELAC Complaint was
determined by the federal prosecutor in charge of the case who has conduct of the
investigation. According to Respondent, in a note dated 21 September 2015, Federal
Prosecutor Marijuan had defined a more limited scope of investigation.’ According to
Respondent, the criminal investigation pursued by the Federal Prosecutor will address only
the alleged maneuvers aimed at channeling payment of an eventual award by way of the
Funding Agreement in order to elude the rights of the creditors in the insolvency proceedings
in Spain, thereby exposing Respondent to the risk of having to make a payment which would

not necessarily be final.'” As a result, since the Federal Prosecutor’s note does not mention

66 TR, p 118.

‘©? Pursuant to Article 177 of the ACC (Exhibit RA-691) and Article 249 of the ACC (Exhibit RA-692).

‘6 TR, pp 122-123. The Respondent submitted that the office of the Treasury Attorney General and the
PROCELAC acted pursuant to a legal duty and merely filed a criminal complaint. They did not promote a
prosecution in strict legal terms and were not parties to any criminal action: see TR, pp 116-117.

'® See the quoted passage from Federal Prosecutor Marijuan’s note of 21 September 2015 at { 68, above:
Exhibit C-1198.

17 TR, pp 125-126, 167-169, 174-177.

57

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

Law 14,034, no potential charges in respect of a breach of its provisions were being

investigated.!7!

155. In this regard, Respondent submitted that in his note, Federal Prosecutor Marijuan
restricted the scope of the investigation to “...the legal representatives, officers or directors”
of Burford, Air Comet and Claimants. According to Respondent, under Argentine law the
expression “legal representatives” (representantes legales) is a term of art having a specific
meaning which includes only the authorized legal representatives of a company such as its
president and officers or its directors and does not include legal counsel who may represent
a party in litigation. As a result, Respondent stated that King & Spalding and its lawyers as
well as Fargosi & Asociados and its lawyers were not included within the scope of the Federal

Prosecutor’s criminal investigation.!””

156. Respondent also reviewed the requirements for the granting of provisional measures
and the relevant sequence of events and facts and submitted that on this basis Claimants had
not demonstrated urgency,” a right to be protected or any irreparable harm or effect on

Claimants’ ability to pursue the arbitration.'”

157. In respect of Claimants’ submissions relating to immunity under the ICSID
Convention, Respondent submitted that this was not an issue as far as counsel to Claimants
were concerned since the criminal investigation did not include them within its scope.!”>
With respect to Burford, Respondent submitted that as a funder to Claimants it was not
included within the scope of immunity provided for in Article 22 of the ICSID Convention.

In this regard, Respondent pointed to the language of the Funding Agreement which

‘1 TR, pp 125-126, 164-165, 169.

'2 TR, pp 168-169, 174-178. The Respondent also submitted that the court-appointed receivers of Claimants
were not included within the scope of the Federal Prosecutor’s investigation since they were not the ones who
represented Claimants with respect to the documents in question: TR, p 178.

'® TR, pp 158-160.

'™4 TR, pp 161-162. Amongst other things, the Respondent submitted that the investigation commenced by the
Federal Prosecutor was merely at the investigative stage and that given that early status, there was no harm to
the legal situation of Claimants in the arbitration: TR, p 156.

"STR, p 169.

58

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

specifically provided that nothing in the agreement created a fiduciary, lawyer client or
agency relationship between Claimants and Burford.'© Respondent went on to distinguish
Burford’s status from that of the escrow agent in the Libananco v. Turkey case, noting that
in the latter case the escrow agent held shares as part of a mechanism decided by the arbitral

tribunal and was not an external funder.'””

158. In response to Respondent’s submissions in respect of the narrowing of the scope of
the criminal investigation by Federal Prosecutor Marijuan, Claimants made a number of
points. Among these was the submission that the note itself made no reference to narrowing
or setting the scope of the investigation. Rather, the note contained only a summary
description of alleged “maneuvers” subject to the Complaints and goes on to refer to several
documents, the three allegedly “apocryphal” letters from Claimants’ court-appointed

receivers and that the conduct subject of the investigation had the “purpose of obtaining sums

resulting from a potential award against the Argentine Republic illegally...”. As a result,

Claimants submitted that the note actually maintained the full scope of the TAG Complaint
and the PROCELAC Complaint.'"* Claimants also pointed to language contained in the
Request for Letters Rogatory issued by the Federal Prosecutor, which referred specifically to
King & Spalding as the “legal representative” of Claimants and that they were alleged to

have submitted “invalid documents” in the arbitration in order to certify their legal

capacity.'”? Claimants said that this contradicts Respondent’s interpretation of Federal

176 TR, pp 169-171. See also Funding Agreement, Exhibit RA-160, Article 15.3.

"7 TR, p 172. The Respondent also repeated its reference to the fact that Messrs. Diaz Ferran and Pascual Arias
had appeared to give testimony in an earlier criminal investigation commenced in 2002 and that Claimants had
described those proceedings as simply at the investigative stage and had not raised any complaint in respect of
that investigation or the hypothetical violation of the immunities provided for in the ICSID Convention.
Similarly, in the present investigation, no specific accusations have been made and, therefore, there was no
basis for complaint or possible grounds for a breach of any right to immunity under the ICSID Convention: TR,
pp 126-128,

"8 TR, pp 196-198. The Claimants also maintained that the only reason they were able to obtain a copy of the
PROCELAC Complaint and the investigation file was that Mr. Fargosi, Claimants’ Argentine counsel, was
granted access because he was the subject of or a party to the investigation.

" See Exhibit C-1215, p 2: “Having said that, and in order to set a legal framework to the request herein, I
make known that based on the records appearing on the case file, King & Spalding law firm - legal
representative of the companies Claimant before the ICSID - would have submitted invalid documents in the

59

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

Prosecutor Marijuan’s note as excluding counsel to Claimants from the scope of the criminal

investigation.'*°

159. In response to Respondent’s submissions regarding the inappropriateness of claiming
substantive relief in an application for interim measures, Claimants submitted that in order
to request interim measures they were required to establish the rights to be protected or a
predicate for ordering the provisional measures. In this regard, Claimants submitted that as
a predicate for the issuance of the restraining orders requested they had alleged various
breaches of rights that entitled them to protection, including the right to immunity. In
Claimants’ submission, it would be entirely appropriate for the Tribunal to find that the rights
in question had, in fact, been breached as part of their determination to grant the interim

measures requested.'*!

160. Finally, with respect to Respondent’s argument that Claimants’ request for relief in
the final award demonstrated that no risk of irreparable harm existed, Claimants submitted
that any such argument did not apply to the urgent interim relief requested in respect of

conduct alleged to affect the immunities under the ICSID Convention or threatening the

2

procedural integrity of the arbitral procedure.'** Further, Claimants also submitted that

granting relief such as an award of the defence fees incurred in defending against the criminal

proceedings was in no way inconsistent with the request for provisional measures.

arbitration proceedings to certify its legal capacity, in an attempt to lead the Arbitration Court into error, thus
making an award that would oblige the Argentine state to make a payment to the detriment of itself and of the
creditors of the failed companies.”

'80 TR, pp 200-202. The Claimants also referred to information contained on the Argentine Supreme Court’s
website which listed in its description of the PROCELAC Complaint both King & Spalding and Fargosi &
Asociados and all of the individual lawyers involved as counsel in the arbitration. In addition, Claimants
referred to the covering page of the Federal Prosecutor's file which listed as “imputados” in alphabetical order,
the first two lawyers from King & Spalding acting as counsel for Claimants, followed by the summary reference
to “and others” (y otros): see Exhibit C-1198. Further, Claimants also noted that in the English translation of
the Letters Rogatory provided by the Federal Prosecutor’s office, the term “representantes legales” used in
referring to King & Spalding appeared as “legal representative”: TR, pp 205-206; Exhibit C-1215. Finally,
Claimants also alleged that even if the Respondent's interpretation of Prosecutor Marijuan’s note were correct,
he could at any time broaden the scope of the proceedings.

'81 TR, pp 218-222.

1 TR, pp 222-223.

60

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

161. In its response, Respondent commented on Claimants’ interpretation of the Federal
Prosecutor’s Request for Letters Rogatory (Exhibit C-1215) and contested that King &
Spalding was named a subject of the investigation. Rather, Respondent submitted that in
referring to the Complaints being investigated, the Federal Prosecutor referred only to the
legal representatives, officers and executives of Burford and of Claimants. Further,
Respondent submitted that Claimants had not contested that under Argentine law the term
“legal representative” of a company does not include counsel authorized to represent the
company at trial.'*° In addition, Respondent noted that no mention of any possible infraction
of Law 14,034 was mentioned in the Federal Prosecutor’s Request for Letters Rogatory and
that this supported their interpretation of the Federal Prosecutor’s note that no investigation

for treason or its equivalent was being pursued.

162. Finally, Respondent referred to the various convictions in Spain of Mr. Diaz Ferran
and other individuals related to the Marsans Group regarding, amongst other things, the
concealment of assets subject to the insolvency proceedings of the Marsans Group in Spain.
In this context, Respondent referred to the judgment of 7 September 2015 of the Spanish
National Criminal Court as demonstrating the illegitimate nature of the payment mechanism
provided for in the Funding Agreement.'** It also repeated its position that the TAG
Complaint relating to the Funding Agreement, seen in the context of the court’s judgment,
was not related to the arbitration.'*° Finally, Respondent made reference to a recent criminal
complaint filed by Aerolineas Argentinas S.A. (“ARSA”), in which ARSA had alleged the
misappropriation and mismanagement of funds paid by Sociedad Estatal de Participaciones
Industriales (“SEPI”) to Air Comet pursuant to the terms of the Share Purchase Agreement

by which Air Comet, and Claimants, acquired an interest in the Argentine Airlines.!*°

'83 TR, pp 231-232.

‘4 TR, pp 252-254; Exhibit RA-687/C-1210.
85. TR, p 254.

86 TR, pp 227-230, 255-256.

61

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

Vv. ANALYSIS AND DECISION

163. Claimants’ Application is somewhat unusual. Unlike the situations addressed by
other ICSID tribunals to which the Parties have referred, the alleged conduct giving rise to
the request for provisional measures comes near the end of the proceedings. In this case, the
oral hearing has been completed, the Parties have submitted their post-hearing briefs and
submissions on costs and what remains is for the Tribunal to formally close the proceedings
and issue its award. Further, each of Claimants and their related corporate entities are in

some form of insolvency proceedings in Spain.

164. Since the submission of the Parties’ post-hearing briefs, the Tribunal has received a
series of requests, primarily from Respondent, to admit additional documents and judgments
from the insolvency proceedings in Spain of the Marsans corporate group to which Claimants
belong, as well as a number of documents and judgments from related criminal proceedings.
As noted previously in the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction and in this Decision,
Claimants have also been the subject of their own insolvency proceedings and have had
receivers appointed by the Spanish courts. These various proceedings have given rise to
many different decisions and judgments in the insolvency and criminal proceedings in Spain,
anumber of which have made reference to Claimants, the ultimate shareholders of Claimants,
and the company through which they made their investment, Air Comet. Given the possible
relevance of some of these developments to this arbitration, the Tribunal has permitted the

submission of most of the documents in question.

165. Given the timing of Claimants’ Application, it does not address the “usual” arguments
made in this type of application like the possible effect that the criminal proceedings at issue
could have on the obtaining of evidence, the possible intimidation of witnesses or other
effects which would impede the procedural progress of the arbitration. Rather, Claimants
say the Complaints and the criminal investigation, together with the publicity that
Respondent has given to these, have affected or threatened to affect rights related to this

arbitration which are entitled to protection, despite the late stage of the proceedings. These

62

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

rights are said to be: the right to enforce Claimants’ rights under the BIT through ICSID
arbitration conducted in good faith; the right to the integrity of the proceedings, including the
right of exclusivity of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Article 26 of the ICSID Convention;
the right for the Tribunal to determine its own jurisdiction and the merits of the case; the right
of immunity of Claimants, their counsel, representatives and funder; and the right to an
enforceable award under Article 53 of the ICSID Convention. In their final form, Claimants’
requests for relief include orders granting provisional measures as well as substantive relief

on the merits in the final award.

A. Claimants’ Requests On The Merits

166. The Tribunal first addresses Claimants’ requests on the merits. In respect of these, in

their Reply, Claimants requested that the Tribunal award Claimants damages for moral and

7

reputational injuries,'*’ satisfaction for the injury caused by Respondent’s internationally

188

wrongful acts'** and, in the event Respondent fails to comply with the Tribunal’s provisional

orders, a finding that Respondent has breached its obligation to ensure fair and equitable

treatment under the terms of the BIT.!*?

167. At the hearing, Claimants requested a permanent injunction restraining Respondent
from criminally prosecuting Claimants, their representatives, counsel and funder for acts

relating to this arbitration and an order that Respondent pay damages for moral and

190

reputational injuries caused to their representatives, counsel and funder.'”” With respect to

their claim for satisfaction in their Reply, Claimants specified that the breaches of

international law committed by Respondent in respect of which satisfaction was due included

'87 Claimants’ Reply, {{] 8 and 80, 59-61.

'88 Claimants’ Reply, { 8 and 80, FN 6. While Claimants did not specifically identify these in their Reply, the
alleged breaches of international law which, according to them, would give rise to a finding of breach and
satisfaction, appear to be the alleged breaches of the immunity afforded under Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID
Convention.

'89 Claimants’ Reply, {{] 8 and 80, 81.

'% See Claimants’ request for relief: demonstrative slides 115-117. The Claimants stated that they would submit
a brief, supplemental costs and damages application for consideration as part of the final award, if the Tribunal
ruled in Claimants’ favour on the requested provisional measures.

63

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

the breach of the right to immunity under Article 22 of the ICSID Convention, the right to an
arbitration conducted in good faith, the right to preservation of the status quo and the right to

fair and equitable treatment under the BIT.!!

168. As indicated previously, Respondent maintains that Claimants’ requests for relief on
the merits, including the request for declarations of new alleged breaches of international law
or Claimants’ BIT rights and the requests for moral damages and satisfaction come too late
and cannot be advanced at this late stage without authorization of the Tribunal. In any event,
Respondent says that these forms of relief are inappropriate in an application for provisional
measures. Claimants, on the other hand, say that the Tribunal has the authority to award the
additional relief and damages they seek. They also submitted that in addition to giving rise
to relief on the merits, their claims of breaches of international law by Respondent served as

the predicate for the various provisional measures requested. '°*

169. In the Tribunal’s view, Respondent is correct that, in principle, an application for
provisional or interim measures is not the appropriate vehicle for requesting relief on the
merits, nor for the Tribunal to grant an award of relief on the merits. Further, the Tribunal
accepts that in order for a party to submit a new claim or defence after the pleadings are
complete, it requires the authorization of the Tribunal, which has not been sought in this

case.

170. Accordingly, subject to the Tribunal’s comments below in respect of the integrity of

the proceedings, Claimants’ request for relief on the merits cannot properly be addressed in

'91 See 4 143, above, and FN 157 and the sources cited there. The Claimants also stated that in so far as
satisfaction was concerned, a declaration of the Respondent’s breaches would be sufficient remedy. The
Claimants also requested an order that the Respondent pay the cost of defence in the Argentine criminal
proceedings of Claimants, their representatives, counsel and funder.

'% See above at {| 81 and 144. The Claimants did not directly address the Respondent’s objection that their
new claims on the merits were too late and not admissible on that basis.

93 In this regard, see 4] 18 of the minutes of the first session on March 22, 2010 in which the procedure for this
arbitration was determined. It provides that the Parties would not bring new arguments, witnesses or evidence
in their reply and rejoinder on the merits, unless these are in rebuttal to claims or issues raised by the other Party
in the previous pleading.

 

64

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

Claimants’ Application. At this stage of the proceedings, adding new requests for relief on
the merits would require the authorization of the Tribunal after having heard both Parties on
the issue.!°* As a result, the Tribunal must dismiss Claimants’ claims for relief on the merits

as brought in Claimants’ Application.

171. Before turning to the provisional measures requested by Claimants, the Tribunal
addresses Respondent’s objection to the admission of the sworn and notarized statements
submitted in the form of public deeds by each of the court-appointed receivers of Claimants
(Exhibit C-1200). In this regard, Respondent has objected that the statements in question
come late and have not been authorized by the Tribunal. In addition, Respondent submitted
that the filing of these statements reflects the seriousness with which Claimants and the court-
appointed receivers take Respondent’s position that the powers of attorney are no longer
valid and shows that at the time of filing the TAG Complaint there were justified reasons for
doing so.'° On the other hand, Claimants said that the public deeds are relevant to the issues

before the Tribunal on this Application.'°°

172. In the Tribunal’s view, the public deeds submitted by the court-appointed receivers
should be admitted into evidence in these proceedings. The public deeds are relevant to a
number of issues before the Tribunal on Claimants’ Application and, more generally, in the
arbitration. They clearly relate to the question of the validity of King & Spalding’s powers
of attorney and their authority to represent Claimants in the arbitration and, indeed, in

Claimants’ Application. As noted previously, the question of the authorization of counsel to

' Further, in the event Claimants were to seek authorization to request additional relief on the merits and the
Tribunal were to authorize the same, the Respondent would be entitled to present its response on the merits of
those claims and further evidence and argument would likely be required in order for the Tribunal to address
the claims fully.

'95 See Respondent’s letter of 27 October 2015. In addition, the Respondent took the position that even these
most recent statements from the court-appointed receivers were defective since, in its view, the public deeds do
not establish a date certain on which the previous letters from the court-appointed receivers (Exhibits C-842,
C-843 and C-844) were issued. In addition, the Respondent submitted that the public deeds did not show any
involvement or intervention by the judges in the respective insolvency proceedings in Spain. See TR, pp 120-
121.

196 See Claimants’ letter of 22 October 2015.

65

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

represent Claimants figures prominently in the Complaints and appears related to the
allegation that there had been connivance among Claimants, their legal representation and
Burford with respect to the Funding Agreement. This question also relates to the suggestion
that the court-appointed receivers participated in a scheme to deceive the Tribunal (whether
by way of “apocryphal” documents or use of authentic documents in a fraudulent manner)
set out in the PROCELAC Complaint.'” Further, the PROCELAC Complaint requests the
investigation of the court-appointed receivers in the insolvency proceedings of Claimants in
respect of their alleged participation in illegitimate conduct.!** This is the first opportunity
that the Spanish court-appointed receivers have to respond to the allegations contained in the
Complaints and the Tribunal believes it is appropriate for them to do so in the
circumstances.'*” In this regard, the Tribunal notes that the statements made in the public

deeds are consistent with the previous statements in evidence from the receivers.

173. Accordingly, the Tribunal admits the public deeds of the court-appointed receivers
submitted as Exhibit C-1200.

B. Provisional Measures Requested by Claimants

174. The Tribunal now turns to the provisional measures requested by Claimants and the
requirements for granting such measures. In this regard, the focus of Respondent’s position
was that Claimants had not met at least three of the requirements for the granting of
provisional measures: the need to demonstrate a right related to the arbitration which must
be protected; the need to demonstrate the threat of irreparable harm if the measures are not
granted; and the need to demonstrate an urgent need to issue the measures requested. The

Tribunal will address each of these requirements in turn, including the differences between

'97 See PROCELAC Complaint, Exhibit C-1198, pp 22-23.

'98 PROCELAC Complaint, Exhibit C-1198, p 25.

'% It appears that Claimants were first able to obtain a copy of the PROCELAC Complaint on or about 9 October
2015 (see 4 62, above). The Claimants submitted the public deeds from the court-appointed receivers with their
letter of 22 October 2015. A summary of the contents of these deeds are set out at paragraph 69, above.

66

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

the Parties’ positions in respect of the nature and content of the requirements in question and

whether these have been met.

1. The Rights To Be Protected By Provisional Measures

175. As described above, Claimants submitted that a number of their rights require
protection by way of provisional measures. Those rights were articulated in their final form
at the hearing and can be summarized as follows: the right to enforce Claimants’ rights under
the BIT through ICSID arbitration conducted in good faith; the right to integrity of the
proceedings, including the right of exclusivity of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Article 26
of the ICSID Convention; the right for the Tribunal to determine its own jurisdiction and the
merits of the case; the immunity of counsel, Claimants and their representatives and funder;

and the right to an enforceable award under Article 53 of the ICSID Convention.

176. Respondent submits that the measures requested by Claimants are not intended to
protect rights at issue in the arbitration before the Tribunal. According to Respondent, only
the rights at issue in the arbitration may be protected by way of provisional measures.
Respondent says that although they have some connection to this arbitration, the Complaints
and the criminal investigation which are the subject of Claimants’ Application are unrelated
to the matters before the Tribunal in this case. Respondent says that the Complaints and the
criminal investigation are separate criminal proceedings relating to events which did not take
place before the Tribunal and are external to the proceedings before it. In this regard,
Respondent maintains that the Complaints are related to the Funding Agreement and conduct
related to it, which are external to these arbitration proceedings.” In addition, Respondent
says that it is difficult to see how the Complaints and criminal investigation can affect any of
Claimants’ rights at this late stage of the proceedings when only the final award is pending.
Finally, Respondent submits that Claimants have not met what it says is the high burden on

them to demonstrate that provisional measures should be granted to require the suspension

200 See, for example, Respondent’s Rejoinder, §ff 31-32.

67

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

of criminal proceedings. In particular, Respondent says that Claimants have not provided
any concrete evidence of conduct in breach, or threatening imminent breach, of Claimants’

rights.

177. Inthe Tribunal’s view, the rights available for protection by provisional measures are
not restricted to rights which may form the subject matter of the dispute between the Parties.
As a number of tribunals have found, the rights which may be protected include procedural
rights, such as the preservation of the integrity of the proceedings and the preservation of the
status quo and non-aggravation of the dispute.?°! As found in the Quiborax v. Bolivia and
Plama v. Bulgaria decisions, the applicable criterion is that the right or rights to be preserved
are related to the dispute in the sense that those rights must relate to the applicant’s ability to
have its claims and requests for relief in the arbitration fairly considered and decided by the
arbitral tribunal and for any arbitral decision which grants the relief sought to be effective

and capable of carrying out.?°?

178. The materials and evidence before the Tribunal reflect a close relationship between
both the TAG Complaint and the PROCELAC Complaint and this arbitration. Further, the
criminal investigation, as described in the Federal Prosecutor’s note of 21 September 2015
is based on the Complaints and while its precise scope may remain somewhat uncertain, it
clearly incorporates a number of the same allegations contained in the Complaints which are

closely connected with the arbitration and the issues before the Tribunal.

179. Among the various indicia of the close relationship between the Complaints and this
ICSID arbitration are, in the first place, Respondent’s letter of 3 March 2015 which stated
that the TAG Complaint was closely intertwined with certain facts at stake in the arbitration

and was intended to prevent Respondent from making a payment in detriment to the creditors

21 See in this regard, Quiborax v. Bolivia, Decision on Provisional Measures, dated 26 February 2010, {fj 117-
118 and the other decisions and sources cited there.

22 See Plama v. Bulgaria, Order, dated 6 September 2005, § 40, as quoted in Quiborax v. Bolivia, Decision on
Provisional Measures, § 118.

68

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

in the insolvency proceedings as well as to Respondent itself. The TAG Complaint and the
PROCELAC Complaint both allege that Claimants, together with their counsel, court-
appointed representatives and funder were, in essence, perpetrating a fraud not only on the

creditors in the insolvency proceedings and Respondent, but also on the Tribunal itself.?°°

180. A close review of the Complaints indicates that the matters in respect of which the
Treasury Attorney General’s office and the PROCELAC complain and request an
investigation are matters which Respondent has placed before the Tribunal in these arbitral
proceedings. Respondent has alleged before the Tribunal that Claimants have attempted to
mislead the Tribunal and that the purpose behind the Assignment Agreement and Funding
Agreement was to exclude from the insolvency proceedings in Spain any sums possibly
awarded to Claimants in this arbitration, thereby defrauding the creditors and creating the
risk that Respondent would be required to pay twice. In this regard, Respondent essentially
argues that the Tribunal and any eventual award in Claimants’ favor will be the instrument

of the fraud it alleges against Claimants.

181. The Complaints also make reference to one of Respondent’s jurisdictional defences
in this arbitration: that Claimants’ claim is derivative and indirect and, therefore, falls outside
the scope of the BIT. This is an issue that has been extensively briefed and addressed in this

arbitration.

23 In this regard, see {fj 32-33, above, and the references to the TAG Complaint made there; the PROCELAC
Complaint, Exhibit C-1198, §§] 63-66 where specific reference is made to each of counsel for Claimants, the
court-appointed receivers of Claimants and Burford, the alleged use of certain documents in this arbitration
with the purpose of illegally appropriating the sums arising from a possible award and the Respondent's
counter-claim in the arbitration is made. The PROCELAC Complaint goes on to refer to the witness statement
of Mr. Barcesat, counsel for the Respondent in this arbitration, with respect to Claimants’ lack of capacity to
sue since its claim was a derivative one based on indirect shareholdings. The PROCELAC Complaint further
alleges that the Respondent’s argument had not yet been addressed by the Tribunal. It also went on to refer to
the allegation in these arbitration proceedings that King & Spalding had no authority to represent Claimants
since their powers of attorney had lapsed or become invalid and the alleged “apocryphal” nature of the letters
from the court-appointed receivers in evidence before the Tribunal.

 

69

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

182. The Complaints also make repeated reference to the Funding Agreement (and the
Assignment Agreement) which are said to be at the heart of the fraudulent scheme concocted
by Claimants. These agreements have been placed before the Tribunal by Respondent as part
of its defence on both jurisdiction and the merits and have been the subject of extensive

evidence and argument.

183. Further, Respondent has raised the question of the alleged invalidity of the powers of
attorney held by King & Spalding and their authority to represent Claimants in this
arbitration. This matter has been before the Tribunal for some time and has been the subject
of extensive expert evidence and argument. Respondent has also raised the same or similar
arguments before both this Tribunal and in the Complaints as to the alleged motives for which
Claimants and their counsel would seek to uphold the validity of the powers of attorney.
Again, this is clearly a matter squarely within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to decide in its
award. Finally, the allegations contained in the PROCELAC Complaint regarding the
violation of Article 1 of Law 14,034 by any Argentine citizen representing Claimants in this

matter also has an apparent close connection to this arbitration.?°

184. This brief review of certain aspects of the Complaints indicates a close relationship
between them and these arbitration proceedings. Indeed, Respondent’s request to admit the
TAG Complaint in these proceedings was made on the basis of the close connection between
the TAG Complaint and the facts at stake in this arbitration and Respondent’s intention to
prevent the risk of harm to it if it were ordered to pay compensation pursuant to an eventual
award. As a result, it would appear that these arbitral proceedings could be seen as the

motivation, at least in part, for the filing of the Complaints.

185. The Tribunal is aware of the distinction which has been drawn by other ICSID

tribunals between claims under a BIT relating to the protection of an investment and criminal

  

24 See, generally, the table comparing the alleged offen

et out in the Complaints and the proceedings in this
arbitration at slides 61-68 of Claimants’ demonstrative i

ides used at the Hearing.

 

 

70

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

prosecutions brought by a State in respect of crimes alleged to have been committed in its
territory. The Tribunal is also aware of the decisions of other tribunals which have expressed
the view that provisional measures are an extraordinary remedy and that tribunals should

exercise particular caution when asked to restrain a sovereign State’s exercise of its right to

conduct criminal investigations and prosecutions relating to conduct within its territory.?°°

However, such powers must be exercised in good faith, respecting a claimant’s rights to have

206

its claims fairly considered and decided by an arbitral tribunal. These issues will be

considered further below. At this stage, the Tribunal concludes that there is a direct
relationship between the Complaints and the criminal investigation commenced by the
Federal Prosecutor and this ICSID arbitration such that certain rights of Claimants in this

arbitration may warrant protection.

186. In addition, and in any event, the Tribunal has the inherent jurisdiction and powers
required to preserve the integrity of its own process and the duty to ensure that the Parties
comply with their obligation to arbitrate fairly and in good faith. In this regard, the Tribunal

agrees with the decision in Libananco v. Turkey when it held as follows:

78. These allegations and counter-allegations strike at principles which lie at the
very heart of the ICSID arbitral process, and the Tribunal is bound to
approach them accordingly. Among the principles affected are: basic
procedural fairness, respect for confidentiality and legal privilege (and indeed
for the immunities accorded to parties, their counsel, and witnesses under
Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention); the right of parties both to seek
advice and to advance their respective cases freely and without interference;
and no doubt others as well. For its own part, the Tribunal would add to the
list respect for the Tribunal itself, as the organ freely chosen by the Parties for
the binding settlement of their dispute in accordance with the ICSID
Convention. It requires no further recital by the Tribunal to establish either
that these are indeed fundamental principles, or why they are. Nor does the
Tribunal doubt for a moment that, like any other international tribunal, it must
be regarded as endowed with the inherent powers required to preserve the

205 See Exhibit AL RA-424: Churchill Mining v. Indonesia, Procedural Order No. 14, dated 22 December 2014,
p 23, as cited by the Respondent in its Rejoinder, | 16. Sce also the other decisions cited by the Respondent to
the same or similar effect.

206 See Quiborax v. Bolivia, Decision on Provisional Measures, {| 123; Plama v. Bulgaria, Order, {| 40;
Libananco v. Turkey, Decision on Preliminary Issues, 4 78; and Caratube v. Kazakhstan I, Decision on
Provisional Measures, dated 31 July 2009, 4] 139.

71

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

integrity of its own process - even if the remedies open to it are necessarily
different from those that might be available to a domestic court of law in an
ICSID Member State. The Tribunal would express the principle as being that
parties have an obligation to arbitrate fairly and in good faith and that an
arbitral tribunal has the inherent jurisdiction to ensure that this obligation is
complied with; this principle applies in all arbitration, including investment
arbitration, and to all parties, including States (even in the exercise of their
sovereign powers).2°”

In this regard, the Tribunal has previously ordered the Parties not to aggravate or extend the

dispute on a number of occasions and has the authority to ensure the respect of its orders.?°*

187. The Tribunal now turns to its assessment of the various rights which Claimants allege
have been threatened or breached and whether the requirements for the granting of

provisional measures in respect of these have been met.

2. The Right To ICSID Arbitration Conducted In Good Faith

188. Claimants submit that Respondent’s conduct in filing the Complaints and
commencing the criminal investigation breaches its duty to arbitrate in good faith and
threatens the integrity of these ICSID proceedings. In essence, Claimants say that the
Complaints and the criminal investigation are guerrilla tactics employed in bad faith by
Respondent in order to derail this arbitration and avoid having to pay an award rendered
against it. Claimants say that the facts of this case represent exceptional circumstances which

justify the suspension of the criminal proceedings initiated by Respondent’s authorities.

189. On the other hand, Respondent says that it has the right and duty to investigate
criminal conduct where it has a legitimate basis to suspect that the same has occurred. It says

that this is a sovereign prerogative and that a high threshold must be met in order to restrain

27 Libananco v. Turkey, Decision on Preliminary Issues, 78. Other tribunals have identified the same duty
on the parties to an arbitration to conduct the procedure in good faith. See, for example, Caratube v.
Kazakhstan I, Decision on Provisional Measures, §f 117-120, as cited by the tribunal in Caratube
International Oil Company LLP and Devineci Salah Hourani v. Republic of Kazakhstan, \CSID Case No.
ARB/13/13 (“Caratube v. Kazakhstan ID’), Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures, dated 4
December 2014, § 113.

208 See Procedural Order No. 2, dated 29 April 2011; Tribunal’s letter of 13 May 2011; Tribunal’s letter of
1 April 2012; Procedural Order No. 4, dated 3 October 2012, 4 62.

72

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

a State’s exercise of that power. It goes on to submit that Claimants have not met that
threshold by, inter alia, demonstrating how the Complaints and criminal investigation have

affected Claimants’ right to have their claims heard before the Tribunal.

190. As has been held by a number of arbitral tribunals, Respondent clearly has the
sovereign right to conduct criminal investigations and it will usually require exceptional
circumstances to justify the granting of provisional measures to suspend criminal proceedings
by a State. Nevertheless, where exceptional circumstances do exist and threaten the integrity
of the arbitration proceedings and the principle of due process, provisional measures may be
warranted.” In addition, separate from the question of whether provisional measures are
warranted, the abuse of the sovereign power of a State to pursue criminal proceedings may
give rise to damage and a claim for the breach of rights protected by a BIT or international
law, more generally. In addressing Claimants’ Application currently before it, the Tribunal
must focus on the former and restrict its inquiry to the question of whether Claimants have
demonstrated that their right to continue or pursue this arbitration in procedurally fair

conditions is threatened.

191. In considering this question, the Tribunal must bear in mind the current stage of the
proceedings. As indicated previously, the only remaining steps are the closure of the
proceedings and the issuance of the Tribunal’s award. All previous procedural steps in the
arbitration, including the submission of pleadings and evidence and the conduct of an oral
hearing at which all of the relevant witnesses requested by the Parties appeared to testify,
have been completed. This distinguishes the circumstances of this case from those in the
other arbitral decisions brought to the Tribunal’s attention and reduces the aspects of the

arbitration in respect of which provisional measures can be sought.

2® EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/14/14 (“EuroGas v
Slovak”), Procedural Order No. 3 - Decision on Request for Provisional Measures, dated 23 June 2015, 82.

73

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

3. The Right To Exclusivity Of ICSID Proceedings

192. Claimants categorize the right to exclusivity of ICSID proceedings as an aspect of the
integrity of the proceedings. Claimants submit that the Complaints and the criminal
investigation are intended to prevent an award in their favor on the basis of an alleged fraud
and breach of the provisions of Article 1 of Law 14,034. In this regard, Claimants point to
the fact that the Complaints refer to the following: Claimants’ claims in the arbitration are
derivative or indirect and therefore inappropriate and the fact that the Tribunal has either not
decided the issue or incorrectly decided it; the alleged lack of valid powers of attorney or
authority of counsel to represent Claimants; the allegation that the Assignment Agreement
and Funding Agreement constitute a fraudulent attempt to exclude the proceeds of an
eventual award against Respondent from the insolvency proceedings of Claimants in Spain;
and the allegation that Claimants, their representatives and counsel are committing a fraud
on the Tribunal. According to Claimants, these matters are all before the Tribunal and
attempting to re-litigate them by way of criminal proceedings violates the exclusivity of the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Article 26 of the ICSID Convention.

193. As has been recognized previously, the right to exclusivity of ICSID proceedings
under Article 26 of the ICSID Convention can be protected by way of provisional
measures.”!° This right of exclusivity relates to the resolution of investment disputes only
and does not include or extend to criminal proceedings which deal with criminal liability and

not with investment disputes.?!!

As a result, in principle, the criminal proceedings
commenced by way of the Complaints and the Federal Prosecutor’s preliminary investigation
do not address the investment dispute before the Tribunal and, therefore, do not threaten the

exclusivity of these ICSID proceedings.

2 See Quiborax v. Bolivia, Decision on Provisional Measures, | 127; Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, Order No 1,
dated 1 July 2003, 47.
21! See Quiborax v. Bolivia, Decision on Provisional Measures, {ff 128-131 and the sources cited there.

14

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

194. Nevertheless, the fact that the Complaints rely upon matters such as the indirect
nature of Claimants’ claims, the alleged lack of authority of Claimants’ counsel, documents
alleged to be part of a fraudulent scheme and the alleged misleading of the Tribunal itself, all
matters which have been placed before the Tribunal by Respondent before the Complaints
were filed, or the Tribunal’s award is rendered, is troubling. In the Tribunal’s view, these
are all matters properly before it and relevant to its determination of the dispute between the
Parties. These are matters which the Tribunal must and will address and determine in its
award. As a result, there is some basis for concern that despite the distinction between the
rights at issue in an investment dispute and criminal proceedings, the exclusivity of these

proceedings is being infringed.

195. However, on the basis of the evidence currently available, there is some doubt in this
regard. This arises from the uncertainty surrounding the scope of the preliminary
investigation which has been commenced by the Federal Prosecutor. As will be discussed
further below, there is a debate between the Parties as to whether this investigation includes
counsel for Claimants and their court-appointed receivers. Respondent argued strongly that
the Federal Prosecutor in his note set the limits of his investigation, which did not include
allegations against counsel or Claimants’ court-appointed receivers (nor any allegations of
breaches of Law 14,034). While Claimants dispute this, the scope of the preliminary
investigation remains uncertain from the Tribunal’s perspective. As a result, it is not clear
whether issues such as the derivative nature of Claimants’ claims and counsel’s alleged lack

of authority form part of the preliminary investigation.

196. In addition, it is important to recall that both Parties have repeatedly stated and
accepted that the judgments of criminal courts in Spain and in Argentina do not and will not

bind this Tribunal.7!? As a result, even if the Tribunal were to conclude that the criminal

212 In this regard, see: Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, 370; Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction,
4332; Claimants’ Application, FN 41, p 11.

75

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

investigation did infringe on the exclusivity of these proceedings, it is unlikely to have any

effect on the continuation of this arbitration and the Tribunal’s award.

197. Asa result, the Tribunal concludes that the Complaints and the criminal investigation
initiated by the Federal Prosecutor of Respondent do not sufficiently threaten the exclusivity

of these ICSID proceedings such that the provisional measure requesting the suspension of

the criminal proceedings should be granted.?!?

4, The Right To The Preservation Of The Status Quo And The Non-aggravation
Of The Dispute

198. The right to the preservation of the status quo and the non-aggravation of the dispute
is well established in arbitral case law.?'* In addition, several tribunals, with which this
Tribunal agrees, have found that preservation of the status quo and the non-aggravation of
the dispute are self-standing rights.7!> Claimants allege that by submitting the Complaints
and commencing the criminal investigation, as well as publicizing these proceedings broadly,
Respondent has sought to intimidate Claimants, their court-appointed receivers and all of
Claimants’ counsel to pressure them to either drop the arbitration or face criminal charges

for pursuing it. Claimants also say that by way of the criminal proceedings, Respondent

213 The Claimants listed the right to have the Tribunal determine its own jurisdiction and the merits of the case
as one of the protected rights related to the integrity of the proceeding which is threatened by the Respondent’s
conduct. The Tribunal sees no material distinction between this right and the right of exclusivity of ICSID
proceedings. Consequently, it reaches the same conclusion as expressed here with respect to the exclusivity of
the ICSID proceedings.

214 See Quiborax v. Bolivia, Decision on Provisional Measures, {{] 134-136; Occidental Petroleum Corporation
and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/11
(“Occidental v. Ecuador”), Decision on Provisional Measures, dated 17 August 2007, | 96; City Oriente v.
Ecuador, Decision on Provisional Measures, dated 19 ber 2007; Burlington Resources, Inc. v. Republic
of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/5 (“Burlington v. Ecuador”), Procedural Order No. 1, dated 29 June 2009,
44 61-68; Caratube v. Kazakhstan 1, Decision on Provisional Measures, f 117-120, as quoted in Caratube v.
Kazakhstan I, Decision on Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures, | 113.

215 See Exhibit C-547: Burlington v. Ecuador, Procedural Order No. 1, dated 29 June 2009, § 60; Exhibit C-
550: loan Micula, Viorel Micula S.C., European Food S.A., SC Star Mill S.R.L, and SC Multipack SRL v.
Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/20 (“Micula v. Romania”), Decision on Claimants’ Application for
Provisional Measures, dated 2 March 2011, 4] 41-42; Exhibit C-543: Quiborax v. Bolivia, Decision on
Provisional Measures, dated 26 February 2010, §| 117; Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania, Procedural Order No. 1,
dated 31 March 2006, 4/71.

 

 

 

 

76

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

seeks to intimidate their funder, Burford, in order to cut off the funding necessary for the
arbitration.7!° In response, as outlined previously, Respondent says that Claimants have not
demonstrated how the alleged conduct would affect Claimants’ rights to continue the
arbitration or provided any evidence that the Complaints and the criminal investigation have

affected or threatened to affect Claimants, its representatives, counsel or funder, as alleged.

199. Claimants have not specified how the status quo of their investment in Argentina
would be affected by the criminal proceedings. The Argentine Airlines in which Claimants
held their disputed investment has been expropriated for some time now and there was no
indication how the criminal proceedings would affect this or otherwise affect the status quo.
Accordingly, the relevant question is whether the criminal proceedings have aggravated the

dispute or threatened to aggravate the dispute such that a provisional measure is warranted.

200. In this regard, there is no doubt that the criminal proceedings have exacerbated the
already difficult climate in which this dispute has unfolded. This is particularly so with
respect to the allegations made in the Complaints against counsel for Claimants, the court-
appointed receivers and Claimants’ funder. However, insofar as Claimants themselves are
concerned, the Tribunal notes that the expropriation at the heart of the dispute occurred in
2008 and that since that time the Argentine Airlines have been in the hands of Respondent.
Further, each of Claimants are currently in liquidation proceedings under the supervision of
their court-appointed receivers and their former ultimate shareholder, Mr. Diaz Ferran, as
well as a number of other former shareholders or officers have been convicted of various
offenses relating to the insolvency of the Marsans Group and have been sentenced to
imprisonment in Spain. In these circumstances, in the absence of any specific indication of
how Claimants or their officers and directors have been harassed or intimidated, there is no

basis for provisional measures in that regard.

216 See TR, pp 26-27. In addition, Claimants claim that the Respondent seeks to unduly influence the Tribunal

by claiming that the issuance and enforcement of an award would be the final element of the alleged fraud.

77

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

201. The Tribunal reaches the same conclusion with respect to Burford. While it does
appear that the criminal investigation includes Burford within its scope, there is no indication
that this has affected, or is likely to affect, Claimants’ funding. In this regard, Respondent
notes that Claimants have met all requests for advances on account of costs by the ICSID
Secretariat and there was no evidence that Claimants are otherwise unable to meet their

financial commitments in this arbitration pending the issuance of the award.

202. The situation is quite different with respect to Claimants’ counsel and their court-
appointed receivers. Dealing first with counsel, the TAG Complaint and, particularly the
PROCELAC Complaint, make a number of serious allegations against counsel, including
participation in fraudulent activity and, in the case of Argentine counsel, a breach of Article 1
of Law 14,034. These crimes carry very serious penalties, particularly for lawyers. The
simple allegation of fraud against lawyers can carry heavy consequences and cause damage
to reputation as well as a lawyer’s business interest. In the case of a breach of Article 1 of
Law 14,034, a conviction carries with it penalties of permanent disbarment and up to 25 years
in prison.?!7

203. The allegations in the Complaints made against Claimants’ court-appointed receivers
are also serious, particularly when one bears in mind the fact that they are appointed by the
Spanish courts to serve a public function by representing the interest of the creditors in the
various insolvency proceedings. They act under the authority and direction of the relevant
Spanish courts. The Tribunal also notes that the court-appointed receivers were appointed

some time after the Assignment Agreement and Funding Agreement were executed. Further,

27 The Tribunal notes that the PROCELAC Complaint lists every member of Claimants’ counsel team in the
body of the complaint, including paralegals and interns who are unlikely to have had any involvement in the
Funding Agreement and Assignment Agreement which the Respondent impugns nor any substantial
responsibility in the representation of Claimants. Further, it appears that at least two members of Claimants’
counsel team have left King & Spalding and are now employed elsewhere.

78

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

the evidence in the record demonstrates that both of these agreements were filed in the

Spanish courts and were reviewed and approved by at least one court.?!*

204. Of particular concern to the Tribunal is the joint, televised press conference held by
the Treasury Attorney General and the head of the PROCELAC on 14 September 2015.
Claimants submitted substantial evidence in regard of that press conference, including a
video posted on the PROCELAC’s website, a transcript of what was said at the press
conference and the slides used by the Treasury Attorney General and the head of
PROCELAC in support of their comments.”!? This evidence was not contested by

Respondent.

205. In the Tribunal’s view, the threat of criminal proceedings against counsel in the
circumstances of this case places substantial pressure on counsel. This, in turn, threatens to
affect Claimants’ right to be represented by counsel of their choice in this arbitration.
Similarly, the possible prosecution of Claimants’ court-appointed receivers places pressure
on them to choose between continuing their court-mandated function of representing
Claimants and pursuing the latter’s claims in this arbitration and withdrawing from their role

or desisting in pursuing Claimants’ claims. Each of these possible threats is of concern.

206. Nevertheless, it is not clear whether the criminal investigation commenced by the
Federal Prosecutor includes allegations against counsel or Claimants’ court-appointed
receivers. Respondent, represented by the Treasury Attorney General, argued forcefully at

the Hearing that the investigation did not include within its scope the investigation of

218 In this regard, on 22 December 2010, the Spanish court overseeing the insolvency of Air Comet issued an
order authorizing the court-appointed receivers of Air Comet to consent to the Funding Agreement: Exhibit
RA-165. In their application to the court, the court-appointed receivers referred to the Assignment Agreement:
Exhibit RA-164. Further, it appears that the commercial court in charge of the insolvencies of the three
Claimants, Spanish Commercial Court No. 7 of Madrid, is aware of the Funding Agreement and has approved
Burford’s claim in the proceedings relating to Transportes de Cercanias $.A.’s insolvency on 19 April 2012. In
this regard, see Annex B-11 to Mr. Cigarran Magan’s Report of 3 May 2013, p 3. See also Claimants’
Application, pp 5-6 and FNs 16-18 and the sources cited there.

219 See Exhibit C-1213. The Claimants also submitted a number of articles and news reports from a broad
variety of newspapers, both in Argentina and overseas, including the Legal Press.

 

79

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

allegations against counsel or the court-appointed receivers. Claimants argue that this is not
at all clear and, in any event, the Federal Prosecutor may choose to expand the scope of the

criminal investigation. As a result, the situation remains uncertain.

207. Possible criminal allegations against, and investigation of, Claimants’ counsel and
the court-appointed receivers are of considerable concern to the Tribunal. As a result, the
Tribunal has decided to defer its determination on this aspect of Claimants’ Application and
grant Claimants liberty to bring this aspect of their Application back to the Tribunal, should
it become necessary. In the Tribunal’s view, this is appropriate given the current uncertainty
regarding the precise scope of the criminal investigation as it relates to counsel and the court-
appointed receivers. It is regrettable that Respondent did not address or clarify this issue

prior to the Hearing.

208. Accordingly, the Tribunal defers its decision on Claimants’ Application as it relates
to the request that the Tribunal order the suspension of the criminal proceedings in regard of
counsel for Claimants and Claimants’ court-appointed receivers. Claimants shall be at liberty
to bring this issue back before the Tribunal in the event there is confirmation that the criminal
proceedings and investigation include the alleged crimes against counsel or the court-

appointed receivers.

209. The Tribunal now addresses Claimants’ allegation that the press conference held by

the Treasury Attorney General and the head of the PROCELAC has aggravated the dispute.

210. In this regard, the Tribunal concludes that the uncontested evidence regarding the
joint press conference held by the Treasury Attorney General and the head of the
PROCELAC on 14 September 2015 reflects an aggravation of the dispute. In the Tribunal’s
view, the matters described and commented on in the press conference and the very broad
dissemination sponsored by Respondent exceeded by a wide margin any reporting which
may have been appropriate. Indeed, Respondent gave no reason for holding the press

conference or for its broad dissemination of the Complaints and the allegations made in them.

80

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

In the Tribunal’s view, the press conference and the matters described and commented upon
by representatives of Respondent, including details of this arbitration and the alleged conduct
of counsel and the court-appointed receivers for Claimants, is inconsistent with the Tribunal’s
repeated orders to the Parties not to aggravate the dispute. Accordingly, a provisional
measure ordering Respondent to refrain from further aggravating the dispute by publicizing
the filing of the Complaints or the criminal investigation and any relation they may have to

this arbitration, whether by way of the press or otherwise, is appropriate.

5. The Right To Immunity

211. Claimants allege that by filing the Complaints and commencing a preliminary
investigation, Respondent has breached the immunity afforded to Claimants as parties, their
counsel, their court-appointed receivers and their funder. Claimants say that as a party to the
ICSID Convention, Respondent is bound by Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention and
that the immunity provided applies ipso iure without a specific order of an ICSID tribunal.
Claimants also submit that a breach of Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention is
justiciable as a breach of Claimants’ legitimate expectation that Respondent would proceed

as provided by the ICSID Convention, including its provisions on immunity.

212. As it relates to Claimants’ Application, the Tribunal understands Claimants’ position
to be that Respondent’s alleged breach of the immunity afforded by Article 22 of the ICSID
Convention reflects what it says is Respondent’s bad faith conduct in filing the Complaints

and commencing a criminal investigation in the circumstances of this case.?”°

213. Respondent does not dispute that Article 22 of the ICSID Convention provides for
immunity from suit for the persons listed in it, but stresses that any such immunity applies
only to acts performed by those persons in the exercise of their functions. According to

Respondent, the acts or conduct in respect of which the Complaints were filed and the

20 TR, pp 67-69.

81

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

criminal investigation has been commenced were not performed in respect of the

arbitration.??!

214. Asa result, the practical issue of interest between the Parties is whether the acts or
conduct performed by Claimants, their court-appointed receivers, their counsel and their

funder was in the exercise of their functions in the arbitration.

215. Respondent submits that the Complaints and the criminal investigation relate to the
Funding Agreement which it says was an agreement signed outside the scope of the
arbitration and was not part of the functions of parties as referred to in Article 22 of the ICSID
Convention (Claimants, as parties, counsel or Claimants’ representatives). On the other
hand, Claimants say that the Funding Agreement, signed between Claimants and Burford in
April 2010, was executed exclusively in pursuit of this arbitration following Respondent’s
uncompensated expropriation of the Argentine Airlines in order to permit Claimants to

pursue their claims in the arbitration.?”?

216. The question of the nature and scope of the immunity granted to parties, their counsel
and the other persons referred to in Article 22 of the ICSID Convention is a complex one,
particularly when one considers the various persons to whom immunities may apply in the
particularly complex circumstances of this case. In the Tribunal’s view, even assuming that
only the Funding Agreement were relevant to the Complaints and criminal investigation,

there are serious, plausible grounds on which some, if not all, of Claimants, their counsel,

221 As described previously, the Respondent’s position is that immunity under Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID
Convention is functional or ratione materiae. The Respondent says that the Complaints are related to the
i that the Funding Agreement did not take
place before the Tribunal and is external to these arbitral proceedings. See Respondent’s Rejoinder, 4] 23-32;
TR, p 118.
22 TR, pp 64-65. As noted previously, Claimants contested that the Complaints and the criminal investigation
relate only to the Funding Agreement. They say the Complaints refer, inter alia, to the Respondent’s allegations
relating the derivative nature of Claimants’ claims and the alleged lack of authorization for counsel to appear
on behalf of Claimants in the arbitration, and that the criminal investigation includes these allegations.

 

82

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

their court-appointed receivers and their funder are entitled to immunity under Article 22 of

the ICSID Convention.?? However, the Tribunal need not decide this question at this stage.

217. It is important to recall that this is an application for interim measures and the
Tribunal’s determination of whether these are warranted must focus on the effect, or the
threatened effect, the Complaints and the criminal investigation may have on Claimants’
rights related to this arbitration. The alleged breach of immunities afforded under Article 22
of the ICSID Convention by the filing of the Complaints and commencement of the criminal
investigation may characterize or qualify Respondent’s conduct in respect of which
Claimants complain. However, the Tribunal need not decide whether a breach of the
immunities invoked has occurred in order to decide this aspect of Claimants’ Application.
As mentioned previously, an application for provisional measures is not the appropriate
occasion to decide this question on the merits. Rather, the Tribunal’s focus must be the effect
of the Complaints and the criminal investigation on Claimants’ rights to pursue the

arbitration?”

218. Turning to the possible effect of the criminal proceedings on Claimants and their
ability to pursue the arbitration, the Tribunal notes that as far as Claimants themselves are
concerned, they were represented by Messrs. Diaz Ferran and Pascual Arias in the execution
of the Funding Agreement. The former is currently imprisoned in Spain and the latter has
been deceased for some time. Accordingly, there is no apparent additional pressure or effect
which the alleged failure to respect any immunity provided by Article 22 of the ICSID

Convention may have with respect to the pursuance of this arbitration by them as

3 In addition, if the investigation relates to more than simply the Funding Agreement, then the basis for the
application of immunity of counsel and the court-appointed receivers becomes broader.

24 It is also relevant to recall that since the immunity claimed by Claimants exists independently of any
declaration by this Tribunal, Claimants, their counsel, their court-appointed receivers and Burford are in a
position to raise the immunities in their defence as they deem appropriate in any relevant forum. Further, a
breach of the immunities provided by the ICSID Convention may give rise to a substantive claim, whether by
a person directly covered by immunity, or their home State, in the appropriate forum.

83

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

representatives of Claimants. The new representatives of Claimants in the insolvency

proceedings, the court-appointed receivers, are considered separately, below.

219. As to Claimants’ funder, Burford, as noted above, there was no indication that the
Complaints or the criminal investigation had affected, or were likely to affect, Burford’s

willingness or ability to fund Claimants at this stage of the arbitration.

220. Further, for the purposes of Claimants’ Application, the Tribunal has not been
persuaded that Burford falls within the scope of the immunity afforded by Article 22 of the
ICSID Convention. In this regard, the Tribunal has considered Claimants’ reference to the
decision in the Libananco v. Turkey case in which the Tribunal found that the immunity under
Article 22 of the ICSID Convention applied to an escrow agent. However, as pointed out by
Respondent, the escrow agent in question was part of an arrangement established by the
Tribunal to permit the production and examination of share certificates relevant to the issues
before the Tribunal for examination by Respondent.””> The circumstances of that case were
that the tribunal made specific provision for the holding of shares to be examined for
evidentiary purposes in the arbitration, which are quite different from the circumstances
relevant to the Funding Agreement in this case. On the basis of the limited evidence and
argument before it, the Tribunal has not been persuaded that the immunity provided in Article
22 of the ICSID Convention applies to Burford. This conclusion is for the purposes of
Claimants’ Application and is without prejudice to Burford’s invocation of immunity

elsewhere.

221. This leaves the question of immunity as it may apply to counsel for Claimants and
the court-appointed receivers. Respondent made representations to the Tribunal during the
Hearing that counsel and the court-appointed receivers were not within the scope of the

criminal proceedings. At this stage, there is sufficient uncertainty surrounding the scope of

25 See Libananco v. Turkey, Decision on Preliminary Issues, {{] 61-65 where the tribunal describes the bearer

share certificates as lying at the heart of the arbitral proceedings.

84

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

the preliminary criminal investigation that the Tribunal does not believe that it is in a position
to make a determination as whether the investigation includes counsel or the court-appointed
receivers. As a result, it is premature to consider whether the criminal proceedings breach
any possible immunity and, if so, whether this contributes to a finding of an aggravation of

the dispute by Respondent.

222. Accordingly, for the reasons set out above at paragraphs 206 through 208, the
Tribunal’s determination in respect of this issue is deferred, with liberty to Claimants to bring

this aspect of the Application back before the Tribunal, if it becomes necessary.

6. The Right To An Enforceable Award Under Article 53 Of The ICSID
Convention

223. Claimants also submit that an aspect of the integrity of the proceedings is their right

to an enforceable award under Article 53 of the ICSID Convention. According to Claimants,

the purpose of the Complaints and criminal investigation is to prevent the enforcement of

any award rendered against Respondent by de-legitimizing this arbitration and any award.??°

224. The Tribunal is not persuaded that this is a right of Claimants which is threatened by
the Complaints and criminal investigation for essentially the same reasons as set out above
in respect of the exclusivity of ICSID arbitration. As previously noted, the purpose and scope
of an arbitration relating to an investment dispute is different from that of a criminal
prosecution. Further, the obligation to abide by and comply with the terms of an award is an
international law obligation and both Parties have accepted that the Tribunal is not bound by

the decisions of national courts.

225. The Tribunal now turns to the remaining requirements at issue for the granting of

provisional measures.

226 See TR, pp 29, 71, 73; Claimants’ demonstrative slide 75.

85

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

7. Irreparable Harm

226. The Parties differ as to whether the threat of irreparable harm must be demonstrated
in order to grant provisional measures. Claimants maintain that there is no standalone
requirement to prove irreparable harm. Rather, they submit that the proper test is that the
measures requested must be “necessary” in the sense that they are required to avoid infliction
of harm upon the applicant. That potential harm is then subjected to a balancing test which
considers the harm or interference the respondent may suffer if the measures requested are
granted.”” Claimants submit that when the harm threatened relates to the integrity of the
proceedings, then the element of necessity will be met.??* Claimants submit that the criminal
proceedings and the media publicity Respondent has given to them exerts undue pressure on
Claimants, their counsel, their court-appointed receivers and their funder to desist from the

arbitration and from any future annulment or enforcement proceedings.”

227. On the other hand, Respondent says that the power to issue provisional measures
should only be exercised where there is an urgent need to prevent irreparable harm.?*?
Respondent also says that the Complaints and criminal investigation pose no risk of
irreparable harm. Respondent also says that Claimants have only made general assertions
and not demonstrated how the Complaints and the criminal investigation could harm
Claimants’ rights to pursue the arbitration at this late stage.?!

228. As noted previously, Claimants’ Application comes late in the arbitral proceedings.
Therefore, issues such as the preservation of evidence or intimidation of witnesses, which

have been the subject of decisions of other tribunals which have considered provisional

27 Claimants’ Reply, { 63-64.

28 Jhid; Quiborax v. Bolivia, Decision on Provisional Measures, { 156. The Claimants say that harm of this
nature is, in itself, irreparable in the sense that it cannot properly be compensated by damages, in any event.
29 See Claimants’ Reply, {ff 66-72.

20 See, for example, Respondent’s Rejoinder, {ff 41-45.

21 See Respondent’s Rejoinder, 4] 46; TR, pp 161-162. The Respondent also pointed to the guarantees of due
process built in to the Argentine criminal process as well as the protection available to Claimants and their
representatives and counsel in international conventions and instruments.

86

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

measures in the context of criminal proceedings, do not arise here. As the taking of evidence
has been completed in this case, there is only a limited possibility that the criminal
proceedings and investigation can now affect the procedural integrity of these proceedings.
As a result, with one exception, the Tribunal is not persuaded that Claimants have, on the
basis of the evidence presented to date, demonstrated irreparable harm or necessity for the

granting of the provisional measures requested.

229. The exception to this conclusion is with respect to the right to counsel. Although this
arbitration is nearing its conclusion, the possible need for legal representation by counsel in
this arbitration, and the right to the same, continues. Until the Tribunal issues its award and
concludes its mandate, Claimants, and their court-appointed receivers, may require the
assistance of counsel. This is a fundamental right and the threat to it by way of criminal
proceedings while the arbitration is ongoing may give rise to harm or necessity sufficient to

justify the suspension of the criminal proceedings against counsel.

230. As indicated previously, there is uncertainty as to the scope of the criminal
investigation commenced by the Federal Prosecutor and it is not clear whether counsel or
Claimants’ court-appointed receivers are included within the scope of the investigation. At
this stage, on the basis of the evidence and arguments before it, the Tribunal is unable to
determine whether there is sufficient likelihood that counsel and the court-appointed
receivers are included within the scope of the criminal investigation so as to justify granting
the interim measure sought in their regard. Nevertheless, this is a matter of some concern to
the Tribunal and, therefore, Claimants will be at liberty to renew their application if necessary

once clarification in this regard has been obtained.

8. Urgency

231. Claimants submit that the provisional measures requested are urgently needed since
they are intended to protect the procedural integrity of the arbitration and they are therefore,

by definition, urgent. They also note that since the filing of the TAG Complaint, the criminal

87

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

investigation is advancing at an unusually fast pace, noting that in a period of approximately
seven months, the PROCELAC investigated the TAG Complaint, received reports from
Respondent’s Spanish counsel in the insolvency proceedings, took witness statements from
one of Respondent’s counsel and submitted its own complaint to the Federal Prosecutor’s
office. In addition, the Federal Prosecutor has requested and received the file from
PROCELAC and issued requests for the production of certain evidence, including Letters
Rogatory for production of a certified copy of the proceedings in this arbitration. In response
to Respondent’s objection that a period of four months elapsed between the filing of the TAG
Complaint and the submission of Claimants’ Application, Claimants say that when they
learned of the filing of the TAG Complaint, they reserved their right to address the complaint
and to request provisional measures once they had received a copy of the TAG Complaint.
The TAG Complaint was only provided to Claimants by way of Respondent’s letter of 13
May 2015.

232. Respondent says that Claimants have not treated the Complaints as urgent and
delayed in filing their Application. It also submits that the criminal investigation is only in
the preliminary stages and will take some time. In any event, Respondent says that a decision

on the criminal investigation will not be issued before the Tribunal renders its final award.

233. In the Tribunal’s view, for the purposes of provisional measures, the requirement of

urgency is met when a question cannot await the outcome of the award on the merits.”*>

234. From its review of Respondent’s submissions relating to the steps involved in the
criminal investigation and the procedural guarantees said to exist under Argentine criminal
procedure, the Tribunal’s view is that it will take some time before the investigation is
completed and a recommendation or charge, if any, is submitted to the Federal court. While

there was no specific evidence given on how much time this process can be expected to take,

222 See Quiborax v. Bolivia, Decision on Provisional Measures, {| 66, quoting C.H. Schreuer, The ICSID
Convention: A Commentary, Cambridge University Press, p 751 (Exhibit C-543); Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania,
Procedural Order No. 1, 14.

88

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

 

the Tribunal’s sense is that it is likely to take several months and, therefore, formal charges

are not imminent.

235. Nevertheless, where the integrity of the arbitral proceedings is threatened, the
Tribunal believes that the need for the measures is inherently urgent. Although very few, if
any, procedural steps remain in the arbitration, the Tribunal regards Claimants’ access to
counsel of their choice as a critical element of the integrity of the arbitral proceedings. As a
result, insofar as the criminal investigation relates to counsel for Claimants, the Tribunal
considers that the requirement of urgency would likely be satisfied should it be necessary to

consider Claimants’ Application further in regard of counsel.

236. In regard of Claimants’ court-appointed receivers, the Tribunal defers further

consideration of this issue, until it should become necessary.

237. With respect to Claimants themselves and Burford, the Tribunal has not been
persuaded on the basis of the evidence currently before it that the requirement of urgency has
been met.

Cc. Decision

238. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal gives the following orders.
239. The Tribunal:

(a) orders that Respondent refrain from publicizing the Complaints or the
criminal investigation and any relation they may have to this arbitration,

whether by communications to the press or otherwise;

(b) defers its decision in respect of Claimants’ Application for Provisional
Measures as it relates to the suspension of the criminal proceedings in regard

of counsel for Claimants and Claimants’ court-appointed receivers, with

89

@

(e)

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)
Decision on Provisional Measures

liberty to Claimants to bring this Application back before the Tribunal in this

respect should it become necessary;

reminds the Parties that they are obligated to refrain from aggravating the

dispute;

denies the remaining aspects of Claimants’ Application for Provisional

Measures; and

reserves its decision on the costs of the procedure relating to Claimants’

Application for Provisional Measures to the final award

90

Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A.
v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1)

 

Decision on Provisional Measures

[signed]
Judge Thomas Buergenthal
President of the Tribunal

 

[signed] [signed]
Mr. Henri C. Alvarez Q.C. Dr. Kamal Hossain
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Subject to the attached
dissenting opinion

91

