International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Washington, D.C.

In the proceedings between
Telefonica S.A.
(Claimant)
and

The Argentine Republic
(Respondent)

Case No. ARB/03/20

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON

OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Giorgio Sacerdoti, President
Judge Charles N Brower, Arbitrator
Lic. Eduardo Siqueiros, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal

Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent

Dr. Guido S. Tawil Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina
M & M Bomchil Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino

Suipacha 268, piso 12 Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina

Buenos Aires

Buenos Aires

Reptblica Argentina Reptblica Argentina

Date of Decision: May 25, 2006

A Procedure

1. On May 12, 2003, Telefonica S.A. (hereinafter “Telef6nica’” or “the
Claimant”) filed with the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID) a “Request for Arbitration” against the Argentine Republic (hereinafter
“Argentina” or “the Respondent”) pursuant to the ICSID Convention and the Treaty
between the Kingdom of Spain and the Argentine Republic concerning the Reciprocal

Encouragement and Protection of Investment (hereinafter “BIT”) of October 3, 1991.

2. On May 14, 2003, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (Institution
Rules), acknowledged receipt and transmitted a copy of the request to the Argentine

Republic and to the Argentine Embassy in Washington D.C.

 

3. On July 21, 2003, the Acting Secretary-General of the Centre registered the
request, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention. On the same date, the
Acting Secretary-General, in accordance with Institution Rule 7, notified the parties
of the registration of the request and invited them to proceed, as soon as possible, to

constitute an arbitral tribunal.

4. Following a request from the Claimant, and in accordance with Art. 37(2)(b)
of the ICSID Convention, the Centre informed the parties that the arbitral tribunal in
this case would consist of three arbitrators. By letter of October 22, 2003 the
Claimant appointed as an arbitrator Judge Charles N. Brower, a U.S. national. By
letter of December 12, 2003, the Argentine Republic appointed Licenciado Eduardo

Siqueiros, a Mexican national, as an arbitrator.

5. As the parties failed to agree on the president of the tribunal, the Claimant
requested that the Chairman of ICSID Administrative Council appoint the President
pursuant to Art. 38 of the ICSID Convention. Accordingly the Acting Chairman of
ICSID’s Administrative Council appointed Professor Giorgio Sacerdoti, a national of
Italy, as the President of the Tribunal on March 17, 2004. All members of the

Tribunal duly accepted their appointment in writing.

6. The first session of the Arbitral Tribunal was held at the seat of the Centre in
Washington, D.C. on July 6, 2004. The parties appeared and were duly represented.
The parties confirmed that the Tribunal had been properly constituted on April 12,
2004 in accordance with the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules and

that they did not have objections in this respect.

7. During the course of the first session the parties agreed on a number of
procedural matters reflected in the written minutes signed by the President and the
Secretary of the Tribunal. Among the various procedural decisions taken at that
hearing, it was agreed that, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 22, the
languages of the proceedings would be English and Spanish. The Claimant would file
its pleadings in English and Argentina would file its pleadings in Spanish, with
subsequent courtesy translation of the written pleadings into the other party’s chosen
procedural language. Following a joint request from the parties and deliberation by
the Tribunal, the President announced that the proceedings were to be suspended until
October 5, 2004. It was further decided that the Claimant would file its Memorial on
the merits within 60 days, if the Claimant would file a “reduced” Memorial

(excluding questions of compensation, remedies and damages), or within 90 days, if

w

the Claimant would file a “complete” Memorial (including questions of
compensation, remedies and damages), from October 5, 2004 or from the end of any
other suspension period agreed upon by the parties, and that the Respondent would
file its objections to jurisdiction within 60 days from its receipt of the Claimant’s
Memorial on the merits. Thereafter the proceedings on the merits would be
suspended in accordance with Arbitration Rule 41(3) and the Claimant would file its
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction within 60 days from its receipt of the Respondent’s

objections to jurisdiction.

8. The Claimant filed its Reduced Memorial on December 5, 2004; Argentina
filed its “Brief on defenses alleging the lack of jurisdiction of the Centre and the
competence of the Tribunal” on February 23, 2005. In accordance with Arbitration
Rule 41(3) the proceedings on the merits were thereby suspended. In conformity with
the above procedural decisions, the Claimant then submitted its Counter-Memorial on

Jurisdiction on May 9, 2005.

9. The hearing on jurisdiction was held at the seat of the Centre in Washington,
D.C. on June 20, 2005. Messrs. Gabriel Bottini, Florencio Travieso and Ariel Martins
addressed the Tribunal on behalf of Argentina. Mr. Guido S. Tawil addressed the
Tribunal on behalf of the Claimant. The Tribunal posed questions to the parties, as
provided for in Arbitration Rule 32(3). The Tribunal granted to each party 15 days

from the date of the hearing to file certain documents referred to at the hearing.

B. The Subject Matter of the Dispute

10. Before examining the issue of jurisdiction submitted to the Tribunal, it appears
useful to highlight briefly the subject-matter of the dispute, in fact and in law, as
presented by the Claimant in its “Request for Arbitration”, and thereafter expanded
upon in its Reduced Memorial of December 2004, taking also into account the
statements made up to now by Argentina. Such presentation is made for the sole
purpose of comprehension of the factual circumstances and the legal claims made by
Claimant in respect of which Argentina has raised objections to jurisdiction. No legal
evaluation is hereby implied or made by the Tribunal, nor should any such

significance be attached to it for purposes of the present case.

11. As indicated by Telef6nica in its written submissions, the Claimant is a
corporation constituted under the laws of the Kingdom of Spain. Telefénica
indirectly owns a 97,91 % shareholding of Telefénica de Argentina S.A. (hereinafter
“TASA”), a corporation legally constituted under the laws of the Republic of
Argentina, thus qualifying as an “investment” according to Art. I(2) (second
paragraph) of the BIT, which refers to “shares and any other kind of participation in

companies.” Moreover, the Claimant has invested more than US$ 5,500 million in
equity in TASA and disbursed other amounts of money which are, in the Claimant’s
view, covered by the BIT provision of Art. I(2) (third paragraph), according to which
investments protected by the Treaty include: “rights arising from any kind of
contributions made for the purpose of creating economic value, including loans

directly related to a specific investment, whether or not capitalized.” The investment

made by Telefénica would also come under the scope of the BIT in accordance with

Art.I(2) (sixth paragraph), by way of the rights granted by Argentina in respect of the
tariff regime, the compensation mechanism in case of price control, the tax stability
provision, the ownership of the Licensee’s assets and to the right to hold a perpetual

telecom license.

12. Following the 1989 State Reform Law, the State-owned telephone company,
Empresa Nacional de Telecomunicaciones (“ENTel’”), was privatized and its assets
were transferred to four corporations created by Argentina through two Decrees of
January 5, 1990. A consortium formed by Telefénica International Holding BV (a
subsidiary of Telefonica S.A.), Citicorp Venture Capital S.A. and Inversora Catalinas
S.A. was awarded a 60% shareholding in Sociedad Licenciataria Sur Sociedad
Anénima (“Consortium” (Exhibit 11 R.A.). The Transfer Agreement was approved
by Decree 2332/90 of November 8, 1990 providing for the transfer of this
shareholding to the Consortium (Exhibit 12 R.A.). Pursuant to Art. 4.3(a) of the
Transfer Agreement, the corporate name of Sociedad Licenciataria Sur Sociedad
Anénima was changed to Telefonica de Argentina S.A. (“TASA”). Since the
privatization was to be final, a license — and not a concession — was granted to the
new operators in order to provide basic telephone services. Licenses could only be
amended by the State when the license itself so provided or when the consent of the
licensee was obtained. In addition, licenses could only be terminated by breach of
their conditions by the licensees. Termination by the State for reasons of public
convenience was expressly excluded. According to the Tariff Regime included in
TASA’s License, a system was created to provide compensation in the event that the
authorities ordered a price or tariff freezing not in line with the Tariff Regime. On

November 28, 1991, as a result of the enactment of the Convertibility Law in March

1991, the License Tariff Regime was modified converting domestic telephone tariffs
into U.S. dollars and subjecting them to an automatic semi-annual adjustment based
on CPI changes (the local cost-of-living index, the so called Consumer Price Index
Undice de Precios al Consumidor). The Tariff Agreement did not affect international

long-distance tariffs method of calculation, which remained fixed in Gold Francs.

13. According to the Claimant, Telefénica made its investment in TASA on the
basis of the specific legal, financial and economic guarantees provided for by
Argentina in the Decrees enacted since the State Reform Law and in the Agreements
entered into with the Claimant prior to the enactment of the Public Emergency and
Foreign Exchange System Reform Act (hereinafter “The Emergency Law), which
became effective on January 6, 2002. Pursuant to the Emergency Law, the system
established in the Convertibility Law whereby the Argentine currency was made
freely convertible into U.S. dollars at a 1:1 exchange rate has been eliminated;
moreover, as regards all agreements executed under public law by Argentina, U.S.
dollar adjustment clauses and indexation clauses based on foreign price indexes have
become invalid. (In particular, Art.8 of the Emergency Law extinguished the right of
regulated public utilities - including TASA — and public works contractors to adjust
their tariffs according to the variance to the CPI, the U.S. dollar, or any other foreign
currency or indices). In the meantime, however, contractors or public service

providers have been asked not to suspend the fulfillment of their obligations.

14. The Claimant complaints that the measures adopted pursuant to the
Emergency Law by Argentina amounted to breaches of the BIT in several ways: first

of all, the obligation to protect and not to impair by unjustified or discriminatory

measures the investments of the other Contracting Party, enshrined in Art. III(1) of
the BIT; secondly, the obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment to the
investments of the other Contracting Party, as prescribed by Art. IV(1) of the BIT;
thirdly, the obligation not to expropriate the investments of the other Contracting
Party through measures tantamount to expropriation, in breach of Art. V of the BIT.
The Claimant seeks compensation for the damages caused to its investment as a result

of the abovementioned breaches by Argentina of the BIT.

15. As far as the governing law is concerned, the Claimant asks the Tribunal to
apply, according to Art. 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, the provisions of the BIT as
lex specialis between the parties at dispute, and the rules of general international law

as a residual source of law.

16. Argentina has not replied yet to the Claimant’s arguments as to the facts since
Argentina has raised preliminary objections to jurisdiction. Still, Argentina has not
basically challenged the facts referred to by the Claimant, nor Claimant’s references
to the various Argentine laws relevant for the making of the investment and the
changes in 2001/02 to the legal regime applicable to it. Argentina does not deny
either that Telefonica is a Spanish corporation that has made indirectly an investment
in Argentina — specifically as shareholder of TASA to which the Argentina-Spain BIT

applies.

Cc. The objections of Argentina to jurisdiction
17. In its “Brief on defenses alleging the lack of jurisdiction of the Centre and the

competence of the Tribunal,” Argentina raises six_grounds for challenging the

jurisdiction of ICSID and the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal to hear the present
dispute. The objections to jurisdiction are being listed hereunder and thereafter

specifically described and addressed together with the counter-arguments of the

Claimant:

a. The dispute submitted to the Tribunal fails to meet the

requirements set forth by Art.25(1) of the ICSID Convention;

s

Pursuant to the terms of the BIT, there is no investment dispute;

c. The Tribunal lacks competence since the parties agreed on the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Federal Courts in and for the Capital
City of the Argentine Republic;

d. Telef6nica lacks ius standi to sue since under international law and
Argentine applicable law, corporate claims of derivative nature
(such as allegedly those made here) are inadmissible;

e. Telef6nica did not comply with the 18-month period prescribed by

Article X of the BIT;

f. The claim is inadmissible due to lack of damage.

 

a. The dispute submitted to the Tribunal fails to meet the requirements
set forth by Art. 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

b. Pursuant to the terms of the BIT, there is no investment dispute.

Since the first two objections to jurisdiction both deal with the requirements laid
down in Art.25 of the ICSID Convention and are closely interrelated, the Tribunal

considers it appropriate to examine them jointly.

Argenti: rguments

18. The first objection presented by Argentina concerns the requirement that “the
dispute arise directly out of an investment.” In order to meet such a requirement, in
Argentina’s view, “the measure or measures invoked in violation of the pertinent
BITs have to be specifically concerned with the investments.” In other words, “the
Centre has only jurisdiction over the measures aimed against the investment of the
investor” bringing a claim to the ICSID. Universal measures addressed to everyone
cannot be considered by ICSID Tribunals. “This would imply the judgment of a

political policy and not a legal conflict.”

19. Argentina considers accordingly that the measures complained of by the
Claimant are of a general nature, being “linked to the termination of the exchange
policy in force in the Argentine Republic.” In order to prove that there is a dispute
arising directly out of an investment, the Claimant, in the Respondent’s view, should
have shown that the measures it complained of were “addressed against specific
compromises entered into, negotiated with Claimant, and particularly, specifically and
exclusively promised to Clamant,” that is between the investor and the host State. As
a support to its approach, Argentina relies on the recent NAFTA arbitration award on
jurisdiction in the case Methanex v. USA to the effect that it is not enough that the
measure “affects” the investor or its investment. The theory of legal causation
construed by the Methanex tribunal interpreting the phrase “relating to” contained in
Art.1101 of the NAFTA is, in Argentina’s view, “a fortiori applicable to a case like
the present one, which is governed by the ICSID rules, where jurisdiction is limited
by the much more restricted phrase: ‘...arising directly out of an investment.’”

Argentina concludes that Telefénica should have proved, “a direct, next and

immediate connection between the measure and its alleged investment,” that is, legal
causation, whereas Telef6nica only presented mere causation of a factual nature.
Moreover, the Respondent asserts that the Claimant also failed to prove that its claim

is of a legal nature, as required by Art.25 of the ICSID Convention.

20. As far as the second objection to jurisdiction is concerned, Argentina questions
the very nature of the investment of Telefénica. According to Argentina, the
Claimant defines its investment in an “imprecise manner,” that “does not permit to
draw the individualization of the investments made by the Claimant from those made
by TASA.” Argentina concludes that “the investment alleged by Telefénica refers

exclusively and distinctly to the shareholding in TASA.”

21. Under the same objection to jurisdiction, Argentina denies that the dispute at
issue is an “investment dispute.” Argentina considers that since “the only investment
made by Telefénica has been the acquisition of the shareholding of TASA, there is no
relation of any kind between such investment and the claim filed by Telefénica.”
According to the Respondent, the dispute brought by the Claimant to ICSID is not
about rights but about commercial transactions. Argentina suggests that “Telefénica’s
claim is of contractual nature” since the disagreement “refers to provisions contained
in licenses granted for the exploitation of the basic telephone service, in contracts
transferring shares and in the tariff agreement.” Accordingly, the Respondent
maintains that any legal dispute that may arise from such contracts and agreements
“shall be submitted to the jurisdiction of national courts”, the only ones capable of
ruling on an alleged non-compliance with a contractual relation under the Argentine

law.

22. Finally, with regard to this heading, Argentina challenges the competence of
the Tribunal on the ground that the dispute concerns a contractual claim. To support
its position, the Respondent reports three decisions rendered under the ICSID
Convention: SGS v. Pakistan;! Generation Ukraine? and Waste Management IL} to
the effect that “an expropriation dispute requires more than eventual contractual non-
compliance.” Argentina asks the Tribunal to address at this jurisdictional stage the
issue of the nature of the dispute. As a result, according to Argentina, the Tribunal

should deny its jurisdiction, since the dispute is contractual.

 

Claimant’s counter-argumen

23. In its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, the Claimant addresses the first and
the second objections raised by Argentina in reverse order: firstly, it responds to the
argument that the dispute is not of a legal nature; secondly, it contests the argument
that the dispute is not an investment dispute; thirdly, it opposes the argument that the

s investment.

 

dispute does not arise directly out of Telef6ni

24. To begin with, the Claimant argues that the dispute is a “legal dispute”
because “Telefonica claims for the violation of its Treaty rights.” According to the
Claimant, the measures complained of taken by Argentina constituted “breaches of

the obligations undertaken towards the investor and its investment under the BIT.”

' SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No.
ARB/O1/13)

° Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9)

5 Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3)

25. Concerning the Respondent’s argument that the dispute is not an investment
dispute because of the very nature of the investment of Telefénica, the Claimant
stresses first of all the broad coverage of the BIT article defining investments
protected by the Treaty. It then recalls, as already explained in its Reduced Memorial
that its investment derives from (i) its shareholding in TASA, which is covered by
Art. I(2), (second paragraph) of the BIT; (ii) from the disbursement of US$6,000
million in equity in TASA and other amounts financing at no cost TASA’s activities,
a case also covered by the BIT at Art. I(2), (third paragraph); and (iii) from
Telef6nica’s rights to the Tariff Regime, the compensation mechanism in case of
price control, the tax stability provision, the ownership of the Licensee’s assets
transferred to Telefénica by Argentina and covered under the terms of Art. I(2) (sixth
paragraph). In addition, the Claimant argues that “activities channeled through a
locally incorporated company are covered by Article I(2) (second paragraph) of the
Treaty and effectively constitute Telefénica’s investments as a 98,03% indirect

shareholder of TASA.”

26. Since the dispute concerns measures against the investment as defined above
by the Claimant, it necessarily arises “directly out” of that investment. To support its
position, the Claimant refers to five recent cases in which Argentina - as a Respondent
- filed an identical objection to ICSID jurisdiction and in which the arbitral tribunals
constantly and identically rejected the objection. The cases are: CMS v. Argentina;!
Azurix v. Argentina; Enron v. Argentina;® LG&E v. Argentina’ and Siemens v.

Argentina.

+ CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8).

5 Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12).

27. Finally, the Claimant addresses Argentina’s argument that the measures
complained of by the Claimant are not specifically against Telefénica, but are of a
general nature. According to the Claimant, characterizing those measures as general
measure taken in light of the financial crisis which touched Argentina is misleading.
The Claimant “does neither claim for the peso devaluation nor challenges Argentina’ s

power to rule its own currency and to fix its value.” The Claimant complains rather
of specific measures which affected Telef6nica’s investment and which were taken in

violation of commitments arising from the BIT.

28. To clarify its assertions that the measures taken by Argentina are specifically

 

aimed at Telef6nica’s investment, thus constituting breaches of the BIT, the Claimant

sets forth a list of the commitments undertaken by Argentina towards Telefonica.

Third jurisdictional objection of Argentina:
c The Tribunal lacks competence since the parties agreed on the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Federal Courts in and for the Capital City of the

Argentine Republic.

29. Argentina maintains that the Transfer Agreement entered into between the
State and the former Empresa Nacional de Telecomunicaciones (ENTel) on the one
hand, and Compafiia de Inversiones en Telecomunicaciones S.A., Telefonica

International Holding BV, Citicorp Venture Capital S.A., Inversora Catalinas S.A.

 

8 Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.

ARB/O1/3).

7 LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1).

s Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8).

and the Claimant on the other hand, provided - in Art.18.6 on Applicable Law - that
“Any question related to the interpretation, the execution or the termination of the
Transfer Agreement shall be resolved in the City of Buenos Aires and the Federal
Courts hearing administrative claims shall have jurisdiction.” To support its
argument, Argentina reports as relevant precedents the Woodruff’ case decided by the
Claims Commission between the U.S. and Venezuela; the North American Dredging
Company (NADC)'" case decided by the Mexican-American Claims Commission in
1926 and the SGS v. Philippines case.'! In the Respondent’s view, such jurisprudence
points out a fundamental criterion according to which a “specific designation

contained in contract” has the “priority” “over the general agreement that serves as

the foundation for the jurisdiction of the international tribunal.”

 

30. The Claimant rejects Argentina’s arguments that the Tribunal cannot hear the
claim because it is basically a contractual claim and because the contract at issue — the
Transfer Agreement — provides for the resolution of disputes arising out of it by
domestic courts. The Claimant maintains that its claims “are founded in the Treaty”
(i.e. the BIT) and that “‘it is for violations of the Treaty” and not for “a mere breach of
contract” that Telef6nica brought its case before this Tribunal. To support its counter-
argument, the Claimant refers to some recent decisions on jurisdiction taken by

arbitral tribunals (Lanco v. Argentina; Salini v. Morocco;"° Vivendi v. Argentina; '*

Woodruff Case (1974), IX Reports of International Arbitral Awards, p. 213 ff.

10

North America Dredging Co. (1926), IV Reports of International Arbitral Awards, p. 26 ff.

u SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case
No.ARB/02/6).
R Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/6)

CMS vy. Argentina). According to this case-law, a “contractual dispute resolution
clause providing for the jurisdiction of the local courts of the host State” cannot have
a “preclusive effect” on the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal constituted under the
terms of the applicable BIT. The Claimant refers, moreover, to some cases where
ICSID Tribunals have upheld their jurisdiction both when the subject-matter of the
proceedings before the domestic courts under the contract and the dispute submitted
to the arbitral tribunal were different (Azurix v. Argentina; Siemens v. Argentina), and
when the international claim concerned at the same time violations of contracts and
breaches of the pertinent BIT (Enron v. Argentina). Accordingly, the Claimant

considers the ¢:

 

ses referred to by Argentina to support its argument as “blurred old
cases” and “highly criticized decisions” and questions their pertinence to the question

at issue.

Fourth jurisdictional objection of Argentina
d. Telefonica lacks ius standi to sue since under international law and
Argentine applicable law, corporate claims of a derivative nature (such as

those allegedly made here) are inadmissible.

Argenti: rguments
31. Argentina submits that Telef6nica lacks ius standi to sue because recognizing
such a right only as regards some of the shareholders of a corporation would lead to

“the definite destruction of the company.” In other words, “if the Tribunal admitted

the action brought by (some) shareholders, in the event of deciding in their favor, it

 

B

Salini Costruttori $.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco (ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/4)

4 Compaiifa de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB/97/3)

could not ensure that the resources would compensate the corporate property

allegedly damaged, which would lead to the anticipatory liquidation of the company.”

32. To defend its argument, Argentina relies on the well-known Barcelona
Traction decision by the ICJ.'° In the Respondent's view, the pronouncement by the
ICJ in that case supports its argument that shareholders’ damages caused by State
measures directed at a company itself cannot give rise to shareholders’ entitlement to
compensation. This is no more than the general principle according to which “no one
can sue in the name of another’. To succeed therefore, indirect or derivative actions,

“have to be expressly authorized.”

33. | Moreover, Argentina maintains that even according to Argentine Companies
Law (ACL)'® “only the corporation can defend its own interests. There is no
provision in the ACL that allows a shareholder to make a complaint on behalf of the
corporation.” Since “Telefénica does not assert, in this case, the violation of any of
the rights that, in its capacity as shareholder, it has” - Argentina concludes — “‘it
cannot bring a derivative action, that is an action “to enforce rights of another legal

person.”

The Claimant’s counter-arguments
34. | The Claimant addresses the second part of the second jurisdictional objection

and the fourth objection raised by Argentina together. According to the Claimant,

15

Case Concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company (Belgium v. Spain),
Judgment of February 5, 1970, 1970 I.C.J. 3.

16 In support of its arguments based on Argentine law, Argentina has submitted with its
memorial on jurisdiction a legal opinion on Argentine corporate law by Prof. Ricardo Augusto Nissen,
Chief Inspector of the Argentine Regulatory Agency of Corporations.

Telefénica’s claim is not a contractual one, but it is based on the BIT. In fact,
Telef6nica - as a Spanish “investor” in Argentina - as defined by the BIT - complains
of the violation of the BIT by Argentina. The Claimant, therefore, brings a claim
under the Treaty in its own capacity. Its claim is therefore a direct claim, that is a
claim which “arises directly from its rights under the Treaty.” Telefonica invokes the
commitments taken by Argentina under the License, the Transfer Agreement and the
Pliego (containing the Bidding Terms and Conditions as approved by the President,
see Annex | to Decree 62/90, Exhibit 9 R.A.) not in order to advance any contractual
claim under Argentine law, but rather “to set out the relevant framework within which
the Tribunal must evaluate whether the conduct of Argentina amounts to a violation
of the Treaty’s protection”. It does not matter whether an action arising under a BIT
may also raise local issues or causes of actions, and amount also to a breach of the

License or a violation of Argentine municipal law.

35. Therefore the Claimant is of the view that, in order to recognize its ius standi

before this Tribunal, it is enough to take into account the BIT’s provisions.

   

Telefonica makes reference to the defi

 

on of “investments” in the BIT, which is
broad, and to the Preamble, which enunciates the object and purpose of the Treaty.
To deny to foreign investors in a local company the protections provided by the BIT
would mean to ignore the Contracting Parties’ commitments under the BIT. In fact,
investing in shares of local companies is often the only choice left to foreign investors
by the host State legislation. To explain how this happened in Argentina, the
Claimant recalls the process and the rules leading to the privatization of the telecom

sector through an international public bid.

36. | Moreover, Argentina has completely overlooked the possibility of applying the
umbrella clause found in the U.S.-Argentina BIT by virtue of the MFN clause
contained in the Argentina-Spain BIT applicable to the present dispute. Such
umbrella clause, in the Claimant’s view, “provides further basis for jurisdiction ... in
the unlikely case that the Tribunal were to find that there is no Treaty claim.”
Contrary to the narrow and restrictive construction of the umbrella clause argued by
Argentina, Telefénica maintains, and seeks to demonstrate by confuting the case-law
mentioned by Argentina, that the “effect of umbrella clauses ... is to extend to any

violation of these (contractual) obligations the status of BIT’s breach.”

37. Finally, under this heading, the Claimant maintains that claims by shareholders
are well recognized by ICSID practice and international law. To support such
position, the Claimant refers to various decisions in cases in which arbitral tribunals
have “consistently granted standing to foreign investors holding shares in locally

incorporated companies.”

38. The reference made by the Respondent to Argentine Companies Law, which
does not admit derivative claims, is irrelevant to these proceedings since Telef6nica’s
claim is a claim based on the BIT. Accordingly, and as already explained in its
Reduced Memorial, the Claimant recalls that the applicable law is the BIT itself and

additionally international law.

39.  Telefénica challenges the reliance by Argentina on the Barcelona Traction
case. First of all, the Claimant recalls that the question at issue in that case was not

the shareholders’ right of action under international law, but the right of the State of

nationality of the shareholders to bring a claim on behalf of its nationals (diplomatic
protection) for damages that their company, established in a different State, had
suffered in a third State. By denying such a right to the national State of the
shareholders (Belgium), and, conversely, recognizing it in the national State of the
company (in that case Canada, where Barcelona Traction had been incorporated), the
ICJ explicitly distinguished the case where a treaty would provide for the direct
protection of shareholders. The Claimant refers in this respect to the ICJ decision in a
later case, which it considers more relevant to the question at issue here, namely the
ELSI case,'” brought before the ICJ by the U.S. against Italy under the Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Navigation between the two countries. Finally, the
Claimant refers to some cases which, in its opinion, would lead one to reassess the
question dealt with by the ICJ in the Barcelona Traction case, that is, “whether

international law affords independent protection to shareholders.”

Fifth ju ional objection of Argentina
e. Telefonica did not comply with the 18-month period prescribed by the

Article X of the BIT.

40. Argentina maintains that Telefénica, by bringing its claim before an ICSID
tribunal without submitting it in the first place (at least for 18 months) to the
competent Argentine tribunals violated Art. X of the BIT, which includes such a
requirement. The reliance by the Claimant on the MFN clause found at Art. IV.2 of
the BIT with reference to the provisions on dispute settlement of the BIT between

Argentina and Chile that contain no such a requirement, does not help the Claimant

" Case concerning Elettronica Sicula $.p.A. 1989 ICI Reports, p. 50.

20

since, in Argentina’s view, the MFN obligation is not applicable to jurisdictional
matters. This conclusion is supported, first of all, by the application of the ejusdem
generis rule and, secondly, by a correct interpretation of the provision of the BIT
containing the MFN clause. According to the ejusdem generis rule, the MFN clause
must refer to the same subject matter of the provision which grants advantages or
benefits to the most-favored nation. Argentina submits that an MFN clause contained
in a BIT cannot be used to extend to one contracting Party the advantages or the
benefits that the other contracting Party accords to another country in respect of a
different matter than that covered by the MFN clause. Secondly, an appropriate
interpretation of Art. X of the BIT must be based first of all on the principle of useful
effect, according to which a treaty provision cannot be interpreted in a way that would
render its words meaningless or superfluous. Moreover, the very text of the MFN
clause in the Treaty, that is Art.IV.2, supports, in Argentina’s view, its position that

settlement of disputes is not included in the clause itself.

41. — Argentina contends also that the Maffezini case, referred to by the Claimant in
its briefs, does not support the Claimant’s interpretation of the MFN clause. Argentina
draws the Tribunal’s attention to the fact that in Maffezini the position taken by Spain
as a respondent was the same as the one taken by Argentina as a respondent in these
proceedings. The arbitral Tribunal in Maffezini, in fact, not finding the text clear in
itself, resorted to the intention of the contracting parties of the BIT. According to
wl8

Argentina, the recent arbitral award in the ICSID case “Salini Costruttori v. Jordan

confirms this position.

8 Salini Costruttori $.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (ICSID Case

No. ARB/02/13); available online at www.worldbank.org/icsid.

21

42. Moreover, Argentina points out that the 18-month period provided for by Art.
X of the BIT cannot be considered “a delaying regulation of international jurisdiction.
On the contrary, it is a concrete opportunity for the courts in Argentina to apply and
defend international laws, granting an appropriate remedy — if applicable — before the
international liability of the Argentine State is established.” Argentina asserts, as a
distinct and additional argument, that its position on the issue, which it has set forth
also in the Siemens dispute, and the identical position taken by Spain in Maffezini, are
to be considered as subsequent practice, in conformity with Art. 31(3)(b) of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of the Treaties, which must therefore be taken into
consideration for an appropriate interpretation of the MFN clause contained in the

BIT.

The Claimant’s counter-arguments

43. In response to the Respondent’s argument on the MEN clause the Claimant
puts forward what, in its view, should be the correct interpretation of the clause itself.
Such an interpretation should start by reading the text of the clause itself according to
the general rule on the interpretation of treaties, as set out in Art. 31 of the Vienna
Convention. The “broad and comprehensive wording” of the BIT’s MEN clause
(which applies to “[...] all matters governed by this Agreement”) supports the
Claimant’s argument that dispute settlement is covered by the clause. Moreover, the
object and purpose of the BIT confirm this interpretation since its aim is to promote
and encourage foreign investment and “an effective system of dispute settlement”
serves this same purpose. As far as the relevant case-law on the matter is concerned,
the decision on jurisdiction in Maffezini has a great relevance to the present

proceedings because the claim was based on the same BIT as is at issue here.

22

According to the Claimant, irrespective of the position taken by Spain in that case
(which is the same as taken by Argentina in the present proceedings), the Tribunal’s

decision in that cas

 

supports Telef6nica’s interpretation of the MFN clause as
applicable also to the dispute settlement procedures. The position taken by Spain in
Maffezini and by Argentina in Siemens cannot, in the Claimant’s view, be resorted to
by the Tribunal to interpret a treaty provision unless the plain meaning of that
provision does not make sense. Moreover, being mere arguments made in the context
of adversarial proceedings, those positions cannot be considered as the expression of
the real intention of the contracting Parties of a treaty. On the contrary, the relevant
case-law on the subject (which Telefonica cites) can be seen to support Telefénica’s

construction of the MFN clause.

44. — Telef6nica challenges also the reference to the ejusdem generis rule made by
Argentina to support its argument that the MFN clause contained in the BIT applies
only to substantive and not to jurisdictional matters. Telefénica also rejects the

relevance of the case-law cited by Argentina in support of its position.

45. Finally, Telefonica raises the so-called “futility exception” under international
law, according to which “when alternative means of dispute settlement are obviously
futile, they need not be complied with.” In this respect, Telefonica argues that in 18
months no decision, not even at first instance, could be rendered by Argentina’s
courts. Telefénica points out moreover that bringing this large case to Argentina’s
courts of justice would require the payment of a fee of a considerable amount. This

useless requirement makes evident, in the Claimant’s view, the “abuse of right”, as

defined in international law, inherent in Argentina’s insistence that those domestic

remedies be pursued for 18 months.

Sixth jui ional objection of Argentina

f. The claim is inadmissible due to lack of damage.

46. Argentina asserts the non-existence of a controversy and the related non-
existence of any real damage suffered by Telefénica. “The increase in the company’s
quotation in the Stock Exchange” shows that the company is, in fact, “financially
solid and active.” Moreover, “the remaining tariff-related issues are being dealt with

within the frame of a negotiation proc

 

taking place in Argentina.”

The Claimant’s counter-arguments

47. — According to the Claimant, the above-mentioned ground for challenging the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal is, in fact, a merits-related one and must be dealt with
accordingly during the merits phase of the proceedings. In order to assert its
jurisdiction, the Tribunal must be satisfied, according to Art. 25 of the ICSID
Convention, of the existence of a legal dispute concerning real facts and these
requirements are met in this case, as shown by Telef6nica in its Counter-Memorial on

Jurisdiction.

48. The fact that TASA is involved in a renegotiation process taking place in

Argentina (in which, by the way, the Claimant asserts that TASA has been forced to

take part and to which it did not voluntarily agree) is without effect on the position of

24

Telef6nica, which is a different legal person and whose claims before this ICSID
Tribunal “are based on its right of action under” a BIT “and do not involve the

exercise of TASA’s rights under Argentine law.”

D. Consideration by the Tribunal of the objections to jurisdiction

In general

50. As announced by the President of the Tribunal at the end of the hearing on
jurisdiction and in conformity with Art. 41 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41, the Tribunal is called upon to decide as a preliminary question
the objections raised by the Respondent to the effect that the dispute is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre nor within the competence of the Tribunal. While the
parties have advanced many arguments, some of them touching upon the merits, the
Tribunal will consider hereafter only those that are relevant to its decision regarding

the objections of the Respondent to jurisdiction.

51. The Tribunal must therefore ascertain, for the sole purpose of determining its
competence under the ICSID Convention and the Argentina — Spain BIT, whether the
criteria that define disputes for the purpose of ICSID jurisdiction under those two

instruments are met. These criteria are:

a) that the dispute is between Argentina (as a Contracting Party to the ICSID
Convention and the BIT) and a national of Spain (as defined in the BIT and in
the ICSID Convention),

b) that the dispute is a “legal” dispute (Art. 25(1) ICSID Convention),

25

c) that said legal dispute arises “directly” out of an investment (Art. 25(1) ICSID
Convention),

d) that said dispute is one of “Las controversias que surgieren entre una de las
Partes y un inversor de la otra Parte en relacién con las inversiones en el
sentido del presente Acuerdo” that is one of “the disputes that arise between
one of the Parties and an investor of the other Party in respect of investments
as defined in the present Agreement’ as stated in Art. X.1 of the BIT,

e) that such investment is of the type defined and listed in Art. I.2 of the BIT.

The proper methodology for resolving the ional

52. Before starting the above examination on the basis of the parties’
documentation and arguments, but not necessarily in the same order as the parties
have raised them, the Tribunal finds it appropriate to elucidate the type of analysis

that it is called upon to make in order to determine its jurisdiction in this case.

53. In order to determine its jurisdiction, the Tribunal must consider whether the
dispute, as presented by the Claimant, is prima facie, that is on a summary
examination, a dispute that falls generally within the jurisdiction of ICSID and
specifically within that of an ICSID tribunal established to decide a dispute between a
Spanish investor and Argentina under the BIT. The requirements of a prima facie
examination for this purpose have been elucidated by a series of international cases."
The object of the investigation is to ascertain whether the claim, as presented by the

Claimant, meets the jurisdictional requirements, as to the factual subject matter at

° A detailed examination of international cases can be found in the recent Decision on

Jurisdiction by the ICSID Tribunal in Impregilo v. Pakistan, ICSID Case No.ARB/03/3, Decision on
Jurisdiction of April 22, 2005, paras. 237-253, available at: http://www.worldbank.org/icsid.

26

issue, as to the legal norms referred to as applicable and alleged to have been
breached, and as to the relief sought.” For this purpose the presentation of the claim
as set forth by the Claimant is decisive. The investigation must not be aimed at
determining whether the claim is well founded, but whether the Tribunal is competent

to pass judgment upon it.

54. As to the facts of the case, the presentation of the Claimant is fundamental: it

must be assumed that the Claimant would be able to prove to the Tribunal’s

 

satisfaction in the merits phase the facts that it invokes in support of its claim, that is

the existence and impact of Argentina’s measures and actions it considers have

 

affected its investments in breach of the BIT. This does not rule out the possibility
that a respondent may submit, already at the jurisdictional stage, such “prima facie”
evidence as to show that the claim, or some claims, are “manifestly without merit” at

a preliminary examination (as currently envisaged under the ICSID Arbitration Rules

as amended on April 10, 2006).

55. In the present dispute, however, there does not seem to be any basic
disagreement between the parties as to the factual elements of the case, as far as this
may be relevant to identify the ambit of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in relation to the
dispute. Argentina does not basically dispute that its measures, referred to by the
Claimant (specifically the Emergency Law of 2002 and its Art. 8), have eliminated
the free convertibility of the peso into U.S. dollars at the rate of 1:1 and have
extinguished the right of regulated public utilities - including TASA — to adjust their

tariffs according to the CPI, the U.S. dollar or other foreign currencies and indexes.

0 This corresponds to the traditional Roman law description of the elements of a claim: factum,

causa petendi and petitum.

27

Argentina does not dispute either, insofar as it might have addressed this issue in the
jurisdictional phase, that those measures generally have had the factual impact
described by the Claimant, namely that the measures adopted in Article 8 of the

Emergency Law have adversely affected TASA’s business.

56. As to the legal foundation of the case, in accordance with accepted judicial
practice, the Tribunal must evaluate whether those facts, when established, namely the

unilateral changes of the legal regime just mentioned and their alleged negative

 

impact on Telefénica’s investment, could possibly give rise to the Treaty breaches
that the Claimant alleges, and which the Tribunal is competent to pass judgment
upon”. In other words, those facts, if proved to be true, must be “capable” of falling
within the provision of the BIT and of having caused or constituting treaty breaches as
alleged by the Claimant.” It is of course a question of the merits as to whether the

alleged facts do constitute breaches of the BIT for which the Respondent must be held

liable.

 

57. _ As to the relief sought, there is no doubt as to the admissibility of the claim for
relief that the Claimant has sought against and from Argentina, notably a declaratory
judgment that Argentina has committed various breaches of the BIT’s provisions and
an order that Argentina compensate it for the damages stemming therefrom. With
these considerations in mind the Tribunal will turn to examine the jurisdictional basis
of the claim challenged by Argentina.

2 See ICJ, Oil Platforms case, ICJ Reports 1996, p. 806, para. 16; see also the separate Opinion

of Judge Higgins, at para. 32 of her separate Opinion; SGS v Philippines, cit. Decision on Jurisdiction
of January 29, 2004, in ICSID Reports (2005), p. 518, para. 157.

 

  

2

25.

ICI, Legality of the Use of Force (Serbia and Montenegro v. Italy), ICJ Reports 1999-1, para.

28

58. | The Tribunal wishes immediately to dispose of the first requirement listed
above, namely that concerning the parties. Argentina does not dispute that the
Claimant, Telefénica S.A., is a juridical person having the nationality of another
Contracting State in conformity with Art. 25(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention. More
specifically, Argentina does not dispute that the Claimant meets moreover the

requirements of being a Spanish company under the BIT.

The first and second objections to jurisdiction by Argentina

The requirement that the dispute be of a “legal” nature

59. Both parties acknowledge that, pursuant to Art. 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention, the dispute must have a “legal” character. Indeed judicial organs can by
their very nature only pass judgment upon disputes which involve the recognition as
between the parties of rights and obligations, stemming from binding norms and
instruments. Such disputes must be resolved by the proper interpretation and
application of those norms and other relevant rules to the facts of the case.”* This is

confirmed within the ICSID system by Art. 42 listing the various “rules of law” in

accordance with which the tribunal “shall decide” a dispute.

60. In this case, the Claimant refers to specific legal acts and provisions as the
basis of its claim: it indicates that certain measures by Argentina have affected its

legal rights protected by the BIT. The Claimant further lists specific provisions of the

23

A possible exception is when the parties expressly confer on a Tribunal the power to decide
“ex aequo et bono”.

29

BIT granting various types of legal protection to its investments in Argentina that in

its view have been breached by those measures.

6l. In the Tribunal’s view, these indications set forth in detail by the Claimant
allow the Tribunal to conclude that the Claimant has made legal claims against
Argentina, so that the Tribunal is presented with a legal dispute which as such is
within its jurisdiction. The Tribunal does not find support for the contrary argument
that “challenges related to questions such as a price control system” and against “the
general suspension of adjustments by foreign indexes and the fixing of the tariff of the

public utilities in Argentine pesos are measures that, under the correct construction of

 

the terms of the ICSID Convention, do not constitute questions of ‘legal nature.’”
The Claimant has indicated, as clearly appears from its arguments, that it does not
complain about general economic measures, but of the violation of express legally
binding commitments (neither political nor commercial) of Argentina as regards

Telef6nica’s investments under the BIT.

The i that the dispute arises “directly” out of an investment.

62. We turn now to Argentina’s objection that its measures are not “specifically”
addressed to Telef6nica’s investments. Argentina bases this objection on the premise
that by referring to “any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment” Art.25(1)
of the ICSID Convention requires that the measures impugned by the Claimant as
being contrary to the BIT must be “specifically” addressed to an investment. In the
present case, according to Argentina, the claims at issue are linked to, and are the

consequence of the termination of Argentina’s exchange policy, over which ICSID

30

has no jurisdiction. The Tribunal does not share the argument of Argentina nor its
conclusions for the following reasons. First of all, the Tribunal does not consider that
from a textual point of view the term “specific” can be considered as a synonym for
“directly”. A measure of the host State can affect an investment directly, so that the
dispute as to the international legality of that measure arises directly out of that

investment, even if the measure is not specifically aimed at that investment.

63. International practice indeed shows that many, if not most, disputes based on
an alleged breach of international standards concerning the treatment of the property
of aliens, settled either through diplomatic protection or by direct arbitration, have
arisen from general measures taken by host States, that affected those investments
directly, without necessarily being specifically aimed at them. Were this not the case,
nationalization measures, either aimed at the property of both nationals and
foreigners, or just at foreign property, which have been the subject matter of a
substantial portion of those disputes, would have escaped any international litigation

and dispute settlement mechanisms.

64. In the present case it appears that Telefonica claims and has given prima facie
evidence, as is sufficient for purposes of establishing jurisdiction, that certain
measures, namely Emergency Law N° 25.561, and more particularly its Art.8,
specifically affected its investment since the legal regime applicable to the
telecommunication service performed by TASA was thereby changed in a way

detrimental to it.

31

65. | The requirement of Art. 25(1) of the ICSID Convention that the dispute arise
directly out of an investment is met when, as is here the case, the Claimant challenges
certain measures of the host State that affect directly the investment in a negative
way, in that these measures are applicable to such an investment as a matter of law™

and that they were in fact implemented in respect of such an investment.

66. Moreover, in the present case one could consider that the more restrictive

criterion advocated by Argentina is also met. This is because some of the measures

 

referred to by Telefénica as having affected its investment adversely, both legally and
economically, such as Decree N°1090/02,?° were directed and applied specifically to
public services (servicios ptiblicos) and their providers under license (los
concesionarios), among which TASA and its operations were included. In this
respect the Tribunal does not consider that for a measure to be found “specifically”
directed to a certain entity or to its assets it is necessary that said entity be singled out

by name as an addressee of such measure.

67. It is important to clarify that the subject matter of the dispute is not the
termination of the exchange policy of Argentina per se, nor can the Tribunal pass
judgment on whether such a decision and the measures through which it was carried
out were right or wrong from an economic or domestic legal point of view. The

Tribunal is called upon, in exercising objectively its competence under the ICSID

4 This element makes reliance on the Methanex case irrelevant, since in that case (moreover

brought under the partly different requirements of NAFTA Art. 1101(1)) the measure at issue was
found to affect the claimant only indirectly. The reason was that the measure restricted the use of a
product made by a different company, to which Methanex supplied an additive, Methanex Corp. v.
USA, Decision on Jurisdiction of August 7, 2002, available online at: www.naftaclaims.com.

Exh. 17 to the Claimant's Request for Arbitration.

32

Convention and the BIT, to determine whether specific measures, or possibly also
measures of a more general nature affecting directly such an investment, have been
adopted in violation of legally binding commitments contained in the BIT. “What is
brought under the jurisdiction of the Centre is not the general measures in themselves

but the extent to which they may violate those specific commitments.””°

The i that the dispute concern “an in

68. The previous discussion leads the Tribunal to examine the second objection of

Argentina, namely that the investment made by Telefénica and protected by the BIT

consists of the acquisition and possession of the shares of TASA. The consequence

 

that Argentina draws is that the dispute is not about Telefénica’s investment, since
those shares are not affected by the various measures challenged by the Claimant as
being in breach of the BIT. Indeed, having found above that Argentina’s measures
are within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal insofar as they allegedly directly affected,
both legally and economically, TASA’s operations, it must be ascertained whether

assets and/or rights that represent Telefénica investments according to the BIT’s

definitions were thereby legally and economically affected.

69.  Telefénica maintains, in contrast with Argentina’s position, that the dispute
involves such investments under the BIT, namely the investment it made to acquire its
current shareholding in TASA, additional financing thereof, as well as “Telef6nica’s

rights in the Tariff Regime, the compensation mechanism in case of price control, the

2 CMS v. Argentina cit., Decision on Jurisdiction of July 17, 2003, para. 27, referred to in part

by Argentina in its Memorial on Jurisdiction. This holding has been relied upon in Enron v. Argentina,
cit., Decision on Jurisdiction (Ancillary Claim) of August 2, 2004, para. 12; both available at:
hitp:/www.worldbank.org/icsid.

tax stability provision, the ownership of the Licensee’s assets and the right to hold a
perpetual telecom license that can only be amended by the mutual agreement of the

parties.”

70. In order to resolve the issue the first step is to ascertain whether the rights that
Telef6nica invokes fall within the definition of investment under the BIT. A second
step is to determine whether those rights pertain to Telefénica, and not just to its local

subsidiary TASA.

71. As to the definition, the BIT contains in Art.II.1 an all-inclusive definition of
“Investments”, namely “every kind of assets, such as goods and rights of any nature,
acquired or made in accordance with the legislation of the host country, and

particularly, but not exclusively...” There is no question moreover that the shares
that Telefénica owns in TASA, controlling it through a 97.91% shareholding, fall
within the first illustrative definition of Art. I.1, namely “shares and other forms of
participation in corporations.” Financing and loans that Telefénica claims have been
affected by Argentina’s action in breach of the BIT clearly fall within the next
definition: “Rights arising from any sort of contribution made for the purpose of

creating economic value, including loans directly related to a specific investment,

whether or not capitalized.”

72. The other rights that Telefénica invokes and claims to have been breached by

Argentina in violation of various BIT’s provisions (notably the licenses and the

various guarantees concerning the service) also fall within the BIT’s illustrative

34

listing of various types of investments, specifically within “Rights conferred by law or

contract for conducting economic and commercial activities....”.

73. Finding that the rights that Telef6nica claims are protected by the BIT (a claim

that Argentina does not challenge as far as the shareholding is concerned) does not by

 

itself resolve the objection to jurisdiction raised by Argentina. In order to dismiss the

  

objection it is necessary to find that:

a) the present case is one of a “dispute arising directly out of an
investment”, in accordance with Art. 25 of the ICSID Convention , and
falls within the definition of Art. 12 and X.1 of the BIT,
notwithstanding that the title to the shareholding in itself has not been
legally affected by Argentina’s measures claimed to be in breach of the

BIT; and

b) the licenses and guarantees pertaining thereto can be properly
considered to be investments of Telefénica, notwithstanding the fact
that they appear to belong to, and/or represent an entitlement of TASA

under Argentina’s law.

74. We start our examination with question (b), since the answer to it is relevant
also for answering question (a), as will appear from our reasoning. The broad
definition of “investment” in BITs generally, and their purpose of promoting and
protecting investments by nationals of one Contracting Party in the territory of the
other, have prompted arbitral tribunals to take somehow as granted that rights of the

type listed under (b) are protected by a BIT, also when they are owned by or granted

35

to the local subsidiary, and irrespective of the fact that in some instances such
subsidiary was not controlled by the foreign claimant. While this broad view appears
to be appropriate when dealing with jurisdiction, the separate legal personalities of the
foreign investor, on the one hand, and of the local company in which such investor
has invested, on the other hand, should not be ignored without an adequate

consideration of the facts of each case.

75. Inthe present instance, considering the general definition of investment in Art.
IL1 of the BIT and the fact that Telefénica fully controls TASA due to its
shareholding, one can consider TASA, as a company, as a protected investment.
Therefore Telef6nica may claim, i.a., a right under Art. III.1 of the BIT that Argentina
“does not hinder by unjustified or discriminatory measures the management,
maintenance, use, enjoyment, extension, sale or, as the case may be, liquidation of

such investment”.

76. Those provisions warrant an interpretation of the BIT according to which, in
case of an acquisition by an investor of one Contracting Party of the entire capital of a
company of the other Party, treaty protection is not limited to the free enjoyment of
the shares, that is the exercise of the rights inherent in the position of a shareholder. It
also extends to the standards of protection spelled out in the BIT with regard to the
operation of the local company that constitutes the investment.’ It is of course a
question of the merits to ascertain whether breaches of the investor’s treaty rights
have been committed by the host State in that respect.

” By so holding the Tribunal does not express its views on the possibility that non-controlling

shareholders, including minority shareholders, may be found to enjoy the same rights, as held by
various arbitral tribunals in investment disputes.

36

77. _ This interpretation is supported by the object and purpose of the BIT, which is
a Treaty “concerning the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investment.” In the
Preamble, the Parties declare that they “intend to establish favorable conditions for
the investments carried out by investors of each party in the territory of the other
one”. Disregard of the actual treatment of the company representing the investment,
by removing it from the BIT’s coverage, would therefore require a restrictive
interpretation of the BIT’s terms contrary to its object and purpose. Such an
interpretation might moreover render several of its provisions ineffective and useless
for investors, especially for those that have made a “direct investment” (as Telefénica
did in this case) through a local company that they have established or acquired, in
order to carry out, through it, a specific economic activity, in casu the provision of

ae «ag 28
telecommunication services.

78. There are additional decisive circumstances, specific to the facts of this case,
that lead the Tribunal to answer the question (b) in para. 73 in the affirmative. Due
attention must be given in this respect to the real scope of Telef6nica’s investments as
it results from its participation in the privatization, in 1989-91, of the State-owned
company that provided telecommunications services in Argentina (ENTel). The
terms of the bidding and of the various related documents make it clear that Argentina
launched a public international bidding for that purpose, which was opened to foreign
investors (which were indeed sought by Argentina), on the condition that they

included as necessary participants “private companies dedicated to the

2s The carrying out of the investment through a local company is sometimes required by the law

of the host State, as was the case here.

37

telecommunication activities as Operator.””?

These companies had to be endowed
with specific technical competences and qualifications, besides having available
adequate financial resources.*” The Operator had to accept the rights and obligations
as “Manager” under a contract to be entered with the licensee (“Contrato de
Gerenciamiento.”) The conditions specified that the successful bidders would be

awarded the shares in the specific licensees, i.e. the local companies which resulted

from the division of ENTel assets (among which Sociedad Licenciataria Sur S.A.).

 

The conditions also specified the basic conditions and warranties under which those

licensees would operate.

79. As a successful bidder, the consortium in which Telef6nica participated
through a fully owned subsidiary was awarded 60% of Licenciataria Sur for the price
of US$ 2,834,000,000, a percentage that was later increased up to almost 100%, while
Licenciataria Sur changed its name into TASA. The Transfer Agreement approved
by Decree 2332/90" explicitly mentioned and recognized Telefonica as “Operador

Principal,” independently from its being also a member of the Consortium.

80. In view of the above, it is clear that the legal regime applicable to TASA’s
operations was the object of an undertaking by Argentina with Telef6nica as a

participant in the privatization and as “Operator.” Telefénica claims that by the

~ The fact that the foreign investor had responded to an international privatization bid addressed

by Argentina to qualified foreign companies has been noted in various decisions upholding the
jurisdiction of ICSID tribunals, see f.i. Enron v. Argentina, cit., Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 January
2004, paras. 54-56, available at: hitp://www.worldbank.org/icsid.

   

30 See Decree 62/90 and annexed “Pliego de Bases y Condiciones para el Concurso Ptiblico

Internacional para la Privatizacién de la Prestacion del Servicio de Telecomunicaciones” (Exh. 9 and
C 34 of Claimant), specifically Art. 3. Also Telefénica, as “Operador principal” was a party to the
Transfer Agreement (see Exhibit 12 R.A.).

3 Claimant’s Exh. 12.

38

changes of the legal and contractual regime laid down and agreed in the privatization
process its rights under the BIT have been breached and its claim is therefore not
barred by the fact that TASA may be the legal holder of certain of those rights and

connected obligations under the laws of Argentina.

81. | As a consequence, question (a) in para. 73, whether the Tribunal is presented
with a dispute arising directly out of an investment, as prescribed by Art. 25 of the
ICSID Convention and meeting the requirements of the BIT, must also be answered in
the affirmative. In view of the circumstances given here, Telefénica’s rights are not
limited to the mere title to the shareholding in TASA. Telefénica made the investment
through TASA and not just in TASA. The Tribunal is thus competent to entertain
claims that measures affecting the legal regime of TASA’s operations have breached
Telef6nica’s rights under the BIT. The Tribunal is faced accordingly with “an
investment dispute” under Art. 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, corresponding to “a
dispute relating to an investment” under Art. X.1 of the BIT, irrespective of the fact
that TASA may have contractual claims against the competent Argentina authorities
for breach of the Transfer Agreement. It is of course for the merits to determine
whether or what treaty breaches have been effected by Argentina through the various

measures challenged by Telefénica.

82. The above specific factual and legal situation and the scope of BIT provisions

lead the Tribunal to conclude that the treaty rights that Telefénica invokes,

complaining that Argentina has breached them, indeed, pertain to Telefénica.

39

83. | Therefore, Argentina’s reliance on the decision rendered in 1970 by the
International Court of Justice in the Barcelona Traction case is misplaced when it
seeks to deny the possibility that action taken by the host country against the activities
and assets of a local company fully owned or controlled by foreign investors may
constitute a breach of the BIT. The factual and legal context was different there and
only the protection of foreign shareholders under customary international law was at
issue in that dispute. Without entering into the specifics of that case, the ICJ itself
recognized in its decision that the protection of shareholders required that recourse be
had to treaty stipulations. The Court recalled that “indeed, whether in the form of
multilateral or bilateral treaties between States, or in agreements between States and
companies, there has since the Second World War been considerable development in

the protection of foreign investments.”

The impressive development of BITs has
been a response to the uncertainty of customary international law relating to foreign

investment.

Third objection to jurisdiction of Argentina

 

84. The reasons elaborated above in deciding the second objection by Argentina
resolve also the third objection. Telefénica claims that Argentina has breached its

undertakings in the privatization instruments, aimed at attracting qualified foreign

32

ICJ Reports (1970), paras. 88-89. In the subsequent ELSI case the Court upheld the
applicability of Art. III.2 of the bilateral treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation of 1948
between the US and Italy (granting to nationals and corporations of either party the right to “organize,
control and manage” corporations controlled by them and created under the law of the other party), in a
case where Italian authorities had requisitioned property of an Italian company owned by two US
corporations, ICJ Reports (1989), paras. 68 ff. The relevance of this decision for the interpretation of
BITs has been highlighted by the late Dr. F.A. MANN in his comment Foreign Investment in the
International Court of Justice, in American J. Int. Law, 1986, p. 92-102.

40

investors intending to participate in such process and meant thereafter to govern the
regime of the operations which successful bidders such as Telefénica were to carry
out. Telef6nica claims that Argentina thereby has breached its BIT obligation and
does not rely on a breach of contract under Argentine law as a party to the Transfer
Agreement. As regards Telefénica, the Transfer Agreement, on which Argentina
relies, appears rather the instrument for implementing the undertakings and
commitments stemming from the bidding process, i.e. the acquisition of the shares of
Licenciataria Sur, entailing the responsibility to carry on its services and the rights

and duties connected therewith.

85. Telef6nica’s investments qualify for investment protection under the BIT, so
that recourse to its dispute settlement mechanism provided in Art. X is possible as a
matter of right. The claim that the host State has breached the BIT in respect of a
given investment can be entertained by this Tribunal irrespective of the existence of
contractual remedies available to TASA or to Telef6nica as provided in the Transfer
Agreement. The exclusive choice of forum clause contained in such contract operates
therefore in respect of such contractual claim and cannot prevent the discharge by this

Tribunal of its obligations in accordance with the BIT.

86. | The Claimant has referred in support of its position to various cases where
ICSID tribunals have held that claims based on alleged breaches of the BIT with
respect to an investment by a foreign investor cannot be equated with contractual
claims under a license agreement. Argentina on the other hand relies on various
cases to the effect that a contractual choice of local forum should be given effect over

8 See f.i. LG&E v. Argentina, cit., Decision on Jurisdiction of April 30, 2004, para. 66, available

at: http://www.worldbank.org/icsid.

41

the international agreement that serves as the foundation of the jurisdiction of the

international tribunal.**

87. Based on its examination of the claims made by Telef6nica and the respective
arguments of the parties, the Tribunal considers that the subject matter of the claims
of Telefénica to be decided here, and as to which Argentina challenges our
jurisdiction, is not the breach of a contract containing a choice of domestic forum
clause. It is not Telef6nica’s position that it has submitted such a contractual claim to
this ICSID Tribunal and this position appears prima facie warranted for jurisdictional
purposes. The choice-of-forum clause of the Transfer Agreement is therefore
immaterial and cannot be a bar to our jurisdiction. This means further that there is no
need for us to examine or rely on Telefénica’s additional argument based on the
applicability of the umbrella clauses present in various BITs of Argentina by virtue of
the MEN clause of Art.IV.2 of the Argentina-Spain BIT in order to find that we are
competent to pass judgment on Telef6nica’s claims (notwithstanding, arguendo, the
choice-of-forum clause that would be applicable to the contractual claim).** The
subject-matter of this dispute is not a contractual claim that would be cognizable by
this ICSID Tribunal established under the BIT only by virtue of an umbrella clause
under which a purely contractual claim would have been converted into a Treaty
claim. The Tribunal is rather presented here with a claim based on the alleged breach
by Argentina, through its legislative and other measures of 2001 and 2002, of the

legal regime applicable to Telefénica’s investment in the telecommunication sector in

Woodruff Case, cit.; North America Dredging Co., cit.; SGS v. Philippines, cit., para. 154.

8 We do not find it necessary therefore to dwell on the interpretation and effects of such

umbrella clauses, an issue which the Claimant has raised with reference to the most recent ICSID case
law on this matter.

42

Argentina in violation of various terms of the BIT. The jurisdiction of this Tribunal on

such claims must be upheld for the above-mentioned reasons.*°

Fourth objection to jurisdiction of Argentina

 

allegedly made here) are inadmissible

88. | As mentioned above, this defense by Argentina is based on the position that
since the assets and rights affected by the measures of Argentina challenged by the
Claimant belong exclusively to the local company in which the foreign party has
bought shares representing the investment, the action brought here cannot but be
defined as a derivative suit. Argentina describes as a derivative suit one by which the
shareholder attempts to make good in its own name rights that belong instead to its
subsidiary in the host State. Such “derivative” suit being inadmissible under the
domestic law of the subsidiary, namely the law of Argentina, the Claimant cannot

present such a claim to an international arbitral tribunal.

89. Having found, however, that the assets and rights that Telefénica claims have
been injured in breach of the BIT fall under the definition of investments under the
BIT, it is immaterial that title to some of them is in TASA in accordance with the law
of Argentina. Telefénica asserts its own treaty rights for their protection, regardless of
any right, contractual or non-contractual, that TASA might assert in respect of such

6 This would not prevent the Tribunal, when dealing with the merits, from examining incidenter

tantum whether there have been breaches of the Transfer Agreement, should this be relevant in order to
ascertain whether Argentina has committed the BIT breaches that Telefénica alleges. See also the
Vivendi Annulment decision, Comp. de Aguas del Aconquija (Annulment),41 ILM 1135 (2002) at para.
112.

assets and rights under local law before the courts of competent jurisdiction of
Argentina for damages suffered as a consequence of actions taken by those authorities

in breach of applicable provisions of such law.

90.  Telefénica, on the other hand, invokes here treaty rights concerning its
investment in Argentina protected by the BIT. The claims of Telefénica cannot
therefore be defined as indirect claims (or “derivative” claims), as if Telefonica were
claiming on behalf or in lieu of TASA in respect of rights granted to the latter by the
laws of Argentina. It is therefore irrelevant that such claims would be inadmissible
under the laws of Argentina and that they would not be amenable in any case to the
jurisdiction of an ICSID arbitral tribunal. This objection of Argentina appears

therefore to be without merit.

Fifth objection to jurisdiction of Argentina

Telefe did not comply with the 18-month period p: ibed by the Article X of

the BIT

91. Argentina submits that this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because Telefénica
initiated the present arbitration without complying with Art. X.3(a) of the BIT, which
allows an investor to submit an investment dispute under the BIT to international
arbitration provided that the tribunal of the host State, competent to hear the dispute
under para. 2 of the same article, has not rendered “‘a decision on the merits of the

claim after the expiration of a period of eighteen months from the date on which the

44

proceedings referred to in par. 2 of this article have been initiated.”*” This provision
requires, according to Argentina, that an aggrieved investor, before resorting to ICSID
arbitration, must submit its claims to domestic courts and pursue its case there for at
least 18 months if no decision on the merits has been rendered within this time

period.**

92. As stated above, Telefénica relies instead on the most-favored-nation clause
found in Art. IV.2 of the BIT in order to claim that the requirement of Art. X.3 (a) is
not applicable in view of the fact that other BITs entered into by Argentina, in
particular the Argentina — Chile BIT of 1991 (in force since January 1, 1995),° does
not subject the submission of an investment dispute to ICSID arbitration under that

BIT to such a condition precedent.

93. In this respect, the Tribunal notes that this requirement, or precondition, is best
qualified as a temporary bar to the initiation of arbitration. The objection is therefore
technically an exception of inadmissibility raised by Argentina against the Claimant

40

for not having complied with the requirement. The Tribunal notes that the

a The original text of Art.X.3(a) is as follows: “La controversia podra ser sometida a un

tribunal arbitral internacional en cualquiera de las circunstancias siguientes: (a) a peticién de una de
las partes en la controversia, cuando no exista una decisién sobre el fondo después de transcurridos
dieciocho meses contados a partir de la iniciacién del proceso previsto por el apartado 2 de este
articulo.”

8 The next subparagraph of Art. X.3(a) allows the introduction of an international claim
notwithstanding the timely issuance of such domestic decision on the merits (no requirement that such
decision be final is mentioned) “if the dispute between the parties continue.”

” Exh, 27 and 28 of Telefénica.
“ The LL.C. uses the terms “Admissibility of claims” as title of Art. 44 of its Draft Articles on
States Responsibility. According to this article: “The responsibility of a State may not be invoked if:
(b) The claim is one to which the rule of exhaustion of local remedies applies and any available and
effective local remedy has not been exhausted.”

As to the various types of relations that can exist between inadmissibility and lack of
jurisdiction see ICJ, Case concerning Armed Activities on the Territory of Congo (Democratic

45

inadmissibility of the claim would result in the Tribunal’s temporary lack of
jurisdiction, that is until the condition of the Claimant having submitted its claims to
the courts of Argentina as the host State and not having obtained a decision on the

merits within eighteen months would not had been satisfied.

94. The objection requires interpreting the scope of the MFN clause of Art. IV.2
of the BIT in order to ascertain whether it is applicable to the above-mentioned
procedural requirement and with what effect. Art. IV of the BIT, whose heading is

“Treatment”, provides as follows :

“1. Cada Parte garantizard en su territorio un tratamiento justo y
equitativo a las inversiones realizadas por inversores de la otra Parte.”
(“Each Party shall grant in its territory a fair and equitable treatment to

investments made by investors of the other Party.”)

“2. En todas las materias regidas por el presente Acuerdo, este
tratamiento no serd menos favorable que el otorgado por cada Parte a las
inversiones realizadas en su territorio por inversores de un tercer pais.”
(“In all matters regulated by the present Agreement, this treatment shall
not be less favorable than the one granted by each Party to the investments

made in its territory by investors of a third country”).

 

Republic of Congo v. Rwanda), Decision on Jurisdiction of the Court and Admissibility of the
Application, February 3, 2006, especially paras. 18, 88 and 100. In SGS v Philippines, cit., the
Tribunal held that it had jurisdiction of the claim thanks to the relevant umbrella clause but that the
claim was not admissible in view of the choice-of-local jurisdiction clause; see paras. 127 f. and 155.

46

Paragraph 3 and 4 contemplate some exceptions to the MFN obligation
(concerning, respectively, regional integration agreements and similar schemes, and
double taxation treaties), while paragraph 5 of the same article deals with national

treatment.

95. Argentina claims that this MFN obligation “is not applicable to jurisdictional
matters” since the application of the MFN clause is governed by the principle
“ejusdem generis.” This principle would restrict the application of the MFN
treatment “to the people or things specified in the clause, or implied in the matter

governed by such clause.”"!

According to Argentina subjecting the 18-month period
prescribed by Art. X to the MFN clause would imply a violation of a basic principle
of treaty interpretation contemplated in Art. 31(1) of the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties of 1969 because the Parties must have given to Art. X an intended

meaning, which is submitting the case to local bodies before making any international

claim.

96. | The exact meaning of the MFN clause in the BIT must indeed be analyzed in
accordance with the principles of Art. 31 of the Vienna Convention (which codifies
the customary principles of international law on the matter). First of all, a treaty must
be interpreted “in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to
the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose” (Art.

31.1).

a Citation by Argentina from the ILC Final Draft Articles on the Most-Favored-Nation Clauses,

Art. 9, Yearbook of the ILC, 1978-II, reprinted in ILM 1978, p. 1518.

47

97. As to the MEN clause, one should specifically consider that it is a “standard
clause”, although the specific language varies from treaty to treaty.” It has been used
for centuries in order to ensure that a certain treatment, or any treatment that the
parties have agreed in a bilateral treaty to grant to their merchants, traders and
investors, as the case may be, in respect of their persons, activities, goods and assets,
depending upon the sectors regulated by said treaty, not be undercut by a better
treatment that either contracting State might in the future grant to the same categories
of persons, activities, goods and assets of a third State. By virtue of the MFN clause
the result sought is achieved by extending to the beneficiaries of the other contracting
State such better treatment. In accordance with the most frequent “automatic” type of
MEN clause, this better treatment is to be extended automatically as a matter of right.
Moreover, the better treatment to be extended to the beneficiary contracting State is
not limited to the one granted under subsequent treaties made by the other signatory
with a third State. Its source may be found also elsewhere; thus the better treatment to
be extended may have been granted by law or even de facto by such other contracting

State.

98. An MEN clause is aimed at ensuring equality of treatment to the beneficiaries
in respect of its subject matter at the most advantageous level." In respect of trade in

goods, establishment, services and investments, the purpose of an MEN clause has

a See Lord McNAIR, The Law of Treaties, 1938, p. 285: “Speaking strictly, there is no such
thing as the most-favoured nation clause: every treaty requires independent examination.”

6 M. GIULIANO, Quelques aspects juridiques de la coopération intergouvernementale en
matiére d’échanges et de paiements internationaux, Recueil des Cours, 1968-II, p. 557 ff, at p. 581.

“4 More generally “the intention of the most-favored-nation clauses [is] to establish and maintain
at all times fundamental equality without discrimination as between the countries concerned”, ICJ,
Case concerning rights of nationals of the USA in Morocco (France v. USA), ICJ Reports (1952), p.
192.

48

been described as that of guaranteeing equal competitive conditions to businessmen of
the countries concerned in the contracting States’ territories. Specifically as to
foreign investors, it appears correct to state that “the basic purpose of MEN is to
guarantee equality of competitive opportunities for foreign investors in the host

state.”.°

99. The original scope of the MFN clause has been enlarged by making it
applicable not only to future better treatments, but also to any treatment, however
provided, by either State to the same categories of persons, things or activities

referred to in the clause, pertaining to a third State.“°

In any case, “The beneficiary
State can only claim rights which belong to the subject-matter of the clause, which are
within the time-limits and other conditions and restrictions set by the agreement, and
which are in respect of persons or things specified in the clause or implied from its

subject-matter.” This relationship is what is generally called the “ejusdem generis”

restriction in the application of the MFN clause.

100. With these general concepts in mind the Tribunal turns now to the specific
issue raised under the MFN clause of Art. IV.2 of the BIT at issue in respect of the
dispute settlement provision of Art. X of the same BIT. Argentina claims that dispute
settlement provisions or mechanisms, such as the one found in Art. X, would not be
encompassed by their very nature by the scope of the MFN clause of Art. IV. The

J. KURTZ, The Delicate Extension of Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment to Foreign Investo
Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, in T. WEILER (Ed.) International Investment Law and Arbitration,
Cameron May, London, 2005, p. 523.

 

“ It is well known that the clause has been widely employed in multilateral treaties, notably in

the GATT as to trade matters, thus guaranteeing equality of treatment among all participants.

“ E, USTOR, Most-Favoured-Nation Clause, Encyclopaedia of Public International Law, North
Holland, Amsterdam 1985, vol.8, p. 411, at p. 415.

49

text of neither articles, however, support this limitation. On the contrary, Art. IV.2
explicitly states: “In all matters regulated by the present agreement this treatment shall

not be less favorable than...” The contrary argument by Argentina that dispute
settlement mechanisms are not covered appears to be unwarranted.** The protection of
the rights of foreigners, including investors, through the granting of an explicit right
to have access to courts and to avail themselves of specific remedies such as recourse
to direct arbitration is a typical matter where the MFN treatment is relevant,

traditional and recognized plicable.” In the Ambatielos” international arbitration

 

case, referred to by both the disputing parties in support of their opposing views, the
Greek claimant invoked the MFN clause of the Treaty of Commerce and Navigation
of 1886 between Greece and the UK dealing with “all matters relating to commerce

and navigation” precisely in order to claim a right of ac

 

ss to British justice based on
the better treatment so provided in that respect in treaties of the UK with other

countries.

101. That case and other instances and examples often quoted refer in any case to

domestic justice.” In the present case, Art. X provides, as far as it is relevant here,

“ The Tribunal notes that notwithstanding, or maybe in view of the use of the term “all

matters”, the Parties have taken care to exclude specifically certain matters from the coverage of the
MEN clause: see Art. IV.3 and 4, as well as par. 1 of the Protocol to the BIT.

* See E.USTOR, cit, at p. 411.
so ICJ Reports (1953) p. 10.
3 Award of 6 March 1956, UNRIAA, XII, p.87, at p. 107.

” See the extensive discussion of the ejusdem generic rule (or limitation) in Commentaries by
the LL.C. to Art. 9 and 10 of its Final Draft Articles on Most-Favoured-Nation Clause, cit. supra. The
fact that the U.N. General Assembly was unable to recommend the Draft Articles to Member States
with a view to the conclusion of a convention on the subject, due to disagreement on specific points
and a decline of interest in the subject, does not affect the value of the I.L.C. contribution to the matter
under customary international law, see Sir A. WATTS, The International Law Commission, Oxford
1999, vol. III, p. 1795.

50

for recourse by the aggrieved investor to ICSID international arbitration under the
Washington Convention of 1965. Access to such a system of international justice
would not be automatically available to an investor of a country which is not party to
the Washington Convention, nor when the host State has not given its consent to such
arbitration in a BIT or otherwise. The fundamental role that direct arbitration in favor
of investors may have under BITs would not overcome the obstacle represented by
the lack of participation by either State in the international organizational context

within which such direct arbitration is possible in case of dispute. 3

102. The issue here is not, however, the extension of ICSID arbitration beyond
what is provided for in the Argentina — Spain BIT by virtue of the reference to another
BIT under the MEN clause.’ The issue is whether submission of the dispute to
ICSID under the BIT may be exempted from the precondition of submitting the claim
to the domestic courts of the host State, thanks to the application of the MFN clause.
In the light of what has been said above, the Tribunal considers that this requirement
pertains to the “treatment” that Argentina applies, “within its territory” to Spanish
investors wishing to complain before an ICSID arbitral tribunal about a breach of
some substantive provision of the BIT in respect of their investment in Argentina.
Therefore, such a requirement falls within the purview of the MEN clause of Art.

IV.2. It follows that if such a requirement is not applied to Chilean (and other foreign)

8 See Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision on Jurisdiction of
January 25, 2000, para. 63, in ICSID Review - Foreign Investment Law Journal (2001) also available
online at www.worldbank.orgficsid.

sa

 

 

Referring to the role and function of the dispute settlement provisions within BITs in general
does not appear to be an adequate interpretative tool to resolve the question at issue. See paras. 106 to
108 hereunder for a discussion of this approach as relied upon in part, but leading to different
conclusions, in the Maffezini Decision on Jurisdiction, cit., (at para. 54), on the one hand, and in Plama
Consortium Ltd v. Bulgaria, on the other hand, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction
of February 8, 2005, para. 223, in ICSID Review—Foreign Investment Law Journal (2005); also
available online at www.worldbank.org/icsid.

Sl

investors by Argentina under the respective BITs, then this requirement properly is

inapplicable to Spanish investors.

103. It is undisputable that it is preferable for an investor not to be obliged to
submit, and pursue for 18 months, its claim before the courts of the host State before
being allowed to submit it to the specific investment arbitration at ICSID. Being
exempted from such a requirement (also considering the unlikelihood that a decision
on the merits be rendered within this time limit)” represents a “better treatment” in

respect of which, therefore, the MFN clause operates.

104. This conclusion fully respects the requirement of the ejusdem generis rule,
invoked by Argentina, for the reasons indicated above. As indicated above, the
Tribunal considers that excluding the 18-month requirement from the application of
the MFN clause would not be justified in view of the explicit applicability of the
clause to “all matters” regulated by the BIT, as stated in Art. IV.2 of the same. Other
BITs concluded by Argentina, which are the basis of disputes brought by foreign
investors against Argentina and currently pending at ICSID, do use a different

language. Thus the Argentina-U.S. BIT of 1991, at Art. II.1 provides: “Each Party

6 The Tribunal does not find it necessary to address the argument of Telefénica that the 18-
month requirement is inapplicable because it should be considered “futile” under a certain doctrine of
international law in relation to the exhaustion of local remedies. Telefonica makes this argument
because it considers (and has given evidence in that respect) that it would be impossible for a court of
Argentina to render a decision on the merits in such a period of time. While this observation appears to
be reasonable, the Tribunal notes that such a requirement is present in various BITs of Argentina and of
other Latin American countries. It has been considered as a mitigated form of the exhaustion of local
remedies requirement, to which these countries have traditionally adhered in accordance with the Calvo
doctrine. It cannot be excluded from the outset that the host State might be able, if it so wishes, to
speed up proceedings and the issuance of a decision by its own courts. See generally H. A. GRIGERA
NAON, Arbitration and Latin America: Progress and Setbacks, in Arbitration International, 2005, p.
127, at p. 137 ff. We note however that the Siemens Tribunal considered that since Art. 10(2) of the
Argentina-Germany BIT (substantially identical to Art. X.3 (a) of the BIT at issue here) “does not
require a prior final decision of the courts of the Respondent... Art. X(2) is not comparable to the local
remedies rule”, Siemens A.G. v. Argentina, cit., Decision on Jurisdiction of August 3, 2004, para. 42,
available online at www.worldbank.org/icsid.

 

52

shall permit and treat investment, and activities associated therewith, on a basis no
less favorable than that accorded in like situations to investment or associated
activities of its own nationals or companies, or of nationals and companies of any
third country, whichever is the most favorable.” The BIT between Argentina and
France of 1991 at Art. 4 specifies: “Each Contracting Party shall accord in its territory
and maritime zone to investors of the other Party, in respect of their investments and
activities in connection with such investments, treatment that is no less favorable than
that accorded to its own investors or the treatment accorded to investors of the most-
favored-nation, if the latter is more advantageous.” The Argentina-Germany BIT,
also of 1991, states at Art. 3(1): “None of the Contracting Parties shall accord in its
territories to the investments of nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party
or to investments in which they hold shares, a less favorable treatment than the
treatment granted to the investments of its own nationals or companies or to the

investments of nationals or companies of third States.”*°

105. The Tribunal is comforted in reaching its conclusion by previous decisions on
the issue, especially those that have interpreted to the same effect the very same
provision of the Argentina—Spain BIT. These decisions have reached the same

conclusion though through partially different reasoning.*’

*6 The Maffezini Tribunal has pointed out that the Argentina-Spain BIT was the only one, among
many BITs concluded by Spain, that included the terms “all matters”, Decision cit., at para. 60.

7 See Maffezini cit.; Siemens A.G. v. Argentina, cit.; Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v. Argentina, ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/10, Decision on Jurisdiction of June 17, 2005. Both the Maffezini and Gas Natural
decisions involved the Argentina-Spain BIT at issue here; in the Siemens case the Argentina-Germany
BIT of 1991 was the relevant treaty.

106. The tribunal in Maffezini was faced with a claim against Spain by an
Argentine investor that had not complied with the “18-month domestic litigation
previous obligation” (as we call it here for sake of brevity) relying on the MFN clause
as Telef6nica does here. The Tribunal considered that, although the Argentina-Spain
BIT does not refer expressly to dispute settlement as covered by the MFN clause,
“there are good reasons to conclude that today dispute settlement arrangements are
inextricably related to the protection of foreign investors... and are also closely linked
to the material aspects of the treatment accorded.”** The Tribunal further noted that
international arbitration has replaced other remedies resorted to in the past, such as
certain forms of extraterritorial jurisdiction which had been frequently abused, and
that “traders and investors, like their States of nationality, have traditionally felt that
their rights and interests are better protected by recourse to international arbitration
than by submission of disputes to domestic courts.” The Tribunal concluded
therefore that “if a third-party treaty contains provisions for the settlement of disputes
that are more favorable to the protection of the investor’s rights and interests than
those in the basic treaty, such provisions may be extended to the beneficiary of the

MEN clause as they are fully compatible with the ejusdem generis principle.”

107. The decision affirming jurisdiction in the Siemens v. Argentina dispute

disc

 

s in detail the manifold aspects of the same question in accepting the plea of
Siemens that it did not have to comply with the “18-month domestic litigation

previous obligation” found in the Argentina-Germany BIT. That Tribunal concluded

5s Maffezini Decision cit., at paras, 54 and 55.

59

Ibid., at para. 55.

Ibid., at para. 56.

54

that “the Treaty itself, together with so many other treaties of investment protection,
has as a distinctive feature special dispute settkement mechanisms not normally open
to investors. Access to these mechanisms is part of the protection offered under the
Treaty. It is part of the treatment of foreign investors and investments and of the
advantages accessible through a MEN clause.”°!

108. We are not called upon to comment upon these other decisions that have
concluded before that BIT provisions containing the “18-month domestic litigation
previous obligation” are inapplicable by virtue of a MFN clause. We note that those
tribunals have reached the same conclusion, namely the inapplicability of the
requirement, although their reasoning in part differs from ours.” Other ICSID
tribunals have recently considered pleas based on the MFN clause contained in

various BITs both in relation to jurisdiction and as to questions of merits. The

 

issues discussed there are however not directly relevant for our decision here.

8 Siemens A.G. v. Argentina, Decision cit., at para. 102.

a The argument relied upon in Maffezini, namely that the international direct arbitration
mechanisms of BITs are inextricably linked to the substantive protection of investors’ rights and thus
are part of the treatment to which they are entitled and to which the MEN obligation applies, has been
referred to also in other decisions. We note however that not all BITs make direct international
arbitration mechanisms available to investors for the protection of all their rights spelled out in the
treaty. In fact various limitations as to access to such a mechanism were present in the 1987 BIT
between Cyprus and Bulgaria at issue in the Plama v. Bulgaria case cit. Moreover, although such
international arbitration pertains to the treatment which investors benefit of under a BIT (and have even
been considered as “perhaps the most important element in investors protection”, as mentioned in the
Gas Natural Decision), we do not consider for the reasons explained in the text that it is in itself part of
the “fair and equitable treatment” that “Each Party shall grant in its territory... to investments made by
investors of the other Party” as provided for by Art.IV.1 of the Argentina-Spain BIT (emphasis added).

 

® The MEN clause has been relied upon and discussed by various ICSID Tribunals recently, both on
request of the claimants and of the respondents. As to the merits see CMS v. Argentina, cit., Award on
the merits of May 12, 2005, in 44 JLM 2005, p. 1205, also available online at
www.worldbank.org/icsid. As to jurisdiction, the ICSID Tribunals in both Salini Costruttori &
Italstrade v. Jordan, cit., Decision on Jurisdiction of November 29, 2004, in ICSID Review — Foreign
Investment Law Journal (2005), p. 148; and in Plama v. Bulgaria, cit., rejected reliance on a MFN
clause as the sole basis for jurisdiction. In Plama the Tribunal was called upon to find jurisdiction on a
claim solely on the basis of incorporation by reference (through a MEN clause) of the ICSID dispute
settlement mechanism in its entirety, since such a mechanism was not provided for in the applicable
BIT. Reliance on the MEFN clause as the basis for jurisdiction in these instances would have been

  

55

in and Argentina

 

109. Argentina has raised an additional argument to support its argument that the
MEN clause of Art. IV.2 should not apply to the “18-month domestic litigation
previous obligation.” Argentina claims that the opposition to such application
expressed by Spain as a respondent in the Maffezini case, and by Argentina in the
Siemens and Gas Natural litigations, leads to this conclusion. Argentina claims that
the parallel positions taken by the two Contracting States in those proceedings, based
on similar arguments as to the interpretation and application of the relevant articles of
the Argentina-Spain BIT amount to “subsequent acts carried out by the parties” which
indicate “their agreement as regards the interpretation of a given provision” which

would be binding on this Tribunal.

110. It is not clear from the outset whether Argentina bases its reasoning and
conclusion on Art. 31.3(a) or 31.3(b) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties. According to Art. 31.3, in order to interpret a treaty provision “There shall
be taken into account, together with the context, (a) any subsequent agreement
between the parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its
provisions”; (b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which
establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation” (emphasis

added).

 

considerably more far reaching that in the present and the other cases mentioned, where only the “18-
month domestic litigation previous obligation” is or was at issue. The Tribunal in Plama concluded that
the principle should be different than the one stated in Maffezini: “an MFN clause provision in a basic
treaty does not incorporate by reference dispute settlement provisions in whole or in part set forth in
another treaty, unless the MFN provision in the basic treaty leaves no doubt that the Contracting Parties
intended to incorporate them” (at para. 223).

56

111. The Tribunal considers that the case of letter (a) is not present here. The
distinct, independent positions taken by the two Contracting States as respondents in
different arbitral proceedings, moreover not involving the other Contracting State,
does not amount to an “agreement”, in any one of the manifold forms admitted by

international law, between the two parties concerning such an interpretation.®°

112. From the arguments developed by Argentina it appears rather that Argentina
relies on subpara. (b) of Art. 31.3 “Subsequent practice” as referred to in that

provision is important because it “constitutes objective evidence of the understanding

1966

of the parties as to the meaning of the treaty. In this respect, the Tribunal is not

convinced that positions on interpretation of a treaty provision, expressed by a
Contracting State in its defensive brief filed in an international direct arbitration
initiated against it by an investor of the other Contracting State, amounts to “practice”
of that State, as this requirement is understood in public international law, nor does it
appear relevant in order to ascertain “how the treaty has been interpreted in practice”

by the parties thereto.”

ad Even a press communiqué of a meeting between representatives of the parties may suffice, see

ICJ, Aegean Sea Continental Shelf case (Greece v. Turkey), ICJ Reports (1978), para. 96.
5 In respect of investment agreements, contracting States have sometimes provided that mixed
commissions made of their representatives may issue authentic, binding interpretations of the relevant
treaty provisions, that amount to subsequent agreements by the parties; see fi. Art. 1131(2) of the
NAFTA. Even when a BIT does not establish such a commission or does not provide for consultations
between the parties in respect of matters arising under the BIT, as is the case of the Argentina—Spain
BIT, contracting States would of course be free to enter into consultations and conclude an
interpretative agreement.

66 LL.C., Yearbook, 1966-II, p. 219, para. 6.

& To use the often quoted expression by Sir G. FITZMAURICE, The Law and Procedure of the
ICJ 1951-4: Treaty Interpretation and Other Treaty Points, (1957) BYIL, p. 203, at p. 211.

57

113. First of all, these positions do not seem to amount to “practice”, ie. to

“conduct of the parties in their application of the... Agreement”

or “performance” by
the States concerned,” in that they do not evidence the “factual element” required by
Art. 31.3(b). These positions, expressed separately by Spain and Argentina in those
distinct disputes, indicate their views set forth in those litigations for purposes of
arguing as respondents therein. Moreover, these statements, individually and
separately made by the Contracting States within such litigation, are not directed
towards each other: they do not evidence therefore an “agreement”, a meeting of their

"as required by the same Art. 31.3(b). In this

minds or intent (“concours de volonté’’)
respect, the present case may be distinguished from a case decided by the Iran-United
States Claims Tribunal in 2004. There that Tribunal had to deal with the admissibility
of counterclaims filed after a deadline set in a provision of the relevant agreement
barring the filing of claims, in view of the practice of both countries to the contrary in
litigation before that Tribunal. The Iran — United States Claims Tribunal found that it

could consider “as action taken in the application of the treaty ... the filing of

counterclaims and assertions and admi:

 

sions made in the course of the proceedings
before a tribunal.” The Tribunal found that “the Parties have engaged in a
concordant, common and consistent practice in filing counterclaims to official claims,
and this practice reflects an agreement as to the interpretation of Article II, paragraph

2 of the Claims Settlement Declaration.””! These factual elements, and especially the

“s laly-USA Air Transport Arbitration, 17 July 1965, 4 ILM (1965) p. 974, at p. 983.
° PCU, Brazilian Loans (France v. Brazil), PCI Series A, 1929, N° 21, at p. 119.
7 P.DAILLER & A. PELLET, Droit International Public (7° ed. 2002), para. 62, p. 118.

7 The Islamic Republic of Iran and The United States of America, interlocutory Award No. ITL

83-B1-FT of September 9, 2004, paras. 115-116, (reprinted in Iran-U.S. C.T.R.), referring i.a. to the
Decision of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission of April 13, 2002, para. 3.30.

58

fact that both parties, Iran and the United States, had followed that practice in

litigation between themselves before that Tribunal are not present in this dispute.

114. The Tribunal finds therefore that those positions, though concordant at least in
appearance,” do not entail a “concordant, common and consistent sequence of acts or
pronouncements which is sufficient to establish a discernible pattern implying the
agreement of the parties [to a treaty] regarding its interpretation” (emphasis
added)” as would be required under Art.31.3(b) of the Vienna Convention. The
Tribunal rejects therefore the argument of Argentina that the MFN clause does not in
any case relieve the Claimant from the duty to comply with the 18-month requirement
of Art. X.3(a) of the BIT because of an interpretative agreement to the contrary of

Argentina and Spain established by their subsequent practice.

Sixth objection to jurisdiction of Argentina

   

of damage

115.  Telefénica has claimed that the measures enacted by Argentina that affected

 

s investments have inflicted on it substantial damages, notably the transformation of
the tariffs from U.S. dollars (to which the peso was pegged at the rate of 1:1) to
devalued pesos and the elimination of the adjustment mechanism. In order to
establish jurisdiction based on a prima facie examination of the claims raised by the
nm We note that the arguments made by Spain to object to the application of the MFN clause in

the Maffezini case are not identical to those made by Argentina before us, as far as can be concluded
from the summary of those arguments found in paras. 41-42 of the Maffezini Decision.

% WTO Appellate Body, Japan — Alcoholic Beverages-II, WT/DS 8-10-11/AB/R, p. 13, adopted
on November 1, 1996, available at: www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/dispu_e.htm#disputes. The
Appellate Body quoted SINCLAIR, The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (2 ed. 1984), p.
137, where the author states: “An isolated act is generally not sufficient to establish subsequent
practice; it is a sequence of acts establishing the agreement of the parties that is relevant.”

 

 

59

Claimant this statement and the documents submitted to this effect appear to be
adequate. The possible uncertainty as to the final amount of the damages does not
represent a bar to jurisdiction, but rather an issue to be decided in the merits phase.
The Tribunal observes moreover that the Claimant has petitioned i.a. for a declaratory
judgment that Argentina has breached the BIT. In this respect the issue of damages is

immaterial.”

116. Nor does the existence of ongoing negotiations with local companies or the
foreign shareholders (which are however disputed by the Claimant) represent a bar to
the introduction or pursuit of an international claim such as the one at issue.
Negotiations in view of a settlement are often carried on by the parties to a dispute,
domestically and internationally, between private parties, between governments, and
between governments and foreign investors, while the dispute is pending before a

court of law or an international or arbitral tribunal. This situation does not undermine

 

the jurisdiction of those judicial or arbitral bodies, except if the parties jointly decide
to suspend proceedings or to intervene otherwise in the course of the pending dispute.
Since this is clearly not the current situation in this dispute”’, the Tribunal has no

other choice than to reject this objection as being without foundation.

™ A basic issue in the present litigation is whether Argentina has committed an internationally
wrongful act, that is whether it has breached the international obligations contained in the BIT by
conduct attributable to it. As held by the LL.C. these two conditions are sufficient to establish such a
wrongful act giving rise to international responsibility. Having caused a damage thereby is not an
additional requirement, except if the content of the primary obligation breached has an object or
implies an obligation not to cause damages, see LL.C., Draft Articles on State Responsibility cit.,
commentary to Art. 2, para. 9.

 

6 See para. 7 above as to the suspension of these proceedings that the parties had agreed for a

few months in 2004.

60

Decision

For the reasons stated above the Tribunal concludes that all jurisdictional
requirements laid down in the ICSID Convention and in the BIT are met in the
present dispute. The Tribunal rejects accordingly Argentina’s objections to
jurisdiction and decides that the present dispute is within the jurisdiction of ICSID

and the competence of the Tribunal.

So decided
Giorgio Sacerdoti
President of the Tribunal
Charles N. Brower Eduardo Siqueiros
Arbitrator Arbitrator

61

