DISTRICT COURT OF THE HAGUE

civil law section — provisional measures judge

challenge number: 13/2004

petition number: HA/RK 2004.667
date of decision: 18 October 2004
DECISION

in respect of the written challenge pursuant to article 1035 (2) Code of Civil Procedure in the matter

of:

The Republic of Ghana
petitioner
electing domicile in The Hague, at the office of:

mr, P.J.M. von Schmidt auf Altenstadt, procurator /itis,

versus

Telekom Malaysia Berhad,

respondent,

electing domicile in The Hague, at the office of:
mr. E, Grabandt, procurator Jitis,

for the purpose of challenging:

Prof. E. Gaillard

arbitrator of the international tribunal

1. Background and the course of the proceedings

In 1996 Telekom Malaysia Berhad (hereinafter to be referred to as “TMB”), a Malaysian
telecommunication company, invested a sum of USD 38 million in Ghana Telecommunications
Company Limited and as a result thereof acquired 30% of, as well as the control over and the
management of, Ghana Telecommunications Company Limited. The Republic of Ghana hereinafter to
be referred to as: Ghana) and the Republic of Malaysia are parties to a “Bilateral Investment Treaty
(BIT), the purpose of which among other things is the protection of each other’s residents who have

made an investment in the other state. In the spring of 2001 a dispute arose between TMB and the

petitioner concerning TMB’s interest in Ghana Telecommunications Company Limited. After it had
become clear that the parties were unable to settle said dispute. TMB invoked the dispute settlement
scheme as provided for in the BIT. Subsequently TMB initiated arbitration proceedings under the
UNCITRAL rules. The formal place of arbitration agreed upon between the parties is The Hague. The
arbitration proceedings are administered by the Permanent Court of Arbitration. The secretary general
to the Permanent Court of Arbitration has been designated “appointing authority” within the meaning
of the UNCITRAL rules. Arbitration proceedings were started on 10 February 2003. TMB appointed
Mr. Blackaby as the first member of the arbitration tribunal. Subsequently dr. Asante was appointed as
the second member of the arbitration tribunal by-Ghana; On 15-May 2003 these two arbitrators
appointed prof. mr. A.J. van den Berg as arbitrator, who subsequently accepted his appointment as
chairman of the arbitration tribunal.

On 10 August 2003 Mr. Blackaby was challenged by Ghana whereupon dr. Asante was subsequently
challenged by TMB on 12 August 2003. Both challenges were allowed by the PCA’s Secretary
General. On 24 September 2003 TMB appointed prof. E. Gaillard as substitute arbitrator, while on 8
October 2003 the PCA’s Secretary General appointed Mr. Layton as arbitrator, at the suggestion of
Ghana, who had omitted appointing another arbitrator within the time set for that purpose. During the
hearings which took place on the legal and substantive aspects in the period 5-15 July 2004, it became
clear that the petitioner among other things based its allegations upon a judgment concerning a dispute
between consortium RFCC and the Kingdom of Morocco. After the petitioner had referred to the
award in the matter of consortium RFCC versus Morocco, prof. Gaillard made a statement which
should be characterized as a “disclosure” within the meaning of article 9 of the UNCITRAL Rules.
Prof. Gaillard stated that he had been instructed to act as one of RFCC’s counsel in an action whose
purpose was the reversal of the judgment rendered in the RFCC versus Morocco case.

On 11 July 2004 Ghana challenged prof. Gaillard. TMB protested against this on 12 July 2004. After
the parties had been heard with respect to the challenge, the arbitral tribunal decided on 12 July 2004
that the arbitration proceedings should be continued. On that occasion prof. E. Gaillard stated that he
would not withdraw.

On 30 July 2004 the petitioner filed a challenge with the Secretary General of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration. This challenge was rejected by the Secretary of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, after
all parties had put forward their views. On 6 September 2004 the petitioner filed a challenge with the
Provisional Measures Judge of the District Court of The Hague.

On 24 September 2004 TMB filed a defence.

2. The oral hearing of the challenge

On 27 September 2004 the challenge was heard before the provisional measures judge. On behalf of

the petitioner there appeared mr. O.L.O. de Witt Wijnen and mr. Arthur L. Mariott QC, attorney of

England. The challenge was explained by mr. de Witt Wijnen on the basis of a memorandum of oral
pleading submitted by him. In addition thereto a statement was made by mr. Mariott.

On behaif of Telekom Malaysia Berhad there appeared mr. J. Fleming and mr. J. Kortman.

On the basis of the memorandum of oral pleading submitted by him mr. Fleming requested that the
challenge be denied. Prof: Gaillard did not appear. He expressed his point of view by letter of 19

August 2004,

3. The petitioner's point of view

The petitioner takes the view that that prof: Gaillard’s role as counsel to the RFCC consortium in the
reversal proceedings of the RFCC/Morocco judgment is incompatible with the role he has undertaken
as an impartial and unbiased arbitrator in the action between the respondent and the petitioner.
According to the petitioner the dispute between the petitioner and the respondent is similar to the
RFCC/Morocco dispute.

Ghana is reproached with having expropriated TMB’s rights in violation of the protection provision in
the BIT between Ghana and Malaysia. The same accusation of expropriation was made in the
RFCC/Morocco case. In that case the tribunal held that an expropriation provision in the treaty
requires an “act of puissance public”. In the reversal proceedings prof. Gaillard might argue that the

tribunal’s decision constitutes an excessive violation of his authority.

On the basis of the so-called “third person test” the petitioner takes the view that prof. Gaillard, who
in his capacity of counsel opposes a specific notion or approach, cannot be unbiased in his judgement
of that same notion or approach in a case in which he acts as an arbitrator. In that respect the petitioner
has invoked the “/BA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest international arbitration”. With respect to the
present challenge the petitioner regards inter alia the following numbers, contained in the IBA, as

relevant, viz.:

“2. Conflict of interests

a (..)

b) The same principle applies if facts or circumstances exist, or have arisen since the

appointment, that, from a reasonable third person's point of view having knowledge of the

relevant facts, give rise to justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator's

 

impartiality or
independence, unless the parties have accepted the arbitrator in accordance with the

requirements set out in General Standard (4).

¢) Doubts are justifiable if a reasonable and informed third party would reach the
conclusion that there was a likelihood that the arbitrator may be influenced by factors
other than the merits of the case as presented by the parties in reaching his or her

decision”.

The petitioner furthermore argues that prof. Gaillard in his capacity of counsel to RFCC will of course
advance all the arguments he can think of in order to plead the reversal of the judgment in the
RFCC/Morocco case. By contrast prof. Gaillard in his capacity of arbitrator should be unbiased when
judging the question whether or not the ruling in the RFCC/Morocco case is relevant to the
examination of the case in the present arbitration proceedings. In this situation he wiil not be able as
an arbitrator to be an unbiased participant in consultations with his fellow arbitrators, or appearances

will at any rate be against him.

The respondent's point of view

Firstly the respondent has argued that the petitioner should have submitted the challenge with the
provisional measures judge earlier. To that end it argued that prof. Gaillard had already acted as SGS’s
counsel in two other actions, viz. against Pakistan and the Philippines respectively. These actions also
concerned a dispute between a national government and a foreign investor. In its arbitration
proceedings against the respondent the petitioner gave a lot of attention to those actions, because the
petitioner believes that its position is similar to that of Pakistan and the Philippines on major points.
These actions did not cause the petitioner to challenge prof: Gaillard. In the respondent’s view the
petitioner might, as a result of those proceedings, have put prof. Gaillard’s independence up for
discussion at a much earlier stage. By failing to do so, the petitioner has lost its right to challenge.
The respondent has moreover argued that the facts in the RFCC versus Morocco judgment differ from
the present arbitration. For that reason reliance on that judgment cannot benefit the petitioner. In
addition thereto the legal and factual merits will be left out of account in the reversal proceedings, in
view of the limited possibilities for reversal granted by article 52 of the ICSID convention. Moreover
the respondent believes that the present disclosure by prof. Gaillard concerns a circumstance which
according to article 4.1.1 of the “Green list” of the IBA Guidelines did not have to be disclosed.
Article 4.1.1 after all states that “the arbitrator has previously published a general opinion (such as in
a law review article or public lecture) concerning an issue which also arises in the arbitration (but

this opinion is not focused on the case that is being arbitrated)”

 

When requested by the court to state his views with regard to the challenge, prof: Gaillard has by letter
of 22 September 2004 referred to his letter of 19 August 2004 addressed to the Permanent Court of

Arbitration. In this letter prof: Gaillard stated as follows:

“4s far as [ am concerned, I only wish to state that I believe to be perfectly impartial and

 

ke lent to act as an arbitrator in the abov ie matter. The fact that I have been
asked to act as counsel for an unrelated party in an unrelated matter does not, in my view,
affect such impartiality and independence in any way. Experience shows that each case is

different and that, in BIT arbitrations, the arbitrators’ primary task is to apply the relevant

 

rules of law, first and foremost the treaty on the basis of which the arbitration is initiated -
here the bilateral treaty between Malaysia and Ghana ~ to the facts of the case at hand. I

consider myself as completely impartial and independent to do so (...)””

4. The examination of the case

The provisional measures judge holds as follows with respect to the challenge to Prof. Gaillard as

arbitrator.

It has been established that the formal place of arbitration agreed upon between the parties is The
Hague. Pursuant to the provision of article 1035 (2) in conjunction with article 1073 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, the provisional measures judge of The Hague is competent to hear the motion
challenging the impartiality within the context of International arbitration. Since the Dutch provisional
measures judge is competent in the present case, he will in his capacity as designated judge apply

Dutch law in respect of the grounds for the challenge.

The respondent has argued that the motion was filed too late by the petitioner, because at a much
earlier stage of the present action it has failed to file a motion challenging the impartiality on account
of Prof. Gaillard’s actions as counsel in the proceedings between SGS against Pakistan and the
Philippines. This is not a valid argument. In principle a motion challenging impartiality has to be
judged on its own merits. If it is assumed that Prof: Gaillard’s actions in the SGS arbitration cases
might have been a cause for a challenge, then the mere circumstance of Ghana not having relied
thereon does not automatically mean that as a result thereof Ghana should have lost its right to still
challenge Prof. Gaillard at a later stage of arbitration proceedings, as a result of his (future) role in

another arbitration action.

The motion currently filed by the petitioner is not in breach of the provision of article 37 of the Code

of Civil Procedure.

Moreover it has been established that the parties do not disagree on the dispute between the petitioner
and the respondent which has been submitted to arbitration. It is the arbitrator’s primary task in such

matters to apply the legal rules of the BIT that has been concluded between Ghana and Mal

 

the basis of the facts of the present case. Prof. Gaillard’s view is that his appointment as arbitrator will

not affect his actual assignment and his independence.

In examining a plea of absence of impartiality or independence on the part of an arbitrator within the

meaning of article 1033 of the Code of Civil Procedure, it has to be assumed that an arbitrator may be

 

challenged if from an objective point of view — i.e. as a result of facts and circumstances ~ justified
doubts exist with respect to his impartiality or independence. The examination of whether there are

sufficient grounds for a challenge should also take account of outward appearance. (NJ 1994, 765)

It is stated first and foremost, contrary to what is alleged by the respondent, that practice in this court
shows that a request for the reversal of an arbitral award is used for the purpose of putting forward all
objections against the contested judgment, and including these objections in the admitted grounds for
the challenge. This will not be different in the present case. This means that account should be taken of
the fact that the arbitrator in the capacity of attorney will regard it as his duty to put forward all
possibly conceivable objections against the RFCC/Moroccan award.

This attitude is incompatible with the attitude Prof: Gaillard has to adopt as an arbitrator in the present
case, i.e. to be unbiased and open to all the merits of the RFCC/Moroccan award and to be unbiased
when examining these in the present case and consulting thereon in chambers with his fellow
arbitrators. Even if this arbitrator were able to sufficiently distance himself in chambers from his role
as attorney in the reversal proceedings against the RFCC/Moroccan award, account should in any
event be taken of the appearance of his not being able to observe said distance. Since he has to play
these two parts, it is in any case impossible for him to avoid the appearance of not being able to keep

these two parts strictly separated.

For this reason there will be justified doubts about his impartiality, if Prof Gaillard does not resign as
attorney in the RFCC/Moroccan case. Consequently the motion to challenge will in that case be
upheld. To avoid any uncertainty Prof: Gaillard should within ten days from this judgment have
expressly and unreservedly notified the parties to this arbitration whether he will resign as attorney in

the RFCC/Morocean case.

There is no ground for an order for costs.

5. Decision

The provisional measures judge:

upholds the motion challenging Prof: Gaillard’s impartiality, if he does not within ten days from this
judgment expressly and unreservedly notify the parties to this arbitration whether he will resign as

attomey in the RFCC/Moroccan case.

This decision was rendered on 18 October 2004 by mr. Von Maltzahn, in the presence of mr.

Jadoenathmisier as the clerk of the court.

