Date of Dispatch to the Parties: September 13, 2006
[Version for publication]

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the Proceeding Between

TELENOR MOBILE COMMUNICATIONS A.S.
(CLAIMANT)

 

(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/04/15)

MEMBERS OF THE TRIBUNAL
PROFESSOR SIR ROY GOODE, CBE, QC (PRESIDENT)
Mr. NICHOLAS W. ALLARD
Mr. ARTHUR L. MARRIOTT, QC

ASSISTANT TO THE TRIBUNAL
MS. JOHANNE COX

SECRETARY OF THE TRIBUNAL
MS. ELOise M. OBADIA

REPRESENTING THE CLAIMANT REPRESENTING THE RESPONDENT
Mr. PETER P. NAGY Mr. WHITNEY DEBEVOISE
Ms. AGNES SZARKA Mr. MICHAEL RYAN

Mr. GERGELY SZIKLA _ Ms. JEAN KALICKI

Mr. JANOS BURAI-KOVACS Ms. EMMA WRIGHT

NAGY ES TROCSANY! UGYVEDIIRODA ARNOLD & PORTER LLP

Dr. EVA DERZSENYI
Dr. JANOS KATONA

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The parties
Procedural history

It THE BACKGROUND TO THE DISPUTE

The basic issues

Mi THE REORGANISATION OF THE HUNGARIAN
PUBLIC TELEPHONE SERVICE

IV. _ THE BILATERAL INVESTMENT TREATY
BETWEEN HUNGARY AND NORWAY

v THE CONCESSION AGREEMENT

Vi THE CLAIMS BY TELENOR

Introduction

The claims made in the Request for Arbitration
The Centre's request for clarification

Telenor's Memorial

Subsequent development of Telenor's case

VIL SUBSEQUENT PLEADINGS

Hungary's Objections to Jurisdiction
Telenor's Answer to Hungary's Objections to Jurisdiction
Hungary's Reply in further support of its Objections to Jurisdiction

Vill THE ISSUES

First issue: what is the investment alleged to have been expropriated?
Second issue: has Telenor asserted facts showing a prima facie
case of expropriation within the meaning of Article VI of the BIT?
Third issue: does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over claims under
Article III of the BIT?

IX CONCLUSIONS
Jurisdiction

Costs

The Award

SCHEDULE OF COSTS

Paragraph
1

44

44
50
54

59

60
63

81

102

102
103
108

I PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The parties
1. Telenor Mobile Communications AS is represented in these proceedings by:
Mr. Péter P. Nagy
and Ms, Agnes Szarka
Nagy Es Trécsanyi Ugyvédi Iroda
Ugocsa utca 4/B
Budapest 1126
Hungary

2. The Republic of Hungary is represented in these proceedings by:

Mr. Whitney Debevoise, Esq.
Arnold & Porter LLP

555 12 Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20004
United States

and

Dr. Eva Derzsényi

Deputy State Secretariat
Ministry of Informatics and
Communications

Republic of Hungary

Dob utea 75-81

H-1077 Budapest

Hungary

The Respondent was also represented by Mrs. Zsuzsanna Varga, Director General at

Ministry of Finance from 30" September 2004 until 3% February 2005.

Procedural history

3. On 16" December 2003, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes ("ICSID" or "the Centre") received from Telenor Mobile Communications AS
("Telenor" or the "Claimant"), a company established under the laws of the Kingdom of
Norway, a Request for Arbitration of 11" December 2003 against the Republic of

Hungary ("Hungary" or the "Respondent") pursuant to a bilateral investment treaty

("BIT") between Norway and Hungary. On 13° January 2004, upon receipt of the
prescribed lodging fee, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings ("the Institution
Rules") acknowledged receipt of the request and on the same day transmitted a copy to
the Republic of Hungary and to its Embassy in Washington, D.C. In letters dated 1“ and
17" June 2004 the Centre requested clarification by Telenor that the dispute involved

matters relating to expropriation.

4, In the light of the replies received by letters of 11" June and 13" July 2004, the
Centre accepted that the requested arbitration was not manifestly outside its jurisdiction.
Accordingly the request, as supplemented by the Claimant's letters of 18" February, 28"
May, 11" June and 13" July 2004, was registered by the Centre on 2" August 2004,
pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the "ICSID Convention”), On the
same day, the Secretary-General of ICSID, in accordance with Rule 7 of the Institution
Rules, notified the parties of the registration and invited them to proceed with the
constitution of an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible. The Centre drew attention to the
fact that registration of the request was without prejudice to the Tribunal's powers and

functions, including those relating to jurisdiction.

5. By a joint letter of 1 October 2004, the parties informed ICSID of their
agreement to extend the periods set out in the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the "ICSID Arbitration Rules") for the
establishment of the Arbitral Tribunal. By a joint letter of 22"! November 2004, the
parties agreed that the Arbitral Tribunal would be composed of three arbitrators, one
appointed by each party, and the third and presiding arbitrator appointed by the two
party-appointed arbitrators. By letter of 13" January 2005, the Claimant appointed Mr.
Nicholas W. Allard, a U.S. national, as arbitrator. By letter of 28" February 2005, the
Respondent appointed Mr. Arthur L. Marriott, QC, a British national, as arbitrator. Both
Mr. Allard and Mr. Marriott accepted their appointments.

6. On 19" April 2005, the two party-appointed arbitrators appointed Professor Sir
Roy Goode, CBE, QC, a British national, to serve as President of the Tribunal. Professor

Sir Roy Goode accepted his appointment,

7. By letter of 22" April 2005, the Secretary-General of ICSID informed the parties
that all the arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal, was deemed
to have been constituted and the proceeding to have begun on that date, pursuant to Rule
6(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. By the same letter, the Secretary-Genera! informed
the parties that Ms. Eloise Obadia, Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the
Tribunal. All subsequent written communications between the Arbitral Tribunal and the

parties were made through the ICSID Secretariat.

8. The first session was held on 8" June 2005 in London. , Present at the session
were the Members of the Tribunal, Ms. Johanne Cox, Assistant to the Tribunal and the
Secretary of the Tribunal; Mr. Péter Nagy for the Claimant; Mr. Whitney Debevoise, Mr.
Michael Ryan, Ms. Jean Kalicki, Ms, Emma Wright and Dr. Eva Derzsényi for the

Respondent.

9. During the first session, the parties expressed agreement that the Tribunal had
been properly constituted (Rule 6 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules) and stated that they
had no objections in this respect. During that session the number and sequence of
pleadings and the time limits for their submissions were agreed. Hungary having
indicated that it might be objecting to the Tribunal's jurisdiction, the Tribunal directed
that any such objections should be taken in Hungary's counter-memorial, with an answer
by Telenor and a reply by Hungary, with alternative directions for pleadings on the merits

in the event that no objections to jurisdiction and/or admissibility were raised.

10. As agreed at the first session, the Claimant filed its Memorial on the merits on 3”

August 2005. The Respondent filed its Objections to Jurisdiction on 11" October 2005

contending that all the claims were outside the Tribunal's jurisdiction. The effect was to

suspend the proceeding on the merits pursuant to Rule 41(3) of the ICSID Arbitration

Rules, so that there were no further pleadings on the merits. The Claimant filed its
4

Answer to the Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction on 9" November 2005. Finally,
the Respondent filed its Reply in Further support of Objections to Jurisdiction on of
December 2005,

li. The filings on the objections to jurisdiction having been completed, by letter of
12" December 2005, the Tribunal consulted the parties on the length of time required for
a hearing on jurisdiction. By letter of 23" December 2005, the Tribunal informed the
parties, having taken into account their comments, that it had decided to hold a one-day-
hearing on jurisdiction in London and consulted the parties on their availability. By letter
of 5" January 2006, the Tribunal confirmed that the hearing would take place on 1s
March 2006.

12. By letter of 22"! February 2006, the Secretary of the Tribunal informed the parties
that due to an unforeseen event, the hearing on jurisdiction would have to be postponed.
By letter of 22"! March 2006, the parties were consulted on a new date for the hearing on
jurisdiction. By letter of 29 March 2006, the Tribunal informed the parties that the
hearing would be held on 28" April 2006 in London,

13. During the hearing on jurisdiction the following persons were present: the
Members of the Tribunal, Ms. Johanne Cox, Assistant to the Tribunal, and the Secretary
of the Tribunal; Mr. Espen Skovly, Mr Balazs Bird, Mr. Péter Nagy, Mr. Gergely Szikla,
and Mr. Janos Burai-Kovacs for the Claimant; Mr. Whitney Debevoise, Mr. Michael
Ryan, Ms. Jean Kalicki, Ms. Emma Wright, Dr. Eva Derzsényi and Dr. Janos Katona for
the Respondent. Both parties fully presented their arguments and answered the Tribunal's

questions, The parties also made submissions on costs.

14. As agreed upon at the hearing on jurisdiction, the Claimant and the Respondent,
having made brief oral submissions on costs at the invitation of the Tribunal, furnished
their written submissions on costs and statements of costs on 16™ May 2006 and on 1s

and 23" May 2006, respectively.

15. The Members of the Tribunal deliberated through various means of
communication, including a meeting in Oxford on 21-22 June 2006. The Tribunal has

taken into account all pleadings and documents in this case.

If THE BACKGROUND TO THE DISPUTE

The basic issues

16. The dispute arises from a BIT between the Government of the Republic of
Hungary and the Government of the Kingdom of Norway dated 8" April 1991 and a
concession agreement for the provision of public mobile radiotelephone services made
between the Hungarian Minister of Transport, Communications and Water Management
and Pannon GSM Telecommunications RT (Pannon), dated 4" November 1993, as
amended on various occasions and finally consolidated in an agreement dated 7" October
1999. Through various direct and indirect holdings Pannon is the wholly owned

subsidiary of Telenor, which itself is 75% owned by the State of Norway.

17. Telenor claims damages for loss alleged to have been suffered by reason of

Hungary's breaches of the BIT in respect of the years 2002 and 2003:

(1) in expropriating Telenor's investment, or part thereof, without compensation, in

breach of Article VI of the BIT; and

(2) in failing to accord Telenor fair and equitable treatment and protection for

Telenor's investment, in breach of Article III of the BIT.

18. Hungary contests the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the grounds that:

(1) Telenor has failed to plead facts showing a prima facie case of expropriation,

even assuming the truth of the allegations of fact made by Telenor; and

(2) disputes arising under Article II are outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal,

which is confined by Article XI of the BIT to issues of expropriation.

19. Hungary therefore contends that the necessary element of consent to jurisdiction
is lacking. Hungary does not dispute that al! the other conditions of ICSID jurisdiction,
including the making of an investment by Telenor and the existence of a legal dispute
arising directly out that investment, are satisfied. Telenor's investment is in its wholly
owned subsidiary, Pannon, rather than directly in the rights conferred by the investment
agreement, to which it is not a party, but though Hungary briefly alluded to the point in
the course of the jurisdiction hearing it has not sought to contend that this is material to

the present case.

20. Telenor contends, first, that it has made out a prima facie case for expropriation
and, secondly, that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain claims under Article III by
virtue of the "procedural link" established by the most-favoured-nation ("MFN") clause
in Article [V, which Telenor claims entitles it to invoke the widest of the dispute
resolution clauses under other BITs entered into by Hungary with other States. This is
contested by Hungary, which contends that the MFN clause is limited to substantive
rights and cannot be invoked to extend the jurisdiction of the Tribunal beyond that

conferred by Article XI of the Hungary-Norway BIT.

21. The Tribunal is not at this stage concerned with the merits of Telenor's claims,
which would arise for consideration only if and to the extent that the Tribunal were to
conclude it had jurisdiction. Accordingly in the rest of this Award the Tribunal has
assumed the correctness of the factual allegations made by Telenor to the extent that
these are prima facie valid and admissible on the pleadings. The description of the facts

which follows reflects this assumption.

Til THE REORGANISATION OF THE HUNGARIAN

PUBLIC TELEPHONE SERVICE

22. In 1990 Hungary decided to reorganize its state-controlled telecommunications
system and to invite tenders from the private sector for the provision of public mobile
radiotelephone services. This was in part motivated by Hungary's prospective
commitment under European Community law to abandon the grant of special and
exclusive rights to State-owned entities, liberalise its telecommunications system and
promote competition. One of the two winners of the tendering process was the GSM
Consortium, of which Pannon was a member, and a concession agreement was then
entered into between Hungary and the GSM Consortium. Subsequently the GSM
Consortium transferred all its rights and obligations under the concession agreement to
Pannon. The concession was limited to mobile telephone services.  Fixed-line
telecommunications services remained in the hands of the fixed-line operators, including
Matav, a subsidiary of Deutsche Telekom and by a considerable margin the market leader
in the Hungarian fixed-line telephone service, Matav is itself the parent company of a
company formerly called Westel Mobi! Tavkézlési (""Westel"), now T-Mobile, a mobile

telephone services operator and thus a competitor of Pannon.

23. At the time of the concession agreement there was only one fixed-line operator,
and the concession agreement imposed on Pannon various fixed fees. However, the
regime changed with the introduction of the concept of the universal telephone service, a

minimum set of telecommunication services to be available to the public at reasonable

cost, The EC Universal Service Directive! imposes on Member States of the European
Union the duty to provide such a universal service. The Hungarian Government left
universal service provision in the hands of the fixed-line operators, whose monopoly was
preserved by the concession agreement until December 2001 or, in some cases, until May
or November 2002. In 2001 the Government set up a public fund, the Universal
Telecommunications Support Fund ("ETTA"), under the control of the Minister, to fund
the unrecovered costs incurred by the universal service providers, calculated from data
they were to supply to ETTA, the fund consisting of a levy on all telecommunications
service providers, mobile as well as fixed, computed as a percentage of their revenue, As
with other operators Pannon was required to contribute to the fund for the years 2002 and
2003 and the manner in which the levy on it was assessed and recovered forms part of
Telenor's complaints in the present proceedings. For the years after 2003 a different

system was adopted and this does not feature in Telenor's claims.

24. The Hungarian Government also introduced a regulated price regime for mobile
service providers with significant market power ("SMP"), and this substituted regulated

prices for free market prices in respect of interconnection (or "call termination") services.

IV THE BILATERAL INVESTMENT TREATY

BETWEEN HUNGARY AND NORWAY

25. The provisions of the Hungary-Norway BIT relevant to the present proceedings

are Articles I], IV, VI and XI, which provide as follows:

" Directive 2002/22/EC of 7" March 2002.

ARTICLE I

PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS

Each Contracting Party shall promote and encourage in its Territory investments made by
investors of ihe other Contracting Party and accept such investments in accordance with its laws
and regulations and accord them fair and equitable treatment and protection. Such investments
shall be consistent with the national objectives of and be subject to the laws and regulations of the
Contracting Party in the Territory of which the Investments are made.

i

ARTICLE IV
MOST FAVOURED NATION TREATMENT

Investments made by Investors of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other
Contracting Party, as also the returns therefrom, shall be accorded treatment no less
favourable than that accorded to investments made by Investors of any third State.

The treatment granted under paragraph | of this Article shall not apply to:

- any advantage accorded to Investors of a third State by the other Contracting
Party based on any existing or future customs or economic union, or similar
international agreement, or free trade agreement to which either of the
Contracting Parties is or becomes a Party.

- any advantages accorded to Investors of a third State by the other Contracting
Party by virtue of a double taxation agreement or other agreements regarding
matters of taxation or any domestic legislation relating to taxation.

ARTICLE VI

EXPROPRIATION AND COMPENSATION
Investments made by Investors of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other
Contracting Party cannot be expropriated, nationalized or subjected to other measures
having a similar effect (hereinafter referred to as "Expropriation") unless the following
conditions are fulfilled:
re8) The expropriation shall be done for public interest and under due process of law.
dy It shall not be discriminatory,
(ia) It shall be done against compensation.
Such compensation shall amount to the market value of the investment immediately
before the date of expropriation and shall be paid without delay and shall carry an annual
rate of interest equal to 12 months LIBOR quoted for the currency in which the

investment was made until the time of payment. The payment of such compensation
shall be effectively realizable and freely transferable.

 

DISPUTES BETWEEN AN INVESTOR AND A CONTRACTING PARTY,

L This Article shall apply to any legal disputes between an Investor of one Contracting
Party and the other Contracting Party in relation to an investment of the former either
concerning the amount or payment of compensation under Article V and VI of the
present Agreement, or concerning any other matter consequential upon an act of
expropriation in accordance with Article VI of the present Agreement or concerning the
consequences of the non-implementation or of the incorrect implementation of Article
VII of the present agreement.

2. Any such disputes which have not been amicably settled within a period of three months
from written notification of a claim, shall if either Party to the dispute so wishes, be
submitted for conciliation or arbitration under the Convention of 18 March 1965 on the
settlement of investment disputes between States and nationals of other States (the
Washington Convention).

26. Of the three other Articles referred to in Article XI, two, namely Articles V and
VII, dealing respectively with compensation for loss through revolution, etc., and
repatriation of investments, are not relevant to the present proceedings, leaving only
Article VI, which is confined to expropriation. The first question in the present case is
whether the acts complained of by Telenor constitute expropriation of Telenor's

investment for the purposes of Article VI.

V_ THE CONCESSION AGREEM

 

27. | Though claims based purely on breaches of contract are outside the Tribunal's
mandate - a point discussed in more detail later - the concession agreement between
Pannon and Hungary is obviously of central importance in determining the nature and
extent of the investment. Strictly speaking, Telenor's investment is in Pannon, not in
Pannon's rights under the agreement, but since Pannon is Telenor’s wholly owned
subsidiary the Tribunal considers that in practical terms this can be regarded as a
distinction without a difference, and it is common ground that this is not an issue in the

case,

28. Article 2 of the concession agreement granted Pannon the right to provide
integrated GSM 900/DCS_ 1800" public mobile radiotelephone services, including
services to and from foreign points, on the territory of the Republic of Hungary, together
with a range of specified additional services. The concession for the GSM 900 was to be
for a period of 15 years, running from 4" November 1993 (the date of the original
concession agreement) to 4" November 2008 and for the DCS 1800 for a period of 15
years from the execution of the consolidated agreement, that is, from 7" October 1999 to
7" October 2014. The Minister was empowered to extend for seven years without

issuing a tender invitation.

29, Under the original agreement the GSM Consortium had paid USD 50 million as
the concession fee for the GSM 900 under the original agreement and under Article 3 of
the consolidated agreement Pannon was required to pay HUF 11,000,000,000 (11 billion
Hungarian forints) in stages. Also payable were a frequency allocation fee (originally
HUF 256 million per year, later reduced to HUF 512,000 per year) and a frequency usage
fee of HUF 200,000 a year for the GSM 900 and HUF 10 million per annum for each 1

MHz frequency band, as well as fees for base stations and certain other items.

30, Various obligations were imposed on Pannon by Article 6 of the concession
agreement, These included the provision of the services which were the subject of the
concession, the duty not to suspend services without prior consent and notification to

subscribers, the establishment and operation of a digital cellular radiotelephone network,

* GSM stands for Global System for Mobile Communications, DCS for Digital Cellular System, an
upbanding ftom 900 to 1800 MHz.
12

the assurance of quality on a continuous basis and co-operation with other public
telecommunications operators to ensure interconnection with their networks. For his part
the Minister undertook, in Article 9, to treat the telecommunications operators equally
both in the administrative proceedings and as telecommunications market players and to
ensure that each and any regulatory and administrative proceedings relating to the rights
obligations and activities of Pannon and other operators was impartial, transparent and
controllable. He also accepted the content of the concession agreement as binding on the
Hungarian State and declared that it would not invoke sovereign immunity from the

jurisdiction of the court.

31. The concession agreement contained numerous other provisions, such as

amendment and termination, to which it is unnecessary to refer here.

32, Under Article 19, the concession agreement was to be governed and construed
under the laws of the Republic of Hungary and exclusive jurisdiction was given to the

Hungarian Court to settle legal disputes.

VI THE CLAIMS BY TELENOR

Introduction

33. The Tribunal has not found it easy to identify with precision the claims that
Telenor is making and their relationship with the BIT. This is partly because they have
been put differently at different stages of the arbitral proceedings and partly because they
have remained very diffuse despite the Tribunal's direction at the first session that they

should be pleaded with particularity, It is therefore necessary to take each stage

13

separately. In the last analysis the Tribunal is, of course, concerned with Telenor's
pleading in its final form, as clarified at the hearing, but to the extent that such pleading
raises claims not originally set out in Telenor's Request for Arbitration this may bear on
the credence to be attached to them, a point quite properly made by Hungary at the

jurisdiction hearing,

34. The Tribunal is currently concerned solely with the question whether it has
jurisdiction. For that purpose it is not the Tribunal's function to examine the merits of
Telenor's claim. On the other hand, unless the issue of jurisdiction is joined with the
merits so that both are dealt with at the same hearing (which is not the position in the
present case) there is an initial threshold that has to be crossed by any claimant resisting
objections to jurisdiction in that the claimant must at least adduce facts showing a prima
facie case in favour of jurisdiction if the arbitration is to proceed to a hearing on the
merits. If the claimant fails to do this the Tribunal must sustain the objection to
jurisdiction and make an award accordingly, thereby bringing the arbitration proceedings
to an end. The question for the Tribunal to decide in the present proceedings is whether
Telenor has indeed made out a prima facie case, That is a matter examined in some

detail later in this Award.

The claims made in the Request for Arbitration
35. In its Request for Arbitration dated 11" December 2003, and supported by 13
exhibits consisting of various documents in English and Hungarian relating to the

background to the case, Telenor made a series of complaints.

(1) Failure to designate mobile service providers as universal service providers

The ETTA scheme limited universal service provision to fixed-line operators despite the
fact that those services could reasonably be provided by mobile telephone operators at
lower rates. In consequence Pannon was deprived of business opportunities that it would
have enjoyed if it had been approved as a universal service provider.

(2) The ETTA levy

The levy imposed on Pannon as its contribution to ETTA for the benefit of the fixed-line
operators took away a portion of Pannon’s profits for no compensation and transferred it
to Pannon's competitors, in particular Matav. Moreover, ETTA never monitored data and
the Minister never resolved to impose charges; instead ETTA forcibly collected from
Pannon's bank account some HUF 1.582 billion (currently about USD 7.2 million) for the
year 2002 and HUF 798,000 (currently about USD 3.6 million) for 2003.

(3) Pricing regime imposed on SMP providers

A third complaint was that Pannon was improperly designated a provider of significant
market power, which it was not, with the effect that its interconnection (or "call
termination") fees to subscribers® and for interconnection services provided to other
operators were subjected to an adverse pricing regime which excluded the recovery of
various cost elements, whereas Mat4v was not so designated, despite the fact that it was
the parent company of Westel, the market leader in mobile telephony. This, Pannon
alleges, reflected the fact that the fixed-line market had been steadily shrinking, while the
mobile market had been solidly growing, and the Hungarian Government was determined

to save Matav from bankruptcy.

* These are fees charged by the ications operator for accepting, and later inating, on its
network a call originating from another network,
15

(4) Proceedings by the Competition Office

The fourth ground of complaint was that the Competition Office launched an
investigation against mobile telephone operators in 2002 and the resulting report accused
Pannon of abusing a dominant position in the call termination market and recommended
that Pannon be fined HUF 1.5 billion. The Competition Council dropped the market
charges and imposed a fine of HUF 150 million, enforcement of which was later
suspended by the court pending court proceedings. Pannon was involved in substantial

costs in defending the charge of market abuse.

36.  Telenor's Request for Arbitration concluded with claims for a declaration that
Hungary's ETTA regime violated Article VI of the BIT, compensation for loss suffered
by Telenor and Pannon in respect of the ETTA levies, further compensation for using the
ETTA regime to strengthen the position of Pannon's competitor Matav through the ETTA
subsidy, an award of interest, and costs. However, no sum was claimed in respect of the
costs of defending the market abuse allegation, which had been the fourth ground of
complaint. Nor was any reference made to Article III of the BIT, which featured for the
first time as a separate ground for relief in Telenor's Answer to Objections on

Jurisdiction.

The Centre's request for clarification

37, A further noteworthy aspect of Telenor's Request for Arbitration is that though it
relied on breaches of Article VI the request not only failed to identify the act or acts
relied on as showing expropriation but nowhere expressly alleged expropriation as such.
It was necessary for the Centre to address two letters to Telenor's counsel to obtain details

16

which the Centre felt able to accept as showing that the request was not manifestly
outside the Centre's jurisdiction for the purposes of Article 36(3) of the Washington
Convention. In the first of these, dated 1 June 2004, the Centre asked to be provided
with a full expianation to show that the dispute between the parties concerned "any
matter consequential upon-an act of expropriation in accordance with Article VI" of the
BIT. Ina letter in reply dated 11" June 2004 Telenor identified as acts of expropriation:
(1) the financial burden imposed on the property of Pannon by the ETTA levy for
2002 and the prospective levy for 2003,

(2) __ the loss in revenues resulting from Pannon's designation as an SMP provider, and
(3) the consequential gains to Pannon's competitors, to the detriment of Pannon.

No mention was made of loss caused by the failure to designate Pannon as a universal
service provider, though this had featured as the first of Telenor's claims in its Request
for Arbitration. Nor did Telenor discuss the magnitude of its loss in relation to the total
value of its investment, a central issue which was to be raised for the first time, and then

very briefly, at the jurisdiction hearing itself.

38. The Centre replied by letter dated 17" June 2004 stating that Telenor's response
did not appear to address any expropriation of Pannon and asking for a full explanation in
that respect. By letter to the Centre dated 13” July 2004 Telenor referred to ICSID
arbitration case law showing that the concept of expropriation was not confined to the
seizure of the investor's property (direct expropriation) but extended to other measures
depriving the investor of the reasonably expected economic benefits of its investment
(indirect expropriation) and did not necessarily involve a single measure or set. of
measures at a particular time but was wide enough to encompass “creeping”

7

expropriation, that is, a series of acts over a period of time no one of which itself
amounted to expropriation but all of which together produced the effect of expropriation.
Telenor contended that the pay-in obligation, in subsidising Pannon’s main competitor
Matav at Pannon's expense to the extent of approximately HUF 3-5 billion, "shows that
this regulatory action of the Hungarian State is discriminatory, unfair and inequitable,
therefore it should qualify as expropriation" [emphasis added]. Similarly, Telenor
contended that its designation as an SMP provider and the consequent imposition of the
State-regulated pricing regime for such providers resulted in a loss of revenue to Pannon
of some HUF 4.5 billion (approximately USD 22 million) a year, producing the same
effect as expropriation, and that the same was true of the breach of Hungary's duty to
preserve competition by favouring Pannon's competitors at Pannon's expense. The latter
does not appear to be an independent claim but rather an overall effect attributed to the
other acts alleged to constitute expropriation. While reference was made to the fact that
universal service providers, which could apply for financial subsidy from the ETTA fund,
were designated from the existing fixed-line providers, thus excluding Pannon, this
complaint did not feature in the details of alleged violations of Article VI of the BIT set
out in section IV of the 13" July 2004 letter or in the questions for the Tribunal listed in
section V of that letter. Again, there was no attempt to show the magnitude of Telenor's

loss in relation to the total value of its investment.

Telenor’s Memorial

39. The claims set out in Telenor's Memorial departed in some respects from those
advanced in its Request for Arbitration, The decision to restrict universal service
provision to fixed-line operators, which had been the first ground of complaint in the

18

arbitration request, did not feature at all in the Memorial, which in this respect followed
Telenor's above-mentioned letters to the Centre of 11" June and 13" July. On the other
hand, two new grounds of complaint were added, namely the obligation imposed on
Pannon, but not on Westel, to refrain from offering handset subsidies and the fact that the
right to use telephone numbers was charged by the number of digits, mobile telephone
numbers having nine digits as opposed to eight digits for fixed-line numbers, so that
Pannon and other mobile service providers incurred charges 10% higher than those

payable by fixed-line providers,

40. In support of its contention that the various measures referred to above constituted

expropriation Telenor referred to:

(1) a decision of an ICSID tribunal that violation of the "fair and equitable treatment”
requirement might well amount to expropriation,’

(2) decisions of other ICSID tribunals that substantial interference with an investor's
property rights constituted expropriation even if effected through otherwise
internally legitimate legislation or court rulings;

(3) decisions to the effect that if government actions (legislative, administrative or
judicial) were discriminatory or arbitrary or perhaps unfair or inequitable, they
were more likely to be viewed as expropriatory.°

Telenor's Memorial concluded with the following summary:

“s Any measure attributable to a State - should it be individual or regulatory - qualifies as
expropriation if such measure interferes with one’s right to property.

* Metalclad Corp. v. United Mexican States, CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/97/1, (2000), 5 ICSID Rep. 209,
ara. 104.
T Ching Feldman v. United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB (AF)99/1, (2002), 7 ICSID Rep. 341 at
para. 99, where the Tribunal drew this implication from a comment in the Restatement of the Law of
Foreign Relations of the United States.
19

+ — In deciding whether a regulatory measure has this effect, public interest and rule of law shall
both be considered.

+ Regulatory measures pursuing aims other than the interest of the public (jack of legitimate
aim) or that are disproportional (lack of fair balance between the aim sought and means
employed) qualify as expropriation with no doubt.

Also, arbitrary, unfair, inequitable, unreasonable, discriminating nature of a measure, or
violation of due process of law (lack of lawfulness) shall qualify as expropriation,”

41. At this stage Telenor's case was based exclusively on Article VI of the BIT
dealing with expropriation; it was only at a later stage, in its Answer to Objections to
Jurisdiction, that it raised for the first time claims based on Article III, dealing with fair
and equitable treatment, and invoked Article [V (the MFN clause) as the "procedural
link” establishing the Tribunal's jurisdiction under Article III despite the fact that Article

IL is not one of the provisions listed in Article XI.

42. As regards the expropriation claim it is notable that once again Telenor, while
referring to cases on substantial deprivation of the investor's property rights, did not
address the substantiality of its loss in relation to the total value of its investment beyond
a fleeting reference in paragraph 42 of the Memorial to "preliminary indications" by
Deloitte & Touche LLP (London) that the direct damage suffered as the result of the
violation of Article VI of the BIT and the concession agreement was between HUF 15-30
billion (approximately USD 76-152 million), coupled with a statement in paragraph 43
that the preliminary indications "do not as yet calculate with cumulative effect of
concerted actions on the part of Hungary resulting in indirect and ancillary damage." For
the reasons set out later in this Award these "preliminary indications" by Deloitte's in a

draft document not disclosed to the Tribunal or to Hungary are not matters which the

Tribunal feels able to take into account in deciding whether a prima facie case of

expropriation has been made out, assuming the truth of the allegations of fact.

Subsequent development of Telenor's case

43. This, then, was the manner in which Telenor's claims had been presented up to the
point where Hungary challenged the Tribunal's jurisdiction, Those claims were later
elaborated in Telenor's pleadings on the issue of jurisdiction by way of answer to
Hungary's jurisdictional challenge and in oral argument at the jurisdiction hearing as

described below.
VIL SUBSEQUENT PLEADINGS

Hungary's Objections to Jurisdiction
44. The Objections to Jurisdiction by Hungary as Respondent were filed on 11"

October 2005 and were supported by nine bundles consisting of 93 exhibits,

45. | Amajor complaint by Hungary was that Telenor’s pleadings had been consistently
confusing, vague and contradictory, despite the Tribunal's directions about pleading
clearly and with particularity what it is that Telenor was contending. Thus at times
Telenor appeared to condemn the whole structure of Hungary's regulatory efforts, such as
the funding mechanism it established to support its universal service programme and the
restriction of universal service providers to fixed-line operators. If this were the case, the
same charge could be brought against dozens of countries worldwide, including EU
Member States, a fact hardly implying that the initiatives taken by Hungary constituted
an expropriation within the meaning of Article VI of the BIT.

21

46.

Hungary also pointed out that some of Telenor's latest complaints were entirely

new, having never been mentioned either in the consultations that preceded Telenor's

Request for Arbitration or in the Request itself, and that its Memorial had increased its

overall damage claim more than tenfold in a single conciusory sentence, with no

explanation of the difference in the figures and no attempt to allocate its claimed damages

against its various claims,

47.

()

Q)

(3)

The more specific grounds of objection may be summarised as follows:

Telenor repeatedly invoked claims under the concession contract which were
outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and were governed by Hungarian law and
subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Hungarian courts. ICSID jurisdiction
was based on consent and Hungary had not consented to jurisdiction by the
Tribunal over contract claims. Only if a breach of contract rose independently to
the level of expropriation - as where it resulted in extinguishment of the
investment or its removal from the investor's control - could the Tribunal's
jurisdiction be engaged.

None of the claims was based on expropriation or other matters consequential
upon an act of expropriation, which was the sole basis of Tribunal's jurisdiction.
Telenor misunderstood the concept of expropriation. The fundamental predicate
element of the law of expropriation was that there must have been either a
government taking of an investment or such substantial regulatory interference
with an investment as to render it functionally equivalent to a taking by depriving
the investor of control over the investment or depriving the investment of all

significant economic value.

4)

6)

(6)

The allegations against Hungary of breaches of European Community law were
misconceived, because they related to legislation enacted prior to the relevant
Cormmunity instruments coming into force and, more fundamentally, because
non-compliance with EC Directives, even if established, was not within the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

The Tribunal had no jurisdiction over claims for breach of the "fair and equitable
treatment” provisions of Article Ill, which fell outside Article XJ, nor could the
rubric of expropriation be expanded to encompass minimum standards under
international law, which are not a subset of expropriation but are a feature of fair
and equitable treatment.

Telenor has not alleged that the actions by Hungary of which it complains
deprived Telenor of control of its investment or deprived that investment of
meaningful value. It was in the nature of regulation that it involved some sort of
wealth deprivation and Telenor’s contention that any form of interference with the
investor's property or diminution of its value constitutes expropriation was
completely out of line with expropriation jurisprudence. There had to be
interference so substantial as to deprive the investor of all ot most of the benefits
of its investment, and that had not been alleged. That conclusion was reinforced
by Article VI(2), which provided that compensation for expropriation "shall
amount to the market value of the investment immediately before the date of
expropriation", which plainly referred to either seizure of the investment or
extinction of its market value, not merely diminution in the investor's profits.
This is to be contrasted with the provision for compensation. for losses in Article
Vv.

23

48. Hungary went on to say that it would, indeed, be impossible for Telenor to
establish expropriation in the sense described above because its annual reports showed
that Pannon was a vigorous competitor in the Hungarian mobile telecommunications
market, today controlling roughly one-third of the market and enjoying a consistent
record of enviable profits. The mobile telecommunications sector in Hungary, in which
Pannon has long been and remains the second largest player, has dramatically advanced
on recent years, and today enjoys nearly three times the subscriber penetration as the
fixed-line sector. Further, the market share of Westel (now branded as T-Mobile), the
mobile telecommunication subsidiary of Matav, the béte noire supposedly benefiting
from Hungary’s actions, has consistently fallen. Both Pannon's rising revenues for the
period 1996-2004 and its description of the profitability of its business in its annual
reports, in which its 2002 performance was described as "the best financial results in our
history" and its 2003 performance as “another year of profitable growth," was

incompatible with its assertion of expropriation.

49. | Hungary contended that complaints about the regulatory structure of universal
service provision were also unfounded. The funding approach adopted by Hungary was
one of the most commonly accepted throughout the world. Complaints as to the failure
of ETTA to assess data and ETTA's collection methods had already been brought before
the Hungarian courts, where they belonged, and they were not matters for the Tribunal.
The interconnection fee issues and other complaints likewise provided no basis for an
expropriation claim. While the relevant measures extended to Pannon, they were not
targeted at Pannon but applied equally to other mobile operators, including Pannon's

24

principal competitor, Westel. Three other claims (the competition authority claim,
handset subsidies and dial digit fees) were insufficiently particularised and anyway
related to transitory phenomena not reached by the public international law of

expropriation.

Telenor's Answer to Hungary's Objections to Jurisdiction

50. This was filed on 9" November 2005 and was supported by four further bundles
consisting of an additional 23 exhibits. Part of Telenor's Answer seems to have been
based on a misunderstanding of Hungary's arguments. For example, the first eight pages
were devoted to establishing the fulfilment of various conditions of ICSID jurisdiction
which Hungary had not sought to dispute in its jurisdictional objections. Again, contrary
to the position taken in Telenor’s Answer, Hungary had never contended that a claim
otherwise falling within the Tribunal's jurisdiction under the BIT would be barred if it
was a claim under a contract. Hungary's position had always been that a contract claim
as such was a matter for the Hungarian courts applying Hungarian law but that if the facts
on which that claim was based also constituted expropriation it fell within the Tribunal's
jurisdiction. Similarly, the reference in Hungary's Objections to the fact that some of the
complaints had been raised before the Hungarian courts, where they belonged, was not
intended to suggest that this by itself excluded them from consideration by the Tribunal,
merely that they were claims based on administrative missteps not giving rise to
violations of the international law of expropriation. Telenor also said that its argument
on EU law had been misunderstood, but the Tribunal remains unclear as to why the duty

on Hungary to secure compatibility with EU legislation is relevant to the present case.

25

51. Telenor also contended that, the BIT having prescribed certain minimum
standards of protection, including fair and equitable treatment, it would be unfair and
inequitabie and contrary to reasonable expectations and good faith to construe the BIT in
such a way as to prevent a Norwegian investor from bringing a claim against the

Government of Hungary for violation of that substantive standard.

52. Telenor further argued that the effect of the MFN clause in Article IV of the BIT
was to entitle Telenor to the benefit not only of any wider substantive investment rights
conferred by other BITs entered into by Hungary with other States but also of any wider
dispute resolution clauses contained in such other BITs. Hungary had entered into BITs
with numerous other States, and some of these, in contrast to the BIT between Hungary
and Norway, were not confined to expropriation but extended to the resolution of all
disputes relating to the investment. The effect was to extend the Tribunal's jurisdiction to
encompass claims under Article II for breach of the obligation to provide fair and
equitable treatment. This argument was entirely new; it had not featured either in the

Request for Arbitration or in Telenor's Memorial.

53. Finally, Telenor challenged Hungary's contention that a prima facie breach of the
BIT had not been established, pointing to a line of cases in which it had been held that at
the jurisdiction stage the Tribunal should not enquire into the merits and that if the facts
asserted by the Claimant were capable of being regarded as breaches of the BIT the
Claimant should be entitled to have them considered on the merits. Telenor argued that a
prima facie case had been made out in that the facts alleged showed that its investment
had been harmed in such a way as to amount to expropriation and Hungary had failed to

26

accord fair and equitable treatment to Telenor's investment or conduct open, transparent

and controllable proceedings, in both cases in breach of the concession agreement.

Hungary's Reply in further support of its Objections to Jurisdiction

54. In its Reply Hungary stated that its objections to jurisdiction posed two core
jurisdictional questions: whether under Article XI the Tribunal had to dismiss all claims
that were not on their face framed as claims concerning an expropriation, and whether
Telenor had presented any claims of expropriation as defined by Article VI. Further,
Hungary's objections noted that several of Telenor's claims, which in the Request for
Arbitration were pleaded in single paragraphs or in some cases were not mentioned at all,
and were never amplified in Telenor's Memorial, did not satisfy the Tribunal's clear

direction to plead claims with particularity.

55, Hungary contended that Telenor had refused to engage on any of these issues. Its
Answer was devoid of analysis of the specific terms of Article XI and it suggested that
the Tribunal's jurisdiction could be divined solely from Article 25 of the Washington
Convention. Instead it devoted much of its attention to jurisdictional arguments Hungary

had not raised.

56. A further point made by Hungary was that the invocation of the MFN clause to
expand the scope of the Tribunal's jurisdiction was new and even if it was open to
Telenor to raise it at that late juncture - which Hungary contested - the argument was
one that had been rejected in a majority of ICSID awards. Article XI, which confined the
Tribunal's jurisdiction to questions of expropriation, was clear, but this limitation had

27

been omitted entirely from Telenor's summary of the jurisdictional requirements of the
BIT. “Expropriation only" clauses had been embodied in numerous other BITs entered
into by Hungary, and the same approach was widely followed by other countries of
Eastern Europe and former communist countries. An MEN provision did not incorporate
by reference dispute settlement provisions in other treaties unless the MFN clause in the
basic treaty left no doubt that such incorporation was intended. Failing this, the MFN
undertaking was purely contractual in nature and disputes had to be settled in accordance

with the agreed dispute resolution mechanism.

57. Telenor's contention that it would be unfair and inequitable and contrary to
reasonable expectations and good faith to preclude it from presenting claims other than
for expropriation was untenable. Equally untenable was the suggestion that Article 25 of
the Washington Convention contained all the limitations on jurisdiction, In fact it was
the first part of a two-step jurisdictional analysis, the second step involving the scope of a
consent given otherwise than in the Convention itself. Such consent was to be found in

the BIT but was limited to expropriation.

58. Hungary also addressed various matters on which its arguments had been

mischaracterised. The Tribunal has already drawn attention to these in paragraph 50.

VII THE ISSUES

59. Three issues arise in connection with Hungary's challenge to the Tribunal's
jurisdiction:

(1) What is the investment alleged to have been expropriated?
28

(2) Has Telenor asserted facts showing a prima facie case of expropriation within the
meaning of Article VI of the BIT?

(3) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over claims under Article HI of the BIT?

First issue: what is the investment alleged to have been expropriated?

60. While Hungary has quite fairly said that the investor in this case is Telenor, not
Pannon, so that strictly Telenor's investment is in Pannon itself rather than directly in the
underlying concession, the distinction is not one on which either party has relied and is
not an issue in this case, neither is it of any practical significance, given that Pannon is
Telenor's wholly owned subsidiary, and acts which cause loss to Pannon deprive Pannon

itself of equivalent value as an investment.

61. At the hearing on jurisdiction Telenor described Pannon as the vehicle for

Telenor's investment, which consisted of four elements:

(1) The radiotelephone network

(2) Pannon's customers

(3) The concession granted by the concession agreement, carrying with it legitimate
expectations on the part of Telenor, including fair and equitable treatment and
conformity with laws, including EU law

(4) Pannon's income expectations.

Telenor contended that all these elements had to be taken together and not dealt with in

isolation from each other, On this basis it would be wrong to focus on the fact that

Pannon was a profitable company. The kernel of Telenor's complaint was that because of

the improper actions of Hungary, Telenor had been deprived of market share and its

29

network was being used by others without proper payment. So Telenor's loss was not
simply the money taken from it, for example through the ETTA levy, but future income

of which it had legitimate expectations.

62. Hungary did not take issue with the formulation of the four elements of the
investment put forward by Telenor, which are consistent with the definition of
"investment" in Article I of the BIT, and the Tribunal accepts that these elements together

constitute the investment made by Telenor through Pannon.

Second issue: has Telenor asserted facts showing a prima facie case of expropriation
within the meaning of Article VI of the BIT?

The concept of expropriation

63. Expropriation can take various forms. Direct expropriation involves the seizure
of the investor's property. But expropriation may also be indirect, as where, without the
taking of property, the measures of which complaint is made substantially deprive the
investment of economic value. Moreover, it is not necessary to show a single act or
group of acts committed at one time. As stated earlier, there may be “creeping”
expropriation involving a series of acts over a period of time none of which is itself of
sufficient gravity to constitute an expropriatory act but all of which taken together
produce the effects of expropriation. Phrases such as "equivalent to expropriation" and
"tantamount to expropriation” do not expand the concept of expropriation and are usually
taken to indicate that the BIT covers indirect as well as direct expropriation, thus looking

at the substance of the measures in question rather than the label attached to them by

30

government,’ and the same is true of "measures having a similar effect", which is the

phrase used in Article VI of the BIT now under consideration.

64, It is well established that the mere exercise by government of regulatory powers
that create impediments to business or entail the payment of taxes or other levies does not
of itself constitute expropriation.’ Any investor entering into a concession agreement
must be aware that investment involves risks and that in some degree the investor's
activities are likely to be regulated and payments made for which the investor will not
receive compensating advantages. These are all part of the price the investor has to pay
for securing the concession. Similarly, unreasonable behaviour on the part of officials
and breaches of contract, even if serious, do not by themselves constitute acts of
expropriation. The conduct complained of must be such as to have a major adverse

impact on the economic value of the investment.

65. There has been a substantial volume of case law, both under the Washington
Convention and in general public international law, as to the magnitude of the
interference with the investor's property or economic rights necessary to constitute
expropriation. Though different tribunals have formulated the test in different ways, they
are all agreed that the interference with the investor's rights must be such as substantially

to deprive the investor of the economic value, use or enjoyment of its investment.

® See, for example, S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, (2000), Partial Award on Liability, 8 ICSID
Rep. 3, para, 285; Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/2, (2003), 19 ICSID Rev.--FILJ 158 (2004), para. 114; Pope and Talbot, Inc. v. Canada,
Interim Award, (2000), 7 ICSID Rep. 55, para. 104.
” Feldman v. United Mexican States, above n 5,7 1CSID Rep. 318.

31

 

"There is ample authority for the proposition that a property has been expropriated when the effect
of measures taken by the state has been to deprive the owner of title, possession or access to the
benefit and economic use of his property".’

"A plea of creeping expropriation must proceed on the basis that the investment existed at a
particular point in time and that subsequent acts attributable to the State have eroded the investor's
rights to its investment to an extent that is violative of the relevant international standard of
protection against expropriation,”

“A deprivation or taking of property may occur under international law through interference by a
state in the use of that property or with the enjoyment of its benefits, even where legal title to the
property is not affected [...] The intent of the government is less important than the effects of the
measures on the owner, and the form of the measures of control or interference is less important
than the reality of their impact."

"Thus there is some textual basis for the Claimant's submission that 'the modern definition of
expropriation must be broad enough to encompass every course of sovereign conduct that unfairly
destroys a foreign investor's contractual rights as an asset. ""'!

"To establish whether the Resolution is a measure equivalent to an expropriation under the terms.
of section S(1) of the Agreement, it must first be determined if the Claimant, due to the
Resolution, was radically deprived of the economical use and enjoyment of its investments, as if
the rights related thereto - such as the income or benefits related to the Landfill or its exploitation
~ had ceased to exist [...] This determination is important because it is one of the main elements
to distinguish, from the point of view of an international tribunal, between a regulatory measure,
which is an ordinary expression of the exercise of the state's police power that entails a decrease in
assets or rights, and a de facto expropriation that deprives those assets and rights of any real
substance,"

66. There have also been arbitral awards suggesting that deprivation of a substantial
or significant part of the economic value of the investment may suffice to constitute
expropriation.

"Thus, expropriation under NAFTA includes not only open, deliberate and acknowledged takings
of property, such as outright seizure or formal or obligatory transfer of title in favour of the host
State, but also covert or incidental interference with the use of property which has the effect of
depriving the owner, in whole or in significant part, of the use or reasonably-to-be-expected
economic benefit of property even if not necessarily to the obvious benefit of the host State.""*

“Expropriations tend to involve the deprivation of ownership rights; regulations a lesser

interference. The distinction between expropriation and regulation screens out most potential
* Compania del Desarrollo de Santa Elena S.A. v. Republic of Costa Rica, 1CSID Case No. ARB/96/1,
(2000), 5 ICSID Rep. 153, para. 77.
° Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9 (2003), 44 ILM 404 (2005), para, 20.26.
\° Tippetts, Abbett, McCarthy, Stratton v. TAMS-AFFA Consulting Engineers of Iran, (1984), 6 Iran-US
CTR 219 at 225-226, See to similar effect Starrett Housing Corp. v. Iran, Case No, 24 (1983), Award No.
ITL 32-24-1, 4 Iran-US CTR 122, and George E. Davidson (Homayounjah) v. Government of the Islamic
Republic of fran, Case No. 457, (1998), 34 Iran-US CTR 3, para. 104.
" Waste Management, Inc, v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, (2004), 43 (LM 967
(2004), para. 145.
" Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States, above n 6, para. 115.
' Metalclad v. United Mexican States, above n 4, para. 103.

32

cases of complaints concerning economic intervention by a state and reduces the risk that
governments will be subject to claims as they go about their business of managing public affairs
[...] An expropriation usually amounts to a lasting removal of the ability of an owner to make use
of its economic rights although it may be that, in some contexts and circumstances, it would be
appropriate to view a deprivation as amounting to an expropriation, even if it were partial or
temporary."

However, these suggestions have typically been made in cases where the question of
partial deprivation did not arise on the facts, and were no doubt designed to avoid
excluding the possibility that partial deprivation might in an appropriate case constitute
expropriation. Thus in the Metalclad case'* there was total deprivation of the economic
value of the investment by denial to the investor of access to the landfill site which was
the subject of the agreement, while in S.D. Myers'® a temporary closure of a border,
which delayed the investor's venture into the Canadian market, was held not to constitute

an expropriation.

67. The Tribunal considers that, in the present case at least, the investment must be
viewed as a whole and that the test the Tribunal has to apply is whether, viewed as a

whole, the investment has suffered substantial erosion of value.

The onus of showing a prima facie case

68. Telenor has quite rightly made the point that at a hearing on a challenge to
jurisdiction it is not required to go into the merits of the case. Indeed, Hungary quite
properly made no pleading as to the merits. Accordingly for the purpose of the
jurisdictional challenge allegations of admissible fact by the Claimant are to be assumed

to be true. The onus is on the Claimant to show what is alleged to constitute

 $.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, above n 6, paras, 282-283.
8 above n4.
"© Above n6,

33

expropriation is at least capable of so doing.” There must, in other words, be a prima

facie case that the BIT applies.

69. Nowadays direct expropriation is the exception rather than the rule, as States
prefer to avoid opprobrium and the loss of confidence of prospective investors by more
oblique means. In the present case, Telenor has asserted that Hungary was guilty of
conduct amounting to indirect, creeping expropriation, that is, expropriation taking forms
other than the divestment of assets and consisting of acts committed over a period of time
no one of which had to be shown (though it might be capable of being shown) as in itself
amounting to expropriation. In considering whether Telenor has shown a prima facie
case of indirect expropriation it is instructive to examine the various types of conduct that
have been held by tribunals in earlier cases to constitute expropriation and use these as a
benchmark against which to measure Telenor's case. The following is a non-exhaustive
list of acts of government or government-controlled agencies that have been held to
amount to indirect expropriation:

. Repudiation of the concession. agreement."

" Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), CJ Reports 1996, p. 803 at p. 828
(“arguable contention"); Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.4. v, The Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/13, (2006), available on ICSID web site at:
http://www.worldbank.org/icsi danAward_IncludingA -pdf, para. 151 ("the Tribunal
will accordingly seek to determine whether the facts alleged by the Claimants in this case, if established,
are capable of coming within those provisions of the BIT which have been invoked"), cited with approval
in Plama Consortium Lid v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No ARB/03/24, (2005), 20 /CSID Rev.—
FILJ 262 (2005), paras. 118 et seq.; SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Philippines, \CSTD Case
No. ARB/02/6, (2004), 8 ICSID Rep. 515, at para. 157 ("Provided the facts as alleged by the Claimant and
as appearing from the initial pleadings fairly raise questions of breach of one or more provisions of the

IT".
'8 In the Matter of Revere Copper and Brass, Inc. v. Overseas Private Investment Corp., Award 24" August
1978, 56 ILR 258.

34

. Forced amendment of a Memorandum of Association so as to require
relinquishment of the exclusive right of use of a licence which had the effect of

destroying the commercial value of the investment.”

‘ Displacement of the investor's management.”

* The imposition of taxes which would substantially erode profits.”"

. Denial of permits necessary to operate the concession, and associated measures.”?
. Freezing of the investor's bank account and harassment of its staff.

. Detention and .deportation of key personnel necessary to run the business

comprising the investment.’

. Acquisition of a majority shareholding in the concession company where
subsequent measures adopted by the majority which destroy the economic value
of the investment go beyond the legitimate exercise of a majority shareholder's

right to manage the company.

70. In considering whether measures taken by government constitute expropriation
the determinative factors are the intensity and duration of the economic deprivation
suffered by the investor as the result of them.” § ‘There is a divergence of views as to

whether the intention or objectives of the government in introducing the measures may

'° CME Czech Republic BV (The Netherlands) v. Czech Republic, (2001), 9 ICSID Rep. 113.
2 Tippetts, Abbett, McCarthy, Stratton vy. TAMS-AFFA Consulting Engineers of Iran, above n 10; Starrett
Housing Corp v. Iran, above n 10,
*\ In the Matter of Revere Copper and Brass, Inc. v. Overseas Private Investment Corp., above n 18.
2 Metalclad Corp. v. United Mexican States, above n 4; Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. United
Mexican States, above n 6.
* Starrett Housing Corp. v. Islamic Republic of Iran, above 1 10.
* Riloune and Marine Drive Complex Ltd v. Ghana Investments Centre and Government of Ghana, Award
on Jurisdiction and Liability (1989), 95 ILR 183.
* Foremost Teheran, Inc. v. Islamic Republic of Iran, Award No. 222-37/231-1 (1986), 10 Iran-US CTR
228, 248.
* Christoph Schreuer, "The Concept of Expropriation under the ETC and other Investment Protection
Treaties", (2005), 2 Transnational Dispute Management, November 2005, para. 82.

35

also be taken into account or whether the sole criterion is the effect of the government
measures,”” but on the view this Tribunal takes of the effects of Hungary's actions on

Telenor in the present case that is not an issue that needs to be expiored.

71. In the present case Telenor complains of a series of governmental and
administrative acts by Hungary which it says have reduced the value of its investment.
However, the inconsistencies and lack of particularity in Telenor's various pleadings have
made it difficult for the Tribunal, even at the conclusion of the hearing on jurisdiction, to
have a clear idea either of the claims it is making or of the magnitude of the erosion of its
investment it is seeking to assert. Hungary repeatedly stressed the difficulties it faced on
these counts in dealing with the claims made by Telenor, and the Tribunal considers that

Hungary's objections on this score were fully justified.

72. As regards the claims themselves, the Tribunal has already drawn attention to the

following facts:

(1) The Request for Arbitration made no mention of expropriation at all.

(2) Though the first head of claim in the Request for Arbitration was the exclusion of
Pannon from universal service provision, no mention was made of this in
Telenor's letter to the Centre of 11" June 2004 in response to the Centre's request
for an explanation of the acts of expropriation relied upon, nor did this head of

claim feature at all in Telenor's Memorial.

” The so-called "sole effects” doctrine. See Rudolf Dolzer, "Indirect Expropriations: New Developments?"
11 NYU Env LI 64, 79 (2002).
36

(4)

G)

(6)

73.

Similarly the letter of 11” June made no mention of the costs incurred in
defending the allegation of market abuse, despite the fact that a claim for such
costs had been included in the Request for Arbitration.

Likewise, Telenor's Memorial omitied all reference to a claim for reimbursement
of the above costs.

On the other hand, Telenor’s Memorial included two claims, relating respectively
to handset subsidies and dial digit fees, which had not been mentioned anywhere
in its Request for Arbitration,

Neither the Request for Arbitration nor the Memorial made any reference to
Article [Il of the BIT as the basis for any claims, Both documents relied
exclusively on Article VI. It was only in Telenor's Answer to Objections that
Article [II was invoked for the first time, together with Article IV as establishing
the procedural link to the Tribunal's jurisdiction. Had Hungary maintained at the
hearing the objection it had made in its Reply to the Tribunal's consideration of
the claim under Article [I and the invocation of Article IV, it is highly unlikely
that the Tribunal would have entertained argument by Telenor in respect of

Articles II and IV.

As regards the magnitude of Telenor's loss in relation to the value of its

investment, the Tribunal is still little wiser now than it was at the commencement of the

proceedings. Indeed, Telenor's Request for Arbitration and subsequent pleadings seem to

regard this question as of no great significance and to assume that any improper

interference with its investment and any unfair, unlawful or inequitable treatment sufficed

37

to establish a prima facie case of expropriation. Thus claims of the kind falling within

Article III of the BIT became elided with those under Article VI.

74, At the hearing the Tribunal sought to establish the total amount Telenor was
contending it had lost because of the alleged breaches of duty by Hungary. In answer to
questions from the Tribunal counsel for Telenor referred to the draft of a report prepared
by Deloitte's which had given a preliminary indication of loss up to HUF 30 billion, as
. briefly mentioned in Telenor's Memorial (see paragraph 42 above), Neither the Tribunal
nor Hungary had been supplied with a copy of the draft, which counsel for Telenor said
he was not authorised to release. Counsel explained that the draft was incomplete and
anyway only provided figures within a certain range, and that once objection had been
made to the jurisdiction the case was suspended as to the merits and therefore he had not
allowed further work on the report to proceed. At this point counsel for Hungary
understandably objected that no further document based on the draft report should be put
in. In the first place, the figure given was not credible, being 10 times the amount of
damages claimed in the Request for Arbitration. Moreover, the case was three years old
and the pleadings on jurisdiction were closed. Telenor had chosen not to present the

report.

75. The Tribunal accepted these objections. The maximum loss referred to in the
report, namely HUF 30 billion, is a large sum, and the issue of the magnitude of Telenor's
loss in relation to its investment is plainly a central issue which could and should have
been addressed in detail in the Request for Arbitration and subsequent pleadings, not
merely adverted to in two brief paragraphs in the Request for Arbitration, The Tribunal

38

has not seen the report, Hungary has not seen it, and Telenor is not authorised by
Deloitte's to release it. The report is an incomplete draft on which considerable further
work has to be done, neither the Tribunal nor Hungary have been supplied with even
minimal information showing how the figures referred to have been computed or how
they have been allocated to the different heads of claim, the figures range from HUF 15
billion at one end to HUF 30 billion at the other, which is an enormous range, and they
bear no relation to the amount of the claims made in the Request for Arbitration. Finally,
in answer to a question from the Tribunal, Telenor confirmed that the draft report went to
the merits, which of course the Tribunal would not reach unless first satisfied that it had
jurisdiction. Given all these facts, the Tribunal confirms its ruling at the hearing that it

can take no account of the information supplied relating to the figures in the draft.

76. The result is that, in the absence of any other figures in Telenor's Memorial, the
Tribunal is left with two amounts only, namely the ETTA levies on Pannon of HUF
1,585,259,454 for the year 2002 and HUF 797,625,024 for the year 2003 (see Memorial,
paragraphs 18 and 21). Table 1 shows the comparison between Telenor's contributions to
ETTA and the amount of its gross and net profits. Table 2 compares the same
contributions with the value of Pannon's assets. Table 3 shows the amount of Pannon's
gross and net profits and the value of its assets for the three years prior to the levy as well
as for 2002 and 2003. All the tables are based on Pannon's annual reports and accounts

which were included as exhibits to the pleadings.

Table t

ETTA LEVY AS PERCENTAGE OF PROFITS AND OF ASSETS
(Exhibit R-71, pp 18, 20)

2002
HUF billion
Gross profit 96.4
Net after-tax income 22.5
Levy 1.6
Levy as % of gross profit 1.7%
Levy as % of net income TA
2003
Gross profit 102.2
Net after-tax income 25.8
Levy 0.8
Levy as % of gross profit 0.8%
Levy as % of net income 3.1%
For two years combined
Gross profit 198.6
Net after-tax income 48.3
Levy 24
Levy as % of gross profits 12%
HUF billion

Levy as % of net income 5.0%

Table 2

ETTA LEVY AS PERCENTAGE OF ASSETS

HUF billion
2002
Assets 149.7 [= increase of HUF 11 billion over
2001]
Levy 16
Levy as % of assets 1.1%
2003
Assets 164.4 [= increase of HUF 15 billion over 2002]
Levy 0.8
Levy as % of assets 0.5%
For two years combined
Assets 314.1
Levy 24
Levy as % of assets 0.8%

40

Table 3

Pannon's gross and net profits and assets for the years 1999-2003
(Exhibits R-68, R-70)

1999 2000 2004 2002 2003
(levy) levy)
(in HUF billions)
Gross profits 53.4 58.5 79.6 96.4 102.2
Net profits 12.9 97 17.2 22.5 25.8
Assets. 1119 H74 138.5 149.7 164.4

77. The following conclusions can be drawn from these figures. First, Pannon is a
very successful and profitable company and regularly describes itself as such in its annual
reports. Its gross and net profits rose every year, nearly doubling between 1999 and
2003. The 2002 levy amounted to 1.7% of its gross profit and 7.1% of its net income,
while the 2003 levy, the last to be imposed under the ETTA system, reduced these
percentages by over a half, to 0.8% and 3.1% respectively. Secondly, the value of
Pannon's assets also rose steadily year by year, from HUF 111.9 billion in 1999 to HUF
164.4 billion in 2003, and the amount of the levy in relation to asset value was 1.1% for
2002 and 0.8% for 2003. There were no further levies after 2003, and in 2004 Pannon's
assets rose in value by a further HUF 86 billion to HUF 249.5 billion, well over double
what they had been in 1999, The Chief Executive Officer's Annual Report 2002
contained the following passage:

"The demanding challenges of the market were successfully met: besides stabilising our market
share around 38%, expanding the network coverage and maintaining our development of our
customer-oriented services, we managed to achieve the best financial results in our history."

In his Annual Report 2003, describing the achievements of that year, the Chief Executive
Officer said:

"Iam proud to announce that 2003 was another year of profitable growth for Pannon GSM [...}
Our business was stable and balanced throughout the whole year."

41

78. These figures, which speak for themselves, are not the cnly difficulty confronting
Telenor in its assertion of expropriation. The evidence submitted to the Tribunal
indicates that the type of arrangement set up by the Hungarian Government for universal
service provision was not dissimilar to those established in a number of other
jurisdictions, both within and outside Europe. The exclusion of mobile operators from
the provision of universal service applied not only to Pannon but to all other mobile
service providers. The ETTA levy of which Telenor has made such fierce complaints
was not imposed on Pannon alone but was a levy on all providers of telecommunications
services, whether fixed-line or mobile, including Pannon's competitors in the mobile
telephony market. Similarly, the restrictions on hand-set subsidies and the
disadvantageous fee structure for digit dialling on mobile networks applied to Pannon's

competitors as it did to Pannon itself.

79. In the light of all the above facts and figures, coupled with absence of any
admissible pleadings as to the magnitude of Telenor's total losses, whether in relation to
the value of its investment or otherwise, and the fact that expropriation was not even
mentioned in the Request for Arbitration and came into play only in response to letters
from the Centre raising the question of expropriation, it is evident that the effect of the
measures by Hungary of which Telenor complains fall far short of the substantial
economic deprivation of its investment required to constitute expropriation as indicated
in the examples given in paragraph 65 above. Beyond the compulsory collection of the
2002 and 2003 ETTA levies from Pannon's bank account, none of Pannon's assets has
been seized. Pannon's management has been left in the hands of its Board without
governmental interference, the concession agreement remains in full force, and Pannon

42

has not been denied access to its assets, its revenues or any of its other resources.
Moreover, Pannon is, and in its annual reports proclaims itself to be, a highly profitable

company whose net income and asset value has increased steadily year by year.

There is no evidence before the Tribunal to suggest any activity on the part of the
Hungarian Government that remotely approaches the effect of expropriation. There has
been no suggestion of government interference with Telenor's network or its relations
with its customers. Telenor's position is thus not dissimilar to that of the Claimant in
Pope & Talbot, Inc. v. Canada, where the Tribunal likewise rejected the contention that
the acts of Canada had amounted to expropriation,

"The Investor's (and the Investment's) Operations Controller testified at the hearing that the
Investor remains in control of the Investment, it directs the day-to-day operations of the
Investment, and no officers or employees of the Investment have been detained by virtue of the
Regime. Canada does not supervise the work of the officers or employees of the Investment, does
not take any of the proceeds of company sales (apart from taxation), does not interfere with
management or shareholders’ activities, does not prevent the Investment from paying dividends to
its shareholders, does not interfere with the appointment of directors or management and does not
take any other actions ousting the Investor from full ownership and control of the Investment."

Except for the ETTA levies, exactly the same is true of the acts of Hungary in relation to

Telenor,

80. The Tribunal therefore concludes that Telenor has failed to make out a prima
Jacie case of expropriation. It follows that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over claims

for expropriation made under Article VI of the BIT.

* Above n 6,
® Thid., para. 100.
43

Third issue: does the Tribunal have jurisdiction over claims under Article [If of the
BIT?

(1) The pleading aspects

81. Telenor's approach to pleading caused the Tribunal similar difficulties in relation
to its claims for breach of the obligation of fair and equitable treatment imposed on
Hungary by Article IJ] of the BIT. Telenor appears to have assumed, at least initially,
that any claim it might have under the BIT would fall within the Tribunal's jurisdiction.
That is not the case. Subject to the argument analysed below that the Tribunal's
jurisdiction is extended by the MFN clause in Article IV to cover claims under Article II,
such claims are outside the Tribunal's jurisdiction, which is limited by Article XI to
expropriation claims. That does not mean that Telenor is without remedy if Hungary has
failed to fulfil its obligations of fair and equitable treatment. On the contrary, Telenor
has two avenues of recourse. One is to invoke diplomatic protection and request Norway
to seek a remedy on its behalf under Article III; the other is to bring proceedings before
the Hungarian courts under Hungarian law for breach of the same obligations under the

concession agreement,

82. As with the expropriation claim, no reference was made to Article Ill in Telenor's
Request for Arbitration. Indeed, Article III was not mentioned even in Telenor's
Memorial, only in its Answer to Hungary's Objections to Jurisdiction. In its Reply
Hungary rightly objected to claims under Article III being pursued, and as stated earlier if
that objection had been maintained at the hearing the Tribunal would have found it

difficult to avoid dismissing the claims under Article Il on the spot. However, the

objection was not pursued and the Tribunal wil! therefore deal with the claims under

Article ILin this Award.

(2) Telenor's reliance on Article IV to invoke dispute resolution clauses in other BITs

83. Article IIT is not one of the Articles referred to in Article XI of the BIT and
therefore prima facie is outside the Tribunal's jurisdiction. However, at a late stage in the
proceedings, Telenor advanced the argument that the most favoured nation clause
embodied in Article IV provided what it called a procedural bridge to Article III in that it
entitled Telenor to take advantage of any wider dispute resolution clause in any other BIT
entered into by Hungary with other States. It is unfortunate that Telenor did not consider
it necessary to identify the wider clauses in question, nor indeed was it able to do so when
asked about this by the Tribunal at the jurisdiction hearing. Telenor's position was that
the investigation into the circumstances in which the Norway-Hungary treaty was
negotiated was a matter to be dealt with only at the merits stage of the case. The Tribunal
then indicated that it could, of course, look at the MFN clauses in other BITs itself. Such
assistance as has been provided to the Tribunal on this point came from Hungary in its
Reply in which it examined the types of dispute resolution clause found in the various

BITs entered into by Hungary and Norway (see paragraph 96).

84. Article IV has already been set out in paragraph 25 but for convenience is
reproduced again here:
ARTICLE IV
MOST FAVOURED NATION TREATMENT
1 Investments made by Investors of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other
Contracting Party, as also the retums therefrom, shall be accorded treatment no less

favourable than that accorded to investments made by Investors of any third State.
45

2 The treatment granted under paragraph | of this Article shall not apply to:
. any advantage accorded to Investors of a third State by the other Contracting
Party based on any existing or future customs or economic union, or similar
international agreement, or free trade agreement to which either of the
Contracting Parties is or becomes a Party.
. any advantages accorded to Investors of a third State by the other Contracting

Party by virtue of a double taxation agreement or other agreements regarding
matters of taxation or any domestic legislation relating to taxation.

(3) Two cases cited in support of Telenor’s position

85. Of the various cases cited by Telenor two in particular were relied on to support
its invocation of Article IV as a procedural bridge, namely Maffezini® and Siemens.' In
Maffezini the parties to the BIT were Argentina and Spain and the claim was brought
against Spain by an Argentinean national. The dispute resolution clause, contained in
Article X of the BIT, was not only very wide but also complex and productive of
potential inconvenience. The relevant part of Article X read as follows:

"1 Disputes which arise within the ferms of this Agreement concerning an investment
between an investor of one Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party shall, if
possible, be settled amicably by the parties to the dispute.

2. If the dispute cannot thus be settled within six months following the date on which the
dispute has been raised by either party, it shall be submitted to the competent tribunal of
the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment was made.

3. ‘The dispute may be submitted to international arbitration in any of the following
circumstances:
a) at the request of one of the parties to the dispute, if no decision has been

rendered on the merits of the claim after the expiration of a period of eighteen
months from the date on which the proceedings referred to in paragraph 2 of this
Article have been initiated, or if such decision has been rendered, but the dispute
between the parties continues;

b) if both parties to the dispute agree thereto.

4. In the cases foreseen in paragraph 3, the disputes between the parties shall be submitted,
unless the parties otherwise agree, either to international arbitration under the March 18,
1965 Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals
of Other States or to an ad hoc arbitral tribunal established under the Arbitration Rules of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

* Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSI) Case No. ARB/97/7, (2000), 5 ICSID Rep. 387.
*! Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, (2004), available on ICSID web site at:
http://www. worldbank.org/icsid/cases/siemens-decision-en.pdf.
46

If after a period of three months following the submission of the dispute to arbitration
by either party, there is no agreement to one of the above alternative procedures, the
dispute shall be submitted to arbitration under the March 18, 1965 Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States,
provided that both Contracting Parties have become parties to the said Convention.
Otherwise, the dispute shall be submitted to the above mentioned ad hoe tribunal.”

86. Article IV of the BIT in Maffezini also embodied an MFN clause in the following
terms:

"In all matters subject to this Agreement, this treatment shall not be less favourable than that
extended by each Party to the investments made in its territory by investors of a third country.”

The claimant contended that Article [V embraced not only substantive investment rights
but also dispute resolution procedures, so that it was entitled to invoke a dispute
resolution clause in Article 10(2) of the Chile-Spain BIT, which provided merely that the
investor could opt for arbitration after the six-month period for negotiations had expired,
with no other pre-conditions. The respondent, Spain, argued that Article IV was confined
to material economic treatment and did not extend to procedural matters. The tribunal
upheld the claimant's submission and ruled that international arbitration and other dispute
resolution provisions were essential to the protection of the rights envisaged under the
pertinent BITs and that Article [V was therefore to be interpreted as giving the claimant
the benefit of any wider dispute resolution clause contained in any other BIT between

Spain and a third State, in the instant case the Chile-Spain BIT.

87. In reaching its decision the Maffezini tribunal examined in detail the practice
followed by Spain in respect of BITs with other countries. It noted that of all the Spanish
treaties it had been able to examine the only MFN provision that spoke of “all matters
subject to this Agreement" was the provision in the BIT with Argentina. All other

treaties omitted this reference and confined the MFN clause to "this treatment” (ie.,
47

treatment accorded to the investments), which as the tribunal noted was a narrower
formulation, and is that used in the BIT between Hungary and Norway. The tribunal,
aware of the danger of disruptive treaty-shopping that could, it thought, play havoc with
the policy objectives of underlying specific treaty provisions, incorporated in its ruling
some important qualifications based on public policy, though the source of these is

unclear,

88. The Siemens Decision is more supportive of Telenor's case in that the MFN clause
was there confined to the treatment of the investments, yet despite this important
difference the tribunal, which concurring with Maffezini that this formulation was
narrower, considered it sufficiently wide to cover the settlement of disputes concluded
that the investor, a German national, was entitled to invoke against Argentina the wider
dispute resolution clause contained in the Chile-Argentina BIT. A similar approach was
adopted in the Gas Natural case,™* where the tribunal focused on the importance to be
attached to the assurance of independent international arbitration and concluded that
MEN provisions in a BIT should be understood to apply to dispute settlement unless it
clearly appeared otherwise. More recently Maffezini was followed in Suez, Sociedad
General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v.

The Argentine Republic.

* Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v. Argentine Republic, Case No. ARB/03/10, Decision on Jurisdiction, 17” June
2005, available on the web site of International Law in Brief at:
htipy/www.asil.ory/pdfivGasNat.v Argentina pdf.
*S {CSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on Jurisdiction, 16" May 2006, available on the web site of
Investment Treaty Arbitration at: http;//ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Suez-Jurisdiction.pdf.

4

(4) Cases adopting a narrower construction of the MFN clause

89. Though Maffezini and Siemens do not stand on their own and have been followed
in some later decisions, it is clear that in other cases they occasioned considerable
disquiet and indeed fairly vigorous criticism and dissent. Thus in Plama Consortium Ltd
vy. Republic of Bulgaria® the tribunal robustly rejected the expansive interpretation
accorded to the MFN clauses in Ma/fezini, and thus found it unnecessary to deal with
Siemens.

"The tribunal in Majfezini further referred to ‘the fact that the application of the most favoured
nation clause to dispute settlement arrangements in the context of investment treaties might result
in the harmonization and enlargement of the scope of such arrangements‘ (Decision at paragraph
62). The present Tribunal fails to see how harmonization of dispute settlement provisions can be
achieved by reliance on the MFN provision. Rather, the ‘basket of treatment’ and ‘self-adaptation
of an MEN provision’ in relation to dispute settlement provisions (as alleged by the Claimant) has
as effect that an investor has the option to pick and choose provisions from the various BITs. If
that were true, a host state which has not specifically agreed thereto can be confronted with a large
number of permutations of dispute settlement provisions from the various BITs which it has
concluded. Such a chaotic situation - actually counterproductive to harmonization - cannot be the
presumed intent of Contracting Parties. [...]

[...] the principle with multiple exceptions as stated by the tribunal in the Maffezini case should
instead be a different principle with one, single exception: an MFN provision in a basic treaty
does not incorporate by reference dispute resolution provisions in whole or in part set forth in
another treaty, unless the MFN provision in the basic treaty leaves no doubt that the Contracting
Parties intended to incorporate them."

Similarly in Salini v Jordan* the tribunal, after stating that it "shares the concerns that
have been expressed in numerous quarters with regard to the solution adopted in the
Maffezini case”, declined to treat the MFN clause as extending the scope of application of
the BIT in relation to dispute settlement and held that its jurisdiction was limited by the
dispute resolution clause in the BIT itself. The tribunal noted that the claimants had not

cited any practice in the States parties to the BIT in support of their claim.

* ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8" February 2005, above n 17, paras. 219 and

223 :

* Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, 1CSID Case No.

ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29" November 2004, 20 /CS/D Rev.—FILJ 148 (2005), para. 115,
49

(3) Conclusions on the MFN clause
90. This Tribunal wholeheartedly endorses the analysis and statement of principle

furnished by the Plama tribunal.

91. There are at least four compelling reasons why an MFN clause in a BIT providing
for most favoured nation treatment of investment should not be construed as extending
the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal to categories of dispute beyond those set out in the

BIT itself'in the absence of clear language that this is the intention of the parties.

92. In the first place, Article 31 of the 1969 Vienna Convention on Treaties requires a
treaty to be interpreted "in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be
given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purposes."
In the absence of language or context to suggest the contrary, the ordinary meaning of
“investments shall be accorded treatment no less favourable than that accorded to
investments made by investors of any third State" is that the investor's substantive rights
in respect of the investments are to be treated no less favourably than under a BIT
between the host State and a third State, and there is no warrant for construing the above
phrase as importing procedural rights as well. It is one thing to stipulate that the investor
is to have the benefit of MFN investment treatment but quite another to use an MFN
clause in a BIT to bypass a limitation in the very same BIT when the parties have not
chosen language in the MFN clause showing an intention to do this, as has been done in

some BITs.

93. Secondly, as the Plama tribunal! pointed out, the effect of the wide interpretation

of the MEN clause is to expose the host State to treaty-shopping by the investor among an
indeterminate number of treaties to find a dispute resolution clause wide enough to cover
a dispute that would fall outside the dispute resolution clause in the base treaty, and even
then there would be questions as to whether the investor could select those elements of

the wider dispute resolution that were apt for its purpose and discard those that were not.

94. Thirdly, the wide interpretation also generates both uncertainty and instability in
that at one moment the limitation in the basic BIT is operative and at the next moment it
is overridden by a wider dispute resolution clause in a new BIT entered into by the host

State.

95. Fourthly, of particular relevance is the practice of the States parties to the BIT in
the formulation of their dispute resolution clauses in BITs with other States. Those who
advocate a wide interpretation of the MFN clause have almost always examined the issue
from the perspective of the investor. But what has to be applied is not some abstract
principle of investment protection in favour of a putative investor who is not a party to
the BIT and who at the time of its conclusion is not even known, but the intention of the
States who are the contracting parties. The importance to investors of independent
international arbitration cannot be denied, but in the view of this Tribunal its task is to
interpret the BIT and for that purpose to apply ordinary canons of interpretation, not to
displace, by reference to general policy considerations concerning investor protection, the
dispute resolution mechanism specifically negotiated by the parties... There are BITs
entered into by a State which provide for reference to arbitration of all disputes, and

St

others entered into by the same State that limit consent to arbitration to specified
categories of dispute, such as expropriation. It must be obvious that such a State, when
reaching agreement on the latter form of dispute resolution clause, intends that the
jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal is to be limited to the specified categories and is not to
be inferentially extended by an MFN clause. Where, as in the present case, both parties
to a BIT which restricts the reference to arbitration to specified categories have entered
into other BITs which refer all disputes to arbitration or where they have concluded other
BITs some of which refer all disputes to arbitration while others limit such a reference to
specified categories of dispute, then it can fairly be assumed that in the BIT in question
the two parties share a common intention to limit the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal
to the categories so specified. In these circumstances, to invoke the MFN clause to
embrace the method of dispute resolution is to subvert the intention of the parties to the

basic treaty, who have made it clear that this is not what they wish.

96. In the present case Hungary made the telling point that, of the 15 Norwegian BITs.
publicly available, the BIT with Hungary is the only one that specifies the categories of
dispute referable to ICSID arbitration; the 14 others all specify "all" or “any” disputes,
All those treaties were included in the exhibits in support of Hungary's objections to
jurisdiction, though not all were in the English language. By contrast about half of the
BITs entered into by Hungary with States other than Norway restrict consent to ICSID
arbitration to expropriation claims. Hungary also included in its exhibits copies of
various BITs entered into by Hungary with States other than Norway, though again some
of these were not in English. The Tribunal's own research shows. that. of the 22
Hungarian BITs available in English on the UNCTAD web site, only seven limit

52.

submission to arbitration to cases involving expropriation or nationalisation,*° while 13
allow for any legal dispute to be referred to arbitration and two, including the BIT under
consideration in this case, specify categories additional to expropriation or
nationalisation, such as compensation for losses due to war, but do not extend to other

disputes.

97. It therefore seems clear that in Article XI of their BIT Hungary and Norway have
made a deliberate choice to limit arbitration to the categories specified in that Article and
have eschewed the wide form of dispute resolution clause adopted in many of their other

BITs.

98. In the recent Aguas*” case, which as stated above followed Maffezini, the tribunal

distinguished Plama on three grounds. First, the MFN clause in Plama was narrower
than in Aguas, which used the phrase "In all matters governed by this Agreement,"
followed by a set of exceptions. Secondly, Plama was guided by evidence that the
contracting States did not intend the MFN clause to cover dispute resolution, whereas in
Aguas no evidence of intent was adduced by the parties. Thirdly, in Plama the Claimant
attempted to replace the dispute resolution clause in the base treaty in toto by a dispute
resolution mechanism incorporated from another treaty, a “radical effect" compared with
the much more limited one in Aguas, which consisted merely of waiving a preliminary
step in accessing the dispute resolution mechanism. All three of the features in Aguas
which were held to distinguish it from Plama also distinguish it from the present case.

The MEN clause in the Hungary-Norway BIT is more limited than in Aguas, the present

© Those concluded with Cyprus, China, The Netherlands, Spain, the United Kingdom, Finland and Greece.
*” Above n 33.
53

Tribunal had before it evidence of a kind not before the 4guas tribunal - namely the
practice of both Hungary and Norway in entering into BITs with other States - that the
parties intended to limit dispute resolution to the matters specified in the dispute
resolution clause in the Hungary-Norway BIT, and what Telenor seeks to do is not
simply remove a preliminary condition of invoking the dispute resolution mechanism but
to extend the scope of the Tribunal's jurisdiction to questions entirely outside Article XT

of the Hungary-Norway BIT.

99. In Aguas, the tribunal expressed no opinion as to whether an MFN clause of the
more radical kind contained in Plama could have the effect of replacing the dispute
resolution clause but dissented from the general principle formulated by the Plama

tribunal. By contrast the present Tribunal fully supports the Plama formulation.

100. The Tribunal therefore concludes that in the present case the MFN clause cannot
be used to extend the Tribunal's jurisdiction to categories of claim other than
expropriation, for this would subvert the common intention of Hungary and Norway in

entering into the BIT in question.

101. Towards the end of the hearing on jurisdiction the Tribunal asked Telenor
whether, if the Tribunal were to rule against its contention on the application of Article
IV, Telenor would still contend that claims under Article ITI fell within the Tribunal's
jurisdiction. Counsel for Telenor very fairly and properly conceded that if Article IV
could not be invoked, claims under Article III would be inadmissible and Telenor would
be restricted to a claim for expropriation. Since the Tribunal has concluded, for the
reasons set out above, that Article IV does not operate to extend the Tribunal's

54

jurisdiction beyond that conferred by Article XI, it follows that Telenor's claims under

Article III must also be dismissed for want of jurisdiction.

1X CONCLUSIONS

Jurisdiction

102. For the reasons set out above the Tribunal concludes:

(1) that Telenor has failed to adduce a prima facie case of expropriation;

(2) that the scope of the Tribunal's jurisdiction is limited by Article X1 to claims
involving expropriation and that the MFN clause embodied in Article [V cannot
be invoked to extend the Tribuna!'s jurisdiction to claims under Article III;

(3) that the Tribunal therefore has no jurisdiction over any of the claims brought by

Telenor.

Costs
103. At the invitation of the Tribunal the parties made brief oral submissions on costs

and later filed more detailed written submissions.

104. In its oral and written submissions Hungary argued that if the Tribunal were to
decide it had no jurisdiction over any part of the claim Hungary should be awarded costs,
partly because of the widely accepted "loser pays" principle and partly because of what it
called "behavioural components", that is, the fact that in the view of Hungary, Telenor's
claims were misconceived from the outset, it initiated the arbitral proceedings without
any examination of the jurisdictional basis of its claims, and its pleadings were
lackadaisical and failed entirely to address the question how its investment was

expropriated.

105. Telenor, having at the oral hearing indicated its acceptance of the principle that
“the winner takes all" (a concession made at the end of a day's hearing and one to which
the Tribunal would not wish to hold Telenor), did not directly address the issue in its
written submission, but (1) attacked Hungary for failing to file any pleadings on the
merits, contrary, said Telenor, to the Tribunal's directions, and for Hungary's "notorious
attempts to divert attention from" this failure and (2) said that "as the Tribunal will
apparently hold it does have prima facie jurisdiction over Claimant's claims" its
jurisdiction costs were separated out "from the costs related to the merits in order to

enable the tribunal to resoive on the forum costs separately.”

106. As stated earlier, the allegation that Hungary ignored a direction from the
Tribunal to file pleadings on the merits is a misconception. The directions given for
pleadings on the merits were conditional on there being at least some aspects of Telenor's
claim in respect of which there was no challenge to the jurisdiction. In the event,
jurisdiction was challenged across the board, so that the question of filing pleadings on
the merits did not arise, all proceedings on the merits being suspended pending the
Tribunal's ruling on jurisdiction. It is therefore quite unfair of Telenor to criticise
Hungary for failing to plead to the merits and to assert that this was in breach of the
Tribunal's direction, and even more unfair to suggest that Hungary had deliberately
sought to deflect attention from the want of such pleading. It is not clear on what basis
Telenor assumed the Tribunal would rule in its favour on the question of jurisdiction and
the assumption has proved to be unfounded...Telenor has made no. submission on what
order should be made as to costs in that event.

56

107. The Tribunal has concluded that on both of the grounds advanced by Hungary
Telenor should be ordered to pay Hungary's costs. Though aware of a common practice
in ICSID arbitrations for the parties to bear their own costs and bear the costs of ICSID
and the tribunal equally regardless of the outcome of the case, this Tribunal is among
those who favour the general principle that costs should follow the event. In any event,
the Tribunal agrees with Hungary's criticisms of Telenor's approach to this case, which
has undoubtedly caused difficulties both for Hungary and for the Tribunal and has added
substantially to the costs incurred. The Tribunal does not propose to say more about this

other than to refer to what has been said in paragraphs 33, 36-39, 41 and 71-75.

The Award

108. Accordingly:

(1) Telenor's claims are dismissed on the ground that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction
over them;

(2) Telenor is ordered to reimburse to Hungary its contributions to the fees and
expenses of ICSID, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, and the costs
incurred by Hungary as set out in the annexed Schedule of Costs. Telenor is
ordered to pay these costs within 30 days from the notification by ICSID to the

parties of its fees and expenses.

 

PROFESSOR. smi Roy Soobe CBE, QC

Zz “ Tame Ind Suna, bth Aan tt

 

 

\a60cn T

 

Mr. NICHOLAS W. ALLARD Mr. ARTHUR Mn ARTHUR MagmorE. OC Qc
6/22/ C& 2O Thu, due

nN

SCHEDULE OF COSTS

Counsel for Hungary: fees and expenses USS
(i) Arnold & Porter LLP (15" May 2006): 979,785.61
(ii) Amold & Porter LLP (23 May 2006): 31,615.72
(ii) Law offices of Tamas Kende, Budapest 237,938.96
1,249,340.29
Hungary's travel costs for attending hearings 3,552.48
1,252,892.77

ICSID costs, including the fees and expenses of this Tribunal:
Amount to be advised to the parties

(i) paid by Hungary: 150,000.00
(ii) paid by Telenor: 150,000.00
(iii) to be reimbursed by Telenor to Hungary: Half of ICSID costs

59

