Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 2 of 31

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the annulment proceeding between
BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA

Applicant

and

TENARIS S.A. AND TALTA - TRADING E MARKETING SOCIEDADE UNIPESSOAL LDA

Respondents

ICSID Case No. ARB/11/26

 

DECISION ON THE REQUEST TO MAINTAIN
THE STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Dr. Andres Rigo Sureda, President

Professor Piero Bernardini
Professor Diego P. Fernandez Arroyo

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee

Mrs. Ana Constanza Conover Blancas

24 March 2017

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 3 of 31

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela:

Dr. Reinaldo Enrique Munoz Pedroza
Dr. Felipe Daruiz

Dra. Erika Fernandez

Procuraduria General de la Republica
Av. Los Ilustres, c/c Francisco

Lazo Marti

Urb. Santa Monica

Caracas 1040

Venezuela

Mr. Kenneth Figueroa

Mr. Alberto Wray

Mrs. Analia Gonzalez

Mrs. Rebecca Gerome

Mr. Jose Rebolledo

Mrs. Francheska Loza

Foley Hoag LLP

1717 K Street NW, Suite 1200
Washington, DC 20006
United States of America

Mr. Ignacio Torterola

Mr. Diego Gosis

Mr. Quinn Smith

Mrs. Veronica Lavista

Mr. Guillermo Moro

GST LLP

1875 I Street NW, 5" floor
Washington, DC 20006
United States of America

Representing Tenaris S.A. and Talta - Trading e
Marketing Sociedade Unipessoal LDA:

Mr. Nigel Blackaby

Mrs, Caroline Richard
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
US LLP

700 13th Street, NW, 10" floor
Washington, DC 20005

United States of America

Mr. Elliot Friedman

Mr. Ben Love

Mrs. Elizabeth Skeen
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
US LLP

601 Lexington Avenue,

31" floor

New York, NY 10022

United States of America

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 4 of 31

HI.

TV.

VI.

TABLE oF CONTENTS

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND.
SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

 
 

First Submission 5

 

First Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay
Second Submissi 9
Second Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay .......
Third ission 14
Third Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay
THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF.

 

nw wN

 

 

 

1. Venezuela’s Request for Relief.....

 

2. Respondents’ Request for Relief.
ANALYSIS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

 

 

The Legal Framework

 

 

2. Preliminary Considerations...........

3. The Burden of Proof.

4. Do Circumstances Exist that Require the Continuity of the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award? ..........

A. Damages Alleged by the Parties...

 

B. Difficulty in Recovering the Amounts Paid in Compliance with the
Award 23

a

 

Compliance with International Obligations

D. Weighting of How the Continuation or Lifting of the Stay
of Enforcement Affects the Parties

 

E. Stay of Enforcement of the Award Conditioned to the Granting

 

 

of a Bank G 26
COSTS 26
DECISION 27

 

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 5 of 31

This decision is issued concerning the request of the Bolivarian Republic of

 

Ve la (the “Appli or “Vi la”) to maintain the provisional stay of
enforcement of the award rendered on January 29, 2016 —including the Decision
on Rectification of the Award issued on June 24, 2016 (jointly, the “Award”) by
the tribunal composed of Messrs. John Beechey (President), Judd L. Kessler and
Toby Landau (the “Tribunal”) in ICSID Case No. ARB/11/26, initiated by
Tenaris SA and Talta - Trading e Marketing Sociedade Unipessoal LDA (the
“Respondents” in the annulment or “Tenaris and Talta” and, together with the

Applicant, the “parties”).
PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

On September 21, 2016, Venezuela submitted to the Secretary-General of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) an

application for annulment of the Award (the “Application for Annulment “).

Venezuela bases its Application for Annulment on the following grounds set forth
in Article 52 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States (“ICSID Convention”): (i) the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention);
(ii) the tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure (Article
52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention); and (Hi) the award failed to state the reasons
on which it was based (Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention).

The Request for Annulment included a request to stay the enforcement of the
Award until the ad hoc committee rendered its decision on the Application for
Annulment (the “Request for a Stay”) pursuant to Article 52 of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 54 of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

(“ICSID Arbitration Rules”).

On September 29, 2016, the Acting Secretary General registered the Application
for Annulment and notified the parties of the provisional stay of enforcement of

the Award pursuant to Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

On December 27, 2016, the Acting Secretary-General notified the parties of the
constitution of the ad hoc Committee (the “Committee”) in accordance with
Rule 52(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. The Committee is composed of

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 6 of 31

Dr. Andres Rigo Sureda (President), a national of Spain, appointed to the ICSID
Panel of Arbitrators by the Kingdom of Spain; Professor Piero Bemardini, a
national of Italy, appointed to the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators by the Italian
Republic; and Professor Diego P. Fernandez Arroyo, a national of Argentina and

Spain, appointed to the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators by the Argentine Republic.

7. On that same date, the parties were informed that the annulment procedure was
deemed to have been initiated in accordance with Rules 6 and 53 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules. The parties were also informed that Mrs. Ana Conover, ICSID

Legal Counsel, would serve as Secretary of the Committee.

8. By communications dated January 9 and 10, 2017, the parties informed the
Committee of their agreement to file three rounds of simultaneous submissions on
the subject of the stay of enforcement of the Award: on January 27, February 17,
and February 24, 2017 (the “Simultaneous Submissions on the Stay”). In
addition, the parties indicated to the Committee their agreement to hold a hearing
on the stay of enforcement of the Award (the “Hearing on the Stay”) in
March 2017.

9. By letter dated January 12, 2017, the Committee took note of the schedule of
Simultaneous Submissions on the Stay agreed by the parties and informed them of
its availability to hold the Hearing on the Stay on a date between 8 and 16 March
2017. In view of the foregoing, the Committee decided to extend the provisional
stay of enforcement of the Award until the parties presented their observations and

the Committee reached a final determination on this matter.

10. On January 27, 2017, in accordance with the timetable set by the parties,
Venezuela filed its first submission in support of the continuation of the
provisional stay of enforcement of the Award (“First Submission”). The First
Submission was accompanied by Annexes | to 5.

11. On the same date, Tenaris and Talta filed their first submission in opposition to the
continuation of the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award (“First
Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay”). The First Submission in
Opposition to the Request for a Stay includes exhibits C-313 to
C-338, and legal authorities CLA-60 to CLA-91.

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 7 of 31

12. On February 3, 2017, the Committee held its first session with the parties by
telephone conference. During the first session, the Committee Members and the
parties indicated their availability to hold the Hearing on the Stay on
March 16, 2017.

13. By letter dated February 6, 2017, the Committee set March 16, 2017 as the date
for the Hearing on the Stay. The Committee also proposed to hold a pre-hearing
organizational meeting (the “Organizational Meeting”) by telephone on
February 10, 2017 in order to resolve any outstanding procedural, administrative,

and logistical matters in preparation for the Hearing on the Stay.

14. By communications dated February 7-10, 2017, at the request of the Applicant, the
parties and the Committee agreed on an alternative date to hold the Organizational

Meeting.

15, On February 10, 2017, with the agreement of the parties, the Committee confirmed

that the Organizational Meeting would be held on February 15, 2017.

16. On February 15, 2017, the parties and the Committee held the Organizational
Meeting. On that same date, the Secretary of the Committee informed the parties
that, if payment of the first advance requested from Venezuela by letter of the
Centre dated December 28, 2016 (the “Advance Requested”) was not received by
February 24, 2017, ICSID would not be able to guarantee the provision of
simultaneous interpretation services or stenographic transcription services to the

parties during the Hearing on the Stay.

17. By letter of the same date, the Respondents requested that the procedure be
suspended for failure to pay the Advance Requested and “[a]s a consequence of
such a stay [they requested] that Venezuela’s pending request to stay enforcement

of the Award be rejected.”

18. On February 17, 2017, in accordance with the timetable set by the parties,
Venezuela filed its second submission in support of the continuation of the
provisional stay of enforcement of the Award (“Second Submission”). The
Second Submission includes exhibits R-169 to R-185, and legal authorities
RLA-145 to RLA-158.

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 8 of 31

19.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

On the same date, Tenaris and Talta filed their second submission in opposition to
the continuation of the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award (“Second
Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay”). The Second Submission
in Opposition to the Request for a Stay includes C-339 to
C-347, and legal authorities CLA-92 to CLA-96.

. On the same date, Venezuela expressed its opposition to Tenaris and Talta’s

request of February 15, 2017 to suspend the annulment proceedings and to lift the

stay of enforcement of the Award.

On February 22, 2017, the Committee informed the parties that if the Advance
Requested was not received by February 28, 2017, the Hearing on the Stay would
be deemed canceled. The Committee also informed the parties that in case the
Advance Requested was not received by March 9, 2017, the Committee may
consider deciding on the stay of enforcement of the Award without a hearing,

based on the parties’ three rounds of simultaneous submissions on this subject.

On February 24, 2017, after receiving a request for an extension from the
Respondents and observations of the Applicant on February 23, 2017, the
Committee granted an extension until February 28, 2017 for the parties to file their

third submissions on the stay of enforcement of the Award.

On February 28, 2017, in accordance with the extension granted by the Committee,
Venezuela filed its third submission in support of the continuation of the
provisional stay of enforcement of the Award (“Third Submission”). The Third
Submission includes exhibits R-186 to R-188, and legal authorities RLA-159 to
RLA-161.

On the same date, Tenaris and Talta filed their third submission in opposition to
the continuation of the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award (“Third
Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay”). The Third Submission
in Opposition to the Request for a Stay includes exhibits C-348 to
C-358, and legal authorities CLA-97 to CLA-106.

Also, by letter of February 28, 2017, with regard to the Committee’s
communication of February 22, 2017, Venezuela requested that the question of the

stay of the Award be presented at a hearing. Venezuela further requested that the

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 9 of 31

hearing be rescheduled for a new date after April 16, 2017, and that the stay of
enforcement of the award be maintained.

26. On March 1, 2017, in accordance with paragraph 21 above, the Hearing on the
Stay scheduled for March 16, 2017 was cancelled.

27. By letter of March 3, 2017, the Respondents expressed their opposition to
reschedule the Hearing on the Stay in view of the lack of payment of the Advance

Requested.

28.

oe

By letter of March 10, 2017, the Committee informed the parties that it would
proceed to issue its decision on the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award
given its priority under Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, without holding
a hearing on this issue. In addition, the Committee indicated that should it require
information from the parties beyond what was provided in the three rounds of

simultaneous submissions on this subject, it would request it in writing.
Il. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
1. First Submission

29.

S

Venezuela enumerates the defects of the Award: manifest excess of the Tribunal’s
powers, serious departure from fundamental rules of procedure, and failure to state
reasons. Venezuela also states that the right to request the annulment of a defective
award is an essential and fundamental aspect of the ICSID system. An integral
part of that right is the possibility of requesting a stay of enforcement of an award

until it is determined whether the award should be annulled.

30. According to Venezuela, this case does not present circumstances that should lead
to a departure from the vast majority of decisions of other annulment committees
in favor of maintaining the stay of enforcement. In this way, serious and
irreparable damage would be avoided for Venezuela, such as the costs of defending
itself against possible enforcement attempts or seizure of property. It would also
avoid the possibility of having to recover the payment of the Award if it is

annulled.

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 10 of 31

3

32.

we

34,

35.

1.

nv

a

Venezuela points out that these damages are not justified considering that Tenaris
and Talta already have the benefits offered by the ICSID system of automatic
enforcement of the Award before any of the national courts of the Member States
if the award is confirmed. In addition, Tenaris and Talta may count on the interest
granted in the Award that accumulates during this proceeding and that would

compensate for any possible damage caused by the delay.

Venezuela insists that Tenaris and Talta have the burden of substantiating their

request to lift the stay of enforcement since they are the party requesting it.

. Venezuela notes that the same counsel for Tenaris and Talta have agreed to

maintain a stay in the case Vestey Group Ltd. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and, therefore, saw no uncertainty or risk of non-payment of the award in that case.
Moreover, Venezuela has demonstrated its commitment to comply with its
international obligations, including its obligations to the Respondents to whom it
paid US$1.970 million for the expropriation of SIDOR. Based on these
considerations, Venezuela concludes: “the only intention pursued by the
[Respondents] with this discussion on the lifting of the stay is to pressure the
Republic to the early compliance of an unjust and deficient Award under
disadvantageous conditions for the country.*! Venezuela requests that the
Committee reject the request to lift the stay of enforcement of the Award and

maintain the stay until it decides on the Request for Annulment.

2. First Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay

The Respondents agree to stay the enforcement of the Award provided that
Venezuela grants them an appropriate security for compliance with the Award.
The Respondents request that the stay of enforcement be lifted only if Venezuela

does not comply with this condition.

The Respondents note that the Committee has discretion to continue the stay of
enforcement if circumstances so require. The continuation of the stay is
exceptional, it is not automatic and it corresponds to Venezuela to demonstrate the
circumstances that require it. Respondents list examples of the factors that

annulment committees have considered in deciding whether to continue the stay

' First Submission, J 23. Committee’s translation.

6

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 11 of 31

37.

38.

a

oo

of enforcement and note that, in the exercise of their wide discretion, annulment
committees have conditioned the stay, particularly where there is a high risk of

non-compliance with the Award.

. According to the Respondents, Venezuela has adopted an explicit policy of non-

compliance with adverse ICSID awards, as expressed by the highest reaches of the
Venezuelan government, particularly when Venezuela denounced the ICSID
Convention. The Respondents note that the annulment committee in the 012 case
paid particular attention to the decision of the Venezuelan Supreme Court of
Justice, which held that the conditions for arbitration under a treaty to which
Venezuela is a party must not be contrary to the Constitution;’ also, they observe
that in that same decision the Tribunal cites another decision of the same Chamber*
indicating that ICSID awards which are contrary to the Constitution are
unenforceable in Venezuela. The Respondents argue that such a position violates
Venezuela’s obligation to pay ICSID awards immediately and also its obligation
to structure its internal legal system to recognize and enforce ICSID awards
without further review. In these circumstances the Committee can have no
confidence that Venezuela will comply with the Award if it is confirmed and
therefore there is overwhelming justification for conditioning the continuation of

the stay to the conditions requested.

The Respondents describe the measures taken by Venezuela to thwart attempts to
recover adverse awards. The Respondents claim that they are unaware of any
compliance by Venezuela with any of the ICSID or Additional Facility awards
after President Chavez’s government. The Respondents also assert that this
circumstance alone would justify the rejection of Venezuela’s request to continue

the stay of enforcement without conditions.

According to the Respondents, the security they request will allow the payment of
the Award if it is not annulled and in the meantime will not require a transfer of
assets to the Respondents. The argument that the compound interest set forth in

the Award is sufficient compensation is not acceptable because it only covers the

2 01 European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25).
3 First Submission, A27, referring to the judgment of the Supreme Court of Justice (SCJ)
(Constitutional Chamber), Decision No. 1541, October 17, 2008 (C-316).

+ SCJ (Constitutional Chamber), Decision No. 1942, July 15, 2003 (C-317).

7

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 12 of 31

40.

delay in the payment of the Award if the stay of enforcement continues and the
Award is confirmed, but it does not protect against the risk that Venezuela refuses

payment. In addition, the long queue of creditors of previous awards and the

 

contraction of the Venezuelan economy create the possibility of Venezuela failing

to pay its sovereign debt.

. In anticipation of possible arguments of the Applicant, the Respondents contend

that granting a security would not unfairly advantage Respondents by constituting
payment in advance, nor would it wrongly penalize Venezuela for exercising its
right to seek annulment. In fact, a security is not a payment and the Respondents
would not receive it before it was due. Furthermore, the security does not represent
an advantage for the Respondents because it would only place them where they
would be if it were not for Venezuela’s routine disregard of Article 53 of the ICSID

Convention.

The Respondents also anticipate the fears of third-party attachment that Venezuela
may express. In that regard, the Respondents first allege that the jurisdiction of
the Committee is limited and that such jurisdiction would be exceeded if the
Committee refused to order the requested security out of concern for the indirect
consequences which the security may entail for Venezuela. In any case,
Respondents are as interested as Venezuela in not having the payment or security
intercepted by third parties and they propose a standby letter of credit or a bank
guarantee for the amount of the Award, issued or confirmed by a reputable
international bank with no principal establishment in Portugal, Luxembourg or
Venezuela, to be payable upon presentation of the Committee’s decision.
Respondents attach to their submission a proposal for such letter of credit.
Respondents explain that a security structured in such manner would not be subject
to attachment by Venezuela’s creditors because it would not be Venezuela’s
property, and any pledged collateral could remain in Venezuela; a letter of credit
is a promise by the issuing bank to pay from its own funds, not to hand over
someone else’s. In these circumstances, if the Award were annulled, Venezuela

would have no difficulty recovering the security it had provided.

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 13 of 31

41.

42.

44,

In the alternative, the Respondents request that the stay of enforcement be lifted.
According to the Respondents, there is ample justification to do so, given the
persistence of Venezuela’s non-compliance with its obligations under the ICSID

Convention.

3. Second Submission

Venezuela states that when the stay is requested together with the annulment of
the Award, Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention requires that it be granted.
Moreover, the party that opposes its continuation has the burden of justifying why

it should be interrupted and why a guarantee is necessary.

. Venezuela reiterates that it has the right to request the annulment of the Award and

that the near-unanimous practice of annulment committees has been to grant the
stay of enforcement of awards. According to Venezuela, there are no exceptional
circumstances that justify a deviation from that practice. Regarding the condition
of a bank guare la indic that a bank guara was requested in
only 14 cases of the 36 in which the stay of enforcement was conditionally granted.
In any case, the requirement of a guarantee or a security is exceptional because it
is not contemplated by the ICSID Convention. According to Venezuela, the

Respondents have not justified their need.

Venezuela criticizes the relevance of the decisions of other annulment committees
presented by the Respondents. Venezuela notes that annulment committees have
varied the weight given to evidence even when the same State was involved.
Venezuela argues that in its own experience as a respondent State in the course of
the last year and a half, four annulment committees decided differently even
though the proceedings concerned the same State. That is why Venezuela states:
“This Committee must reach its conclusions on the basis of the evidence and
arguments presented by the [Respondents] in this case, and the [Respondents]
cannot dispose of their burden with mere references to cases other than the present

case.”°

5 Second Submission, § 24. Committee's translation

9

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 14 of 31

45.

46.

47.

Venezuela notes that “the denunciation of the ICSID Convention falls within its
rights as a sovereign State, and cannot be interpreted as an indication of non-
compliance with an award,* ° particularly when Venezuela, despite the
denunciation, has continued to respect all pending proceedings and “has complied

with arbitration awards or reached amicable settlements with investors..." 7

 

Venezuela criticizes the reference to declarations of the ex-president Chavez for
being political declarations taken out of context. Venezuela explains that when
ex-president Chavez allegedly indicated that Venezuela would not recognize
ICSID decisions he was actually “referring to his understanding that Exxon Mobil

had already been compensated by the ICC award.**

Venezuela then questions the relevance of the Venezuelan courts decisions relied
upon by the Respondents to question Venezuela’s willingness to comply with the
Award. According to Venezuela, the citation of the Supreme Court of Justice? is
obiter dicta, and there is nothing controversial in the national courts’ position that
the enforcement of an arbitration award conflicts with the Constitution or public
order. Venezuela indicates that the judgment of the Supreme Court of Justice
“validates the binding force of the final award by mentioning that ‘no previous
exequatur process is required’; and in the same sense it recognizes that the
enforcement of the award, that is to say its application on specific assets, must
conform to the constitutional guidelines, as in fact all judgments to be enforced in

Venezuela must do.”!° In addition, Venezuela notes that the judicial decisions to

 

which reference is made predate the issuance of adverse ICSID rulings and in
subsequent years its courts have maintained their commitment to comply with

international obligations.

Venezuela indicates that the awards that the Respondents allege that Venezuela
did not comply with are awards subject to applications for annulment. Venezuela
argues that the initiation of remedies provided for in the ICSID Convention cannot

be considered as evidence of failure to comply with an award. On the contrary,

© ld.
7 Id.,f 33. Committee's translation.
8 Id.,32. Committee’s translation.
° SCJ (Constitutional Chamber), Decision No. 1942, July 15, 2003 (C-317).

' Second Submission, \ 37. Committee's translation. Emphasis in the original, internal citations
omitted.

f 30. Committee's translation.

 

10

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 15 of 31

48.

ow

49.

50.

“(t]he filing of the remedies implies a confirmation of the Republic’s commitment
to the standards of the Convention, and not the contrary.*"! Venezuela indicates

that in the Rusoro!?

case, the time limit to contest the award has not expired and in
the Tidewater"? case, the decision on the application for annulment was not issued
until December 29, 2016 and the Respondents have not provided any evidence that

the respective award will not be complied with.

Venezuela enumerates the cases in which it has negotiated settlement agreements
with its counterparts and concludes: “The fact that Venezuela has paid billions of
dollars to date in compliance with agreements with its creditors in multiple awards
is far from a ‘pattern of noncompliance [that] alone warrants a rejection of

Venezuela’s request for an unconditional stay ofenforcement' .”"4

Venezuela rejects the arguments that it has relocated assets of CITGO and PDVSA
to frustrate the payment to creditors of arbitration awards in the United States. It
questions the basis of these arguments, and alleges that they are based on
speculation. In any case, the Respondents are entitled to enforce the Award only
against Venezuela and not against such companies. Therefore, the Respondents’

arguments are not relevant.

With regard to the request for a security, Venezuela argues in the first place that it
is not the role of this Committee to guarantee compliance with the Award. The
powers of the Committee are limited to determining whether or not the Award is
to be annulled. In addition, it would be contrary to good faith to assume that
Venezuela will not comply with the decision that the Committee renders.
Venezuela notes that the ICSID Convention does not provide for the posting of
security as a price for the stay of enforcement, contrary to the provisions of the
New York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral
Awards of 1958. Venezuela also notes that Article 47 of the ICSID Convention is
not included in the list of provisions which apply mutatis mutandis to the

annulment proceeding.

'! Id., } 43. Committee’ s translation.
" Rusoro Mining Ltd. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/5).

8 Tidewater Investment SRL and Tidewater Caribe, CA v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/5).

' Second Submission, [J 47. Committee‘s partial translation.

11

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 16 of 31

Sl.

53.

54.

According to Venezuela, the granting of a security would put the investor in a
better position than the one before the request for stay of enforcement of the
Award. Venezuela indicates that the Respondents themselves acknowledge it by
arguing that due to the numerous arbitrations any delay in the moment in which
they may enforce the Award places them behind other creditors of Venezuela.
Venezuela asserts that “[i]t would be a distortion of the annulment process that a
claimant may take advantage of this situation to place itself in a more favorable

situation than other claimants within the framework of the ICSID Convention.”'°

Venezuela also rejects the argument of its economic situation to justify the request
of a security because, in certain instances, the existence of a critical economic
situation has been precisely used to justify not granting a security.

‘Venezuela emphasizes the risk that third parties may attach or access the funds that
could be granted as collateral in this proceeding. Venezuela puts into question
whether the letter of credit proposed by the Respondents is a solution since it is
unlikely that a bank will issue a letter of credit without the obligor providing funds

in an amount equal to that of the letter of credit.

4. Second Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay

The Respondents note that Venezuela’s arguments in its First Submission were
mostly anticipated by the Respondents in their First Submission in Opposition to
the Request for a Stay. The Respondents insist that Venezuela bears the burden of
demonstrating the circumstances meriting the continuation of the stay of
enforcement and has not done so. The Respondents conclude their argument in

this regard by stating:

“The decision for the present Committee, therefore, is not whether
Venezuela bears the burden of justifying a continued stay (it does),
whether conditional stays of enforcement are standard practice (they
are), or whether the Committee has the power to condition a stay of

enforcement on the provision of security (it does). Instead, the

'S Jd, }{ 73. Committee's translation.

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 17 of 31

question is whether the Committee should, in this case, exercise its

power to place conditions on a stay.”!®

55. According to the Respondents, Venezuela’s fears of irreparable harm are
unjustified because the Respondents’ proposal of a standby letter of credit or an
independent bank guarantee does not involve that the Respondents or third parties
would have access to the amount of the Award while the annulment proceeding is
ongoing. That is, Venezuela would not have to defend itself against enforcement
actions of the Award, nor would it have to recover payments made to the

Respondents in the event that the Award were annulled.

56. The Respondents argue that if the Committee decides to lift the stay without any
type of condition, Venezuela’s claim of irreparable damage due to having to
defend itself in enforcement proceedings demonstrates Venezuela's disdain for the
ICSID system; that is because awards are enforceable without possibility of
appealing them or subjecting them to other remedies. Moreover, Venezuela’s
claim that it would be difficult to recover any sums collected by the Respondents
is unfounded. The Respondents claim that they have sufficient assets in their
States of incorporation and elsewhere and undertake to return any sums collected

from Venezuela that are owing due to annulment.

57. The Respondents insist that Venezuela has an explicit policy of not complying
with ICSID awards. According to the Respondents, the cases Venezuela mentions
in support of its compliance with its international obligations do not in fact

demonstrate it and there is an objective risk of non-compliance.

58. The Respondents maintain that, contrary to what is alleged by Venezuela, the
continuation of the stay of enforcement is prejudicial to them. Moreover, the
interest accrued subsequent to the date of the Award does not compensate for the
risk of non-payment, and that would precisely be the risk faced by the Respondents
in this case.

59. Lastly, Respondents state that they have no ulterior motives for opposing the
Request for a Stay. According to the Respondents, there is no point in Venezuela’s

argument that Respondents’ counsel acts inconsistently simply because in the

' Second Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay, 9.

13

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 18 of 31

60.

Vestey '7

case they did not object to the continuation of the stay. Instead,
Respondents note that this case is relevant in another respect because, due to the
non-payment of the advance by Venezuela, the annulment committee in that case
simultaneously lifted the stay of enforcement and suspended the annulment
proceeding. The Respondents add that the same result should apply if this

proceeding is suspended even if the Respondents’ requests are not granted.

5. Third Submission

Venezuela insists on its arguments as to who bears the burden of proof and the lack
of damages to the Respondents for the continuation of the stay of enforcement
given the compound interest set forth in the Award and the evidence submitted by
Venezuela concerning its compliance with international obligations. In this regard,
Venezuela attaches a statement by the Attorney General addressed to the
Committee in which “fully in accordance with the powers granted to him by the
Constitution of the Republic, he emphatically confirms that the award will be
recognized if it is not annulled and will comply with its international

obligations.”!’ The Attorney General asserts:

“[I] confirm that, in the event that the Application for Annulment is
not successful, the Republic, in accordance with the terms of the
ICSID Convention, will recognize the mandatory nature of any
confirmed part of the award and will comply with any pecuniary

obligation established in the decision of the Annulment Committee.

In conclusion, and in view of the rights and prerogatives vested in me
by the Constitution of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, I
solemnly declare that the Republic maintains unaltered its
position of complying with all its international obligations,

including the Award dated January 29, 2016, issued in the

  

"” Vestey Group Lid v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/4).

'S Third Submission, § 40. Committee’s translation.

14

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 19 of 31

61.

62.

Nv

64.

referenced case, in the event that this honorable Annulment

Committee decides not to annul it in whole or in part.”!

Venezuela thoroughly discusses the defects of the Award that it considers manifest

 

and maintains that its compliance with settlement agreements reached with
multiple creditors shows that it complies with awards and its international
obligations.

According to Venezuela, the lifting of the stay of enforcement or the requirement
of a security for its continuation would cause harm to the Republic that cannot be
repaired with a subsequent rectification. In light of Respondents’ assertions,
Venezuela clarifies that when it alleges as damages the costs of defending itself it
refers to the enforcement procedures of the Award and not to proceedings where
it questions the validity of the Award in the courts of the Member States of the
ICSID Convention. Venezuela also notes the costs and difficulty of recovering
from the Respondents the value of the assets enforced if the Award is annulled
because they are holding companies. Venezuela further notes the costs of
establishing and maintaining the security in case it is required.

Venezuela notes the Committee’s statement with respect to deciding on the
continuation of the stay of enforcement of the Award based on the submissions of
the parties and not on the mere delay of payment and considers that this is the
minimum demanded by the procedural rights of the parties. However, Venezuela
maintains that the procedural rights of the parties also require that the dispute be
presented to the Committee at a hearing where the parties may respond to the
Committee’s questions. Venezuela recalls that it “has categorically reiterated that
it is doing everything possible to make the payments of the advances requested by

ICSID and has given a commitment to do so unconditionally.” ??

6. Third Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay

The Respondents insist on their arguments as to which party bears the burden of
proof, they argue that the Committee has the power to impose conditions on the

lifting of the stay of enforcement of the Award and insist that Venezuela has not

 R-188, emphasis in the original. Committee's translation.
0 Third Submission, 66. Committee’s translation.

15

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 20 of 31

6!

a

66.

67.

justified its request to continue the stay without conditions. The Respondents
again stress the failure to comply with ICSID awards and Venezuela’s policy of
not contributing to the costs of arbitrations filed against them. In that regard, the
Respondents cite the Attorney General’s communication to the Secretary-General
of ICSID informing her that “this Agency instructed all its representatives and
agents to refrain from making payments relating to arbitrations instituted against
our country, in the above-mentioned circumstances. In this regard, we hereby

inform you that no new payments will be made because they would be improper.’”!

. According to the Respondents, Venezuela's claims have not allayed concerns

regarding its willingness to comply given the statements from high-ranking
Venezuelan officials, including its former president and the position adopted by
the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice. The Respondents
explain: “The key issue [...] is that Venezuelan law gives judges the power to
review the merits of an ICSID award for compliance with Venezuelan
constitutional law (which is a test that ICSID awards will per se fail, according to
Venezuela’s own officials). That is clearly wrong: substantive review of ICSID

awards by domestic courts is not permitted under the ICSID Convention.”

The Respondents insist that Venezuela has not once complied with an adverse
award in the post-President Chavez era and that its arguments concerning post-
award settlements only confirm that Venezuela will not voluntarily pay the Award
in full if it is confirmed. The Respondents clarify that they do not contest
Venezuela's right to seek annulment of awards, but rather the fact that it seeks the
vacatur or annulment of every adverse award, even though these are exceptional

remedies.

The Respondents reiterate that the balance of interests favors their request for a
security if the stay of enforcement is maintained, and note that Venezuela has not
considered in its briefs how the structure of the security proposed by the
Respondents seeks to avoid the concerns expressed by Venezuela. The only

reasonable alternative is to lift the stay.

21 C.350. Letter dated April 26, 2013. Committee's translation.
2 Third Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay, 48. Emphasis in the original,
internal citation omitted.

16

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 21 of 31

Til, THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF
1. Venezuela’s Request for Relief

68. Venezuela requests that the Committee:

“(1) Maintain the stay of enforcement of the Award until the

Committee decides on the Request for Annulment of said Award;

(Il) Reject Tenaris and Talta’s request to impose a condition on

maintaining the stay of enforcement of the Award;

(IID) Reject Tenaris and Talta’s request to lift the stay of enforcement
of the Award.

(V) Order Tenaris and Talta to pay the costs related to this

procedure.*?>

2, Respondents’ Request for Relief

69. Respondents request that the Committee:

“(a) ORDER that the stay of enforcement be continued pending the
resolution of this application for annulment, on condition that
Venezuela post financial security sufficient to satisfy the Award in
full on the terms and conditions stated in Appendix A to the
[Respondents’ First Submission in Opposition to the Request for a
Stay], or as otherwise determined by the Committee, failing which

the stay of enforcement shall be lifted immediately;

(b) in the alternative to (a), above, ORDER that the stay of

enforcement be lifted immediately;

(c) AWARD the [Respondents] their full costs of this procedure; and

3 Third Submission, \ 67. Committee’s translation.

17

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 22 of 31

(d) AWARD any other relief to the [Respondents] deemed
5504

appropriate by the Committee.
IV. ANALYSIS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

1. The Legal Framework

70. The stay of enforcement of an award is governed by Article 52(5) of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. Article 52(5) provides:

“The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so
require, stay enforcement of the award pending its decision. If the
applicant requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his
application, enforcement shall be stayed provisionally until the

Committee rules on such request.”
71. Rule 54 titled “Stay of Enforcement of the Award” provides:

“(1) The party applying for the interpretation, revision or annulment
of an award may in its application, and either party may at any time
before the final disposition of the application, request a stay in the
enforcement of part or all of the award to which the application
relates. The Tribunal or Committee shall give priority to the

consideration of such a request.

(2) If an application for the revision or annulment of an award
contains a request for a stay of its enforcement, the Secretary-General
shall, together with the notice of registration, inform both parties of
the provisional stay of the award. As soon as the Tribunal or
Committee is constituted it shall, if either party requests, rule within
30 days on whether such stay should be continued; unless it decides

to continue the stay, it shall automatically be terminated.
(3) If a stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to

paragraph (1) or continued pursuant to paragraph (2), the Tribunal or

24 Third Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay, (81.

18

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 23 of 31

Committee may at any time modify or terminate the stay at the
request of either party, All stays shall automatically terminate on the
date on which a final decision is rendered on the application, except
that a Committee granting the partial annulment of an award may
order the temporary stay of enforcement of the unannulled portion in
order to give either party an opportunity to request any new Tribunal
constituted pursuant to Article 52(6) of the Convention to grant a stay

pursuant to Rule 55(3).

(4) A request pursuant to paragraph (1), (2) (second sentence) or (3)
shall specify the circumstances that require the stay or its
modification or termination. A request shall only be granted after the
Tribunal or Committee has given each party an opportunity of

presenting its observations.

(5) The Secretary-General shall promptly notify both parties of the
stay of enforcement of any award and of the modification or
termination of such a stay, which shall become effective on the date

on which he dispatches such notification.”

72. As the ICSID Convention is a treaty, to the extent that the Committee has to
interpret its provisions, the Committee will be guided by the principles of
international law expressed in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the

Law of Treaties.

73. In accordance with the aforementioned provisions of the ICSID Convention and
the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Committee may stay the enforcement of the
Award if circumstances so require after inviting the parties to submit their
observations. Neither the Convention nor the Arbitration Rules reveal what those

circumstances are nor the criteria for ass

 

sing their relative importance. The stay
of enforcement is the exception to the obligation to “abide by and comply with”
the award provided for in Article 53(1) of the Convention. Its exceptional nature

is expressed in the terms of this article:

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 24 of 31

74.

75.

76.

“The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to
any appeal or to any other remedy excep?” those provided for in this

Convention. [...]”

In other words, the stay is an exception in the context of a remedy that is already

extraordinary, as recognized by ICSID itself:

“The limited and exceptional nature of the annulment remedy
expressed in the drafting history of the Convention has been
repeatedly confirmed by ICSID Secretary-Generals in Reports to the
Administrative Council of ICSID, [...]”.7°

Within this legal framework, the Committee will consider the claims of the parties,
beginning with preliminary considerations in the light of the procedural
background and the parties’ arguments, followed by a consideration of the claims

regarding the burden of proof.

2, Preliminary Considerations

First, the Committee decided, as already described, to proceed to rule on whether
to continue the provisional stay of enforcement without a hearing after three rounds
of written submissions. While it is true, as Venezuela has pointed out, that the
hearing had been agreed by the parties, that agreement was superseded by the
Respondents’ request to lift the provisional stay at the same time that the
annulment proceedings were suspended as a result of the delay of Venezuela in
paying the Advance Requested by ICSID. In deciding to cancel the hearing and
issue this decision without a hearing, the Committee took into account the priority
it must give to decide on the Request for a Stay and that the parties have had on
three occasions the opportunity to express all their arguments and offer all their
evidence in writing. In addition, the Committee may at all times request further

information or request clarifications if it deems it nec

 

ssary.

5 Emphasis of the Committee.

2% Updated Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID,

May 5, 2016, 73. See footnote 137 that accompanies the cited text.

20

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 25 of 31

77.

78.

79.

80.

Second, it should be noted that the continuation of the stay of enforcement depends

on the circumstances of the particular case and on their assessment by the

 

Committee. The Committee is aware that in the vast majority of c the stay of
enforcement has continued without this implying a presumption favorable to its
continuation. Given the variety of situations and circumstances alleged by the
various parties, it always depends on how they are appreciated by the Committee.
Neither the ICSID Convention nor the ICSID Arbitration Rules provide guidelines

on how to assess or weigh the different circumstances.

 

Third, while Venezuela has described the defects of the Award in its submissions,
this is not the pertinent procedural moment for the Committee to consider them.
The circumstances that may dictate the need to continue or not the stay of
enforcement are normally independent of the relevance of the grounds of

alleged by the party on 1 The C i therefore

considers that it is not appropriate to analyze these grounds at this time.

Fourth, the parties have referred to decisions of annulment committees in other
cases involving Venezuela and other countries. The Committee seriously
considers the decisions of other committees that the parties have invoked, which

form part of their arguments, and which have been developing a body of case-law

 

in respect of investment law worthy of analys Nonetheless, the Committee
recalls that it is not obliged to follow any of these decisions and that it must decide
the issues in question, as a priority, on the basis of its own reasons and the specific

circumstances of the case.

3. The Burden of Proof

The parties disagree as to who bears the burden of proof in order to justify the
continuation of the stay and the condition of a security in the event that the decision
is favorable to the continuation of the stay. In the first place, the Committee notes
that while Venezuela requests the continuation of the stay, as recorded in
Procedural Order No. 1,7” the Respondents have asked that if such request is
granted by the Committee the continuation of the stay of enforcement is

conditioned on the posting of a security.

1122.1-
21

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 26 of 31

8

8

8

85.

1.

2.

a

4.

an

While it is true that Respondents have requested the lifting of the provisional stay
of enforcement, such request must be considered in the context of the provisional
nature of the stay granted by the Acting Secretary-General at the time of
registration of Venezuela’s Application for Annulment. Pursuant to Rule 54(2),
this provisional stay shall automatically be terminated unless the Committee
decides to continue the stay. That is, if Venezuela had not requested continuity,
the stay would be lifted without the need for the Respondents to request it.
Therefore, the party requesting its continuity must prove the circumstances that

warrants it.

Moreover, the party requesting a stay subject to conditions must prove that, under
the circumstances, the requested conditions are justified. In short, each party must

justify the claim it seeks.

4. Do Circumstances Exist that Require the Continuity of the Stay
of Enforcement of the Award?

. Under Rule 54(4), a request for stay shall specify the circumstances that require it.

As abovementioned, the parties start from conflicting premises on the question of
who must demonstrate if these circumstances exist. However, the simultaneous
filing of submissions in each of the rounds has forced each party to defend its
position on the possible allegations of the other party and to complement or
reinforce them in the subsequent round or rounds. The Committee will firstly
consider the alleged circumstances that justify the continuation of the stay of
enforcement of the Award and, secondly, whether a security should be required in
the event that the Committee decides to continue the stay.

The parties’ arguments concern the following circumstances as justification for the
continuation of the stay: the damages alleged by the parties, the likelihood of
having to recover the payment of the Award if it is annulled and Venezuela’s
compliance with its international obligations. The Committee will proceed to

consider each of these arguments and weigh their effect on the rights of the parties.

A. Damages Alleged by the Parties

While Venezuela alleges serious and irreparable damages for the costs of

defending itself from the enforcement of the Award and from damage to its

22

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 27 of 31

86.

87.

reputation, the Respondents contend that compound interest does not safeguard the
risk of non-compliance with the Award, since the delay in the compliance with the
Award puts the Respondents further back in the long line of Venezuela’s creditors.
In order to avoid these risks, the Respondents call for the granting of a bank

guarantee.

The enforcement of the Award carries costs for both parties, particularly if one of
them challenges it. The Committee has difficulty in considering the defense costs
of a possible enforcement among the risks incurred by one of the parties when both
parties are bound to comply with the Award. Compound interest may compensate
for the pure delay inherent to the annulment proceeding but not for other risks such
non-compliance with the Award in case it is confirmed. The Committee will
consider this other risk further on. Regarding the reputational damage to
Venezuela if this Committee lifts the stay, the Committee notes that it would not
be the first time that an annulment committee lifts a provisional stay of
enforcement of an award adverse to Venezuela,”* and it is part of the possible

actions to which any party is exposed in an annulment proceeding.

 

Ity in Recovering the Amounts P:

 

Compliance.

 

 

There is no indication in the record that the Respondents are not solvent or that
they will not voluntarily return the sums paid by Venezuela in compliance with the

Award if it were annulled. Venezuela bases i

 

s claims on the structure of the group
to which the Respondents belong and on their nature as holding companies. While
the Committee does not deny that this concern deserves consideration, in its
Second Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay, the Respondents have
clearly stated their willingness to return such sums if the Award was annulled:
“...to put the matter beyond any doubt, if the Award is annulled, the Claimants
hereby undertake to return any sums collected from Venezuela that are owing due

to annulment.’”?

28 See, for example, Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 07 European Group B.V.
v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25).

2° Second Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay, 15

23

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 28 of 31

88.

89.

C. Compliance with International Obligations

There is no doubt that Venezuela had the right to denounce the ICSID Convention.
The Committee also acknowledges Venezuela’s participation in the multiple
pending ICSID proceedings and does not question Venezuela’s eventual ability to
meet its obligations. The Committee does not need to analyze whether the
settlement agreements discussed by the parties constitute evidence of Venezuela’s
compliance with its international obligations, as it has become clear in this
proceeding that Venezuela has difficulty in advancing the sums to which it is
obliged for this proceeding to continue, a proceeding initiated by Venezuela with
costs well known by the Republic. The Committee does not need nor is it
competent to evaluate the economic situation of the country, but it is evident that
Venezuela, in the experience of this Committee, has limitations in its ability to pay
the costs of the proceeding in a timely manner. In any event, for whatever reason
beyond this Committee, it is objectively true that those payments have not been

completed.

 

Contrary to ICSID practice, the first session was held without receiving the
Advance Requested. Given the priority that the Committee must grant to decide
whether to continue the provisional stay of enforcement, the Committee, despite
the lack of funds, has gone ahead for the purpose of issuing this decision. Nearly
two months after the first session, the Advance Requested has not been received,

nor has Venezuela committed to make the payment by a specified date. The

Committee cannot fail to notice that this situation is repeated in three ongoing

 

i proceedings in which V la has requested i 30 all of them
stayed for non-payment of the advances required by ICSID, despite the fact that
their continuation should be in Venezuela’s interest. This is particularly worrying
because it fits with the non-payments to ICSID expressed by the Attorney General
to the Secretary-General of ICSID in 2013.7!

% These are the three annulment proceedings that are stayed for non-payment of the required

advances: Flughafen Zilrich A.G. and Gestion e Ingenieria IDC S.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/19), CLA-60; O/ European Group B.V_v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25), CLA-65; and Vestey Group Ltd v.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/4), CLA-347.

   

31. €.350. The Committee acknowledges that, by electronic communication dated March 2, 2017,
Venezuela authorized ICSID to transfer the remainder of outstanding repayments to Venezuela
from two accounts of previous ICSID cases into the account established for this annulment

24

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 29 of 31

90. The Committee recognizes the payment assurances of the Award clearly expressed

91.

directly to this Committee also by the Attorney General and cited in this decision.
However, these assurances should be considered in the context of previous
communications, such as the one mentioned in the previous paragraph and that of
the Ministry of Popular Power for Foreign Affairs denouncing the ICSID
Convention and informing that its national Constitution “invalidate[d], in its spirit

* These communications

and in its letter, the provisions of said Convention.”
concerning ICSID undermine the weight that the communication of the Attorney
General deserves, not because there is doubt about his word but there is doubt
about its effectiveness within the constitutional framework of the country. In view
of these considerations, the Committee does not need to analyze the relevance of

the claims on asset stripping exchanged between the parties.

D. Weighting of How the Continuation or Lifting of the Stay of
Enforcement Affects the Parties

In weighing how each party would be affected by the continuation of the
provisional stay of enforcement or its lifting, the Committee is aware that under
Rule 54(1) either party may request the stay of enforcement of the Award for the
duration of the annulment proceeding. It also takes into account that the
suspension of the annulment proceeding is imminent, as already announced to the
parties. That is, unless the provisional stay of enforcement is lifted, the suspension
of the annulment proceeding will entail the continuation of the provisional stay of
enforcement of the Award indefinitely until Venezuela decides to provide funds to
the case account or until the discontinuance of the proceeding under Rule 14(3)(d).
The Committee notes that the suspension of one of the pending annulment
proceedings dates back to July 8, 2016.** In this sense, the initiation of an
annulment proceeding becomes an instrument to postpone the exercise of the rights

recognized in the Award to the creditor thereof and leaves this exercise at the

proceeding. However, this is less than 10% of the Advance Requested and completely insufficient
to finance this proceeding.

» C315, cited by the Respondents in the First Submission in Opposition to the Request for a Stay,
125. Committee's translation,

3 It concerns the case Flughafen Zurich A.G. and Gestion e Ingenieria IDC S.A. v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/19), as indicated in ICSID’s website.

25

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 30 of 31

mercy of the will of one of the parties and not the decision of the Committee. The
Committee does not consider that this result can be offset by the compound interest
provided for in the Award nor this is the purpose of the stay of enforcement under
the ICSID Convention or the ICSID Arbitration Rules. In view of the Committee
and in the light of the other circumstances alleged by the parties and the
considerations made by the Committee with respect to each of them, the procedural
situation resulting from the continuation of the stay of enforcement when the

pension of the 1 procs is unbalances

the position of the parties. For these reasons, the Committee concludes that the

circumstances do not allow for the continuation of the provisional stay.

E. Stay of Enforcement of the Award Conditioned to the Granting of
a Bank Guarantee

92. The Respondents have requested that if the Committee decides not to lift the stay
of enforcement, it conditions the stay so that Venezuela provides a bank guarantee
in favor of the Respondents. In view of the Committee’s conclusion concerning
the circumstances which might justify the continuation of the stay, the imminence
of the suspension of the proceedings and the vehement opposition of Venezuela to
the requirement of such a guarantee, the Committee considers that the requirement
of a guarantee would involve prolonging this provisional situation at least until the
condition has been met or no longer met, increasing the costs of ICSID and the
Committee. It is therefore favorable to lift the stay of enforcement. Consequently
it would be irrelevant to consider here the arguments of the parties on whether the
Committee has the power to condition the stay of the enforcement of the Award

on the granting of a guarantee.

Vv. COSTS

93. Each party has sought in its request for relief that the Committee orders the other
party to pay the costs. The Committee considers it more appropriate to rule on this
request in its decision on the Request for Annulment when it will have a

comprehensive overview of the procedure.

26

Case 1:18-cv-01371-CRC Document 1-8 Filed 06/08/18 Page 31 of 31

VI. DECISION

94. For the reasons set out above, the Committee decides:
a) To lift the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award.

b) To reserve its decision on costs.

For and on behalf of the ad hoc Committee,

(\
qu Nas \ 2

Dr. Andres Rigo Sureda
President of the Committee
Date: 24 March 2017

27

