Global Affairs Canada Affaires mondiales Canada

 

Department of Justice Ministére de la Justice

CANADA

125 Sussex Drive

Ottawa, Ontario

KIA 0G2

February 4, 2020
VIA EMAIL
Mr. Cavinder Bull, SC Mr. Doak Bishop Sir Daniel Bethlehem
Drew & Napier LLC King & Spalding LLP ec
10 Collyer Quay 1100 Louisiana 20 Essex Street
10" Floor Ocean Financial Suite 4000 London, WC2R 3AL
Centre Houston, Texas 77002 DBethlehem @ 20essexst.c
Singapore 049315 dbishop @kslaw.com om
cavinder.bull @drewnapier
com

Dear Members of the Tribunal:
Re: Tennant Energy LLC v. Government of Canada

Canada respectfully requests a ruling from the Tribunal for permission to submit the following legal
authority into the record, and to allow the disputing parties, should the Tribunal wish, to make brief,
concise written submissions on the relevance of the decision to Canada’s Motion for Security for
Costs and Disclosure of Third-Party Funding:

Dirk Herzig as Insolvency Administrator over the Assets of Unionmatex
Industrieanlagen GmbH v. Turkmenistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/18/35)
Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Security for Costs and the
Claimant’s Request for Security for Claim, 27 January 2020.

This Decision was issued on January 27, 2020, and was publicly released today. As such, today is the
earliest opportunity for Canada to introduce the legal authority into the record. The legal authority
contains a decision by an international investment arbitration tribunal regarding the respondent
State’s request for security for costs. The tribunal’s reasoning and conclusion on this matter are
directly relevant to Canada’s Motion for Security for Costs and Disclosure of Third-Party Funding.

Canada notes that Article 8.4 of Procedural Order No. | provides that “the Tribunal shall not consider
any evidence that has not been introduced as part of the written submissions of the Parties. unless the
Tribunal grants leave on the basis of exceptional circumstances.” However, Article 8.4 does not apply
to requests to introduce new legal authorities. Thus, the Parties are not required to show “exceptional
circumstances” to submit new legal authorities into the record.

If the Tribunal admits this legal authority into the record, and wishes to hear submissions on the
matter, Canada proposes the following briefing schedule. Within five days of the Tribunal’s decision
to admit the legal authority, Canada will provide its written submission to the Tribunal. Canada will
append the new authority to this submission (with label RLA-1 12) and provide an updated cumulative
index. The Claimant will then have five days to file its response. In order to uphold the efficiency of
this arbitration, Canada requests that each party’s submission not exceed two pages in length.

Out of an abundance of caution, Canada has not annexed this authority, and will await the Tribunal’s
permission to have it admitted into the record.

Yours very truly,

ae

Heather Squires
Counsel
Trade Law Bureau

Ge! Barry Appleton, TennantClaimant@appletonlaw.com (Appleton & Associates)
Ed Mullins, Ben Love (Reed Smith LLP)
Christel Tham, Diana Pyrikova (Permanent Court of Arbitration)
Annie Ouellet, Alexandra Dosman, Susanna Kam, Mark Klaver, Johannie Dallaire. Maria Cristina
Harris (Trade Law Bureau)

