From: Jose Luis Aragon Cardiel

Sent: 10/02/2020 14:37:35

To: ‘pappleton@appletonlaw.com’; 'EMullins@reedsmith.com';
‘tennantclaimant@appletonlaw.com’; 'Ben Love’; 'sbustillos@reedsmith.com';
'Heather.Squires@international.gc.ca’; 'Mark.Klaver@international.gc.ca’;
‘Annie.OQuellet@international.gc.ca’; 'Susanna.Kam@international.gc.ca’;
‘MariaCristina.Harris@international.gc.ca’; 'Johannie.Dallaire@international.gc.ca’;
‘Benjamin. Tait@international.gc.ca’; 'Darian.Bakelaar@international.gc.ca’;
‘Alexandra. Dosman@international.gc.ca’

 

cc: "Cavinder Bull’; ‘Doak Bishop’; 'Daniel Bethlehem QC’; Christel Tham; Diana Pyrikova
BCC:
Subject: PCA Case No 2018-54 Tennant Energy LLC v. Government of Canada

Dear Mesdames, dear Sirs,
| look forward to assisting the Parties and the Tribunal during Ms. Tham’s temporary absence.

| write under the instructions of the Tribunal, further to the Respondent’s communications of 4 and 5
February 2020 and the Claimant’s communication of 4 February 2020.

In its 4 February communication, the Respondent requests leave to submit a legal authority into the
record and allow the disputing parties to make written submissions thereon. The legal authority in
question is the Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Security for Costs and the Claimant’s Request
for Security for Claim, dated 27 January 2020, in the matter Dirk Herzig as Insolvency Administrator over
the Assets of Unionmatex Industrieanlagen GmbH v. Turkmenistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/18/35) (the
“Decision in Dirk Herzig”).

Having considered the Parties’ respective positions, and seeing that the Decision in Dirk Herzig is
available in the public domain, the Tribunal has decided to grant the Respondent’s request. The
Respondent shall file the Decision in Dirk Herzig, together with any comments thereon not exceeding 2
pages in length, by no later than Monday, 17 February 2020 . The Claimant may submit any comments it
may have on the Decision in Dirk Herzig (also not exceeding 2 pages) within 5 days from the
Respondent's filing of the said Decision and accompanying comments.

Yours sincerely,

José Luis Aragon Cardiel

Legal Counsel = Conseiller juridique

Permanent Court of Arbitration * Cour permanente d'arbitrage
Peace Palace « Palais de la Paix

Carnegieplein 2

2517 KJ The Hague * La Haye

The Netherlands © Pays-Bas

Tel: +31 70 302-4155 (direct * directe)

Fax: +31 70 302-4167

URL: http://www.pca-cpa.org

tee

This email and any attachments may be confidential. Please notify us immediately if you have received

this email or any attachment in error.
ke

Ce courriel, ainsi que toute piéce jointe, peut étre confidentiel. Si vous avez recu ce message ou toute
piéce jointe par erreur, veuillez nous en aviser immédiatement.
whe

