INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between

TETHYAN COPPER COMPANY PTy LIMITED

Claimant

and

THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

 

DECISION ON CLAIMANT’S REQUEST FOR
PROVISIONAL MEASURES

 

Members of the Tribunal
Dr. Klaus Sachs, President
Lord Hoffmann, Arbitrator
Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 13 December 2012

CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

A. THE PARTIES. 1
I. Claimant 1
II. Respondent. 1

B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 1

C. BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE........cccsssssssssssessessesnessessscencencencenceneeneeseeneenneeneenees 6

D. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

‘s

I. Summary of Claimant’s Position
1. Authority of the Tribunal to Grant Provisional Measures ............cccceeeeeeeeeeee
2. Right to Mine Reko Diq

3. Right to Specific Performance...
4. Circumstances Warranting Provisional Measures

II. Summary of Respondent’s Position

1. No Authority of the Tribunal to Grant Provisional Measures ............0::ceeeeeeee
2. No Right to Mine Reko Diq
3. No Legitimate Expectation
4.
5

 

No Right to Specific Performance....
Circumstances Do Not Warrant Provisional Measures .............c.cccceceseeseseeseseeees

Ill. The Parties’ Requests for Relief

1. Claimant’s Request for Relief.
2. Respondent’s Request for Relief... ccc ceeeeesee es eeesceeeseeeeeeeeeeeeensnenenes

DECISION BY THE TRIBUNAL
I. _ Legal Framework for the Recommendation of Provisional Measures .................5.
IL Prima Facie Jurisdiction of the Tribumal...........0.ccccccscscssesseeeteseeteseeeseeeseeeeeenes

Ill. Interim Measures for Preserving Claimant’s Asserted Right to Mine Reko Dig...

1. Right to be Preserved

 

2. Circumstances Requiring Provisional Measures ............ccccceeeeeeeseeeeeseseeeeeees

IV. Decision

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

THE PARTIES

Claimant

Tethyan Copper Company Pty Limited, a company constituted and registered
under the laws of Australia and owned in equal shares by Antofagasta plc, a
company incorporated in the United Kingdom with its headquarters in Chile, and
Barrick Gold Corporation, a company incorporated in Canada, hereinafter referred to
as “Claimant” or “TCCA”, represented in this arbitration by its duly authorized
attorneys Debevoise & Plimpton LLP. Counsel for Claimant are Messrs. Donald
Francis Donovan, Mark W. Friedman and Dietmar W. Prager and Ms. Natalie L.
Reid of the New York office (919 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022, U.S.A.) and
Lord Goldsmith QC and Mr. Matthew H. Getz of the London office (Tower 42, Old
Broad Street, London, EC2N 1HQ, United Kingdom).

Respondent

The Islamic Republic of Pakistan, hereinafter referred to as “Respondent” or
“Pakistan”, represented in this arbitration by its duly authorized attorneys Mr.
Ahmer Bilal Soofi, and Mr. Arthur Marriott QC of M/s ABS & Co. (12 Embassy
Road (6th Avenue), Sector G-6/4, Islamabad, Pakistan); Ms. Mahnaz Malik and Mr.
John Kingston of 12 Gray’s Inn Square (London WC IR SJP, United Kingdom); and
Ms. Cherie Blair QC of Matrix Chambers (Griffin Building, Gray’s Inn, London WC
1R SLN, United Kingdom).

Claimant and Respondent are hereinafter referred to individually as a “Party” and

collectively as the “Parties”.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 28 November 2011, Claimant filed its Request for Arbitration with the Secretary-

General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”)

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

pursuant to Article 36 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States (“ICSID Convention”). In its Request
for Arbitration, Claimant referenced Article 13(3)(a) of the Agreement between
Australia and the Islamic Republic of Pakistan on the Promotion and Protection of
Investments, signed 7 February 1998 and entered into force 14 October 1998
(“Australia-Pakistan Treaty”; Exhibit CE-4) as Respondent’s written consent to

arbitration.

5. On 12 January 2012, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered Claimant’s Request

for Arbitration.

6. By letter dated 18 May 2012, Claimant informed the Secretary-General of ICSID
(“Secretary-General”) that it appointed Mr. John Beechey as an arbitrator pursuant
to Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. Mr. Beechey accepted his appointment
on 1 June 2012 and made a declaration pursuant to Rule 6(2) of the Rules of

Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”).

7. On 12 June 2012, Respondent appointed as arbitrator Lord Hoffmann, who accepted
his appointment on the following day. In separate letters dated 9 July 2012, the
Parties jointly consented to the appointment of Dr. Klaus Sachs as the President of

the Tribunal, who accepted his appointment as presiding arbitrator on 12 July 2012.

8. On 12 July 2012, the Tribunal was constituted in accordance with Article 37(2)(b) of
the ICSID Convention.

9. On 23 July 2012, Respondent filed a proposal to disqualify Mr. Beechey from the
Arbitral Tribunal under Article 57 of the ICSID Convention (“Disqualification
Proposal”). Subsequently, the ICSID Secretariat (the “Secretariat”) informed the
Tribunal that the proceedings were suspended pursuant to Rule 9(6) of the

Arbitration Rules.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

On the same date but after the submission of Respondent’s Disqualification Proposal,
Claimant filed a Request for Provisional Measures (the “Request’). The Secretariat
informed the Parties that, in light of the suspension of the proceedings, Claimant's

submission would be sent to the Tribunal once the proceedings resumed.

Submissions were made on the Disqualification Proposal by Mr. Beechey and both
Parties. In addition, the unchallenged Members of the Tribunal scheduled a hearing
on the Disqualification Proposal, to be held at the International Dispute Resolution

Centre in London on 8 September 2012.

By letter dated 6 September 2012, Claimant informed the unchallenged Members of
the Tribunal that the Parties had jointly requested Mr. Beechey to resign from the
Tribunal and that he had complied with this request. Claimant also expressed its
consent to Mr. Beechey’s resignation. By letter of the same date, Respondent
informed the unchallenged Members of the Tribunal that it accepted Mr. Beechey’s
resignation from the Tribunal. Respondent stated that its consent was without
prejudice to objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, which it might raise at a

later stage of the proceedings.

By letter dated 7 September 2012, the unchallenged Members of the Tribunal
informed the Secretary-General of their consent to Mr. Beechey’s resignation. By
letter of the same date, the Secretariat informed the Parties hereof and invited
Claimant to appoint an arbitrator pursuant to Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID

Convention in order to fill the vacancy resulting from Mr. Beechey’s resignation.

By letter of 6 September 2012, Respondent informed the Secretary-General that it
would consent to Claimant’s appointment of Mr. Stanimir Alexandrov as an
arbitrator if he confirmed the disclosure which he had provided to Respondent in

advance.

By letter of 7 September 2012, Claimant informed the Secretary-General that it

appointed Mr. Alexandrov as an arbitrator.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

16.

20.

21.

22.

On 10 September 2012, Mr. Alexandrov accepted his appointment and confirmed the

disclosure which he had previously made to Respondent.

By email of the same date, the Secretariat informed the Tribunal that the proceedings
would resume pursuant to Rule 12 of the Arbitration Rules from the point which they
had reached at the time the vacancy on the Tribunal had occurred. The Secretariat
provided the reconstituted Tribunal with Claimant’s Request and Exhibits CE-37 to
CE-149 as well as the Witness Statements of Messrs. Timothy Livesey and Robert

Kremarov.

Under cover of a letter dated 11 September 2012, Claimant submitted corrected

versions of Exhibits CE-99 and CE-128.

By letter dated 14 September 2012, the Secretariat, on behalf of the Tribunal,
confirmed that the hearing on the Request (the “Hearing”) would be held at the

International Dispute Resolution Centre in London on 6 November 2012.

Under cover of a letter dated 1 October 2012, Respondent submitted its Response to
Claimant’s Request for Provisional Measures ("Response") with Exhibits RE-1 to
RE-11 and Legal Authorities RLA-1 to RLA-6, as well as the Witness Statement of

Dr. Samar Mubarakmand and its annexes.

On 15 October 2012, Claimant submitted its Reply on Provisional Measures
(“Reply”) together with the Second Witness Statement of Mr. Timothy Livesey. In
the Reply, Claimant renewed its request that, given the imminent nature of the harm
anticipated by Claimant, the Tribunal immediately grant the requested provisional

measures as a temporary restraint pending disposition of the Request.

By letter dated 18 October 2012, the Secretariat informed the Parties of the
Tribunal’s decision that the Tribunal would not decide on the requested relief before
having received Respondent’s Rejoinder and having heard both Parties’ arguments at

the oral hearing.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

Under cover of a letter dated 29 October 2012, Respondent submitted the Rejoinder
(titled “Respondent’s Answer to the Claimant’s Reply”; “Rejoinder”), together with
Exhibits RE-12 and RE-13 and Legal Authorities RLA-7 to RLA-10.

By letter dated 31 October 2012, the Secretariat, on behalf of the Tribunal, requested
that Respondent inform the Tribunal and Counsel for Claimant whether Respondent
intended to cross-examine Messrs. Livesey and Kremarov during the Hearing. By

letter of the same date, Respondent confirmed that it did not intend to do so.

Under cover of a letter dated 3 November 2012, Claimant submitted Exhibits CE-181
and CE-182.

By two separate emails of 5 November 2012, Respondent submitted Exhibit RE-15
and provided page 46 of its Exhibit RE-1.

The Hearing was held on 6 November 2012. Respondent’s witness Dr. Samar

Mubarakmand was cross-examined during the Hearing.

Under cover of a letter dated 13 November 2012, Claimant submitted the Third

Witness Statement of Mr. Timothy Livesey.

On 19 November 2012, Respondent submitted its comments on the Third Witness

Statement of Mr. Timothy Livesey.

By letter dated 28 November 2012, Claimant, upon direction by the Tribunal, and in
response to Respondent’s letter of 22 November 2012, stated its position on a cross-
undertaking and security in the event that the Tribunal were inclined to grant the

Request.

By letter dated 30 November 2012, Respondent replied to Claimant’s letter dated 28
November 2012.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

32.

33.

34.

35.

BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE

This section briefly sets out the background of the dispute as derived from the briefs
and evidence submitted by the Parties at this preliminary stage of the arbitral
proceedings. This factual summary should not, therefore, be taken as the Tribunal’s
prejudgment of any issues of fact or law to be resolved at a later stage of the

proceedings.

On 29 July 1993, BHP Minerals International Exploration Inc. (“BHP”) and the
Balochistan Development Authority (“BDA”), a statutory corporation of the Province
of Balochistan in Pakistan (“Balochistan”), entered into the Agreement for Chagai
Hills Exploration Joint Venture (“CHEJVA”; Exhibit CE-1), which established the
unincorporated contractual Chagai Hills Exploration Joint Venture (the “Joint
Venture”) with the purpose of exploring for deposits of gold, copper and other
materials in the Chagai district of Balochistan. Pursuant to the terms of the CHEJVA,
BDA held a 25% ownership interest in the Joint Venture, while BHP held a 75%
interest in return for agreeing to fund the costs of exploration and any feasibility

studies to be conducted under the CHEJVA.

The statutory legal regime which regulates the exploration and mining activities is
contained in the 2002 Balochistan Mineral Rules (“BM Rules”; Exhibit CE-5). The
BM Rules provide, inter alia, that the Technical Head of the Directorate General of
Mines and Minerals (the “Licensing Authority”) is the authority to which
applications for mineral titles or mineral concessions should be submitted and which
is empowered to grant mineral titles and mineral concessions pursuant to the BM

Rules.

On 4 March 2000, the Government of Balochistan, BHP and BDA entered into the
Addendum No. | to the CHEJVA (“Addendum No. 1”; Exhibit CE-2) pursuant to
which the Government of Balochistan and BHP confirmed their intention that all
references to BDA in the CHEJVA were deemed to refer to the Government of

Balochistan. Based on two other contracts, an Option Agreement and an Alliance

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

36.

37.

38.

39.

Agreement with BHP (Exhibits CE-12 and CE-15), Claimant subsequently took

over from BHP the exploration activities in the Chagai Hills exploration area.

On 30 November 2000, Claimant established Tethyan Copper Company Pakistan
(Private) Limited (“TCCP”) as its wholly owned Pakistani subsidiary (Claimant and
TCCP are collectively referred to as “TCC”).

In May 2002, the Licensing Authority granted “M/S. BDA/BHP Chagai Hills Joint
Venture”, i.e., the Joint Venture, the Exploration License EL-5 (“License EL-5”;
Exhibit CE-16), which originally covered 973.75 square kilometers in the Reko Diq
area. License EL-5 was initially granted for a period of three years from 21 February
2002 to 20 February 2005 and was subsequently renewed on two occasions through
19 February 2011. The area covered by License EL-S was reduced first to 482.72
square kilometers and then to 435.02 square kilometers (Exhibits CE-17 and
CE-20).

On 1 April 2006, Claimant became a party to the CHEJVA pursuant to a Novation
Agreement with the Government of Balochistan and BHP (the “Novation
Agreement”, Exhibit CE-3), and replaced BHP as a party to the CHEJVA with a
75% interest in both the Joint Venture and its principal asset, License EL-5. Claimant
then transferred its mining rights, including the 75% interest in License EL-5 and
certain other assets and liabilities, to TCCP (Exhibit CE-21). The remaining 25%

continued to be held by the Government of Balochistan.

From 2006, Claimant together with TCCP carried out an exploration program, as
envisaged by Clause 7 of the CHEJVA, in the Exploration Area delineated in
Schedule B of the CHEJVA, known as “Reko Dig’! Part of Reko Dig is the deposits
Tanjeel (H4) and the Western Porphyries (H13, H14 and H15).

' Request, para. 38 et passim.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

40.

Al.

42.

In early January 2009, the Chinese state-owned company China Metallurgical Group
Corporation (“MCC”), which operates a mine close to Reko Dig, was invited to
submit a financial and technical proposal for Reko Diq to the joint Government of
Balochistan/Government of Pakistan Reko Diq Steering Committee (Exhibit CE-
69). Beginning in May 2009, while Claimant was carrying out its exploration
program, Balochistan and the Federal Government also began to consider an
alternative proposal for Reko Diq submitted by Dr. Samar Mubarakmand (“PC-1
Proposal’), which provided, inter alia, for the construction of a smelter in the Reko

Dig area.

On 26 August 2010, after completing a scoping study in October 2007 (analyzing
fourteen project development paths and recommending four options), a pre-
feasibility study in July 2009 (focusing on a base case configuration centered around
the Western Porphyries but also including a significant amount of analysis regarding
Tanjeel) and an expansion pre-feasibility study in July 2010 (envisaging an
expansion to Tanjeel and H13 in the sixth year of the mining operation), TCC
formally submitted the feasibility study envisaged in the CHEJVA (the “Feasibility
Study”) to the Government of Balochistan. The Feasibility Study examined the
technical and economic feasibility of a base case mining project centered on the
Western Porphyries and also contemplated its future expansion to Tanjeel and other

adjacent ore bodies.

On 6 November 2010, a Pakistani attorney, M. Tariq Asad, filed a constitutional
petition (Exhibit CE-172) before the Supreme Court of Pakistan against the Federal
Government, the Provincial Government and other respondents, including Dr. Samar
Mubarakmand, requesting the Court to, inter alia: (i) direct the Federal Government
through its Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Resources, the Chief Secretary of
Balochistan, the Head of the Department of Mines and Mineral Development of
Balochistan, the Steering Committee and the Board of Revenue of Balochistan to
refrain from issuing a mining license in an arbitrary and unlawful manner and
without the consultation of the Parliament of Balochistan; (ii) direct the Federal
Government, the Chief Secretary of Balochistan and the Head of the Department of

Mines and Mineral Development of Balochistan to explain why the mining process

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

43.

44.

4S.

46.

could not have been carried out by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Resources
and Mining Department, and why such efforts had not been made thus far; and
(iii) further direct these three respondents to complete the whole process of gold
mining, either independently or with the joint venture, within Pakistan territory and
restrain them from taking the raw material out of Pakistan, so that the entire process

could take place in Pakistan.

On 8 November 2010, a number of Pakistani politicians filed an additional petition

with the Supreme Court of Pakistan (Exhibit CE-173).

Under Clause 11.3.1 of the CHEJVA, each party had 90 days after submission of the
Feasibility Study to notify the Manager of the CHEJVA in writing “whether it
intend[ed] to participate in development of the (...) Mineral deposit as a Mining
Area.” On 8 November 2010, Claimant and TCCP provided notice to the
Government of Balochistan of their election to participate in the development of
Reko Dig (Exhibit C-23). The Government of Balochistan, for its part, did not make
such an election within the mandated 90-day period. By letter to TCCP dated
28 March 2011 (Exhibit CE-114), the Government of Balochistan stated instead that
it could not discuss participation in the mine development or consider a joint mining
lease application due to third-party challenges to the CHEJVA pending before the

Supreme Court of Pakistan.

On 3 December 2010, Dr. Samar Mubarakmand gave an interview to the Pakistani
television station Duniya TV. When the two interviewers suggested that Balochistan
should be giving mining contracts relating to Reko Diq to local companies rather
than to outsiders so that the flow of money could remain within Pakistan rather than
going to foreign companies, Dr. Mubarakmand stated in response that this was the
reason he had developed a technical project and presented it to the Chief Minister of

Balochistan (Exhibit CE-105).

The PC-1 Proposal to the Executive Committee of the National Economic Council

was submitted by Balochistan on 10 December 2009 (Exhibit CE-112), and

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

approval of the proposal was granted by decision of 9 December 2010 (Exhibit CE-
106), following which 8.812 billion rupees were allocated to the project. This project

is also referred to as the “Balochistan Copper/Gold Project”.

On 15 December 2010, Dr. Samar Mubarakmand stated in a television interview that
TCC had completed its exploration work and provided a feasibility report.
Dr. Mubarakmand further noted that the decision on whether TCC would be granted
a mining lease would be made by the Government of Balochistan “as these deposits

belong to them.” (Exhibit CE-108).

On 15 February 2011, on Claimant’s instructions, TCCP submitted to the Licensing
Authority an Application for a Mining Lease (“Application”) in respect of a portion
of Reko Dig of just less than 100 square kilometers situated within the boundaries of
License EL-5 (Exhibit CE-6). The Application was supported by the Feasibility
Study and other documents required by the BM Rules.

On 3 March 2011, TCC notified the Government of Balochistan of Claimant’s
intention to purchase the Government’s 25% interest in the Reko Dig project in order

to pursue the project as the sole Participating Party pursuant to the CHEJVA.

On 15 September 2011, The Wall Street Journal reported that an unnamed Chinese
company had approached the Government of Balochistan with a proposal for mine

development at Reko Dig (Exhibit CE-25).

On 21 September 2011, the Licensing Authority issued a notice of its intent to reject
Claimant’s Application (the “Notice”; Exhibit CE-7) as “not satisfactory” and

granted Claimant 30 days to submit a response.

On 19 October 2011, Claimant submitted its Response to the Notice (Exhibit CE-8).
On the same date, Claimant also submitted a Notice of Dispute under the CHEJVA
to the Government of Balochistan (Exhibit CE-9), which invited the Government to

enter into consultations to reach an amicable resolution of the dispute. In a letter sent

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

53.

54.

55.

the following day, Claimant further informed Respondent that a denial of the Mining
Lease would deprive Claimant of its investment in the Reko Diq project and
constitute an expropriation within the meaning of Article 7 of the Australia-Pakistan

Treaty.

By order of 15 November 2011, the Licensing Authority rejected Claimant’s
Application (Exhibit CE-11). On 28 November 2011, TCCP filed an administrative
appeal against the order (Exhibit CE-36). On 23 February 2012, a day after the
Balochistan Mines & Mineral Development Department of the Licensing Authority
(“MMDD’) submitted its reply to TCCP’s administrative appeal (Exhibit CE-129),
the Parties were informed that the appeal would be heard approximately two weeks
later. The next day, however, the Supreme Court of Pakistan ordered the Licensing
Authority to decide on the appeal on 3 March 2012 (Exhibit CE-131). Following a
hearing on 2 and 3 March 2012, TCCP learned that its administrative appeal had
been denied by order of 3 March 2012 (Exhibit CE-137).

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

This section contains a short summary of the Parties’ respective positions. As with
the summary of the dispute set out in the preceding section, this summary should not
be regarded as the Tribunal’s prejudgment of any issues of fact or law that are to be

resolved at a later stage of these proceedings.

Summary of Claimant’s Position

Claimant contends that through exploration and feasibility activities which have
consumed over ten years and hundreds of millions of dollars, Claimant and TCCP
have done everything necessary to earn a legal entitlement to a mining lease for Reko
Diq. Claimant claims that Balochistan has denied the mining lease and is now
moving to either develop Reko Dig on its own, or to transfer some or all of it to third
parties. Claimant asserts that Respondent and Balochistan have deprived Claimant of

its right to a mining lease in breach of the Australia-Pakistan Treaty and that they

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

56.

57.

58.

threaten to make this deprivation permanent unless the Tribunal grants the

provisional measures Claimant seeks.”

Authority of the Tribunal to Grant Provisional Measures

Claimant submits that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to recommend provisional
measures pursuant to Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the
Arbitration Rules. Claimant submits that the Tribunal merely needs to have prima
facie jurisdiction on the merits in order to recommend provisional measures.
According to Claimant, such prima facie jurisdiction is established pursuant to
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and Article 13 of the Australia-Pakistan Treaty
because (i) Claimant tried, but failed, to resolve the dispute with Respondent through
negotiations pursuant to Article 13(1) of the Australia-Pakistan Treaty; (ii) Claimant
is an Australian “investor” under Articles 1(1)(c) and (d) of the Australia-Pakistan
Treaty; (iii) Claimant holds a protected “investment” within the meaning of
Articles 1(1)(a) and 2(3) of the Australia-Pakistan Treaty, and the dispute relates to
and arises directly out of this “investment” within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the
ICSID Convention; and (iv) the Parties consented to the jurisdiction of ICSID in

accordance with Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.?

Claimant states that it is a well-established principle laid down by the jurisprudence
of ICSID tribunals that the provisional measures “recommended” by an ICSID

tribunal are legally compulsory.*

Right to Mine Reko Diq

Claimant submits that the right that it requests the Tribunal to preserve through

provisional measures is Claimant’s right to mine in Reko Diq and benefit from its

? Request, paras. 112 et seq.
5 Request, paras. 119 et seq.
+ Request, para. 118.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

59.

60.

61.

62.

alleged investments there.” Claimant contends that it not only satisfied but in fact
exceeded the requirements for being granted a mining lease as set forth under the
CHEJVA and the BM Rules.° Claimant submits that the Licensing Authority’s
discretion under the BM Rules is limited to determining whether the license
applicant has satisfied what the CHEJVA describes as “routine Government

requirements”. 1

Claimant asserts that Balochistan denied its Application on unsupportable grounds.
Claimant states that the Licensing Authority manifestly failed to exercise its
discretion appropriately. Claimant alleges that Balochistan and Respondent planned

to obtain the expert feasibility work from Claimant and then oust it from Reko Diq.*

Claimant rejects as a mischaracterization Respondent’s assertion that the Licensing
Authority’s rejection of Claimant’s application was “overseen” by the Supreme
Court of Pakistan, and argues that, instead, the Court suspended its own proceedings
on the ground that this matter fell within the domain of the Government of

Balochistan.’

Claimant submits that the BM Rules did not require TCC to undertake a full
feasibility study of all the discovered deposits in the proposed Mining Area.'°
Further, Claimant asserts that neither the CHEJVA nor the BM Rules require an

applicant to limit the scope of the mining lease to a single deposit. "

Claimant submits that, without the mining lease, it cannot further develop Reko Diq
and therefore cannot earn any return on its considerable investments: its investments

will be destroyed and its legitimate expectations denied.'? Claimant also submits that

* Request, para. 129.

® Request, paras. 129 et seq.; Reply, paras. 62 et seq.
7 Reply, para. 67.

® Request, paras. 132 et seq.; Reply, paras. 68 et seq.
° Reply, paras. 72 et seq.

'° Reply, para. 83.

" Reply, para. 87.

° Request, para. 133.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

63.

64.

65.

66.

it has at this stage established at least a prima facie case that it has a right to mine

Reko Dig and, accordingly, is entitled to specific performance enforcing that right. 8B

Right to Specific Performance

Claimant seeks provisional measures to preserve the right to specific performance as

a remedy for Respondent’s alleged breaches of the Australia-Pakistan Treaty. 4

Claimant submits that nothing in the Australia-Pakistan Treaty or the ICSID
Convention prevents an investor from seeking restitution in the form of specific
performance instead of through monetary compensation. To hold otherwise would
render meaningless the specific conditions under which an expropriation is permitted

under Article 7 of the Australia-Pakistan Treaty. is

Claimant states that international law provides for “restitution”, which includes
specific performance, as a “preferred” remedy unless it is “materially impossible or
wholly disproportionate”. In support of this statement, Claimant relies on Article 35
of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility and the award in CMS v. Argentina’
(Exhibit CA-15).

Claimant also looks to the Decision on Jurisdiction in Enron'’ (Exhibit CA-16),
where the arbitral tribunal observed that “[a]n examination of the powers of
international courts and tribunals to order measures concerning performance or
injunction and of the ample practice that is available in this respect, leaves this

Tribunal in no doubt about the fact that these powers are indeed available.”

8 Request, para. 135; Reply, para. 61.

"4 Reply, para. 61.

'S Reply, para. 92.

‘6 CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentina, Award of 12 May 2005, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8;
Request, para. 134; Reply, paras. 90 er seq.

'T Enron Corp. and Ponderosa Assets v. Argentine Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction of 14 January 2004,
ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

67.

68.

69.

Claimant further cites Micula'* (Exhibit CA-17), in which the tribunal observed that
“Tulnder the ICSID Convention, a tribunal has the power to order pecuniary or non-

pecuniary remedies, including blishing the situation which

 

existed before a wrongful act was committed.”'°

Claimant argues that Respondent cannot rely on the Decision on Provisional
Measures in Occidental”? (Exhibit RLA-1) because, in the case at hand, Respondent
and Balochistan have not yet taken any irreversible steps that might render specific

- . ay, 2
performance impossible.”!

Circumstances Warranting Provisional Measures

Claimant submits that the circumstances require provisional measures pursuant to

Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules as they show “urgency” and “a risk of harm’.

a) Urgency

Claimant submits that it is settled law that provisional measures are appropriate in
urgent circumstances where “action prejudicial to the rights of either party is likely
to be taken before [a] final decision is taken.” According to Claimant, the current
situation is urgent because Balochistan is ready to take immediate steps that will
permanently deprive Claimant of its alleged right to mine Reko Diq. Claimant asserts
that the requirement of urgency is met when “a question cannot await the outcome of

the award on the merits.”**

'§ Toan Micula v. Romania, Decision on Jurisdiction an Admissibility of 24 September 2008 (ICSID Case
No. ARB/05/20).

'° Micula, para. 166.

?° Occidental Petroleum Corporation & Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The Republic of
Ecuador, Decision on Provisional Measures, 17 August 2007 (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11).

2! Reply, para. 97.

Request, para. 136.

5 Request, para. 138.

*4 Request, para. 138.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

70. Claimant asserts that due to the following developments it is not possible to await the

outcome of the Award on the Merits:

. As stated in Dr. Mubarakmand’s Witness Statement, a meeting of the
Board of Governors of the Reko Diq Copper/Gold Project, with the Chief
Minister of Balochistan as Chairman and Dr. Mubarakmand as Co-
Chairman, took place on 12 September 2012 and the Government of
Balochistan “resolved to grant permission for the project to begin
operations at area H-4” (Witness Statement of Dr. Samar Mubarakmand,
para. 20);

. Respondent states in the Response that if the Tribunal were to grant
provisional measures enjoining the Government from taking further steps
to develop the Reko Diq Mining Area, “[t]he Government’s efforts to
develop H4 would be brought to a standstill including the preparation
for the excavation of the ore due to commence in 6 months and the
construction of a smelter” (Response, para. 117);

. The work plan and timeline for the Balochistan Copper/Gold Project at
deposit H4 attached as Annex 6 to Dr. Mubarakmand’s Witness
Statement (“H4 Work Plan”) show that there will be an initial
mobilization at the site within three months, and by mid-December 2012,
test drilling will begin and a temporary camping site will be established
at Reko Diq (Annex 6 to Witness Statement of Dr. Samar
Mubarakmand).

Respondent’s plans to develop H4 are addressed in further detail below.

71. With respect to urgency in particular, Claimant also refers to the following

developments:

. Press announcements of the Chief Minister of Balochistan that
Balochistan is taking measures to run Reko Dig by itself (Exhibits CE-
144 and CE-146);

. Publication by the Government of Balochistan of several notices seeking
senior technical and administrative personnel and tenders seeking

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

72.

advanced office equipment for the “Reko Dig Copper Gold Project” it
would develop (Exhibits CE-125, CE-127 and CE-133);

. Reports by news outlets that a technical team would soon begin work at
the Reko Dig site and that Balochistan had allocated budgetary resources
to develop the site (Exhibits CE-134 and CE-146 to CE-148);

. A news report that the Federal Government had granted “Export
Processing Zone” status to Reko Digq, thereby conferring a favorable tax
and duty regime upon Balochistan’s government-run Reko Diq
Copper/Gold Project (Exhibit CE-142);

. Restrictions placed on Claimant’s expatriate staff by Balochistan and
Respondent preventing the staff from accessing the Reko Dig site, which
make it impossible for Claimant to supervise the temporary closure of the
site and secure its equipment and assets there;

. Reports that employees of a competitor mining company, accompanied
by Balochistan officials, accessed the Reko Digq site in early July 2012
and took samples from the deposits identified in Claimant’s studies
(Exhibit CE-149).?>

b) Risk of Harm

Claimant submits that there is a substantial risk of harm if no provisional measures
are granted.”° Claimant asserts that the Government of Balochistan’s imminent
actions would create faits accomplis that would be difficult, if not impossible, to
undo. If one or more mining leases were granted to a Balochistan entity and/or third
parties, new rights and obligations would be created under provincial mining law,
and the new leaseholder or leaseholders would, in turn, enter into numerous contracts
and supply agreements with other parties. It would be difficult to extinguish these
rights, and in the event the Tribunal decided to grant relief to Claimant, this would
undoubtedly give rise to numerous and protracted legal disputes. Furthermore,

Claimant states that there is a considerable risk that the construction or mining

* Request, para. 139.
*6 Request, para. 140.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

723.

74.

activities undertaken by Balochistan or a third party lacking Claimant’s expertise
would reduce the commercial prospects of the Reko Diq site. Claimant submits that
enforcement of a final award in Claimant’s favor would be impossible as a practical

matter under such circumstances.””

Claimant submits that the Tanjeel deposit (H4) forms an integral part of TCC’s
overall plans for Reko Diq and cannot simply be excised from the project. This is
evidenced by the fact that TCC has consistently planned to extract ore from Tanjeel

and has expended considerable time, effort and money in furtherance of this goal.

According to Claimant, Balochistan’s planned construction, extraction and
processing activities within the Reko Diq Mining Area would risk rendering specific
performance of Claimant’s right to mine Reko Diq impossible for the following
reasons: (i) the project was purposefully designed so that, if warranted by prevailing
economic conditions, it could eventually support expanded operations, in particular
in Tanjeel; (ii) Balochistan would implement mine designs, choose processing
methods and construct infrastructure that would almost certainly have a detrimental
effect on the long-term efficiencies and returns of TCC’s mining operation;
(iii) Balochistan’s copper mining operation will affect a much greater portion of the
Reko Diq Mining Area than the five square kilometers specified in the Response;
(iv) Balochistan’s lack of experience in developing sustainable projects may have
far-reaching and long-term effects, e.g., in the form of leakage from tailings areas,
adverse effects from dust dispersion and a failure to plan for important remediation
of environmental impacts following the closure of the mine; and (v) the name “Reko
Diq Copper/Gold Project” suggests that the project will be extended to other parts of

Reko Dig because there is no exploitable gold at the Tanjeel deposit.”*

*7 Request, paras. 141 et seg.
*8 Reply, paras. 108 et seq.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

75.

76.

77.

78.

Claimant cites the Decision on Revocation of Provisional Measures in City Oriente”?

(Exhibit CA-18), where the arbitral tribunal concluded that:

“Tulpon weighing the interests at stake, the Arbitral Tribunal must
choose to protect the possibility of enforcing a hypothetical award
favorable to Claimant, even at the cost of temporarily depriving
Respondents’ (sic) of their contractual right to self-protection.
Thus, given that Claimant has already commenced arbitration
proceedings demanding performance of the Contract, Claimant has
a right to request that Respondents refrain from performing any act
that may lead to the early termination of the Contract.”

Claimant concludes that, without provisional measures, imminent actions by the
Government of Balochistan threaten to destroy Claimant’s investment and, as a
practical matter, deprive the Tribunal of the opportunity to grant a performance

remedy.

According to Claimant, the practical effect of denying provisional measures would
be to deny Claimant the right to seek specific performance and obtain the mining
lease before the Tribunal has had the opportunity to reach a final determination on
that issue. Claimant states that the loss of the right to mine Reko Diq would not be
adequately reparable by an award of damages as the Reko Diq site is an
“irreplaceable asset’. Claimant submits that decades of exploration work,
consuming tens of billions of dollars, have not uncovered a truly equivalent property.
Claimant asserts that, since there is a possibility that it may be economically feasible
to extract more of the mineral resources at Reko Diq in the future, any award of

damages would likely undercompensate Claimant.*°

In support of its argument, Claimant cites the Decision on Provisional Measures in

Perenco*! (Exhibit CA-12), in which the tribunal found provisional measures to be

*° City Oriente Limited v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador),
Decision on Revocation of Provisional Measures and Other Procedural Matters of 13 May 2008, ICSID Case
No. ARB/06/21.

* Request, paras. 143 et seq.

*! Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador),
Decision on Provisional Measures of 8 May 2009, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/06.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

79.

80.

81.

necessary where the imminent seizure of the claimant’s assets would have caused it

to go out of business, an injury that could not be fully remedied by damages.

c) Balance of Harms

Claimant submits that international tribunals typically assess whether the harm likely
to result if the provisional measures are not ordered substantially outweighs the harm
that is likely to result to the party against whom the interim relief is directed. If
provisional measures are ordered, Claimant argues, all Respondent faces is a
temporary hold on work at Reko Diq pending the outcome of this dispute. Even if
Respondent were to prevail in this arbitration, the Government of Balochistan could
still carry out its plans to dispose of the asset or run the project itself, thereby
enjoying the substantial direct and indirect benefits of the mining operations over the
long life of the mine. By contrast, if provisional measures are not granted, the

imminent actions of Balochistan would be effectively irreversible.”

Claimant states that any harm that Respondent alleges it will suffer is self-inflicted
and could have been avoided had Respondent observed its obligations under the
Australia-Pakistan Treaty and Balochistan observed its obligations under the

CHEJVA and the BM Rules.**

Claimant asserts that, as compared to the 1,500 jobs envisaged by the PC-1 Proposal,
the mining project planned by TCC would create up to 11,500 jobs in the
construction phase and more than 2,500 full-time jobs in the operating phase.
Further, Claimant notes that even though it viewed a smelter built and operated by
Balochistan or a third party as being unnecessary for the processing method applied,
Claimant nevertheless did not object to supplying copper concentrate to this planned
smelter. According to Claimant, the calculations on which the PC-1 Proposal is
based do not take into consideration the significant capital and operating costs that

are involved in mining, producing and processing copper. Claimant states that the

* Request, paras. 150 et seg.
Reply, para. 119.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

82.

83.

84.

mining project as contemplated by Claimant in the Feasibility Study, if properly
managed, would be in operation for at least 56 years and provide substantial direct

and indirect benefits to Balochistan, Respondent and any private stakeholders.*

d) Risk of Aggravation of the Dispute

Claimant states that it is further well established that ICSID tribunals, like other
international tribunals, may order provisional measures to prevent aggravation of the
dispute. In particular, Claimant cites in this regard the Decision on Provisional
Measures in Perenco (Exhibit CA-12) and Procedural Order No. | in Burlington®>
(Exhibit CA-14).

Claimant accepts Respondent’s view that non-aggravation of the dispute is not an
independent ground on which to grant provisional measures under Article 47 of the
ICSID Convention but that the added requirements of necessity and urgency must

also be met.*°

Claimant submits that its right to avoid aggravation of the dispute deserves to be
protected through the recommendation of provisional measures (i) to allow the
Tribunal sufficient time to decide the issues in dispute without a Party taking justice
into its own hands and rendering the resolution of the dispute more difficult, costly
and time-consuming; and (ii) to prevent the relationship between the Parties from
worsening, in order not to complicate or preclude a future collaboration between the

Parties in the event of a settlement or necessary future collaboration.*”

* Request, paras. 155 et seq.; Reply, paras. 118 et seq.

5 Burlington Resources, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador (formerly Burlington Resources, Inc., and others v.
Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador)), Procedural Order No. 1
on Provisional Measures of 29 June 2009, ICSID Case No. ARB/O8/5.

* Reply, para. 128.

*7 Request, paras. 161 et seq.; Reply, paras. 129 et seq.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

85.

86.

87.

Summary of Respondent’s Position

No Authority of the Tribunal to Grant Provisional Measures

As regards the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, Respondent makes the following arguments:
(i) the matters in dispute are before the Supreme Court of Pakistan, which will state
the law of Pakistan definitively with respect to the interpretation of the CHEJVA and
the application of the relevant legislation; (ii) the terms of the Australia-Pakistan
Treaty are under review by the Governments of Australia and Pakistan, in particular
the issue of whether the BIT should apply to Claimant as a company owned and
controlled by non-Australian companies; (iii) Claimant’s voluntary participation in
court proceedings in Pakistan prevents it from invoking the right to arbitration in
Article 13 of the Australia-Pakistan Treaty; (iv) public interest overwhelmingly
favors the Government of Balochistan’s proceeding with the H4 project without
further delay and (v) Claimant has made an application for provisional measures in

the parallel ICC arbitration that seeks the same relief against Balochistan.**

Respondent refers to the decision on Provisional Measures in Occidental (“Exhibit
RLA-1), which states that “in order for an international tribunal to grant provisional

measures, there_must exist both_a_right_to_be

     

necessity and_ urgency to avoid irreparable harm. (emphasis in the original)?

Respondent submits that the power to grant specific performance is not explicit in the
ICSID Convention and that no ICSID tribunal has ordered a state to grant rights to an

investor over its natural resources as a final or interim remedy.”

No Right to Mine Reko Diq

Respondent states that, even though Claimant sought a mining lease over the entire

Reko Diq area which contains at least 14 known deposits, the Feasibility Study was

*8 Response, paras. 23 et seq.; Rejoinder, paras. 8 et seg. and 41.
*° Occidental, para. 61.
+ Response, paras. | et seq. and 28-29.

reserved and circumstances of

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

88.

89.

limited to only two deposits, i.e., H14 and H15. Respondent submits that a project of
this size has never previously been contemplated in Balochistan or Pakistan and that,
therefore, the governmental mechanisms for putting it into effect cannot be

considered “routine”.“!

Respondent submits that the BM Rules make clear that when the Government enters
into mineral agreements with companies or other entities, these agreements are
subject to the BM Rules and the discretion of the Licensing Authority, which is in
turn advised exclusively by the Mines Committee consisting of officials of the
Directorate General of Mines and Minerals.” Respondent states that the Licensing
Authority is not a party to the CHEJVA and is not bound by any attempt to “agree in
advance or to preordain the result of the application of the mining rules and the
exercise of the statutory discretion to grant or to refuse an application for a mining

lease”.“?

Respondent submits that Claimant lacks any right or title to mine in the Reko Diq
Mining Area because its Application was rejected by the Licensing Authority.4
Respondent submits that, under the BM Rules, the Licensing Authority has broad
discretion to refuse a mining lease application if it believes that this would not be in
the interest of the development of Balochistan’s mineral resources. Respondent
submits that the Licensing Authority properly exercised its discretion under the BM
Rules to refuse Claimant’s Application. According to Respondent, Claimant had no
locus standi under the BM Rules to apply for the mining license because the Joint

Venture, not Claimant, was the holder of License EL-5.*

4! Response, paras. 39 et seq.

® Response, paras. 45 et seq.

4 Response, para. 59.

+4 Response, para. 50.

+5 Response, paras. 90 et seqg.; Rejoinder, paras. 5 et seq.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

90.

91.

92.

93.

Respondent asserts that, under the BM Rules, mining lease applications can be

refused in the public interest and for failure to provide for additional value.*®

Respondent submits that the issues of the validity and legality of the CHEJVA,
Addendum No. | and the Novation Agreement are currently before the Supreme
Court of Pakistan and have been pending since 2007. Respondent notes that the
signatory to the CHEVJA on behalf of the BDA, then BDA Chairman Mr. Ata
Muhammad Jafar, was later convicted of corruption. Respondent argues that
Claimant’s reliance on the ultra vires joint venture contracts is misplaced because,
whether or not they are declared by the Supreme Court of Pakistan as void ab initio
under applicable law, they do not contain any promise to grant a mining lease to

Claimant.*”

Respondent argues that, even if Claimant succeeds in establishing that the BM Rules
entitle it to a mining lease, this would be in relation to a certain mine or mineral
deposit, in accordance with the procedure set out in the CHEJVA. Respondent
submits that Claimant’s Application related to at least 14 mineral deposits contained
in Reko Diq, while the Feasibility Study related only to the two mineral deposits at
H14 and H15. Respondent argues that Claimant failed to follow the procedures in the
joint venture contracts in relation to the other mineral deposits in Reko Diq; it
unilaterally submitted an application for the entire 99.483 square kilometers in

breach of the joint venture contracts. **

Respondent submits that Claimant applied for a mining lease as the holder of License
EL-S even though this license was granted to the Joint Venture and not to Claimant.
Thus, pursuant to the CHEJVA, it was the property of the Joint Venture and not of

Claimant.”

46 Rejoinder, para. 53.

47 Response, paras. 53 et seq.

48 Response, 77; Rejoinder, para. 58.
* Response, 81.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

94.

95.

96.

97.

Respondent argues that the Licensing Authority gave Claimant sufficient notice of its
intent to refuse the Application and thus provided Claimant with an opportunity for it

to amend its Application — which Claimant did not do.

No Legitimate Expectation

Respondent submits that Claimant was well aware, or that it ought to have been plain
to a prudent investor in Claimant’s position, that the legislative framework applicable
to mining titles as set out in the BM Rules provides the Licensing Authority with
extremely wide discretion to refuse a mining lease application. Further, Claimant
should have appreciated that an exploration license could not automatically be
converted to a mining lease, and that the provisions of the Joint Venture contracts did

not contain such a guarantee.*!

Respondent states that Claimant could not expect that the lease of the entire area of
99.473 square kilometers for which it applied would be granted by the Licensing
Authority, particularly because the Feasibility Study related only to 6 square
kilometers (deposits H14 and H15).”? In the Rejoinder, Respondent contends that the
“feasibilities or pre-feasibilities were made in relation to mineral deposits, namely

4, H14 and H15, and not areas in terms of square kilometres.”>

Respondent contends that Claimant’s expectation that the CHEJVA gave rise to an
entitlement to a mining lease is wrong for the following reasons: (i) the CHEJVA
does not make such a representation or promise, but rather, Article 5.9 of the
CHEJVA provides that the parties shall “seek an assurance from the Provincial
Government, namely that the Joint Venture shall have the right to apply for a mining
lease”; and (ii) pursuant to Rules 9(4) and 9(5) of the BM Rules, and as a matter of

common law and common sense, such a guarantee by the Government of Balochistan

* Response, paras. 91 et seq.

*! Response, para. 97.

* Response, para. 98; Rejoinder, para. 17.
* Rejoinder, para. 44.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

98.

99.

100.

in an agreement would be unenforceable and void. According to Respondent,
Claimant was never given an assurance within the meaning of Article 5.9 of the

CHEJVA by the Government of Balochistan.

No Right to Specific Performance

Respondent submits that it is established as a matter of customary international law
that a State controls its own natural resources and no international tribunal can
compel a State to transfer title to natural resources. Respondent states that the ICSID
cases cited by Claimant in support of specific performance do not address the
question of whether specific performance can be ordered where title to natural
resources is at stake.*> According to Respondent, the reasoning in Occidental applies
here, namely that “where a State has, in the exercise of its sovereign powers, put an
end to a contract or a license, or any other foreign investor’s entitlement, specific
performance must be deemed legally impossible.”*© Respondent submits that by
denying Claimant’s application for a mining lease, the Licensing Authority put an

end to the CHEJVA.*”

Respondent concludes that, should the Tribunal find liability to exist in this case, the

only remedy available to Claimant is damages.**

Circumstances Do Not Warrant Provisional Measures

a) No Urgency and Necessity

Respondent submits that Claimant has failed to demonstrate that there are

circumstances of urgency and necessity that merit the grant of provisional measures.

* Response, para. 99; Rejoinder, paras. 47 et seq.

*5 Rejoinder, paras. 57 et seq. referring to the cases of Micula, Enron and Burlington.
*6 Occidental, para. 79

57 Rejoinder, paras. 69 et seq.

* Rejoinder, para. 71.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

101.

102.

103.

104.

According to Respondent, Balochistan has no current intention of granting mining

rights over Reko Dig to a third party or parties.”

Respondent submits that the Government of Balochistan’s plans are limited to
mining 5.08 square kilometres at deposit H4 of Reko Diq in order to meet Pakistan’s
domestic copper consumption needs. Further, Respondent states that the Government
of Balochistan has no intention to extend its current development plans to the rest of

Reko Dig.”

Respondent submits that Balochistan will only mine at deposit H4 at an initial rate of
15,000 tons per day. Considering that Claimant’s plan is to mine 110,000 tons of ore
per day at deposits H14 and H15 on the basis of an initial 30-year mining lease over
an area of 99.473 square kilometres, it is inconceivable that Respondent’s activities
could cause any harm to Claimant, let alone harm of an irreparable nature.
Respondent concludes that damages are an adequate remedy and, in fact, the only
available remedy; none of Balochistan’s actions with respect to Reko Dig during the
pendency of these proceedings will compromise Claimant’s ability to claim

monetary compensation as part of the final award.*!

b) Balance of Harms Not at Issue

Respondent claims that arguments as to the “balance of convenience” come into play
only where the requirements of necessity, urgency and “an arguable case” are met.
Respondent submits that Claimant is unable to prove that these requirements are met

here.

Furthermore, Respondent states that Claimant’s project, which requires that a
pipeline of 682 kilometers be constructed through inhospitable territory with major

security concerns, cannot be realized in practice. Respondent states that, in view of

* Response, para. 104.
© Response, para. 104.
°! Response, paras. 106 et seq.
© Response, para. 116.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

likely terrorist attacks on the pipeline, the security of the project cannot be

3
guaranteed.“

Respondent explains that the project is politically unacceptable for the Federal
Government and the Government of Balochistan given the strength of public opinion

against it in the absence of economic benefits to the people of Balochistan.

Respondent rejects as untenable Claimant’s concerns that its mining project in

relation to H4 would damage the deposit or the environment.

Respondent states that Claimant’s conduct can be interpreted both as a deliberate
attempt to conceal the extent of the mineral deposits in Reko Diq and mislead the

Government of Balochistan, as well as an act of bad faith.

Respondent asserts that there is a political and economic need for the Balochistan

Copper/Gold Project.

c) No Aggravation of the Dispute

Citing Cemex v. Venezuela” (Exhibit CA 26), Respondent submits that the “non-
aggravation of the dispute” is not an independent ground on which to grant
provisional measures under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. The added

requirements of urgency and necessity must be met.*

© Rejoinder, paras. 20 et seq.

“ Rejoinder, paras. 15 et seq.

© Rejoinder, paras. 26 et seq.

© Rejoinder, para. 37.

©? Cemex Caracas Investments B.V. and Cemex Caracas II Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/O8/15, Decision on the Claimant's Request for Provisional Measures of 3
March 2010, para. 61.

© Response, para. 112.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

110.

111.

Ill.

112.

Respondent submits that it is unclear how the Government of Balochistan’s
proposals with regard to deposit H4 will “aggravate the dispute’, as the only remedy

available to Claimant is damages.”

Respondent claims that the Government’s proposed actions with respect to deposit
H4 presently do not involve granting rights to any third parties during the pendency
of these proceedings and beyond. Thus, Claimant’s request for provisional measures

does not help or hinder the Tribunal’s ability to resolve this dispute in any way.”

The Parties’ Requests for Relief

Claimant’s Request for Relief

Claimant requests the Tribunal to issue an Interim Award ordering that Respondent,

during the pendency of this dispute:

a. refrain from, and take all steps necessary to ensure that Balochistan
refrain from, taking further steps to develop the Reko Dig Mining Area,
or any part thereof, by itself or with third parties;

b. — refrain from, and take all steps necessary to ensure that Balochistan
refrain from, selling, leasing, transferring, authorizing or otherwise
disposing of the Reko Dig Mining Area, or its interest in the Joint
Venture, or any part thereof to any third party;

c refrain from, and take all steps necessary to ensure that Balochistan
refrain from, breaching the confidentiality provisions of TCC’s
Feasibility Study by sharing or disclosing any portion of its contents with
any unauthorized persons or entities;

© Response, para. 111.
” Response, para. 111; Rejoinder, paras. 22 et seq.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

113.

114.

d. _ refrain from, and take all steps necessary to ensure that Balochistan
refrain from, taking any steps that infringe TCC’s exclusive surface
rights under the Surface Rights Lease;

e. issue, and take all steps necessary to ensure that Balochistan issue, any
authorization required to allow TCC’s expatriate staff to work in
Pakistan and to travel to and access the Reko Dig site, including work
visas, security clearances and No-Objection Certificates; and

f. refrain from, and take all steps necessary to ensure that Balochistan
refrain from, taking any steps that would unsettle the status quo,

aggravate the dispute, or render ineffective any ultimate relief granted by

the Tribunal.”

Respondent’s Request for Relief
Respondent requests the Tribunal to dismiss the application with costs awarded in

Respondent’s favor.”

DECISION BY THE TRIBUNAL

Legal Framework for the Recommendation of Provisional Measures

Article 47 of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:

“Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it
considers that the circumstances so require, recommend any
provisional measures which should be taken to preserve the
respective rights of either party.”

Thus, there is no question that the Tribunal has the authority to order provisional

measures to preserve a party’s rights.

™ Request, para. 166; Reply, para. 132.
” Response, para. 123; Rejoinder, para 72.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

Rule 39(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules also states:

“At any time after the institution of the proceeding, a party may
request that provisional measures for the preservation of its rights
be recommended by the Tribunal. The request shall specify the
rights to be preserved, the measures the recommendation of which
is requested, and the circumstances that require such measures.”

Thus, before “recommending” any provisional measure under the ICSID Convention
and the Arbitration Rules, an arbitral tribunal must be satisfied that two prerequisites
are met: (i) that a right exists and (ii) that the circumstances require that the

provisional measures be ordered to preserve such right.

The question of whether the right to be preserved exists goes to the merits of the case
which will not be decided at this preliminary stage of the proceedings. It therefore
suffices that the party requesting the provisional measure establishes a prima facie

case that it owns a legally protected interest.”*

Neither the ICSID Convention nor the ICSID Arbitration Rules further specify the
circumstances under which provisional measures may be granted. This question has,
however, been dealt with extensively in various decisions by ICSID tribunals.
Pursuant to the well-established jurisprudence of ICSID tribunals, provisional
measures may be granted where the situation is urgent and the requested measures

are necessary to preserve a party’s right from irreparable harm.”

This test is in conformity with the practice of the International Court of Justice
(“ICJ”) under Article 41 of its Statute, on which Article 47 of the ICSID Convention
is modeled.” Article 41 of the ICJ Statute reads:

Burlington, para. 53; Occidental, para. 64.

™ Occidental, para. 61; Burlington, para. 82; Perenco, para. 43. See also Cemex, paras. 44-56.

75 L. Malintoppi, “Provisional Measures in Recent ICSID Proceedings: What Parties Request and Tribunals
Order,” in C. Binder, U. Kriebaum, A. Reinisch, S. Wittich (eds.), International Investment Law for The 21st
Century, Oxford University Press, 2009, p. 158 et seq.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

120.

S

121.

122.

Nv

123.

“I. The Court shall have the power to indicate, if it considers that
circumstances so require, any provisional measures which ought to
be taken to preserve the respective rights of either party.

2. Pending the final decision, notice of the measures suggested
shall forthwith be given to the parties and to the Security Council.”

Although Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules
use the word “recommend”, it is generally recognized that arbitral tribunals are
empowered under these provisions to order provisional measures with binding force
and that the parties are obliged to comply with such orders.” The Parties to the

present arbitration have not contested the binding nature of provisional measures.

Under the ICSID Convention, moreover, an arbitral tribunal may recommend
provisional measures before it has decided on whether it has jurisdiction over the
dispute. However, the Tribunal, in accordance with the well-established practice of
ICSID tribunals,” will only recommend provisional measures if it is satisfied that it

has prima facie jurisdiction to decide the merits of the case.

In view of the above, the Tribunal will proceed to determine whether it has prima
facie jurisdiction over the dispute (II.) and whether provisional measures are required
by the circumstances at hand to preserve Claimant’s asserted right to mine Reko Diq

(IL).

Prima Facie Jurisdiction of the Tribunal

The Tribunal is satisfied that, in the present circumstances, it has prima facie
jurisdiction over the merits of the dispute pursuant to Article 25(1) of the ICSID

Convention and Article 13 of the Australia-Pakistan Treaty.

© Occidental, para. 58; Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSD Case No. ARB/02/18, Order No. 1 on Request for
Provisional Measures, para. 4; City Oriente, paras. 51-53. See also La Grand (Federal Republic of Germany
v. United States), Judgment, 2001 1.C.J. Rep. p. 466 (Exhibit CA-4), p. 502 et seg. (“The contention that
provisional measures indicated under Article 41 might not be binding would be contrary to the object and
purpose of that Article.”)

7” Burlington, para. 49; City Oriente, para. 50; Perenco, para. 39; Occidental, para. 55.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

124. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention reads as follows:

“(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State
(or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State
designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in
writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their
consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.”

125. In Article 13 of the Australia-Pakistan Treaty, it is stated, in relevant part:

“1. In the event of a dispute between a Party and an investor of the
other Party relating to an investment, the parties to the dispute
shall initially seek to resolve the dispute by consultations and
negotiations.

2. If the dispute in question cannot be resolved through
consultations and negotiations, either party to the dispute may:

(a) in accordance with the law of the Party which admitted the
investment, initiate proceedings before that Party's competent
judicial or administrative bodies;

(b) if both Parties are at that time party to the 1965 Convention on
the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals
of other States ("the Convention"), refer the dispute to the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes ("the
Centre") for conciliation or arbitration pursuant to Articles 28 or
36 of the Convention;

(..)

3. Where a dispute is referred to the Centre pursuant to paragraph
2(b) of this Article:

(a) where that action is taken by an investor of one Party, the other
Party shall consent in writing to the submission of the dispute to
the Centre within thirty days of receiving such a request from the
investor;

(...)”

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

Pursuant to Article 13(3)(a) of the Australia-Pakistan Treaty, Respondent agreed to
“consent in writing to the submission of the dispute to the Centre within thirty days”
after receiving the Request for Arbitration. On 28 November 2011, Claimant filed its
Request for Arbitration and consented “to submit to the Centre the dispute that is

subject of this Request for Arbi tration.”®

Respondent contests the jurisdiction of the Tribunal for the reasons set out in
paragraph 85. As to the second reason — the review of the terms of the Australia-
Pakistan Treaty by the two signatory governments with respect to its application to
companies owned and controlled by non-Australian companies — the Parties
confirmed at the First Session that Australia had advised the Pakistani Government
that it has no intention of denying Claimant the benefits of the Australia-Pakistan

Treaty.” The Tribunal understands that this issue has become moot.

Claimant contends that the Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction to decide on the

merits.

The Tribunal considers it to be preliminarily established that (i) the Parties tried, but
failed, to resolve their dispute through negotiations pursuant to Article 13(1) of the
Australia-Pakistan Treaty; (ii) Claimant is an Australian “investor” under
Articles 1(1)(c) and (d) of the Australia-Pakistan Treaty; (iii) Claimant holds a
protected “investment” within the meaning of Articles 1(1)(a) and 2(3) of the
Australia-Pakistan Treaty, and the dispute relates to and arises directly out of this
“investment” within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention; and
(iv) the Parties consented to the jurisdiction of ICSID in accordance with

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

Further, the Tribunal is satisfied that its prima facie jurisdiction is not affected by the
separate proceedings before the Supreme Court of Pakistan to decide on matters

relating to the interpretation of the CHEJVA under Pakistani law and the application

78 Request for Arbitration, para. 16.
” Transcript, p. 24.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

131.

132.

133.

Ill.

134.

of the relevant legislation. The reasons why such proceedings prima facie cannot
affect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the present dispute are twofold: Firstly, the
subject matter of the proceedings before the Supreme Court of Pakistan is distinct
from that of the present arbitration, which deals primarily with an allegation of a
breach of Respondent’s obligations under the Australia-Pakistan Treaty and general
international law, and not with the interpretation of the CHEJVA under Pakistani
law. Secondly, the parties to the proceedings before the Supreme Court of Pakistan

differ from those in the present proceedings.

For the same reasons, the Tribunal finds prima facie that its jurisdiction is not
affected by the ICC arbitration proceedings in which Claimant pursues its rights

under the CHEJVA against Balochistan.

Furthermore, in the Tribunal’s view, Respondent has not established that Claimant is
pursuing its rights under the Australia-Pakistan Treaty in court proceedings in
Pakistan. The Tribunal therefore does not have to express its view on whether
Article 13 of the Australia-Pakistan Treaty contains a fork-in-the-road clause that

would preclude submission of this dispute to an international tribunal.

Finally, the question of whether public interest overwhelmingly favors the
Government of Balochistan’s proceeding with the H4 project without further delay is

a question that goes to the merits and does not affect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

Interim Measures for Preserving Claimant’s Asserted Right to Mine Reko Diq

Right to be Preserved

Claimant requests provisional measures for the protection of the asserted right to
“mine all ore in the Reko Digq Mining Area’”® because it has satisfied the

requirements for receiving a mining lease under both the CHEJVA, in particular

®° Cf. Reply, para. 61.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

135.

136.

137.

138.

Clause 11.8.2, and the BM Rules. Claimant also seeks protection of its asserted right

to “restitution in the form of specific performance”*' as a remedy for Respondent’s
failure to grant TCC the mining lease. In addition hereto, Claimant pursues its

request in order to prevent the aggravation of the dispute.

Respondent, on the other hand, denies that Claimant has the right to a mining lease or

any right capable of enforcement by specific performance.

The Parties’ submissions regarding the existence of the asserted right to be preserved
raise complex questions of law and fact. In the Tribunal’s view, they are unsuitable

for decision before a full hearing on the merits of the case.

At this early stage in the proceedings, the Tribunal cannot assume that Claimant does
not have the rights or remedies to which it asserts it is entitled, including any right
capable of enforcement by specific performance. To make this assumption would be
tantamount to deciding the merits of the case in Respondent’s favor based only on
the evidence and argumentation that has been presented thus far. Accordingly, for
the purpose of deciding on the Request, the Tribunal will assume that Claimant will
succeed on these points, and turn its focus to the question of whether the
circumstances in the present case require that provisional measures be ordered for the

preservation of the asserted rights.

Circumstances Requiring Provisional Measures

As set out above, provisional measures may be ordered where the situation is urgent
and the requested measures are necessary to preserve the asserted right from
irreparable harm. Claimant bases the Request on two scenarios, which it set out
during the Hearing. In the first scenario, Respondent limits its mining activities to

deposit H4 (Tanjeel). In the second scenario, Respondent expands its activities to

5! Reply, para. 93.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

139.

140.

141.

2 Tra
3 Pry

Transc

in!

 

deposit H15.” The Tribunal must therefore determine with regard to both scenarios

whether the requirements of urgency and necessity are met.

a) Urgency

As regards the first scenario, the element of urgency is not disputed between the
Parties. Indeed, Respondent itself stated during the Hearing that it intends to
commence mining activities at deposit H4 within the next few months. At the
Hearing, Respondent’s Counsel stated that “[y]es, there will be mining in the H4

deposit within the space of the coming year.”

Assuming that Claimant is correct
that Respondent’s mining activities would cause it irreparable harm by limiting or
even closing off completely Claimant’s ability to mine at Tanjeel, there is no

question that the situation is urgent.

In contrast, it remains unclear whether the situation is urgent with respect to the

second scenario, i.e., deposits other than H4, in particular H14 and H15.

Claimant submits that Respondent will most likely expand its activities to H15.™ In
further support of this submission, Claimant adduced a Third Witness Statement by
Mr. Timothy Livesey following the Hearing, in which Mr. Livesey attests that on
4 November 2012, a local employee of TCC encountered a convoy of vehicles
traveling to the Reko Diq site led by an employee of Balochistan’s Reko Diq
Copper/Gold Project, Mr. Rehmat Ullah, and that some of the convoy’s vehicles and
drivers had been supplied by the nearby mining project operated by MCC. The Third
Witness Statement contains three photographs which show off-road cars in a desert
landscape. According to Mr. Livesey, the photographs on pages 2 and 3 of the Third
Witness Statement show the convoy at the Tanjeel deposit and the photo on page 4 of

the Third Witness Statement shows the convoy at deposit H15.

script, p. 190 and 192.
ipt, p. 226.

 

“ Transcript, p. 192 et seq.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

142.

143.

144.

  

In his oral testimony given at the Hearing, Dr. Samar Mubarakmand stated that
Balochistan had no present intention to develop the deposits H14 and H15.®° This
statement was confirmed by Counsel for Respondent who submitted that “the
Government has no present intention to do other than implement the plan that it has
proposed for H-4; it has no present intention to develop H-14 or H-15, or any other
deposit covered by the application for the mining links; and it has no present

intention to give any rights whatsoever to any third parties (...).788

Upon questioning by the Tribunal as to whether Respondent would give an
undertaking to the Tribunal as to any grant of rights to third parties, Counsel for
Respondent declined to do so, stating that “the Government does not feel it
appropriate, as a sovereign government, to give undertakings over what it considers
to be its sovereign property and its sovereign rights”, which included the right “to

develop H-14 and H-15 in due course if it chooses to do 0.787

Counsel for Respondent did, however, state that “the Government has given (...)
assurances such as have been set out in the pleading.”** Counsel for Respondent
further stated that by “Government” he referred to both governments, i.e., of
Respondent and Balochistan. Finally, Counsel for Respondent confirmed that “[i]f
there is a change of position, a change of mind, the governments will give immediate
notice”, “first of all to the people of both the Province and the nation; secondly, it
will be to the Supreme Court; and, thirdly, it will be to this Tribunal.” By letter of
19 November 2012, Counsel for Respondent confirmed that this assurance “‘stands
good, the Government has not changed its plans and that there is no urgent need for
Provisional Measures.” By letter dated 30 November 2012, Counsel for Respondent

again affirmed the assurance given.

ipt, p. 128 et seq.

‘7 Transcript, p. 206.
*§ Transcript, p. 206.
® Transcript, p. 206 et seq.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

145.

146.

147.

148.

The Tribunal notes the assurances given by Counsel for Respondent, which
Respondent renewed in in its letter dated 19 November 2012, that Respondent will
immediately inform the Tribunal and Claimant if there is any change to
Respondent’s present intention to limit its activities to H4. In view of the position
taken by Respondent, the Tribunal, for the time being, will presume that Respondent
does not intend to expand its mining activities beyond deposit H4. The assurances

given by Respondent are reflected in the decision on the Request.

b) Necessity

This leaves the question of whether Respondent’s planned mining activities in the H4
area will, during the period before the final award, cause harm to Claimant which is
“irreparable”, i.e., which cannot be repaired by an award of damages or subsequent

work of repair.

The burden is on Claimant to show that this is likely to happen in the absence of

provisional measures.

As regards the harm to its mining project in the first scenario, Claimant has offered
written testimony of Mr. Livesey, who in his First Witness Statement states that there

is “substantial risk’ of “irremediable harm”®°

to TCC’s planned project if
Balochistan or a third party were to begin construction or mining at the Reko Dig site
because they might (i) render a portion of the viable mineral resource inaccessible
due to improper placement of infrastructure or inadequate mining,” (ii) enter into
supply and service agreements with unsuitable subcontractors,” and (iii) carry out
substandard construction work with a view toward short-term profits to the detriment

1.33

of long-term potential.” Moreover, Mr. Livesey states in his First Witness Statement

that “additional harmful possibilities that may result from inexpert operations are

® First Witness Statement of Mr. Livesey, para. 95.

°! First Witn
® First Witn

tatement of Mr. Livesey, para. 96.
tatement of Mr. Livesey, para. 98.

 

° First Witness Statement of Mr. Livesey, para. 99.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

149.

150.

151.

environmental damage, poor labor conditions, or diminished welfare in the local

community.”°*

In his Second Witness Statement, Mr. Livesey states that “Tanjeel forms an integral
part of TCC’s planned mining project and cannot simply be excised from the project
without significantly impacting the economics of TCC’s mining venture at Reko
Dig,” which would permanently impair “the ‘optionality’, or flexibility of TCC’s

mining project.”°®

The above statements are all based on possible mistakes which Balochistan might
make when mining at deposit H4. There is no evidence that Balochistan or
Respondent intends to do any of these things. Nor is there evidence that
Respondent’s planned mining activities in deposit H4 will have the significant
impact on the economics of TCC’s mining venture that Claimant alleges. The
Tribunal also notes that Claimant did not propose to expand its activities to deposit
H4 for six years after it started mining at deposits H14 and H15. Indeed, at the
Hearing, Counsel for Claimant stated that “Tanjeel would get going six years later as

part of the project.”?"

In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that, at present, there is insufficient evidence on
record to show that provisional measures are necessary to avoid irreparable harm.
However, the Tribunal notes that the H4 Work Plan is fairly general and does not
provide any details about the work specifically envisaged by Respondent with
respect to deposit H4. The Tribunal therefore requests Respondent to inform the
Tribunal and Claimant, on a regular basis, about its specific plans and activities with

respect to deposit H4.

°* First Witness Statement of Mr. Livesey, para. 101. See also Second Witness Statement of Mr. Livesey,
paras. 21-23.

* Second Witni
* Second Witni

Statement of Mr. Livesey, para. 19.
Statement of Mr. Livesey, para. 20.

 

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

152.

153.

In the remaining parts (c) to (f) of the Request, Claimant further requests the
Tribunal to order Respondent or Balochistan to refrain from breaching the
confidentiality provisions of TCC’s Feasibility Study, infringing TCC’s exclusive
surface rights under the Surface Rights Lease, and unsettling the status quo,
aggravating the dispute or rendering ineffective any ultimate relief granted by the
Tribunal. Finally, Claimant requests the Tribunal to order that Respondent or
Balochistan issue any authorizations necessary for TCC’s expatriate staff to work in

Pakistan and travel to and access the Reko Dig site.

In its pleadings, Claimant has based these requests on the same arguments of urgency
and necessity without however developing them further during the Hearing. The
Tribunal is of the view that in regard to these requests Claimant failed to meet its
burden of showing urgency and necessity. This leads the Tribunal to dismiss these

parts of the Request.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

IV. Decision

154. The Tribunal therefore decides as follows:

1.

Respondent shall immediately inform the Tribunal and Claimant
of any change of its present intention (i) to implement the H4 Work
Plan, (ii) not to expand its mining activities to H14 and/or H15 or to
any other deposit within License EL-5 and (iii) not to give any

rights in this regard to any third party.

Respondent shall further inform the Tribunal and Claimant, on a
regular basis, about its specific plans and activities with respect to

deposit H4.

The Tribunal remains seized of the matter and shall consider
future applications by Claimant if the situation materially changes,
in particular in case Respondent (i) materially deviates from the H4
Work Plan, (ii) expands its mining activities to deposits H14 and/or
H15 or to any other deposit within License EL-5 or (iii) gives any
rights in this regard to any third party.

Otherwise, the Request is dismissed.

The Tribunal will decide on the costs related to the Request at a

later stage of the arbitral proceedings.

ICSID Case No. ARB/12/1

[signed]

Dr. Klaus Sachs
President of the Tribunal

[signed] [signed]

Lord Hoffmann Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov
Arbitrator Arbitrator

