IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION PROCEEDING UNDER CHAPTER 10 OF THE UNITED STATES —
PERU TRADE PROMOTION AGREEMENT AND
THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES (2010)

In the arbitration proceeding between

THE RENCO GROUP, INC.
Claimant

and

REPUBLIC OF PERU
Respondent

UNCT/13/1

 

DECISION REGARDING RESPONDENT’S REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

 

Members of the Tribunal
Dr. Michael J. Moser, Presiding Arbitrator
The Honorable L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC, Arbitrator
Mr. Toby T. Landau, QC, Arbitrator

Tribunal Assistant
Ms. Ruth Stackpool-Moore
Tribunal Secretary
Ms. Natali Sequeira
Date

June 2, 2015

Representation of the Parties

Representing The Renco Group, Inc.:

Mr. Edward G. Kehoe

Mr. Guillermo Aguilar Alvarez

Mr. Henry G. Burnett

Ms. Caline Mouawad

King & Spalding LLP

1185 Avenue of the Americas
New York, New York 10036-4003

Representing the Republic of Peru:

Mr. Jonathan C. Hamilton
Ms. Andrea J. Menaker
Mr. Petr Polasek

Ms. Kristen M. Young

Ms. Estefania San Juan
White & Case LLP

701 Thirteenth Street N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20005
and

Mr. Eduardo Ferrero Costa
Ms. Maricarmen Tovar Gil
Estudio Echecopar

De la Floresta 497, Piso 5
San Borja, Lima, Peru

Vi.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONG..........::cccccccssssssesssessseseseseseseseseseeeseesseesseeeseees 3
A. Introduction 3

 

B. Submissions on the Respondent's Preliminary Objection under Article 10.20.4 of the
Treaty

(1) The Respondent's Notification of its Preliminary Objection under Article 10.20.4
of the Treaty

The Claimant's Opposition to the Scope of the Respondent’s Preliminary
Objection

(3) The Claimant’s Submission of its Opposition to Peru's 10.20(4) Objection.......... 5

C. The Respondent's Request for Relief from the Alleged Ongoing Prejudice Caused by.
the Claimant’s Conduct Within and Beyond the ProceedingS ............:cccseseeseeeees

(1

 

 

(2)

 

The Claimant's Interference with the Respondent’s Treaty Right to Bring
Preliminary Objections

 

(2) The Claimant's Ongoing Violation of the Treaty ............ cece cece eeeeeeeeee teeta 9
(3) The Claimant's Violation of the Respondent’s Due Process Rights..............0+ 11
(4) Request for Relief

 

 

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISIONS
A. The Claimant's Interference with the Respondent's Treaty Right to Bring Preliminary,

 

Objections
B. The Claimant's Ongoing Violation of the Treaty ...........cscceesseesseesteeeteeeteesteteeenenes 16
C. The Claimant's Violation of the Respondent's Due Process Rights................00000 17
COSTS 18

 

OTHER MATTERS 18

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This case concerns a dispute submitted on the basis of the United States - Peru Trade
Promotion Agreement dated April 12, 2006 (the “Treaty”) and the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules (2010).

The Claimant is The Renco Group, Inc. and is hereinafter referred to as “Renco” or the
“Claimant.”

The Respondent is the Republic of Peru and is hereinafter referred to as “Peru” or the
“Respondent.”

The Claimant and the Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties.”
The Parties’ respective representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

This Decision disposes of the Respondent's several requests for interlocutory and other
relief in relation to the Article 10.20.4 Phase of these proceedings. The background is as
follows.

On December 19, 2014 the Tribunal issued its Decision as to the Scope of the
Respondent's Preliminary Objections under Article 10.20.4 dated December 18, 2014 (the
“Decision on the Scope of Article 10.20.4” or the “Scope Decision”). The Spanish version
of the Scope Decision was communicated to the Parties by the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or “the Centre”) on February 13, 2015.

By communications dated January 2, 2015 the Parties informed the Tribunal of their
agreed schedule for submissions relating to the Respondent's remaining preliminary
objection pursuant to Article 10.20.4.

On January 27, 2015 a two day hearing regarding the Respondent's remaining preliminary
objection pursuant to Article 10.20.4 was scheduled for September 1 and 2, 2015 in
Washington, D.C.

On February 21, 2015 the Respondent filed its Preliminary Objection Under Article 10.20.4
dated February 20, 2015 accompanied by Legal Opinions of John B. Bellinger, Ill and
Carlos Cardenas Quirés.

On February 23, 2015 the Claimant notified the Tribunal that it considered that the
Respondent's filing raised jurisdictional and other issues beyond the scope of objections
permitted per its Decision on the Scope of Article 10.20.4 and that accordingly, the
Respondent’s submissions should not be posted to the Centre’s website. The Claimant
reserved its right to address what it described as the Respondent's “overreaching.”

On March 9, 2015 the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal indicating that its February 23,
2015 submission should be published on the Centre’s website in accordance with the
transparency provisions of the Treaty and Procedural Order No. 1.

On April 17, 2015 the Claimant submitted its Opposition to Peru’s 10.20(4) Objection
accompanied by the Legal Expert Report of Dr. Fernando de Trazegnies.

On April 30, 2015 the Respondent addressed to the Tribunal, in a letter dated April 29,
2015, a request seeking relief from ongoing prejudice caused by the Claimant's conduct
within and beyond the pending arbitration.

On May 4, 2015, the Tribunal invited the Claimant to comment on the Respondent's April
29, 2015 letter which it did on May 5, 2015.

On May 7, 2015 the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal requesting (i) the opportunity to be
heard with respect to the Claimant’s response of May 5, 2015 and (ii) an immediate (and
at least temporary) suspension of the briefing calendar until the procedural implications of
the pending issues are resolved. Both the Claimant and the Respondent commented
further to the Tribunal on the request for a suspension of the briefing calendar on May 8,
2015.

On May 11, 2015 the Tribunal informed the Parties of the temporary suspension of the
Respondent's Article 10.20.4 filing deadline and invited the Respondent to submit a full
reply to the Claimant's May 5, 2015 letter by May 18, 2015.

On May 19, 2015 the Respondent submitted a reply, in a letter dated May 18, 2015, to the
Claimant's letter of May 5, 2015, written further to the Respondent's letter of April 29, 2015
requesting relief from ongoing prejudice caused by the Claimant.

On May 21, 2015 the Tribunal indicated to the Claimant that if it wished to add anything to
its submissions on the issues raised by the Respondent including and following its

20.

21.

22.

submission dated April 29, 2015, it must do so before May 25, 2015. The Claimant
indicated by reply that it did not wish to comment further.

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
A. Introduction

The Tribunal has had the benefit of a full exchange of correspondence between the
Parties, a summary of which is set out by the Tribunal in this section. For the avoidance
of doubt, even if not specifically noted in the summary below, all of the issues and
arguments raised by the Parties in their correspondence have been carefully considered
by the Tribunal in reaching its decisions.

The Tribunal’s analysis of the issues is reserved to Section IV. below.

B. Submissions on the Respondent’s Preliminary Objection under Article 10.20.4
of the Treaty

(1) The Respondent’s Notification of its Preliminary Objection under Article
10.20.4 of the Treaty

In its Decision on the Scope of Article 10.20.4, the Tribunal determined that, on a proper
interpretation, objections relating to the Tribunal's competence fall outside the mandatory
scope of Article 10.20.4 and that, accordingly, only one of the preliminary objections
noticed by the Respondent, namely, the Claimant's alleged failure to state a claim for
breach of the investment agreement, would be considered and decided in the Article
10.20.4 Phase of these proceedings. '

In its 2014 submissions on the meaning and ambit of Article 10.20.4, the Respondent
argued that its refusal to assume liability for claims in the St. Louis Lawsuits could not
constitute a violation of the Treaty because the Guaranty and Stock Transfer Agreement
(the “Contract”), which together allegedly constitute an Investment Agreement, concern
third party claims relating to Doe Run Peru, and, because the Plaintiffs in the St Louis
Lawsuits chose to sue Doe Run Peru's U.S.-based affiliates in the US courts rather than
bringing claims against Centromin’s successor, Activos Mineros, or the Republic of Peru,

' Decision, 254-255.

23.

24.

25.

or Doe Run Peru. As a matter of law, the Respondent cannot therefore have breached
the Contract. Further, as the Claimant has failed to submit a claim for determination by a
technical expert as required by the Contract, it is the Respondent's position that it cannot
be deemed to have breached a contractual obligation with respect to the St Louis Lawsuits
as the Claimant asserts.”

In accordance with the Tribunal’s Decision on the Scope of Article 10.20.4 and the
schedule established by the Tribunal in its Procedural Order No. 1 dated August 22, 2013,
as modified by agreement of the Parties, the Respondent made submissions dated April
29, 2015 in support of its Preliminary Objection under Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty (the
“Preliminary Objection’).

In its Preliminary Objection the Respondent advanced a number of legal arguments to
support its position that claims advanced by the Claimant relating to its alleged violation
of its investment agreements should be dismissed under Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty
including that (1) there is no investment agreement between Peru and Renco within the
meaning of the Treaty; (2) even if the Contract constituted a valid investment agreement
between Peru and Renco under the Treaty, Peru, as a matter of law, could not have
breached any obligations to Renco under it because Peru is not a party to the Contract
and because the obligations contained therein run only to Doe Run Peru and DRC Ltd.;
and (3) even if the Guaranty constituted a valid investment agreement between Peru and
Renco under the Treaty, Peru could not have breached any obligations to Renco
thereunder because the Guaranty is void under Peruvian law and because Renco’s claims
under the Guaranty in any event are not ripe or otherwise fail to state a claim.®

(2) The Claimant’s Opposition to the Scope of the Respondent’s Preliminary
Objection

Following its receipt of the Respondent's Preliminary Objection, the Claimant suggested
that the Respondent's filing raised “jurisdictional and other issues that go beyond the

2 Decision, Section III.B.(3) and 243(3).

3 Preliminary Objection, 43.

26.

27.

28.

29.

scope of what the Tribunal permitted Respondent to file per its Decision concerning
10.20.4 scope objections dated December 18, 2014."

This led the Respondent to complain that the Claimant was behaving in a manner contrary
to the Treaty and Procedural Order No. 1.°

(3) The Claimant’s Submission of its Opposition to Peru's 10.20(4) Objection

In addition to submitting that the sole preliminary objection made by the Respondent which
properly falls within the Tribunal’s Scope Decision lacks merit, in its Submission of
Opposition to Peru's 10.20(4) Objection (the “Opposition”), the Claimant also objected to
the introduction by the Respondent in its Preliminary Objection of what it called “three
additional patently improper objections” going largely to the competence of the Tribunal.®

The Claimant submits that because the Respondent did not notify the Claimant or the
Tribunal of its intention to raise these three objections, the Parties did not have an
opportunity to brief whether these three objections fall within the scope of Article 10.20.4
and the Tribunal did not rule upon them in its Scope Decision. Further, the Claimant
submits that by raising objections that were not notified in accordance with Procedural
Order No. 1, the Respondent is undermining the integrity of the Article 10.20.4 process
and seeking to disadvantage the Claimant in the proceedings.’

Accordingly, in its Opposition submittal, the Claimant dealt only with the Respondent's
objection that it considered to be authorised by the Scope Decision and reserved its right,
should the Tribunal determine that it should address any of the other objections, to request
an appropriate revision to the briefing schedule in order to permit it to do so.®

* The Claimant’s email to the Centre dated February 23, 2015.
5 Letter from the Respondent dated March 9, 2015.

° Claimant’s Opposition, (7.

7 Ibid.

8 Op. Cit. §23.

30.

31.

32.

33.

C. The Respondent’s Request for Relief from the Alleged Ongoing Prejudice
Caused by the Claimant’s Conduct Within and Beyond the Proceedings

By letter dated April 29, 2015, the Respondent complained to the Tribunal of three aspects
of the Claimant’s behavior within and beyond the arbitration which it claimed was causing
it ongoing prejudice (the “Request for Relief”). The Respondent complained that (1) by
declining to address most of the arguments in the Respondent's Preliminary Objection,
the Claimant is granting itself the right to disregard the Tribunal’s procedural orders while
prejudicially reserving to itself the right to respond later, all of which violates the
Respondent's rights to bring preliminary objections under the Treaty; (2) the Claimant has
renewed its acts and is engaged in an ongoing violation of the waiver requirement in Article
10.18 of the Treaty; and (3) by seeking to prevent the Respondent from setting out its
serious arguments regarding the Claimant's violations of law, contract, and Treaty, and
from rightfully defending itself, the Claimant has systematically infringed the Respondent's
procedural and substantive rights.

On May 5, 2015 at the Tribunal’s invitation, the Claimant submitted its letter in response
to the Respondent's April 29, 2015 Request for Relief (the “Response”). The Claimant
contends that the Respondent’s Request for Relief goes beyond zealous advocacy and in
fact seeks to re-litigate decided issues, pushes the Tribunal into a reconsideration of its
Scope Decision, and unfairly states that the Claimant has acted in bad faith because the
Claimant seeks to follow and enforce the Tribunal’s ruling. The Claimant asserts the
Respondent has made its Request for Relief for two reasons: first, to expand the scope of
the Article 10.20.4 Phase even after the Tribunal explicitly limited it to only one of the
various preliminary objections noticed by the Respondent; and second, to further delay
the proceedings.

In accordance with the Tribunal’s direction of May 11, 2015, the Respondent addressed a
further letter to the Tribunal in reply to the Claimant’s Response regarding its April 29
Request for Relief (the “Reply”).

Each of the matters raised by the Respondent in its Request for Relief and its Reply as
well as those addressed by the Claimant in its Response is addressed below.

34.

35.

36.

37.

(1) The Claimant’s Interference with the Respondent’s Treaty Right to Bring
Preliminary Objections

In briefing its Preliminary Objection, the Respondent submits that the three arguments it
notified® are not separate objections under Article 10.20.4 as the Claimant contends, but
rather are, consistent with the Tribunal’s Scope Decision, arguments in support of the
Respondent's preliminary objection that, as a matter of law, the Claimant's claims for
breach of an investment agreement are not claims for which an award in favor of the
Claimant may be made under Article 10.26 of the Treaty.

It is the Respondent's position that each of the three legal arguments accord with the
parameters set forth in Article 10.20.4 — in other words, they each require the dismissal of
claims strictly as a matter of law, and assume the truth of the facts alleged by the Claimant,
or otherwise rely on undisputed facts.'° Further, because the three legal arguments are
closely related and intertwined, they should be heard together.'' Finally, the Respondent
notes that the Claimant has no basis to complain that the legal arguments were not set
out in full in the Respondent's previous filings, as Respondent was under no obligation to
brief in full all details of the legal arguments in support of its particular preliminary objection
before submitting its Preliminary Objection. '?

The Respondent also argues that the Claimant seeks to restrict its Treaty right to bring
preliminary objections which could dispose of or limit the scope of its claims in this case,
by dictating which arguments the Respondent can and cannot raise in support of its
preliminary objection under Article 10.20.4.'3 The Respondent submits it would be
seriously prejudiced if it were prevented from presenting all of its potentially dispositive
arguments at this stage.“

The Respondent further argues that it is in fact the Claimant, through its refusal to respond
to the majority of the Respondent's arguments, which is acting in contravention of the
Tribunal’s Scope Decision. Rather than raising its objections with the Tribunal in good faith

° See supra, 138.

‘© Request for Relief, Section 1.a; Reply, Section 1.b.
4 Reply, Section 1.b.

” [bid.

8 Reply, Section 1.

4 Op. Cit., Section L.b.

38.

39.

40.

immediately after it filed its Preliminary Objection, or addressing all the arguments raised
in that Objection in the alternative in its Opposition, the Respondent notes that instead the
Claimant waited eight weeks to raise these issues, and attempted to unilaterally reserve
the right to request additional time to brief arguments, which it itself had chosen not to
address. '®

The Respondent submits that the Claimant cannot be permitted to dictate the content of
its legal arguments, nor can it be permitted to reframe those arguments unilaterally. '® Due
process now bars the Claimant from benefitting from its own procedural wrongdoing. '”
Having failed to raise its issues with the Tribunal promptly, and having chosen not to
address the majority of the Respondent’s arguments in its Opposition, the Claimant is now
not entitled to and has, in fact, waived its right to respond. The Respondent asserts that
Claimant's attempt to reserve its rights and raise arguments in later briefing, or at the
hearing, would violate the Respondent's right to due process, the equality of its defense,
and the ability to present its case. "®

In its Response, the Claimant submits that the Respondent is improperly relying on the
reference to the term “investment agreement’ in § 255 of the Scope Decision in its
Preliminary Objection to expand its sole permitted objection into something broader than
what it is, to encompass what are quintessentially competence objections within objections
that fall within the scope of Article 10.20.4. The Claimant submits that this reference does
not justify the Respondent's attempt to raise objections in its Preliminary Objection which
it did not notice in the 10.20.4 Phase, even if it may now wish it had."®

The Claimant rejects the Respondent’s contention that it has the right to raise the three
arguments made in its Preliminary Objection, and underscores that it was the Tribunal in
its Scope Decision, and not the Claimant, that set the limitations as to what objections
could be raised. The Claimant maintains that as the three objections are patently improper
— because they relate to the competence of the Tribunal and were never notified by the

'5 Request for Relief, Section 1.b. In its Reply the Respondent notes that the Claimant has not even attempted
to explain or justify in any way its failure to raise these issues with the Tribunal promptly, or to address the
Respondent's arguments in the alternative in its Opposition.

‘6 Reply, Section |.
"” Reply, Section L.a.
8 Ibid.

' Response, pp.2-3.

41.

42.

Respondent as required by Procedural Order No. 1. — the approach it adopted in its
Opposition was justified as the Claimant did not want to be complicit in Respondent's
violation of the Tribunal’s Decision on the Scope of Article 10.20.4. The Claimant argues
that the Respondent will suffer no prejudice as a result because, in accordance with
256 of the Scope Decision, it will have every opportunity to raise its other preliminary
objections in its Counter-Memorial and subsequent phases of the proceedings.”°

(2) The Claimant’s Ongoing Violation of the Treaty

The Respondent alleges that the Claimant is using procedural circumstances as an
excuse to take additional steps to pursue local actions in Peru by its affiliates in violation
of the waiver requirement in Article 10.18 of the Treaty, and that any delay by the Tribunal
in ruling on this matter not only facilitates the Claimant's continued violation of the Treaty
(and potential rendering of the Tribunal without jurisdiction), it also allows the Claimant to
have two bites at the apple. According to the Respondent, either the Claimant will obtain
the relief it seeks at the local level, or, if unsuccessful, it will turn to the Tribunal and claim
that the decisions of the Peruvian courts constitute or are evidence of an additional Treaty
violation.?1

The Respondent submits that, unlike many fork-in-the-road clauses which bar only local
actions alleging treaty violations,”* the language of Article 10.18 of the Treaty makes clear
that the Parties have conditioned their consent to arbitrate on claimants having waived
their “right to initiate or continue [...] any proceeding with respect to any measure alleged
to constitute a breach referred to in Article 10.16."° According to the Respondent, the
Treaty is thus intended to ensure that there are no proceedings of any nature concerning
a measure alleged to constitute a breach of the Treaty in parallel to the arbitration.”

9 Op. Cit., p.
21 Request for Relief, Section 2. The Respondent also relies on the decisions in Commerce Group v. El
Salvador; Waste Management, Inc. v. Mexico and Detroit International Bridge Company v. Canada as
evidence of the impact that an early resolution of waiver objections may have. It also notes that the
Respondent's request is in line with Article 17.1 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and the requirement that
the Tribunal “conduct the proceedings so as to avoid unnecessary delay and expense and to provide a fair and
efficient process for resolving the parties’ dispute.”

 

  

» See cases referenced in Request for Relief, FN 22.
23 Reply; Section 2 (the Respondent’s emphasis included). See Article 10.18.2 of the Treaty.
24 Request for Relief, Section 2.a; Reply, Section 2.

9

43.

44.

45.

46.

The Respondent points to Action 368-2012 and the Constitutional Amparo Action as
examples of local proceedings pursued by the Claimant, through its subsidiaries,
concerning measures alleged to constitute a breach of the Treaty being conducted in
parallel to the arbitration in breach of Article 10.18.” It is the Respondent's submission
that, in this way, the Claimant has taken steps intended to deliberately render the
Tribunal’s ultimate decision without effect and urges the Tribunal to take action. It
emphasises that it is not requesting the Tribunal to reconsider its decision with respect to
Article 10.20.4,?° but rather asks the Tribunal, pursuant to its independent authority under
Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (which the Tribunal did not rule on in its
Scope Decision), to decide as a preliminary question the Respondent's objection?” and
put a halt to the Claimant's opportunistic behavior.

In its Reply, the Respondent notes that the Claimant does not deny or even dispute that
the local proceedings it continues to pursue in the Peruvian courts concern measures at
issue in this arbitration; that it is using facts from those local proceedings in this arbitration;
or that, through its subsidiary, it recently requested a ruling in one of those proceedings,
which would directly impact this arbitration.

The Respondent submits that no prejudice to the Claimant will be occasioned by the
Tribunal hearing this issue now. On the contrary, it suggests that if the waiver objection is
not heard and decided now, the result will be an extraordinary waste of resources for the
Parties and the Tribunal in having to brief and to decide all of the complex legal and factual
issues pertaining to the Claimant's claims for tantamount to US$ 1 billion, if those claims
are ultimately dismissed for failure to comply with the Treaty’s waiver requirement.

It is the Claimant's position that the Tribunal has considered and already rejected the
Respondent's arguments on why the waiver issue should be heard during the 10.20.4
Phase. As it has stated in the past, the Claimant maintains its position that the conduct
being complained of does not violate the Treaty’s waiver provisions, but that, in any event,
the Tribunal will be the ultimate judge of the issue at a further stage in the proceedings.
The Claimant suggests that the Respondent understands this, thus explaining why the

°5 Ibid.

26 Reply, Section 2.

?7 Request for Relief, Section 2.b.
28 Reply, Section 2.

9 Ibid.

47.

48.

49.

50.

Respondent is seeking reconsideration of the issue through a ‘backdoor’ of supposed

improper recent conduct.*°

Specifically in relation to the Respondent's request that the Tribunal decide its waiver
objection as a preliminary matter under Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
the Claimant argues that the Tribunal has, following thorough briefing and consideration
over many months, already rejected that request in its Scope Decision.*'

(3) The Claimant's Violation of the Respondent’s Due Process Rights

It is the Respondent's position that the Claimant has infringed the Respondent's right to
due process by preventing the Respondent from setting out its arguments regarding the
Claimant’s violations of law, contract, and Treaty, and from rightfully submitting its
preliminary objections to defend itself in this case. It alleges that the Claimant has done
this through its disregard for due process and the arbitral process; as well as its disregard
for transparency.**

The Respondent points to the Claimant's opposition to transparency provisions and its
resistance to the conduct of the proceedings on a dual language basis, even though
Spanish is the official language of Peru. The Respondent highlights that even after the
Tribunal ruled in Procedural Order No. 1 that the “procedural languages of the arbitration
shall be English and Spanish’ and that translations of key documents should be submitted,
the Claimant has nevertheless failed to submit Spanish translations of its Article 10.20.4
pleadings.*° The Respondent also points out that by opposing that the hearing be open to
the public and objecting to the publication of the Respondent's Preliminary Objection on
the Centre’s website, the Claimant continues to interfere with and control the public’s
access to information despite the transparency provisions in the Treaty.**

The Respondent also complains of the Claimant's continued resort to methods outside the
arbitral process (and beyond its aforementioned breaches of the waiver provisions of the

3 Response, p.4.

| Response, p. 3. The Claimant relies on 4256 of the Decision where it states the Tribunal decided the
Respondent could only bring its competence objections “together with its Counter-Memorial on Liability in
accordance with the timetable set out in Annex A to Procedural Order No. I” and refers also to 185 in support.
*» Request for Relief, Section 3.

3 Op. Cit., Sections 3.a. and b; Reply, Section 3.

4 Op. Cit., Section 3.b.

51.

52.

53.

Treaty) to pursue its objectives, and, in particular, the lobbying of U.S. officials and the
U.S. Government in connection with this dispute.°® According to the Respondent, official
reports indicate that the Claimant has continued to lobby the U.S. Government with
respect to this dispute, including lobbying the State Department and the U.S. Congress
during the period covering the Article 10.20.4 scope phase and beyond, all the way
through the last reporting date of March 31, 2015.°°

The Claimant rejects the Respondent's allegations. While the Claimant apologises in its
Response for its belated translation into Spanish of certain previous submissions and
undertakes to do better in this respect in the future, it objects to the Respondent's
characterisation of these shortcomings as a deliberate “disregard of due process.”*”

The Claimant denies all allegations regarding its supposed lobbying of U.S. officials
concerning the Article 10.20(4) process, and refers the Tribunal to the confirmation
provided by the U.S. government itself that no such lobbying occurred.**

Finally, the Claimant submits that the allegation that it is interfering with the transparency
of the proceedings is baseless. While recognizing the importance of the transparency of
the proceedings, the Claimant submits that the Respondent should not be permitted to
use transparency for its own ends in insisting that its Preliminary Objection be posted on
the Centre’s website in its entirety, despite its containing objections that are not remotely
part of the Article 10.20.4 Phase, were not addressed in the Tribunal’s Decision, and will
not be considered, if at all, until months from now should Respondent raise them it its
Counter-Memorial.°?

% Op. Cit., Section 3.a.

36 Reply, Section 3.

7 Response, p.5. The Respondent takes issue with the Claimant’s suggestion it has in fact submitted the
required Spanish translations in Section 3 of its Reply.

8 The Claimant relies on the Letter of U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Lisa J. Grosh to the Tribunal dated
September 10, 2014. The Respondent asserts in Section 3 of its Reply that the limited statement of the U.S.
State Department that there had been no meetings with the parties concerning the interpretation of Article
10.20.4 does not undermine its position, as lobbying activities may be conducted in various ways.

 

Response, p.5.

12

54.

55.

(4) Request for Relief

In light of the ongoing prejudice suffered by the Respondent as a result of the conduct of

the Claimant complained of in the preceding sections, the Respondent has requested that

the Tribunal rule:

(a)

that the Claimant has waived its right to respond to the Respondent’s arguments
which it has chosen not to address in its Opposition;“° or if the Tribunal is to revise
the briefing schedule and allow the Claimant to address the Respondent’s
arguments, (i) the Respondent must be granted an equal opportunity to respond;
and (ii) the Claimant should not be permitted to address any of the Respondent's
arguments for the first time at the Hearing;*"

that it be permitted to brief, and that the Tribunal decide as a preliminary question
in accordance with the Tribunal’s authority under Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, its objection pertaining to the waiver requirement;4?

that the Claimant comply with the provisions of the Tribunal’s Procedural Order
No. 1 with respect to the translations of documents; that it comply with the
transparency provisions of the Treaty and the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1;
and that the Claimant avoid other actions which unduly interfere with the arbitral
procedure.*$

Regarding the Respondent's Request set out in (a) above, the Claimant submits that the

granting by the Tribunal of the request will amount to “due process” and “equality of the

parties’ violations because the orderly resolution of Respondent's preliminary objections

in accordance with the Scope Decision and the schedule set out in Procedural Order No.

1 (as amended), will be disrupted to the Respondent's benefit at the expense of the

Claimant. The Claimant urges the Tribunal to reject the request on the basis that the

Respondent has no right to raise the arguments at this stage of the proceedings, and it

9 Request for Relief, Section 1.c., Reply.

“| Reply, Section L.a.

* Request for Relief, Section 2.c.; Reply.
8 Op. Cit., Section 3.c.; Reply.

56.

57.

58.

59.

should in fact do so, in accordance with the Tribunal’s Decision, at the appropriate time
later in the arbitration.**

Regarding the Respondent's Request set out in (b), the Claimant suggests this request is
essentially an interlocutory appeal, and that the Tribunal must treat it as such. The
Claimant refers to a recent decision in Perenco v. Ecuador** where the tribunal refused to
entertain what was essentially the appeal of an interlocutory order on the basis that such
decisions are res judicata, and suggests the same approach should be followed here.“°
The Claimant encourages the Tribunal to see the Request for Relief as an attempt to
second-guess the Scope Decision through purported new events and the Claimant’s
alleged misconduct.

The Claimant insists that it has not engaged in any deliberate “disregard of due process”
and that the allegation that it is interfering with the transparency of the proceedings is
baseless. It does however acknowledge that will submit to any directive the Tribunal may
make in this regard.‘”

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISIONS

The Tribunal has been presented with three issues to deal with, each of which is
addressed in turn below.

A. The Claimant’s Interference with the Respondent’s Treaty Right to Bring
Preliminary Objections

As noted in Section Ill.C.(1) above, Peru alleges that Renco has “interfered” with Peru's
Treaty rights to bring its Preliminary Objection.

+ Response, pp.4-5.

4 Perenco Ecuador Limited v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Ecuador’s
Reconsideration Motion, April 10, 2015. The Claimant also refers to ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V.,
ConocoPhillips Hamaca B.V. and ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision on Respondent’s Request for Reconsideration, March 10, 2014.

4 Response, p 3. In its Reply, the Respondent submits that the Claimant's reliance on the tribunal’s decisions
in Perenco v. Ecuador and ConocoPhillips v. Venezuela is misplaced. In those cases, Ecuador and Venezuela
expressly requested the tribunals to reconsider their holdings on jurisdiction and liability, which is not the case
here where the request is grounded on the Tribunal’s independent authority under Article 23(3) of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

+7 Response, p.5.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

The Tribunal recalls that in its Decision on the Scope of Article 10.20.4, it decided that
only one of Peru's objections, namely “the Claimant's alleged failure to state a claim for
breach of the investment agreement’, fell within the scope of Article 10.20.4.

Peru’s argument in this regard was referred to in the Tribunal’s Scope Decision at 54.
The argument was that the Contract concerns third-party claims relating to Doe Run Peru.
Because Doe Run Peru is not a party to the St Louis lawsuits, then even assuming the
facts alleged by Renco are true, Peru claims that, as a matter of law, it could not have
breached the Contract.

In its subsequent submissions in support of its Preliminary Objection, Peru has now
advanced a number of legal arguments including that (1) "there is no investment
agreement between Peru and Renco within the meaning of the Treaty’;“° (2) "[nJeither the
Contract nor the Guaranty was executed by both Peru and Renco”;® and (3) “the Guaranty
is void.”5"

Renco’s position is that, consistent with the Tribunal’s Scope Decision, the only argument
that Peru should be permitted to make in support of its objection is that Peru, as a matter
of law, could not have breached any obligation to Renco under the Contract, and hence
under the Treaty, because the obligations contained in the Contract run only to Doe Run
Peru and DRC, and not to Renco.

Renco further argues that the other three arguments raised by Peru were never set out in
Peru’s previous filings, and that these matters in any event go to competence and fall
outside the 10.20.4 procedure. Therefore, Renco has refused to respond to these three
arguments in its April 17, 2015 Opposition. Instead, Renco has reserved “the right to
request an appropriate revision to the briefing schedule in order to permit it to do so” at
a later stage.

For its part, Peru contends that the three legal arguments in issue are not separate
objections under Article 10.20.4 but arguments in support of Peru’s preliminary objection

+8 Decision, 255.

* Preliminary Objection, p.9.
9 Op. Cit., 429.

5! Op. Cit., 474.

2 Opposition, {23.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

that none of Renco’s claims can be sustained as a matter of law. Peru argues that, by
refusing to engage on these issues, Renco is “dictating” what arguments Peru can and
cannot make in support of its case and thus “interfering" with the exercise of its Treaty
rights.

Peru requests the Tribunal to rule that Renco has waived its right to respond to the three
arguments it has chosen not to address in its briefs.

Renco requests the Tribunal to rule that Peru’s “additional objections” go to competence
and should be dealt with later (presumably at the Counter-Memorial stage, in accordance
with Procedural Order No. 1). Alternatively, if the Tribunal decides the additional objections
are properly within the Article 10.20.4 Phase, then a new briefing schedule will need to be
fixed to allow Renco to respond.

Having carefully considered the arguments addressed by both Parties, the Tribunal has
decided to reject Peru’s request that the Tribunal find Renco has waived its right to
respond to the three arguments raised by Peru in its Preliminary Objection but which were
not addressed by Renco. In the Tribunal’s view, the proper approach, both as a matter of
fairness and procedural efficiency, is to require that all of the relevant legal arguments be
addressed at the same time.

Accordingly, the Tribunal directs the Parties to consult and agree a new briefing schedule
which includes Renco’s responsive submissions on the three arguments raised by Peru.
The Parties are directed to bear in mind the hearing dates already fixed for September 1
and 2, 2015 and are requested to ensure that the new briefing schedule does not put the
hearing dates in jeopardy. The Tribunal invites the Parties to notify the Tribunal of the new
briefing schedule on or before June 5, 2015.

B. The Claimant’s Ongoing Violation of the Treaty

As noted in Section IIl.C.(2) above, Peru alleges that Renco has violated the waiver
requirement in Article 10.18 of the Treaty and that the violation is ongoing. In particular,
Peru says that Renco has used or is using one of its subsidiaries to pursue proceedings
before the courts in Peru and that the proceedings concern the measures at issue in this
arbitration. Renco denies this is a Treaty violation.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

Peru requests the Tribunal decide this issue now as a preliminary issue. Peru makes its
application based on Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules, not as part of the Article
10.20.4 procedure.

Renco requests that Peru’s application be dismissed. Renco says that the time to raise
this issue is when Peru files its Counter-Memorial in accordance with Procedural Order
No. 1.

The Tribunal has carefully considered the positions of both Parties. Given the importance
of this issue, and the urgency with which it has been pressed by Peru, the Tribunal has
decided in accordance with Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules to grant Peru’s request
to hear and decide as a preliminary issue in the arbitration the question of whether Renco
has violated the waiver requirement contained in Article 10.18 of the Treaty.

The Tribunal invites the Parties to consult and agree on a separate and streamlined
timetable to dispose of this discrete issue in a way which does not disrupt the ongoing
Article 10.20.4 procedure.

Peru is invited to note that there will be cost consequences in the event Peru’s application
does not succeed.

C. The Claimant's Violation of the Respondent’s Due Process Rights

As noted in Section III.C.(3) above, Peru states that (i) ICSID is not publishing all of the
case materials on its website due to objections from Renco; (ii) that Renco has not always
complied with the requirement to submit materials in Spanish and English; and (iii) that
Renco is continuing its alleged lobbying activities.

Peru requests an order from the Tribunal that Renco comply with Procedural Order No. 1
and its other Treaty obligations regarding transparency and dual language texts and that
it not “interfere” with the arbitration.

Renco rejects the allegations but has stated that “Renco will submit to any directive the
Tribunal may make in this regard.”®*

53 Claimant’s Response, p.5.

79.

80.

81.

Vi.

82.

The Tribunal notes the allegations made by Peru. Without reaching any judgement on the
allegations themselves, the Tribunal wishes to state, in the strongest possible terms, that
it will not tolerate any breach of the rules of procedure and accordingly directs both Parties
to fully comply with their obligations under the Treaty, the UNCITRAL Rules and
Procedural Order No. 1. Any disputes in this regard which remain unresolved, shall be
referred immediately to the Tribunal for resolution.

Save insofar as the Parties’ applications have been dealt with herein, the same are
dismissed.

COSTS

The Tribunal notes the Claimant's reservation of its right to apply for recovery of the full
costs of Peru’s application.® The Tribunal has decided to make no order as to costs at
this stage under Article 10.20.6 of the Treaty but to reserve its decision to the final stage
of these arbitration proceedings.

OTHER MATTERS

As to all other matters, the Tribunal retains its full power to decide any further matters in
these arbitration proceedings, whether by order, decision or award.

Made in Paris, France

Date: June 2, 2015

4 Claimant’s Response p.4.

[Signature] [Signature]

 

The Honorable L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC Mr. Toby T. Landau, QC
Arbitrator Arbitrator

[Signature]

Dr. Michael J. Moser
Presiding Arbitrator

