IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION PROCEEDING UNDER CHAPTER 10 OF THE UNITED
STATES — PERU TRADE PROMOTION AGREEMENT AND
THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES (2010)

In the arbitration proceeding between

THE RENCO GROUP INC
Claimant

-and-

REPUBLIC OF PERU
Respondent

UNCT/13/1

 

PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Dr. Michael J. Moser, Presiding Arbitrator
The Honorable L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC, Arbitrator
Mr. Toby T. Landau, QC, Arbitrator

Tribunal Assistant
Ms. Ruth Stackpool-Moore
Tribunal Secretary
Ms. Natali Sequeira
Date

July 15, 2016

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing The Renco Group, Inc.:

Mr. Edward G. Kehoe

Mr. Guillermo Aguilar Alvarez

Mr. Henry G. Burnett

Ms. Caline Mouawad

King & Spalding LLP

1185 Avenue of the Americas
New York, New York 10036-4003
United States of America

Representing the Republic of Peru:

Mr. Jonathan C. Hamilton
Ms. Andrea J. Menaker
White & Case LLP

701 Thirteenth Street N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20005
United States of America

Dra. Maria del Carmen Tovar Gil
Estudio Echecopar

Av. La Floresta 497, Piso 5

San Borja, Lima 41 - Peru

Vi.

Vil.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
OVERVIEW OF THE ISSUES AND THE PARTIES’ CONTENTIONG................00+5 9
THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISIONS ............ccsssssssesssesssesssesssesseeseees 12
A. _ Introduction
B. Relevant Treaty Provisions and their Interpretation
C. Background: Waiver as a Precondition to the Existence of a Valid Arbitration
Agreement and the Tribunal’s JUrisdictiOn.............ccccccceeeeeeteeeteteteeeteneneeeee 15
D. The Validity of Renco’s Waiver and Reservation of Rights...............00006 17
(1) Express Terms of Article 10.18(2)(b) .........c.cccccccseseseessseeseseseeseseeeees
(2) Object and Purpose of Article 10.18(2)(b)
(3) “No U-turn” Structure of Article 10.18(2)(b)
(4) Reservation as “SuperfluOus”...............ccccccccessseseseeteseteeteseeneteseenenes
(5) Conclusion 29
E. The Consequence of Renco’s Non-compliance with Article 10.18(2)(b) ...... 29
(1) Overview 29
(2) Cure 31
(3) Severance 40
(4) Abuse of rights 44
(5) Conclusion 48
F. Other Objections 48
COSTS 49
CONCLUDING REMARKS 49

 

FORMAL AWARD 50

INTRODUCTION

This arbitration concerns a dispute submitted under the United States—Peru Trade
Promotion Agreement dated April 12, 2006 (“the Treaty”) and the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules (2010). The Claimant is The Renco Group, Inc. (“Renco” or “the
Claimant”). The Respondent is the Republic of Peru (“Peru” or “the Respondent’).
The Claimant and the Respondent are collectively referred to in this Partial Award
as “the Parties”.

This Partial Award contains the Tribunal’s ruling on Peru’s objection to jurisdiction
as a result of Renco’s alleged non-compliance with the requirement contained in
Article 10.18(2) of the Treaty for an investor to waive its right to initiate or continue
before any administrative tribunal or court under the law of any Party, or any other
dispute settlement procedures, any proceeding with respect to any measure alleged
to constitute a breach referred to in Treaty Article 10.16.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The full procedural history of these proceedings up to December 19, 2014 is set out
in the Tribunal’s Scope Decision referred to in paragraph 14 below. This will not be
repeated here, save to the extent that it is relevant to the issue of Respondent's
waiver.

On December 29, 2010, Renco served its Notice of Intent to Commence Arbitration.

On April 4, 2011, Renco served its Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim,
which it subsequently amended on August 9, 2011. As set out in more detail in
Section III below, the Notices both contained written waivers purportedly submitted
in compliance with Article 10.18(2) of the Treaty.

On May 10, 2013, Peru submitted its Response to Renco’s Amended Notice of
Arbitration and Statement of Claim dated August 9, 2011.

On July 18, 2013, the Tribunal held the first procedural session.

On August 22, 2013, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, which set forth the
procedural timetable for the arbitration. The procedural timetable was the subject of

extensive discussions and consultations between the Parties both before and during
the first procedural session.

On February 20, 2014, Renco submitted its Memorial on Liability, including Witness
Statements and Expert Reports.

On March 21, 2014, Peru submitted a notice of intention to make preliminary
objections pursuant to Article 10.20(4) of the Treaty. Peru gave notice that it
intended to raise three preliminary objections, the first of which was that Renco had
violated the Treaty’s waiver requirement in Article 10.18(2). The second and third
objections related to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis and Renco’s
compliance with various provisions of the investment agreements at issue in the
arbitration.

On April 3, 2014, Renco filed a submission challenging the scope of Peru’s
preliminary objections. Renco submitted that Peru’s objections in fact encompassed
six separate preliminary objections, namely:

(a) The presentation of an invalid waiver;

(b) The violation of the waiver;

(c) The lack of jurisdiction ratione temporis;

(d) The violation of the Treaty’s three-year limitation period;

(e) The failure to state a claim for breach of the investment agreement; and

(f) The failure to submit two factual issues for determination by a technical expert
prior to commencement of the arbitration.

On April 23, 2014, Peru filed a submission on the scope of the preliminary objections.

Thereafter, the Parties filed further submissions in connection with the scope of
Peru’s preliminary objections.

On December 19, 2014, the Tribunal issued its Decision with respect to the Scope
of Peru’s Preliminary Objections under Article 10.20(4) of the Treaty (“the Scope

Decision”). The Spanish version of the Scope Decision was communicated to the
Parties by the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”
or “the Centre”) on February 13, 2015.

In its Scope Decision, the Tribunal concluded as follows:

(a) Article 10.20(4) objections relating to the Tribunal’s competence fall outside
the mandatory scope of Article 10.20(4).

(b) Save for the preliminary objection that Renco had failed to state a claim for
breach of the investment agreement, Peru’s preliminary objections related to
the Tribunal’s competence and therefore fell outside the scope of Article
10.20(4). The Tribunal therefore declined to hear Peru’s competence
objections in the Article 10.20(4) phase of these proceedings.

(c) Peru's preliminary objection relating to the investment agreement should be
briefed and heard as a preliminary objection in the Article 10.20(4) phase of
these proceedings in accordance with a timetable to be set by the Tribunal
following further submissions from the Parties.

After the Scope Decision was issued, by communications dated January 2, 2015,
the Parties informed the Tribunal of their agreed schedule for submissions relating
to Peru’s remaining preliminary objection pursuant to Article 10.20(4).

On January 27, 2015, a two-day hearing regarding Peru’s remaining preliminary
objection pursuant to Article 10.20(4) was scheduled for September 1 and 2, 2015
in Washington, D.C.

On February 21, 2015, Peru filed its Preliminary Objection under Article 10.20(4)
dated February 20, 2015 accompanied by Legal Opinions of John B. Bellinger, III
and Carlos Cardenas Quirés.

On February 23, 2015, Renco notified the Tribunal that it considered that Peru’s
filing raised jurisdictional issues and other issues beyond the scope of objections
permitted in its Decision on the Scope of Article 10.20(4) and that accordingly, Peru’s
submissions should not be posted to the ICSID website. Renco reserved its right to
address what it described as Peru’s “overreaching.”

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

On March 9, 2015, Peru wrote to the Tribunal indicating that its February 23, 2015
submission should be published on the ICSID website in accordance with the
transparency provisions of the Treaty and Procedural Order No. 1.

On April 17, 2015, Renco submitted its Opposition to Peru’s 10.20(4) Objection
accompanied by the Legal Expert Report of Dr. Fernando de Trazegnies.

On April 30, 2015, Peru addressed to the Tribunal, in a letter dated April 29, 2015,
a request seeking relief from alleged “ongoing prejudice” caused by Renco’s conduct
within and beyond the pending arbitration (“Respondent’s Request for Relief’).
Amongst other matters, in the Request for Relief, Peru complained that Renco had
engaged in an ongoing violation of the waiver requirement contained in Article
10.18(2) of the Treaty as a result of the conduct of Renco’s subsidiary company in
domestic bankruptcy proceedings in Peru.

On May 4, 2015, the Tribunal invited Renco to comment on Peru’s April 29, 2015
letter which it did on May 5, 2015.

On May 7, 2015, Peru wrote to the Tribunal requesting: (i) an opportunity to be heard
with respect to Renco’s response of May 5, 2015; and (ii) an immediate (and at least
temporary) suspension of the briefing calendar until the procedural implications of
the pending issues were resolved. Both Renco and Peru commented further to the
Tribunal on the request for a suspension of the briefing calendar on May 8, 2015.

On May 11, 2015, the Tribunal informed the Parties of the temporary suspension of
Peru’s Article 10.20(4) filing deadline and invited Peru to submit a full reply to
Renco’s May 5, 2015 letter by May 18, 2015.

On May 19, 2015, Peru submitted a reply to Renco’s letter of May 5, 2015, written

further to Peru’s letter of April 29, 2015, requesting relief from “ongoing prejudice’
caused by Renco.

On May 21, 2015, the Tribunal informed Renco that if it wished to add anything to
its submissions on the issues raised by Peru including and following its submission
dated April 29, 2015, it must do so before May 25, 2015. Renco indicated by reply
that it did not wish to comment further.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

On June 2, 2015, the Tribunal issued its Decision Regarding Peru’s Requests for
Relief. The Spanish version of the Decision was communicated to the Parties by
ICSID on July 24, 2015. The Tribunal reached the following conclusion with respect
to Peru’s contention that Renco violated the waiver requirement in Article 10.18(2)(b)
of the Treaty:
Given the importance of this issue, and the urgency with which it has been pressed by
Peru, the Tribunal has decided in accordance with Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL
Rules to grant Peru’s request to hear and decide as a preliminary issue in the
arbitration the question of whether Renco has violated the waiver requirement
contained in Article 10.18 of the Treaty.
Pursuant to the Tribunal’s Decision of June 2, 2015, the Parties proposed a
procedural calendar for the Tribunal to consider on June 10, 2015.

By letter dated June 10, 2015, Renco requested:

... that the Tribunal’s December 18, 2015 Scope Decision in respect of Peru’s waiver
objection be reinstated [and that the Tribunal] ... reconsider and reverse the portion
of its June 2, 2015 Decision requiring full briefing on Peru’s objection that Renco
violated the waiver provisions of the Treaty, and reaffirm its previous ruling that such
objection be brought by Peru together with its Counter-Memorial on Liability in
accordance with the timetable set out in Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1.

On June 17, 2015, Peru submitted its reply to Renco’s request of June 10, 2015.

On June 20, 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 reiterating its
direction to the Parties to agree on a new briefing schedule including Renco’s
responsive submissions on the arguments raised by Peru in its Preliminary
Objection under Article 10.20.4. The Tribunal further declined to reconsider its
Decision of June 2, 2015. Accordingly, the Tribunal reiterated its direction to the
Parties to agree on a “separate and streamlined timetable” to address the alleged
ongoing breaches by Renco of the waiver requirement. Counsel were invited to
inform the Tribunal of the new agreed briefing schedule, hearing dates and timetable
by Wednesday, June 24, 2015. The Spanish version of Procedural Order No. 3 was
communicated to the Parties by ICSID on July 24, 2015.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

1

Following the issuance of Procedural Order No. 3, the Parties exchanged their
views' on the procedural calendar and hearing dates.

On July 6, 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4, establishing a
procedural schedule to address the Article 10.20(4) objections and a “separate and
streamlined” schedule for the waiver objection. The Spanish version of Procedural
Order No. 4 was communicated to the Parties by ICSID on July 24, 2015.

Pursuant to the schedule established by the Tribunal in Procedural Order No. 4,
Peru filed its Memorial on Waiver on July 10, 2015 (“Memorial on Waiver” or

“Memorial’).

On July 30, 2015, Renco filed its Supplemental Opposition to Peru’s Preliminary
10.20(4) Objection.

On August 10, 2015, Renco filed its Counter-Memorial Concerning Peru’s Waiver
Objections (“Counter-Memorial on Waiver” or “Counter-Memorial’).

On August 17, 2015, the United States Government indicated that it had been
monitoring the developments in the case and it was “studying the most recent
pleadings on waiver, which were obtained from the ICSID website, and is
considering whether to make a submission to the Tribunal on issues of interpretation
of the U.S.—Peru Trade Promotion Agreement pursuant to Article 10.20.2”. The
United States Government further informed the Tribunal and the disputing Parties of
its intention to attend the hearing on waiver.

On August 17, 2015, Peru submitted its Reply on Waiver (“Reply on Waiver” or
“Reply’).

On August 21, 2015, the Tribunal invited the Parties to submit their observations, if
any, on the United States Government's letter of August 17, 2015. The Parties did
not raise any objections to the United States Government's letter.

See Renco’s correspondence of June 22, 25, 27 and 29, 2015 and July 3, 2015. See also Peru's

correspondence of June 22, 25, 26 (received on June 27), 27, 29 and, 30, 2015 and July 3, 2015.

A.

42.

43.

On August 24, 2015, Renco submitted its Rejoinder on Waiver (“Rejoinder on
Waiver’ or “Rejoinder’).

On September 1, 2015, pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1 and Article 10.20.2 of
the Treaty, the United States Government submitted its second non-disputing Party
written submission regarding interpretation of the Treaty (“Second Submission of
the United States of America’).

On September 2, 2015, the Tribunal held a hearing in Washington D.C. to hear the
Parties’ oral arguments on the waiver objection. Present at the hearing were the
members of the Arbitral Tribunal, the Tribunal Secretary and the following Party
representatives and other attendees:

On behalf of Renco:

Mr. Edward G. Kehoe King & Spalding, LLP
Mr. Henry G. Burnett (Harry) King & Spalding, LLP
Mr. Guillermo Aguilar-Alvarez King & Spalding, LLP
Ms. Margarete Stevens King & Spalding, LLP
Mr. David H. Weiss King & Spalding, LLP
Ms. Jessica Bees und Chrostin King & Spalding, LLP
Ms. Ashley Grubor King & Spalding, LLP
Ms. Veronica Garcia King & Spalding, LLP
Mr. Dennis A. Sadlowski The Renco Group, Inc.
On behalf of Peru:

Mr. Jonathan C. Hamilton White & Case LLP
Ms. Andrea Menaker White & Case LLP
Mr. Francisco X. Jij6n White & Case LLP
Ms. Michelle Grando White & Case LLP
Ms. Jacqueline Argueta White & Case LLP
Mr. Guillermo Cuevas White & Case LLP
Mr. Alejandro Martinez de Hoz White & Case LLP
Mr. Carlos Natera White & Case LLP
Ms. Maria del Carmen Tovar Estudio Echecopar
Ambassador Luis Miguel Castilla Ambassador of Peru to Washington D.C
Mr. Carlos José Valderrama Bernal Republic of Peru

Mr. Rafael Suarez Republic of Peru

On behalf of the United States Government (as a non-disputing Party):

Ms. Lisa Grosh Assistant Legal Adviser
Ms. Alicia Cate Attorney-Adviser

Mr. John Blanck Attorney-Adviser

Ms. Anna Estrina Financial Economist

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

Mr. Brooks Allen Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Juan Millan Acting Assistant U.S. Trade Representative
for Monitoring & Enforcement

Court Reporters:

Mr. Dante Rinaldi Court Reporter — Spanish Language
Ms. Gail Verbano Court Reporter — English Language
Interpreters:

Ms. Judith Letendre English /Spanish

Ms. Stella Covre English /Spanish

Ms. Karin Ruckhaus English /Spanish

On September 3, 2015, and as permitted at the conclusion of the hearing, Renco
added two additional legal authorities to the record.

On September 9, 2015, the Centre provided copies of the audio recordings of the
hearing to the Parties.

On September 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17, 2015 the Parties exchanged observations with
respect to additional legal authorities addressed by the Parties at the close of the
Hearing on Waiver.

On September 16, 2015 the Tribunal posed four specific questions and invited the
Parties to submit their responses within seven (7) days and submissions in reply, if
any, within seven (7) days thereafter.

The Parties submitted consolidated corrections to the transcripts of the Hearing on
Waiver on September 22, 2015.

Renco’s responses to the Tribunal’s questions of September 16, 2015, were
received on September 23, 2015 (“Renco’s Post-hearing Submissions’). Peru’s
responses were received on September 24, 2015 (“Peru’s Post-hearing
Submissions’).

On September 27, 2015, the Tribunal invited the Parties to comment on the
relevance of the principle of severability to the question of the legal effect of the
reservation of rights contained in Renco’s waiver.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

The Parties submitted their replies to the Tribunal’s invitation on September 30, 2015
(‘Renco’s Post-hearing Reply Submissions” and “Peru’s Post-hearing Reply
Submissions’).

On October 11, 2015, the United States Government submitted its third non-
disputing Party written submission regarding interpretation of the Treaty in relation
to the relevance of the principle of severability (‘Third Submission of the United
States of America’).

On October 18, 2015, Peru submitted a Post-hearing Supplemental Submission,
responding to Renco’s submission dated September 30, 2015 (“Peru’s
Supplemental Post-hearing Submissions’).

On October 23, 2015, Renco submitted its comments on the Third Submission of
the United States of America and Peru’s Supplemental Post-hearing Submissions
(‘Renco’s Supplemental Post-hearing Submissions’).

On October 23, 2015, Peru wrote to the Tribunal to confirm the agreement between
the United States and Peru regarding the interpretation of the waiver requirement
contained in Article 10.18 of the Treaty.

OVERVIEW OF THE ISSUES AND THE PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS

In its Notice of Arbitration dated April 4, 2011, Renco submitted a claim to arbitration
on its own behalf under Article 10.16(1)(a) of the Treaty and a claim on behalf of its
wholly-owned local enterprise, Doe Run Peru S.R. LTDA (“DRP”), under Article
10.16(1)(b).

In its Amended Notice of Arbitration dated August 9, 2011, Renco withdrew its
enterprise claim under Article 10.16(1)(b). However, Renco retained the claim it had
submitted to arbitration on its own behalf under Article 10.16(1)(a). DRP also
purported to withdraw its written waiver.

58.

59.

60.

Renco’s Notice of Arbitration and Amended Notice of Arbitration were accompanied

by written waivers in the following terms:?

 

Waiver Accompanying Renco’s
Notice of Arbitration

Waiver Accompanying Renco’s
Amended Notice of Arbitration

 

“Finally, as required by Article 10.18(2) of
the Treaty, Renco and its affiliate DRP
waive their right to initiate or continue before
any administrative tribunal or court under the
law of any Party, or other dispute settlement
procedures, any proceeding with respect to
any measure alleged to constitute a breach
referred to in Article 10.16, except for
proceedings for interim injunctive relief, not
involving payment of monetary damages,
before a judicial or administrative tribunal of
Peru. To the extent that the Tribunal may
decline to hear any claims asserted herein
on jurisdictional or admissibility grounds,
Claimants reserve the right to bring such
claims in another forum for resolution on the
merits.”

 

 

“Finally, as required by Article 10.18(2) of
the Treaty, Renco waives its right to initiate
or continue before any administrative
tribunal or court under the law of any Party,
or other dispute settlement procedures, any
proceeding with respect to any measure
alleged to constitute a breach referred to in
Article 10.16, except for proceedings for
interim injunctive relief, not involving
payment of monetary damages, before a
judicial or administrative tribunal of Peru. To
the extent that the Tribunal may decline
to hear any claims asserted herein on
jurisdictional or admissibility grounds,
Claimant reserves the right to bring such
claims in another forum for resolution on
the merits.”

 

 

In this Partial Award, The Tribunal will refer to the italicised text in the waiver
accompanying Renco’s Amended Notice of Arbitration as “the reservation of rights”.

It is common ground that the provisions of Article 10.18(2)(b) dealing with waiver
encompass two distinct requirements: a formal requirement (the submission of a
written waiver which complies with the terms of Article 10.18(2)(b)) and a material
requirement (the investor abstaining from initiating or continuing local proceedings
in violation of its written waiver).° As the arbitral tribunal held in Waste Management
/, when considering the waiver provision in Article 1121 of the North American Free
Trade Agreement (“NAFTA’):*

Any waiver, and by extension, that one which is now the subject of debate, implies a
formal and material act on the part of the person tendering [the] same. To this end,
this Tribunal will therefore have to ascertain whether Waste Management did indeed
submit the waiver in accordance with the formalities envisaged under NAFTA and
whether it has respected the terms of same through the material act of either dropping
or desisting from initiating parallel proceedings before other courts or tribunals.

The redlined text appears in the original version of Renco’s Amended Notice of Arbitration. The Tribunal

has added the emphasis in bold and italics to the final sentence of the waiver.

Memorial on Waiver 4 15; Counter-Memorial on Wavier 65.

Waste Management Inc v United Mexican States (I\CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/2) Award dated June 2,
2000 § 20.

61.

62.

63.

Peru contends that Renco has failed to comply with the formal and material
requirements of the waiver provision in Article 10.18(2)(b) of the Treaty. Peru cites
the following reasons:

(a) As to formal compliance:

(i) By its “reservation of rights” Renco has purported to reserve its right to
bring claims in another forum for resolution on the merits if the Tribunal
dismisses any claims on jurisdictional or admissibility grounds. As a
consequence, says Peru, Renco’s waiver is non-compliant.

(ii) |DRP has failed to submit a waiver in the Amended Notice of Arbitration,
despite the fact that Renco is submitting claims on behalf of DRP under
the Treaty.

(b) As to material compliance, Peru contends that Renco has (through DRP)
initiated and/or continued proceedings in the Peruvian courts concerning
measures alleged to constitute a breach of the Treaty in this arbitration.

As a result of Renco’s alleged non-compliance with the Treaty’s waiver
requirements, Peru submits that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over Renco’s claims.
Peru asks the Tribunal to render an award dismissing Renco’s claims for lack of
jurisdiction, together with an award of costs in its favor.

Renco contends that it has complied with both the formal and material requirements
of Article 10.18(2)(b) of the Treaty. Renco relies on the following grounds:

(a) As to formal compliance:

(i) |The Treaty does not prevent a claimant from pursuing claims on the
merits in another forum if its Treaty case is dismissed on jurisdictional or
admissibility grounds. Therefore, Renco’s waiver is compliant.

(ii) | Renco is asserting its own claims under Article 10.16(1)(a) for loss and
damage that it has suffered as a result, in part, of measures that Peru
has inflicted on its enterprise, DRP. Such claims, Renco asserts, may

64.

65.

66.

67.

be submitted under Article 10.16(1)(a) and do not require a waiver from
DRP.

(b) As to material compliance:

(i) | The Peruvian proceedings relate to defensive measures taken by DRP,
and defensive measures taken by an investor to defend itself against
claims asserted in local proceedings do not breach the waiver
requirement in Article 10.18(2)(b).

(ii) The local proceedings do not relate to the same measures that are
alleged to constitute a breach of Article 10.16(1)(a).

For these reasons, Renco submits that the Tribunal should dismiss Renco’s waiver
objections. Renco also seeks an award of costs.

The foregoing is only a brief summary of the gist of the Parties’ positions in relation
to Renco’s compliance or non-compliance with the formal and material requirements
of Article 10.18(2)(b). The Tribunal has had the benefit of extensive written and oral
submissions from the Parties in relation to the issues presented. The Tribunal has
carefully considered all of these submissions and, while not setting out every such
submission in the body of this Award, refers in more detail to the central points raised
by the Parties in the next section.

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISIONS
A. Introduction

The Tribunal will begin by considering Peru’s contention that Renco has failed to
comply with the formal requirement of Article 10.18(2)(b) by including the reservation
of rights in the waiver accompanying its Amended Notice of Arbitration.

B. Relevant Treaty Provisions and their Interpretation

The issues raised by the Parties involve complex issues of interpretation of the
relevant provisions of the Treaty. The principal provisions engaged are Articles
10.16, 10.17 and 10.18. These provisions establish the procedures by which an
investor may submit an investment dispute to arbitration. Given their importance to

the issues at hand, it is appropriate to set out the text of these provisions in full
below:

Article 10.16: Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

1. In the event that a disputing party considers that an investment dispute cannot
be settled by consultation and negotiation:
(a) _ the claimant, on its own behalf, may submit to arbitration under this
Section a claim
(i) that the respondent has breached
(A) an obligation under Section A,
(B) aninvestment authorization, or
(C) aninvestment agreement; and
(ii) that the claimant has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or
arising out of, that breach; and
(b) the claimant, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that is a
juridical person that the claimant owns or controls directly or indirectly,
may submit to arbitration under this Section a claim
(i) that the respondent has breached
(A) an obligation under Section A,
(B) aninvestment authorization, or
(C) aninvestment agreement; and
(ii) that the enterprise has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or
arising out of, that breach,
provided that a claimant may submit pursuant to subparagraph (a)(i)(C) or
(b)(i)(C) a claim for breach of an investment agreement only if the subject matter
of the claim and the claimed damages directly relate to the covered investment
that was established or acquired, or sought to be established or acquired, in
reliance on the relevant investment agreement [...]

Article 10.17: Consent of Each Party to Arbitration

1. Each Party consents to the submission of a claim to arbitration under this
Section in accordance with this Agreement.

2. The consent under paragraph 1 and the submission of a claim to arbitration
under this Section shall satisfy the requirements of:

(a) Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and the
ICSID Additional Facility Rules for written consent of the parties to the
dispute;

(b) Article II of the New York Convention for an “agreement in writing;” and
(c) Article | of the Inter-American Convention for an “agreement.”
Article 10.18: Conditions and Limitations on Consent of Each Party
1. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section if more than three
years have elapsed from the date on which the claimant first acquired, or should have
first acquired, knowledge of the breach alleged under Article 10.16.1 and knowledge

that the claimant (for claims brought under Article 10.16.1(a)) or the enterprise (for
claims brought under Article 10.16.1(b)) has incurred loss or damage.

68.

69.

2. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section unless:
(a) _ the claimant consents in writing to arbitration in accordance with the
procedures set out in this Agreement; and
(b) _ the notice of arbitration is accompanied,
(i) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article 10.16.1(a), by the
claimant's written waiver, and
(ii) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article 10.16.1(b), by the
claimant’s and the enterprise's written waivers
of any right to initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court
under the law of any Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any
proceeding with respect to any measure alleged to constitute a breach referred
to in Article 10.16.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2(b), the claimant (for claims brought under Article
10.16.1(a)) and the claimant or the enterprise (for claims brought under Article
10.16.1(b)) may initiate or continue an action that seeks interim injunctive relief and
does not involve the payment of monetary damages before a judicial or administrative
tribunal of the respondent, provided that the action is brought for the sole purpose of
preserving the claimant's or the enterprise’s rights and interests during the pendency
of the arbitration.

4. (a) Noclaim may be submitted to arbitration:

(i) for breach of an investment authorization under Article
10.16.1(a)(i)(B) or Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(B), or

(ii) for breach of an investment agreement under Article
10.16.1(a)(i)(C) or Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(C),

if the claimant (for claims brought under 10.16.1(a)) or the claimant or the

enterprise (for claims brought under 10.16.1(b)) has previously submitted

the same alleged breach to an administrative tribunal or court of the

respondent, or to any other binding dispute settlement procedure.

(b) For greater certainty, if a claimant elects to submit a claim of the type
described in subparagraph (a) to an administrative tribunal or court of the
respondent, or to any other binding dispute settlement procedure, that
election shall be definitive, and the claimant may not thereafter submit
the claim to arbitration under Section B.

The Tribunal must interpret these provisions in accordance with the rules of treaty
interpretation set out in Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
(‘VCLT’). The provisions of the Treaty “shall be interpreted in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose” (VCLT, Article 31(1)).

For the purposes of interpretation, the “context” comprises the text, the preamble of
the Treaty and its Annexes as well as the matters set out in Article 31(1)(a) and (b)
of the VCLT. Furthermore, the Tribunal must “take into account, together with
context: (a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions...” (VCLT, Article 31(3)).

70.

71.

72.

73.

The VCLT provides that the Tribunal may have recourse to “supplementary means
of interpretation, including the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances
of its conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of
Article 31, or to determine the meaning when the interpretation according to Article
31: (a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or (b) leads to a result which is
manifestly absurd or unreasonable”. Neither Party has referred to relevant parts of
the travaux préparatoires in relation to the issues which arise for consideration.

Cc. Background: Waiver as a Precondition to the Existence of a Valid
Arbitration Agreement and the Tribunal’s Jurisdiction

It is axiomatic that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction must be founded upon the existence of
a valid arbitration agreement between Renco and Peru. Under the Treaty, an
arbitration agreement is formed when an investor accepts Peru’s standing offer to
arbitrate claims by submitting a claim to arbitration in accordance with the
requirements set forth in Section B of Chapter 10 of the Treaty. Peru’s consent to
arbitrate and “the submission of a claim to arbitration under [Section B]” are deemed
to satisfy the requirements of a written arbitration agreement for the purposes of,
inter alia, Article || of the New York Convention (see Article 10.17(2)).

The Treaty establishes several important conditions and limitations on Peru's
consent to arbitrate claims under the Treaty. This is made clear by the title to Article
10.18 (“Conditions and Limitations on Consent of Each Party”). Under Article
10.18(2), “no claim may be submitted to arbitration” under Section B unless:

(a) _ the claimant consents in writing to arbitration in accordance with the
procedures set out in this Agreement; and
(b) _ the notice of arbitration is accompanied,
(i) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article 10.16.1(a), by the
claimant's written waiver, and
(ii) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article 10.16.1(b), by the
claimant’s and the enterprise's written waivers
of any right to initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court
under the law of any Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any
proceeding with respect to any measure alleged to constitute a breach referred
to in Article 10.16.

Accordingly, an arbitration agreement will be formed under the Treaty only if the
investor satisfies the formal and material waiver requirements of Article 10.18(2)(b).
This is so because compliance with Article 10.18(2) is a condition and limitation upon

74.

75.

5

Peru’s consent to arbitrate. Article 10.18(2) contains the terms upon which Peru's
non-negotiable offer to arbitrate is capable of being accepted by an investor.
Compliance with Article 10.18(2) is therefore an essential prerequisite to the
existence of an arbitration agreement and hence the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.®

In terms of compliance with the formal requirement, an investor's waiver must be
given in writing and it must be “clear, explicit and categorical”. As emphasized by
the tribunal in Waste Management (No 1)°

The act of waiver per se is a unilateral act, since its effect in terms of
extinguishment is occasioned solely by the intent underlying same. The
requirement of a waiver in any context implies a voluntary abdication of rights,
inasmuch as this act generally leads to a substantial modification of the pre-
existing legal situation, namely, the forfeiting or extinguishment of the right.
Waiver thus entails exercise of the power of disposal by the holder thereof in
order to bring about this legal effect.

Whatever the case, any waiver must be clear, explicit and categorical, it
being improper to deduce same from expressions the meaning of which is at all
dubious.

On the basis of the foregoing, any waiver submitted pursuant to the
provisions of NAFTA Article 1121(2)(b) must, depending upon the petition or
request filed, be clear in all its terms with regard to abdication of given rights by
the party proposing to make said waiver.

Arbitral tribunals which have been called upon to interpret the validity of waivers
submitted by investors have repeatedly held that a waiver is invalid if an investor
purports to carve out from its scope certain domestic court proceedings which cover
the same ground as the measures being challenged in arbitration. For example, in
Waste Management (No |) the claimant's waiver stated as follows:

This waiver does not apply, however, to any dispute settlement proceedings involving
allegations that Respondent has violated duties imposed by other sources of law,
including the municipal law of Mexico.

Without derogating from the waiver required by NAFTA Article 1121, Claimants here
set forth their understanding that the above waiver does not apply to any dispute
settlement proceedings involving allegations that Respondent has violated duties

See Commerce Group Corp v The Republic of El Salvador ICSID Case No. ARB/09117, Award, March

14, 2011 4 115 (interpreting Article 10.18 of CAFTA-DR Treaty: “[i]f the waiver is invalid, there is no
consent. The Tribunal, therefore, does not have jurisdiction over the Parties’ CAFTA dispute”). See also
Railroad Development Corporation v Republic of Guatemala, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/23, Decision on
Objection to Jurisdiction, CAFTA Article 10.20.5, November 17, 2008 4 56 (“Only if and ‘unless’ have the
same meaning and, whether the term ‘precedent’ is used or not, the conditions set forth in Article 10.18
need to be met before the consent of the Respondent to arbitration is perfected”).

Waste Management Inc v United Mexican States (No |), \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/2, Award, June 2,
2000 § 18.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

7

imposed by sources of law other than Chapter Eleven of NAFTA, including the
municipal law of Mexico.

The arbitral triounal concluded that the claimant had “issued a statement of intent
different from that required in a waiver pursuant to NAFTA Article 1121”. As a result,
the tribunal concluded that the waiver was invalid and therefore that the tribunal
lacked jurisdiction.”

D. The Validity of Renco’s Waiver and Reservation of Rights

Against the background set out above, the Tribunal now turns to consider whether
Renco’s waiver complies with the formal requirements of Article 10.18(2)(b).

(1) Express Terms of Article 10.18(2)(b)

In accordance with Article 10.18(2)(b), in order to engage Peru’s consent to arbitrate
under the Treaty, Renco must submit a written waiver:
of any right to initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court under the

law of any Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any proceeding with respect
to any measure alleged to constitute a breach referred to in Article 10.16

(emphasis added).

In the Tribunal’s opinion, the repeated references to the word “any” in Article 10.18
demonstrate that an investor's waiver must be comprehensive: waivers qualified in
any way are impermissible.

Renco has purported to qualify its written waiver by reserving its right to bring claims
in another forum for resolution on the merits if this Tribunal were to decline to hear
any claims on jurisdictional or admissibility grounds.

In the Tribunal’s opinion, this qualification is not permitted by the express terms of
Article 10.18(2)(b). The only express exception to the waiver requirement set out in
Article 10.18(2)(b) is for proceedings seeking “interim injunctive relief and [which do]
not involve the payment of monetary damages before a judicial or administrative

Waste Management Inc v United Mexican States (No |), \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/2, Award, June 2,

2000 99 31-32.

82.

83.

84.

85.

8

tribunal of the respondent” (Article 10.18(3)). It is common ground that this exception
does not apply here.

In the considered judgment of this Tribunal, the term “any proceeding” in Article
10.18(2)(b) must be interpreted to cover proceedings which are or may be “initiated
or continued” either:

(a) At the time the notice of arbitration is filed;
(b) During the pendency of the arbitration; and/or

(c) After the arbitration has concluded, whether or not the investor’s claims are
dismissed on jurisdictional or admissibility grounds or on the merits.

The Tribunal considers that this interpretation is clear from the ordinary meaning of
the words “any proceeding” in Article 10.18(2)(b). There is no basis in the text of the
Treaty for qualifying the temporal scope of the “proceeding[s]” in respect of which a
written waiver must be provided, for example by excluding future proceedings which
may be “initiated” by an investor if the Tribunal were to decide that it lacked

jurisdiction or that Renco’s claims were inadmissible.
(2) Object and Purpose of Article 10. 18(2)(b)

The Tribunal’s interpretation of Article 10.18(2)(b) is consistent with the object and
purpose of the waiver provision. Renco, Peru and the United States all agree that
the object and purpose of Article 10.18(2)(b) is to protect a respondent State from
having to litigate multiple proceedings in different fora relating to the same measure,
and to minimise the risk of double recovery and inconsistent determinations of fact
and law by different tribunals.®

Investment tribunals have concluded that the comparable waiver provision in Article
1121 of NAFTA has a similar object and purpose. For example:

(a) In Waste Management Inc v United Mexican States (No 1), the tribunal held
that “when both legal actions [parallel domestic and NAFTA claims] have a

Memorial on Waiver § 2; Counter-Memorial on Waiver 4 56; Second Submission of the United States of

America 4 5.

86.

87.

88.

legal basis derived from the same measures, they can no longer continue
simultaneously in light of the imminent risk that the Claimant may obtain the
double benefit in its claim for damages. This is precisely what NAFTA Article
1121 seeks to avoid”.®

(b) In Waste Management Inc v United Mexican States (No II), the tribunal held
that “[nJo doubt the concern of the NAFTA parties in inserting Article 1121 was
to achieve finality of decision and to avoid multiplicity of proceedings”. '°

(c) In International Thunderbird Gaming Corp v United Mexican States, the
tribunal observed that “[t]he consent and waiver requirements set forth in
Article 1121 serve a specific purpose, namely to prevent a party from pursuing
concurrent domestic and international remedies, which could either give rise
to conflicting outcomes (and thus legal uncertainty) or lead to double redress
for the same conduct or measure”."!

Renco submits that its reservation of rights does not undermine the object and
purpose of Article 10.18(2)(b) because if the Tribunal were to dismiss all claims on
jurisdictional or admissibility grounds there would be no risk of concurrent
proceedings, double recovery or inconsistent findings of fact or law.

The Tribunal cannot accept Renco’s submission. The burden and risk of a
multiplicity of proceedings arises whether or not the proceedings are commenced in
parallel or sequentially. The fact that one set of proceedings terminates, and another
set then commences, may be just as prejudicial to the respondent State as two sets
of proceedings running in parallel.

Renco’s argument also overlooks the possibility that only some of its claims may be
dismissed on jurisdictional or admissibility grounds. If Renco then chose to litigate

Waste Management Inc v United Mexican States (No |), \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/2, Award, June 2,

2000 § 27.3.
Waste Management Inc v United Mexican States (No II) \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3), Decision of the
Tribunal concerning Mexico's Preliminary Objection concerning the Previous Proceedings, June 26, 2002

927.

International Thunderbird Gaming Corp v United Mexican States Ad-hoc UNCTRAL, Award, January 26,
2006 { 118. See also Detroit International Bridge Company v Government of Canada, PCA Case No.
2012-25, Article 1128 Submission of the United States of America, February 14, 2014 § 6 (‘This
construction of the phrase is consistent with the purpose of the waiver provision: to avoid the need for a
Respondent to litigate concurrent and overlapping proceedings in multiple forums, and to minimize not
only the risk of double recovery, but also the risk of “conflicting outcomes (and thus legal uncertainty)”.)

89.

90.

91.

the dismissed claims in a domestic court or tribunal, while at the same time pursuing
the remaining claims before this Tribunal, Peru would be forced to litigate concurrent
proceedings before a domestic court and before this Tribunal. In this scenario, the
respondent State would confront a multiplicity of proceedings. There is also a risk
that Renco may recover twice for the same damage and/or that the domestic court
or tribunal may reach conflicting findings of fact or law. In the Tribunal’s opinion,
Article 10.18(2)(b) is designed to avoid these risks from eventuating.

(3) “No U-turn” Structure of Article 10.18(2)(b)

Peru submits that Renco’s reservation of rights is also incompatible with the “no U-
turn” structure of Article 10.18(2)(b). The United States, in its Second Submission
as a non-disputing Party, agrees with Peru that Article 10.18(2)(b) is a “‘no U-turn’
waiver provision”. As such, so it is argued, Article 10.18(2)(b) is designed to
encourage investors to investigate possible remedies within the host state’s
municipal law before seeking to internationalise their dispute by filing a notice of
arbitration under the Treaty. However, once an investor has chosen to invoke the
dispute settlement provisions in the Treaty, the waiver requirement prevents an
investor from subsequently returning to a domestic court, irrespective of the outcome
of the arbitration.

Renco disagrees with Peru’s and the United States’ interpretation. Renco argues
that an investor may not perform a U-turn once it has received a determination on
the merits from an arbitral tribunal but, until that point is reached, the investor may
pursue claims in a domestic court which have been dismissed on jurisdictional or
admissibility grounds. Renco also points out that the object and purpose of Article
10.18(2)(b) cannot be to encourage investors to investigate possible remedies in the
domestic courts because the Treaty includes a “fork in the road” provision.

Renco is correct to point out that, under Article 10.18(4) of the Treaty, an investor is
prevented from submitting an investment agreement claim to arbitration if the
claimant or its enterprise “has previously submitted the same alleged breach to an
administrative tribunal or court of the respondent, or to any other binding dispute
settlement procedure”. Article 10.18(4)(b) provides as follows:

20

92.

93.

94.

95.

For greater certainty, if a claimant elects to submit a claim of the type described in
subparagraph (a) to an administrative tribunal or court of the respondent, or to any
other binding dispute settlement procedure, that election shall be definitive, and the
claimant may not thereafter submit the claim to arbitration under Section B.
Annex 10-G of the Treaty also contains a “fork in the road” provision for Section A
obligations (for example, the prohibition against expropriation without compensation
in Article 10.7 and the fair and equitable treatment obligation in Article 10.5).
Paragraph (1) of Annex 10-G provides that “[a]n investor of the United States may
not submit to arbitration under Section B a claim that a Party has breached an
obligation under Section A ... if the investor or the enterprise, respectively, has
alleged that breach of an obligation under Section A in proceedings before a court
or administrative tribunal of that Party”. Paragraph (2) of Annex 10-G provides as
follows:
For greater certainty, if an investor of the United States elects to submit a claim of the
type described in paragraph 1 to a court or administrative tribunal of a Party other than
the United States, that election shall be definitive, and the investor may not thereafter
submit the claim to arbitration under Section B.
The Tribunal observes that, unlike Article 10.18(4)(b) and paragraph (2) of Annex
10-G, Article 10.18(2)(b) does not explicitly provide that an investor's election to
submit a claim to arbitration “shall be definitive” and that the investor “may not
thereafter” submit its claim to a court or administrative tribunal.

However, in the Tribunal’s opinion, the absence of such language does not assist
Renco’s argument. Article 10.18(2) sets out the requirements which must be
satisfied as part of the submission of a claim to arbitration: in particular, the formal
requirement of the provision of a written waiver. Article 10.18(2) does not address
the effect of commencing proceedings before another forum, and so there is simply
no place for the phrase “shall be definitive” which is found in Article 10.18(4) and
Annex 10-G.

In any event, Article 10.18(2) does provide, in effect, that the investor “may not
thereafter submit its claim to a domestic court” by insisting upon a written waiver of
“any right to initiate or continue before any [forum] any proceeding with respect to
any measure alleged to constitute a breach...” (emphasis added). In the Tribunal’s
opinion, this language must be interpreted to require an investor definitively and
irrevocably to waive all rights to pursue claims before a domestic court or tribunal.

21

96.

97.

98.

99.

12

The Tribunal accepts the submission of Peru and the United States that Article
10.18(2)(b) is a “no U-turn” provision which is intended to provide flexibility, by
allowing recourse to other fora up to a point, and certainty, by prohibiting any such
recourse thereafter. In particular, it prevents an investor from returning to a domestic
court after submitting its claims to arbitration. Renco’s reservation of rights is
incompatible with this “no U-turn” structure because it purports to reserve Renco’s
right to initiate subsequent proceedings in a domestic court and perform the very “U-
turn” which Article 10.18(2)(b) is designed to prohibit.

Support for this interpretation of Article 10.18(2)(b) can be derived from the decision
of the arbitral tribunal in Waste Management I/.'? The claimant's original waiver was
held to be invalid by a previous arbitral tribunal constituted under NAFTA because it
purported to exclude certain proceedings from its scope which the claimant had
continued to litigate in the domestic courts. The claimant then filed a new NAFTA
proceeding, accompanied by an unequivocal waiver of the domestic proceedings.
The respondent State argued that the first unsuccessful NAFTA proceeding
prevented the claimant from bringing any further claim with respect to the measures
that were alleged to be in contravention of NAFTA.

The arbitral tribunal found that the claimant was not prevented from bringing a
second claim before the second NAFTA tribunal. In the course of its decision, the
tribunal made a number of important findings, the first of which appears at paragraph
31 of the decision. The tribunal held as follows:

[I]t seems that the waiver contemplated by Article 1121(1)(b) is definitive in its effect,
whatever the outcome of the arbitration. The waiver concerns the right “to initiate or
continue” domestic proceedings for damages or similar relief. A dismissal of the
NAFTA claim would, it seems, be final not only with respect to NAFTA itself but also
any domestic proceedings with respect to the measure of the disputing Party that was
alleged to be a breach of NAFTA. Such proceedings may not be initiated or continued
(except as permitted by Article 1121) at any time after the claim has been submitted
to arbitration. (emphasis added)

Article 1121 of NAFTA is drafted in similar terms to Article 10.18(2)(b) of the Treaty.

The Tribunal is satisfied that the same interpretation should be given to Article
10.18(2)(b). Once a valid waiver has been given under Article 10.18(2)(b), the waiver

Waste Management Inc v United Mexican States ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/00/3, Decision of the Tribunal

concerning Mexico's Preliminary Objection concerning the Previous Proceedings, June 27, 2002 (“Waste
Management II’).

22

100.

101.

102.

103.

is irrevocable. A claimant may not thereafter “initiate” any subsequent proceedings
in a domestic forum in respect of the same measure. The waiver required by Article
10.18(2)(b) is intended to operate as a “once and for all” renunciation of all rights to
initiate claims in a domestic forum, whatever the outcome of the arbitration (whether
the claim is dismissed on jurisdictional or admissibility grounds or on the merits).

Renco argues that it would be contrary to the object and purpose of the dispute
resolution procedures contained in Chapter 10 of the Treaty to require it to waive its
right to initiate subsequent proceedings in a domestic court if its claim were
dismissed on jurisdictional or admissibility grounds. In Renco’s submission, the
purpose of Chapter 10 of the Treaty is to create “effective procedures” for the
resolution of disputes. This purpose would be frustrated if Renco were not able to
have its dispute resolved in any forum. In this regard, Renco relies on paragraph 35
of the Waste Management II decision, where the tribunal held as follows:

An investor in the position of the Claimant, who had eventually waived any possibility
of a local remedy in respect of the measure in question but found that there was no
jurisdiction to consider its claim at the international level either, might be forgiven for
doubting the effectiveness of the international procedures. The Claimant has not had
its NAFTA claim heard on the merits before any tribunal, national or international; and
if the Respondent is right, that situation is now irrevocable. Such a situation should be
avoided if possible.
The tribunal’s findings in Waste Management || must be placed in context. The
tribunal was responding to an argument that the claimant only had one chance to
present its claim before the first NAFTA tribunal. In other words, the respondent
State argued that because the claimant's original waiver was invalid, the claimant

could not start a second arbitration even if it was accompanied by a valid waiver.

The tribunal held that the respondent State’s argument was contrary to the purpose
of the dispute resolution procedure in NAFTA, which was designed to create
effective procedures for the resolution of disputes. If the respondent State’s
argument had prevailed, the claimant would have had no forum in which to seek a
resolution of its dispute because it had waived its rights to pursue a claim at the
domestic level.

Renco argues that it should be entitled to litigate its claims in a domestic forum if
they are dismissed by this Tribunal on jurisdictional or admissibility grounds. In
Waste Management II, the claimant was attempting to litigate before two separate

23

104.

105.

106.

107.

NAFTA tribunals. The claimant was not seeking to return to a domestic forum after
the first NAFTA tribunal dismissed the claim for lack of jurisdiction. Accordingly, the
Waste Management II decision cannot be invoked in aid of Renco’s submission that
it is not required to waive rights to pursue a claim in a domestic forum.

Renco’s next argument is that if its claims are dismissed for lack of jurisdiction or
admissibility, any such dismissal does not affect Renco’s underlying rights. In such
a case, there has been no determination of Renco’s claims “on the merits” and
therefore the principle of res judicata does not apply. Renco relies on paragraph 36
of the Waste Management II decision, where the tribunal held as follows:

Neither does a claim which fails for want of jurisdiction prejudice underlying rights: if
the jurisdictional flaw can be corrected, there is in principle no objection to the claimant
re-commencing its action. This applies equally to claims which fail on (remediable)
grounds of inadmissibility, such as failure to exhaust local remedies.
Renco also argues that a dismissal based on lack of jurisdiction or inadmissibility
does not preclude a later claim before a tribunal which has jurisdiction. In support of
this submission, Renco cites paragraph 43 of Waste Management II, where the

tribunal held as follows:

Thus there is no doubt that, in general, the dismissal of a claim by an international
tribunal on grounds of lack of jurisdiction does not constitute a decision on the merits
and does not preclude a later claim before a tribunal which has jurisdiction. The same
is true of decisions concerning inadmissibility ... The point is simply that a decision
which does not deal with the merits of the claim, even if it deals with issues of
substance, does not constitute res judicata as to those merits.
In the Tribunal’s opinion, Renco’s argument fails to address the underlying question
of whether Article 10.18(2)(b) requires an investor to waive its rights to pursue a
subsequent claim in a domestic forum if the claim is dismissed on jurisdictional or
admissibility grounds. Whether a subsequent claim may or may not be precluded by

principles of res judicata is an entirely separate question.

The Tribunal has already determined that Article 10.18(2)(b) is a “no U-turn”
provision such that an investor may not subsequently initiate domestic proceedings
if a claim is dismissed, whether on jurisdictional or admissibility grounds or on the
merits. Accordingly, the fact that principles of res judicata might not preclude a later
claim is beside the point.

24

(4) | Reservation as “superfluous”

108. Renco has argued that its reservation of rights should have no effect on the validity

109.

110.

111.

of its waiver because the language is “superfluous”. In Renco’s submission, the
reservation of rights is merely a “belt and braces” provision of the kind that is
regularly included in legal documents.

Responding to this argument at the oral hearing, counsel for Peru referred to a
number of hypothetical scenarios where a claim could be dismissed on jurisdictional
or admissibility grounds but where a waiver (without the reservation of rights) might
still prevent a subsequent claim in a domestic court or tribunal. Each of these
scenarios is discussed in turn below.

Scenario 1: Where a claim is dismissed on jurisdictional or admissibility grounds for
reasons of illegality. Peru refers by way of example to Metal-Tech v Uzbekistan
where the tribunal held that it lacked jurisdiction because the claimant's investment
was tainted by illegality."° If Renco’s reservation of rights were upheld in a
hypothetical scenario of this kind, Peru submits that it would not be able to invoke a
waiver containing Renco’s reservation of rights to bar any subsequent claim in a
domestic court because the claim was only dismissed on jurisdictional grounds. This
could be extremely significant, and indeed extremely burdensome for Peru, since
the practical result could be a full re-hearing of all issues that had previously been
heard and determined in the arbitration. Peru submits that it should be entitled to
rely on a clean waiver without the reservation of rights, rather than having to re-
litigate the issue of whether there was illegal conduct or argue that the prior award
created a res judicata on this issue.

Significantly, Renco concedes that “if a domestic forum were available to the
claimant in Metal-Tech to assert those dismissed treaty claims or claims under
domestic law regarding the underlying measures, the waiver requirement under the
US-Peru TPA per se would not bar those claims”.'4 In the Tribunal’s opinion,
Renco’s concession demonstrates that its reservation of rights is in fact not
superfluous. The Tribunal stresses that no allegation or suggestion of corruption,

13 Metal-Tech Ltd v Uzbekistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/3, Award, October 4, 2013 372, 423.
‘4 Renco’s Letter to the Tribunal dated September 23, 2015 at 2.

25

fraud or illegality has been made against Renco in this arbitration. However, the
hypothetical scenario referred to by Peru shows quite clearly that a respondent State
may be prejudiced by a reservation of rights of the kind that Renco has included in
its waiver because the respondent State may be deprived of a potential waiver
defence in any subsequent domestic proceeding.

112. Renco goes on to argue that if “the bribery or other illegality finding [by the

investment tribunal] were not a bar to those claims in that domestic forum, or if
another claim regarding the same or related measures were available to the claimant
(for example, unjust enrichment regarding the benefits that a State obtained under
a contract that is subsequently voided), that domestic forum could proceed to rule
on the merits of the claims dismissed in the investment arbitration”. '°

113. In the Tribunal’s opinion, Renco’s submission illustrates again why Renco’s

reservation of rights is not superfluous. If an investor were to advance a subsequent
claim in a domestic court relying on principles of unjust enrichment, the respondent
State might not be able to rely on res judicata principles to bar the subsequent
claim.'® The respondent State may also be deprived of a potential waiver defence
in any subsequent domestic proceeding because the reservation of rights excludes
claims which were dismissed for lack of jurisdiction or inadmissibility.

114. Scenario 2: Where a claim is dismissed on jurisdictional or admissibility grounds but

the tribunal, having heard the complete case, indicates the claim would have failed
on the merits. Peru refers by way of example to Loewen v United States of America
where a bankruptcy and reorganisation led to a change in the investor's nationality
which deprived the tribunal of jurisdiction. This fact did not come to light until after a
full and extensive hearing on the merits. Nevertheless, having conducted a full
hearing, and having progressed so far in its deliberations, the tribunal indicated (in
an obiter dictum) that the claim would have failed on the merits.'? There are many

‘5 Ibid.
‘6 For example, there may be a lack of identity between the parties, cause of action and/or subject matter of

the subsequent domestic claim and the earlier investment arbitration claim. In this scenario, a complete
waiver without the reservation could potentially still bar the reformulated domestic claim.

The Loewen Group Inc and Raymond L Loewen v United States of America |CSID Case No ARB(AF)/98/3,
Award, June 26, 2003 { 2 (“As our consideration of the merits of the case was well advanced when
Respondent filed this motion to dismiss and as we reached the conclusion that Claimants’ NAFTA claims.
should be dismissed on the merits, we include in this Award our reasons for this conclusion. As will appear,
the conclusion rests on the Claimants’ failure to show that Loewen had no reasonably available and

26

other similar examples, including Methanex v USA."® In each case, claims were
dismissed on jurisdiction or admissibility grounds, but following a full hearing and full
deliberations, such that the tribunal was able to set out the reasons why the claims
would have failed on their merits in any event. And in each case, if Renco’s
reservation of rights were upheld, Peru submits that the respondent State would not
be able to rely on the waiver in order to bar any subsequent action on the same
claims, because the claim was only dismissed on jurisdictional or admissibility
grounds. Peru submits that a respondent State should be entitled to invoke the
waiver as a defence to the subsequent claim in such a situation, and thereby avoid
a complete re-hearing of the entire case.

115. Scenario 3: Where an expropriation claim is held to be inadmissible because it is

plainly unarguable. Peru refers by way of example to Occidental v Ecuador where
the tribunal found it was so evident that there was no expropriation that it disposed
of this claim on the basis that it was inadmissible.'® The tribunal also found a breach
of the fair and equitable treatment and national treatment standards. Peru asked the
Tribunal to assume that both of these claims had been dismissed. In this
hypothetical scenario, the claimant could not re-litigate the fair and equitable
treatment or national treatment breaches because these were dismissed on the
merits. But Peru submits that, were Renco’s reservation of rights in its waiver to be
permitted, the even-more-unmeritorious expropriation claim that did not make it to
the merits (because it was plainly unarguable) could potentially be re-litigated

adequate remedy under United States municipal law in respect of the matters of which it complains, being

matters alleged to be violations of NAFTA”).

Methanex Corp v USA, Final Award on Jurisdiction and Merits, Aug 3, 2005, Part IV — Ch.F 995-6 (“By
virtue of the Tribunal’s decision above on the Disputing Parties’ respective cases under Article 1101
NAFTA, it follows that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to decide the merits of Methanex’s claims... By
virtue of the Tribunal’s decisions above on the Disputing Parties’ respective cases under Article 1102, 1105.
and 1110 NAFTA, it follows that Methanex's claims fail on the merits. Accordingly, assuming that the
Tribunal had jurisdiction to determine the claims advanced by Methanex in its Second Amended Statement
of Claim, the Tribunal decides, pursuant to Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules and Articles 1102, 1105
and 1110 NAFTA, to dismiss on their merits all claims there advanced by Methanex”).

Occidental Exploration & Production Co v The Republic of Ecuador (LCIA Case No UN3467), Final Award
dated July 1, 2004, {J 80, 89, 92 (“A claim of expropriation should normally be considered in the context
of the merits of acase. However, it is so evident that there is no expropriation in this case that the Tribunal
will deal with this claim as a question of admissibility ... The Tribunal holds that the Respondent in this.
case did not adopt measures that could be considered as amounting to direct or indirect expropriation. In
fact, there has been no deprivation of the use or reasonably expected economic benefit of the investment,
let alone measures affecting a significant part of the investment ... The Tribunal accordingly holds that the
claim concerning expropriation is inadmissible”).

27

because the waiver would not apply to claims that were dismissed on the basis that
they were inadmissible.

116. Scenario 4: Where a tribunal holds that it lacks jurisdiction over a claim concerning
a breach of an Investment Agreement. Peru observes that in this arbitration Renco
has argued that several of Peru’s objections to Renco’s investment agreement
claims under Article 10.20(4) are jurisdictional objections, namely Peru’s objections
that:

(a) Peru has not breached the Stock Transfer Agreement because Peru is not
party to that Agreement;

(b) Peru has not breached the Guaranty Agreement because it is void under
Peruvian law; and

(c) Renco has failed to submit factual issues to a technical expert.

117. If Renco’s reservation were upheld, Peru submits that it may not be able to rely on
Renco’s waiver in order to bar any subsequent claim based on the Stock Transfer
or the Guaranty Agreement because the claims may have been dismissed on
jurisdictional grounds. Peru submits that it should not be forced to make the same
arguments about being a non-signatory to the Stock Transfer Agreement, or about
the Guaranty Agreement being void under Peruvian law or about Renco having
failed to submit factual issues to a technical expert. Peru submits that it should be
entitled to invoke a waiver to preclude such claims, and a re-hearing before some
other forum.

118. Renco and Peru both agree that the Tribunal should refrain from making a
determination as to whether Renco’s waiver would in fact prevent Renco from
initiating a claim in a subsequent court or tribunal.”° The Tribunal accepts that this
is a question for any subsequent court or tribunal to determine. For present

20 Renco’s Letter to the Tribunal dated September 23, 2015 at 8; Hearing Transcript at p. 45 (Counsel for
Peru, Ms Menaker): “But that question as to whether its waiver would bar that future claim from going
forward must be resolved by that future court or Tribunal that is seized with that claim. That's not an issue
that should be negotiated with Peru now, and it's certainly not an issue for this Tribunal to decide”), citing
Canfor Corp v United States of America, Terminal Forest Products Ltd v United States of America and
Tembec et al v United States of America, Order for the Termination of the Arbitral Proceedings, January
10, 2006 4 1.3.

28

119.

120.

121.

122.

purposes, the Tribunal simply observes that the hypothetical scenarios set out above
demonstrate that Renco’s reservation of rights is not “superfluous”, as Renco
contends. If Renco’s reservation of rights were held to be valid and permissible
under Article 10.18(2)(b), Peru could in each of the above scenarios be deprived of
a potential waiver defence.

(5) Conclusion

For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal concludes that Renco has failed to
comply with the formal requirements of Article 10.18(2)(b) by including the
reservation of rights in the waiver accompanying its Amended Notice of Arbitration
because:

(a) The reservation of rights is not permitted by the express terms of Article
10.18(2)(b);

(b) The reservation of rights undermines the object and purpose of Article
10.18(2)(b);

(c) The reservation of rights is incompatible with the “no U-turn” structure of Article
10.18(2)(b); and

(d) The reservation of rights is not superfluous.
E. The Consequence of Renco’s Non-compliance with Article 10.18(2)(b)
(1) Overview

Having decided that Renco’s waiver failed to comply with the formal requirements
of Article 10.18(2)(b) of the Treaty, the Tribunal now turns to the question of what
consequence should follow from this determination.

For its part, Peru submits that as a result of Renco’s non-compliance with Article
10.18(2)(b) the Tribunal must dismiss Renco’s claims for lack of jurisdiction. Renco
contends otherwise and maintains that Peru’s waiver objection should be dismissed.

At the outset, the Tribunal wishes to record the following observations which inform
the Tribunal’s approach to the ultimate disposition of the issue before it.

29

123.

124.

125.

126.

The Tribunal has been troubled by the manner in which Peru's waiver objection has
arisen in the context of this arbitration. The arbitration had already been on foot for
quite some time before Peru filed its Memorial on Waiver in July 2015. By this stage
over four years had passed since Renco filed its Notice of Arbitration; the Tribunal
had already issued Procedural Order No.1 which recorded the agreed briefing
schedule for the arbitration; Renco had filed its Memorial on Liability; the Parties had
exchanged voluminous submissions in connection with Renco’s challenge to the
scope of Peru’s Preliminary Objections; and the Tribunal had issued a substantive
decision on December 18, 2014 in relation to the Scope of Peru’s Preliminary
Objections under Article 10.20(4). Clearly, it would have been preferable for all
concerned if Peru had raised its waiver objection in a clear and coherent manner at
the very outset of these proceedings. Instead, they emerged piecemeal over a
relatively lengthy period of time. This issue is considered further at paragraphs 180-
183 below.

Against this background, the Tribunal has found the issue of Renco’s non-
compliance with Article 10.18(2)(b) to be extremely difficult to resolve, requiring
extensive and intensive deliberations by the Tribunal over many months. This is not
only because the issues raised by the Parties are inherently complex, but also
because of the severe consequences which would follow for Renco if Peru’s plea
for dismissal were to be accepted by the Tribunal.

Despite the Tribunal’s misgivings about the manner in which Peru's waiver objection
was raised, the Tribunal has concluded that it is compelled by its mandate to reach
a principled decision as to the consequences of Renco’s non-compliance with Article
10.18(2)(b).

In the process of reaching its decision in this case the Tribunal has given careful
consideration to a range of arguments which might weigh against dismissal of
Renco’s claims in these proceedings. These include:

(a) Whether Renco should be permitted to cure its defective waiver by
withdrawing the reservation of rights;

(b) Whether the Tribunal can sever the reservation of rights so as to decide that
Renco’s waiver complies with Article 10.18(2)(b); and

30

(c) Whether Peru’s arguments and conduct in relation to its waiver objection
constitutes an abuse of rights.

Each is discussed in turn below.
(2) Cure

127. Renco submits that its waiver only suffers from a defect in “form” and that it should
be entitled to cure this defect by withdrawing the reservation of rights or presenting
a new waiver without the reservation of rights. Renco observes that this course of
action would cause no prejudice to Peru because Renco has not committed any
material breach of the waiver requirement in Article 10.18(2)(b).

128. Renco submits that investment tribunals have allowed parties to cure “formal” (as
opposed to “material”) defects in their written waivers. Renco refers to Ethyl
Corporation v Government of Canada, where the claimant’s waiver was filed
together with the statement of claim rather than with the notice of arbitration. The
tribunal held that Canada suffered no prejudice as a result of the fact that the waiver
was provided late. The delay was “not of significance for jurisdiction in this case”.?'

129. Renco also relies on International Thunderbird Gaming Corp v United Mexican
States, where the facts were the same as in Ethyl. The tribunal held that the delay
in the provision of the investor’s waiver was a mere formal defect, which did not
deprive the Tribunal of jurisdiction:

Although Thunderbird failed to submit the relevant waivers with the Notice of
Arbitration, Thunderbird did proceed to remedy that failure by filing those waivers with
the [Particularised Statement of Claim]. The Tribunal does not wish to disregard the
subsequent filing of those waivers, as to reason otherwise would amount, in the
Tribunal’s view, to an over-formalistic reading of Article 1121 of the NAFTA. The
Tribunal considers indeed that the requirement to include the waivers in the
submission of the claim is purely formal, and that a failure to meet such requirement
cannot suffice to invalidate the submission of a claim if the so-called failure is remedied
at a later stage of the proceedings. The Tribunal joins the view of other NAFTA
Tribunals that have found that Chapter Eleven provisions should not be construed in
an excessively technical manner.

21 Ethyl Corporation v Government of Canada NAFTA/UNCITRAL Case, Award on Jurisdiction, June 24,
1998 89, 91.

22 International Thunderbird Gaming Corp v United Mexican States, Ad-hoc UNCTRAL, Award, January 26,
2006 FF 116-118.

31

In construing Article 1121 of the NAFTA, one must also take into account the rationale
and purpose of that article. The consent and waiver requirements set forth in Article
1121 serve a specific purpose, namely to prevent a party from pursuing concurrent
domestic and international remedies, which could either give rise to conflicting
outcomes (and thus legal uncertainty) or lead to double redress for the same conduct
or measure. In the present proceedings, the Tribunal notes that the EDM entities did
not initiate or continue any remedies in Mexico while taking part in the present arbitral
proceedings. Therefore, the Tribunal considers that Thunderbird has effectively
complied with the requirements of Article 1121 of the NAFTA.

130. Renco observes that these decisions are consistent with numerous holdings of the
Permanent Court of International Justice and the International Court of Justice,
which routinely allow “formal” jurisdictional defects to be cured during a proceeding.
Renco submits that outright dismissal of Renco’s claims would require the Tribunal
to construe the waiver requirement in Article 10.18(2)(b) in an excessively technical
manner. In Renco’s submission, this would be fundamentally unjust and would not

further the object and purpose of the waiver requirement itself.

131. Renco submits that if it were to submit a new claim to arbitration (accompanied by
a new waiver without the reservation of rights) Peru may argue that Renco’s claims
may be barred by the three-year limitation period in Article 10.18(1) of the Treaty.
However, if the Tribunal were to allow Renco to cure the defect by withdrawing the
reservation of rights, the Tribunal should treat Renco as having complied with the
waiver requirement in Article 10.18(2) from the outset of this arbitration.

132. In response, Peru submits that the Tribunal is not empowered to grant Renco an
opportunity to cure its waiver. In support of this submission, Peru relies on Railroad
Development Corp v Republic of Guatemala. In this case, the tribunal found that the
claimant did not comply with the material requirement of the waiver obligation
because it continued to litigate overlapping domestic proceedings after commencing
the arbitration. The tribunal refused to allow the claimant to cure this defect by
withdrawing the domestic proceedings. The tribunal held as follows:

This being a matter pertaining to the consent of the Respondent to this arbitration, the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction without the agreement of the parties to grant the Claimant
an opportunity to remedy its defective waiver. It is for the Respondent and not the
Tribunal to waive a deficiency under Article 10.18 or to allow a defective waiver to be
remedied, as the United States did in Methanex.

23 Railroad Development Corp v Republic of Guatemala CAFTA-DR/ICSID Case No ARB/07/23, Decision on
Objection to Jurisdiction CAFTA Article 10.20.5, November 17, 2008 4 61.

32

133.

134.

135.

137.

Peru also relies on the following submission of the United States Government in this
arbitration:
The discretion whether to permit a claimant to either proceed under or remedy an
ineffective waiver lies with the respondent as a function of the respondent's general
discretion to consent to arbitration.2° Therefore, while a tribunal may determine
whether a waiver complies with the requirements of Article 10.18, a tribunal itself
cannot remedy an ineffective waiver. Accordingly, a claim can be submitted, and the
arbitration can properly commence, only if a claimant submits an effective waiver. The
date of the submission of an effective waiver is the date on which the arbitration
commences for purposes of Article 10.18.1.
Peru agrees with the submissions of the United States Government cited above.
Therefore, Peru contends that there is a “subsequent agreement between the
parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions”
for the purposes of Article 31(3)(a) of the VCLT. Peru submits that only it may waive
Renco’s non-compliance with the formal requirement of Article 10.18. In this case,
Peru has not agreed to disregard Renco’s waiver violation.

In evaluating these contentions, the Tribunal recalls its earlier observation that
Article 10.18(2)(b) comprises two distinct elements, namely a formal and a material
requirement. Compliance with both elements is a precondition to Peru’s consent to
arbitrate and to the existence of a valid arbitration agreement. Renco failed to
comply with the formal requirement of Article 10.18(2)(b) by including the reservation
of rights in its waiver. The fact that it has complied with the (different) material
requirement is beside the point.

. Equally, given the clear and specific nature of the pre-conditions to consent in Art

10.18(2), formal invalidity is as critical as material invalidity. There is certainly no
clear basis to downgrade formal compliance, or discount it as a pre-condition to
consent.

Indeed, as Peru noted in the course of its submissions,”° if anything, the text of Art
10.18(2) gives greater importance to formal compliance, than it does to material
compliance:

24 Second Submissions of the United States § 16.
25 In support of this proposition, the United States cites Railroad Development Corp v Republic of Guatemala.
2 Peru's submission of September 30, 2015.

33

In any event, the existence of a material breach of the waiver requirement is
independent of Renco’s formal violation, either one of which alone is fatal to Renco’s
claims. Contrary to Renco’s suggestion, the formal requirement is as important, if not
more important, than its material counterpart. In fact, it is the formal requirement that
is expressed in the language of the Treaty itself: while the Treaty expressly provides
in what form a waiver must be submitted, and specifically provides for the sole
reservation that may be made by a claimant, the Treaty does not expressly state that
the State’s consent is conditioned upon the claimant’s compliance with the terms of
the waiver. Rather, that condition can be discerned from reading the language of the
waiver requirement in context and in light of the Treaty’s object and purpose and, thus,
tribunals consistently have so interpreted the requirement, as reflected in the
jurisprudence. Accordingly, there is no basis to construe the so-called “formal”
requirement of the waiver any less strictly than the “material” requirement; if a violation
of the latter requires dismissal, as tribunals unanimously have found, then a violation
of the former does as well, as the Treaty expressly states and as both Parties to the
Treaty have confirmed.

138. The inevitable conclusion, therefore, is that no arbitration agreement ever came into
existence. In the Tribunal’s opinion, given the unequivocal language of Art 10.18(2),
this is not a trivial defect which can be easily brushed aside—the defective waiver
goes to the heart of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

139. Ethyl and Thunderbird were both concerned with the proper interpretation of Article
1121 of NAFTA. The issue in each case was whether the requirement that the waiver
“shall be included in the submission of a claim to arbitration” meant that the waiver
had to be supplied with the notice of arbitration or with the statement of claim. In
Ethyl, the tribunal concluded that the investor’s compliance with Article 1121 was a
prerequisite to the admissibility of its claims and not a precondition to jurisdiction.
The tribunal held as follows:?”

Canada’s contention that [the submission of a waiver with the Notice of Arbitration is]
a precondition to jurisdiction, as opposed to a prerequisite to admissibility, is not borne
out by the text of Article 1121, which must govern. Article 1121(3), instead of saying
“shall be included in the submission of a claim to arbitration” — in itself a broadly
encompassing concept — could have said “shall be included with the Notice of
Arbitration” if the drastically preclusive effect for which Canada argues truly were
intended. The Tribunal therefore concludes that jurisdiction here is not absent due to
Claimant's having provided the consent and waivers necessary under Article 1121
with its Statement of Claim rather than with its Notice of Arbitration.

140. In the present case, Article 10.18(2) of the Treaty provides that “[n]o claim may be
submitted to arbitration under this Section unless ... the notice of arbitration is

27 Ethyl Corporation v Government of Canada NAFTA/UNCITRAL Case, Award on Jurisdiction, June 24,
1998 491.

34

141.

142.

143.

accompanied ... by the claimant's written waiver’. It would therefore appear that the
text of Article 10.18(2) is much more explicit than the text of Article 1121 of NAFTA.

Indeed, Peru observes that, since the publication of the 2004 United States Model
BIT, the United States has amended the waiver language in its treaties, including in
Article 10.18(2) of the Treaty and in the DR-CAFTA, to expressly state that the
waiver must accompany “the notice of arbitration”. Moreover, the title of the waiver
provision also was amended by including in the title of Article 10.18 of the Treaty (as
well as in the equivalent provisions of the DR-CAFTA and the US Model BIT) the
word “consent”.

The Tribunal is constrained to conclude, therefore, that the submission of a formally
compliant waiver (and the material obligation to abstain from initiating or continuing
proceedings in a domestic court) is a precondition to the State’s “consent” to
arbitrate and to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that
the Ethyl and Thunderbird decisions cannot assist Renco in the present case
because of the differences between the text of Article 10.18 of the Treaty and Article
1121 of NAFTA.

A further comment may be appropriate here as to the concern expressed in
Thunderbird that “overly formalistic” or “excessively technical” approaches should
be avoided. This is obviously of no assistance here, given (a) the non-superfluous
nature of Renco’s reservation, and (b) the specific requirements of Article 10.18(2)
of the Treaty. Further, the tribunal in Thunderbird cannot be taken to have laid down
a general proposition that formal defects in a waiver can never invalidate a
submission to arbitration, or can always be remedied at a later stage. The decision
in that case seems to have turned upon the highly technical and insignificant nature
of the defect that was in issue (the untimely filing of certain waivers on behalf of the
claimant’s enterprises that had been “inadvertently missing from earlier filings”, and
were submitted with the Particularised Statement of Claim, well before Mexico raised
any objection to jurisdiction and years before the hearing), which was all the more
insignificant when set against the different language of NAFTA. Unlike the position
in that case, there is no suggestion here that Renco’s reservation in its waiver was
inadvertent, and as explained earlier it is certainly not insignificant.

35

144. The Tribunal turns now to consider the decisions of the Permanent Court of
International Justice and the International Court of Justice cited by Renco. Article
10.22(1) of the Treaty provides that “the tribunal shall decide the issues in dispute
in accordance with this Agreement and applicable rules of international law’.
Furthermore, when interpreting the Treaty, the Tribunal must take into account “any
relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties”
under Article 31(3)(c) of the VCLT. The relevant rules of international law include
general principles of law recognised by civilised nations. Furthermore, decisions of
the International Court and the Permanent Court are “a subsidiary means for the
determination of rules of law” (see Articles 38(1)(c) and (d) of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice).

145. Renco places reliance upon the decision of the Permanent Court of International
Justice in the Case of the Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions. In this case, Greece
had commenced proceedings against the United Kingdom under the Treaty of
Lausanne before the Treaty had been ratified by the States Parties. The Treaty was
subsequently ratified shortly after proceedings were commenced. However, the
United Kingdom contended that the Permanent Court lacked jurisdiction at the time
when proceedings were commenced.

146. The Court rejected the submission of the United Kingdom and held as follows:?8

Even assuming that before that time the Court had no jurisdiction because the inter-
national obligation referred to in Article Il was not yet effective, it would always have
been possible for the applicant to re-submit his application in the same terms after the
coming into force of the Treaty of Lausanne, and in that case, the argument in question
could not have been advanced. Even if the grounds on which the institution of
proceedings was based were defective for the reason stated, this would not be an
adequate reason for the dismissal of the applicant's suit. The Court, whose jurisdiction
is international, is not bound to attach to matters of form the same degree of
importance which they might possess in municipal law. Even, therefore, if the
application were premature because the Treaty of Lausanne had not yet been ratified,
this circumstance would now be covered by the subsequent deposit of the necessary
ratifications.

147. The Mavrommatis doctrine has been applied by the International Court of Justice on
several occasions, in particular in the Case Concerning the Application of the

28 Case of the Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions (Greece v United Kingdom), Judgment, August 30, 1924
PClJ Series A, No. 2 at 34.

36

Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.”? Serbia's
first preliminary objection in this case was based upon Article 35(1) of the Statute of
the Court, which provides as follows: “The Court shall be open to the states parties
to the present Statute”.

148. Serbia contended that it was not a Member of the United Nations (and thus not a

party to the Statute of the Court) when Croatia commenced its proceedings on 2
July 1999. The Court was therefore not “open” to Serbia within the meaning of Article
35(1). The fact that Serbia later became a party to the Statute of the Court on 1
November 2000, as a result of its admission to the United Nations, was said by
Serbia to be irrelevant.

149. The International Court rejected Serbia’s submission. The Court accepted that, in

general, fulfilment of the conditions in Article 35(1) had to be assessed when the
application was filed. However, the Court explained that it had “shown realism and
flexibility in certain situations in which the conditions governing the Court’s
jurisdiction were not fully satisfied when proceedings were initiated but were
subsequently satisfied, before the Court ruled on its jurisdiction”. The Court referred
to the Mavrommatis case and held that the decisive question was as follows:°°

What matters is that, at the latest by the date when the Court decides on its jurisdiction,
the applicant must be entitled, if it so wishes, to bring fresh proceedings in which the
initially unmet condition would be fulfilled. In such a situation, it is not in the interests
of the sound administration of justice to compel the applicant to begin the proceedings
anew — or to initiate fresh proceedings — and it is preferable, except in special
circumstances, to conclude that the condition has, from that point on, been fulfilled.

150. The Court found there was no reason why the initial defect in Croatia's application

could not be “cured by a subsequent event in the course of the proceedings, for
example when that party acquires the status of party to the Statute of the Court
which it initially lacked”. The Court found that it would not be in the interests of the

 

22 Case C i of the C ion on the jon and P of the Crime of

Genocide (Croatia v Serbia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, November 18, 2008 [2008] ICJ Reports
412.

Case Ci i of the Cc ion on the ion and P of the Crime of
Genocide (Croatia v Serbia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, November 18, 2008 [2008] ICJ Reports
412 at 441. The Court also observed that “it is concern for judicial economy, an element of the requirements.
of the sound administration of justice, which justifies application of the jurisprudence deriving from the
Mavrommatis Judgment in appropriate cases. The purpose of this jurisprudence is to prevent the needless
proliferation of proceedings” (at 443).

 

37

151.

152.

153.

154.

155.

sound administration of justice to require Croatia to initiate fresh proceedings.*'
Accordingly, the Court dismissed Serbia’s objection to jurisdiction.

The question which arises for determination is whether the Mavrommatis doctrine
can be applied to the facts of the present case. The Tribunal observes that in the
Mavrommatis and Genocide cases the jurisdictional defect was cured as a result of
a subsequent event occurring during the proceedings, namely the ratification of the
Treaty of Lausanne on which the Court’s jurisdiction was based (in the Mavrommatis
case) and the admission of Serbia to the United Nations resulting in its accession to
the Statute of the International Court of Justice (in the Genocide case).

In the present case, however, the jurisdictional defect (Renco’s non-compliance with
Article 10.18(2)(b)) remains uncured. This jurisdictional defect could only be cured
(a) if Renco took the positive step of withdrawing the reservation of rights, or
submitting a new waiver without the reservation of rights, and Peru consented to this
by way of a variation of Article 10.18(2)(b) of the Treaty, or (b) if Renco commenced

a new arbitration together with a waiver without any reservation of rights.
Option (a) here does not arise, in the absence of consent by Peru.

Option (b) remains a possible course (putting aside any limitation issue under Article
10.18(1) of the Treaty). Given that, on this basis, Renco would be entitled to cure
the defect itself, and unilaterally, by the commencement of a new arbitration, the
question arises as to whether, applying the Mavrommatis doctrine, it might be said
that it would not be in the interests of the sound administration of justice to compel
Renco to begin a new proceeding.

The United States and Peru contend that there is a “subsequent agreement”
regarding the interpretation of Article 10.18 to the effect that neither Renco nor the
Tribunal can remedy a defective waiver and that the date for submitting an effective
waiver is the date on which the arbitration commences. On this basis, Peru would
appear to contend that the Mavrommatis doctrine is inapplicable to the facts of the
present case.

31 Ibid at 442.

38

156.

157.

158.

159.

In its Decision on Scope, the Tribunal observed that it credits the views of both State
Parties with the highest respect. However, the Tribunal is not bound by the views of
either State Party. Although the Tribunal must “take into account” any subsequent
agreement between the State Parties pursuant to Article 31(3)(a) of the VCLT, the
proper interpretation of Article 10.18 and how it should be applied to the facts of this
case are tasks which reside exclusively with this Tribunal.°?

The Tribunal is faced with an apparent conflict between the interpretation of Article
10.18 adopted by the United States and Peru and the jurisprudence of the
International Court of Justice as evidenced in the Mavrommatis doctrine. Having
given careful consideration to the matter, the Tribunal has felt constrained to
conclude that the clear and express language of Article 10.18 of the Treaty, as well
as its object and purpose, establishes a /ex specialis which must prevail over, or in
any event precludes, the Mavrommatis doctrine. (This conclusion is made by a
majority of the Tribunal as one member is not persuaded that Renco could not
unilaterally cure its defective waiver.)

Under Article 10.18, the submission of a valid waiver is a condition and limitation on
Peru’s consent to arbitrate. This is a precondition to the initial existence of a valid
arbitration agreement, and as such leads to a clear timing issue: if no compliant
waiver is served with the notice of arbitration, Peru's offer to arbitrate has not been
accepted; there is no arbitration agreement; and the Tribunal is without any authority
whatsoever. If the Tribunal applied the Mavrommatis doctrine, the Tribunal would be
exercising powers it simply does not have (because there is no arbitration
agreement, and so the Tribunal is not a tribunal). In effect, it would be creating,
retrospectively, an arbitration agreement for the Parties when no agreement had
ever come into existence. To put it colloquially, the Tribunal would be “pulling itself
up by its own bootstraps” in order to create jurisdiction when none existed. In the
Tribunal’s considered opinion, this would be entirely unprincipled and obviously

impermissible.

The Tribunal observes that the conclusion it has reached is consistent with the
decision in Detroit International Bridge Company v Canada. |n this case, the
claimant's waiver expressly carved out claims pending between the parties in the

32 Scope Decision ff 172-174.

39

so-called “Washington Litigation’. The tribunal found that the claims in the
Washington Litigation covered the same grounds as the measures challenged in the
NAFTA arbitration. The claimant’s waiver was therefore held to be defective. The
claimant then withdrew its claim for damages in the Washington Litigation and filed
a second waiver but still purported to carve out the Washington Litigation from the
scope of its waiver. The tribunal found that the submission of the new waiver could
not:3>

.. retroactively validate several months of proceedings during which the Tribunal
wholly lacked jurisdiction but had some kind of potential existence that might have
been realized if it had acquired jurisdiction at some subsequent date. The lack of a
valid waiver precluded the existence of a valid agreement between the disputing
parties to arbitrate; and the lack of such an agreement deprived the Tribunal of the
very basis of its existence.
160. For all of the reasons set out above, therefore, the Tribunal has concluded that
Renco cannot unilaterally cure its defective waiver by withdrawing the reservation of
rights. (This conclusion is made by a majority of the Tribunal as one member is not

persuaded that Renco could not unilaterally cure its defective waiver.)
(3) Severance

161. On September 27, 2015, after the Tribunal had commenced its deliberations, the
Tribunal wrote to the Parties to observe that neither Party had addressed the
relevance, if any, of the principle of severability in connection with the question of
the legal effect of the reservation contained in Renco’s waiver. The Tribunal invited
the Parties to comment on whether this principle could be applied so as to allow the
reservation of rights to be severed from the remainder of Renco’s waiver.

162. The Tribunal received extensive submissions from the Parties, as well as the United
States, in relation to the principle of severability. The Tribunal observes that the
principle that non-essential invalid conditions can be severed from the instruments
in which they are contained was endorsed by Judge Lauterpacht in his Separate
Opinion in the Norwegian Loans case. Judge Lauterpacht held that:54

33 Detroit International Bridge Company v Canada NAFTA/PCA Case No 2012-25, Award on Jurisdiction,
April 2, 2015 4321.

34 Case Concerning Certain Norwegian Loans (France v Norway) [1957] |CJ Reports 9 at 56-57. See also
Interhandel (Switzerland v United States of America) [1959] ICJ Rep 6 at 116-117 (Separate Opinion of
Judge Lauterpacht).

40

.. itis legitimate—and perhaps obligatory—to sever an invalid condition from the rest
of the instrument and to treat the latter as valid provided that having regard to the
intention of the parties and the nature of the instrument the condition in question does
not constitute an essential part of the instrument. Utile non debet per inutile vitiari. The
same applies also to provisions and reservations relating to the jurisdiction of the
Court. It would be consistent with the previous practice of the Court that it should, if
only possible, uphold its jurisdiction when such a course is compatible with the
intention of the parties and that it should not allow its jurisdiction to be defeated as the
result of remediable defects of expression which are not of an essential character.

163. As Renco points out, several investment tribunals have cited the severability
principle when discussing the separability of an arbitration agreement from the
contract in which it is contained such that a finding that the main contract is invalid
does not necessarily entail the invalidity of the arbitration agreement.® This is a well-
established concept in the domestic arbitration laws of a large number of States
which have adopted the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial

Arbitration.*°

164. The severability principle has also been applied by several international courts and
tribunals in the context of State reservations to the jurisdiction of the European Court
of Human Rights.°” Furthermore, the International Law Commission, in its 2011
study on treaty reservations, surveyed a wide range of state practice and endorsed
a “rebuttable presumption, according to which the treaty would apply to a State or
international organization that is the author of an invalid reservation, notwithstanding
that reservation, in the absence of a contrary intention on the part of the author”.*
However, the Commission observed that its recommendation “form[ed] part of the
cautious progressive development of international law”.

165. Peru submits that the severability principle does not apply in the investor-state
context. Peru submits that, unlike claimants seeking to accept a State’s offer to
arbitrate under an investment treaty, States entering into treaties are entitled to

Daimler Financial Services AG v Argentina \CSID Case No. ARB/05/1, Award, August 22, 2012 4 221;
Impregilo S.p.A. v Argentina, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/17, Concurring and Dissenting Opinion of Prof.
Brigitte Stern, June 21, 2011 § 31; /CS Inspection and Control Services Ltd v Argentina, PCA Case No.
2010-09, Award on Jurisdiction, February 10, 2012 § 290; CCL v Kazakhstan, SCC Case No. 122/2001,
Jurisdictional Award, January 1, 2003 29. See also The Government of Sudan v The Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army (Abyei Arbitration), Final Award, July 22, 2009 9 416-424.

See UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration (1985), Article 16(1).

Loizidou v Turkey Application No. 15318/89, Judgment of March 23, 1995, Series A, No. 310; Belilos v
Switzerland Application No. 10323/83, Judgment of April 29, 1988. See also Hilaire v Trinidad and Tobago,
Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Judgment of September 1, 2001, Series C, No. 80 4 98.

Report of the International Law Commission, 63" Session Guide to Practice on Reservations to Treaties,
UN Doc A/66/10/Add.1 at 525-542 (guideline 4.5.3).

4

166.

167.

168.

make reservations provided that they comply with Article 19 of the VCLT. Peru also
submits that the severability principle is not universally accepted. Peru points out
that an alternative approach is to find that a reservation contrary to the object and
purpose of a treaty may result in the “total invalidity” of the treaty for the State making
the reservation. Peru argues that this approach is most similar to the practice of
international investment tribunals, which have determined that a claimant's failure to
abide by the terms of State’s offer to arbitrate in a treaty results in the invalidity of
the arbitration agreement.

Peru submits that, even if Renco’s reservation of rights were deemed to be a non-
essential part of its waiver, severance of the reservation of rights would infringe upon
Peru’s sovereignty because Peru was not obligated to extend an offer to arbitrate to
claimants and did so only on condition that the offer be accepted, without
reservation, at the time of the filing of the Notice of Arbitration. Furthermore, Peru
argues that—unlike the European Convention of Human Rights, which may have
the objective of exercising jurisdiction over as many States as possible in order to
uphold human rights and fundamental freedoms—investment tribunals have no
mandate to expand the scope of a State’s offer to arbitrate.

Finally, Peru submits that the application of the severability principle in the present
context would have radically different consequences. In the context of State
reservations to treaties, the severability principle operates against the interests of
the State making the reservation by preventing the State from escaping jurisdiction
as a result of its reservation of rights. In the present context, the application of the
severability principle would operate to the benefit of an investor and against the
interests of the respondent State whose consent is conditioned upon the submission
of a valid waiver at the time of the submission of the Notice of Arbitration.

For its part, the United States submits that the principle of severability is not a
generally accepted rule of international law or custom. The United States points out
that it has consistently maintained that a reserving State cannot be bound without
its consent to a treaty without the benefit of its reservation. The United States
submits as follows:

To apply the proposed “principle of severability” in order to sever an invalid reservation
of rights in a claimant's waiver would defeat the purpose of the Agreement's arbitration

42

provisions. It would alter the conditions of the respondent's offer to arbitrate and
deprive the waiver provision of its intended purpose, thereby exposing the respondent
to the risk of having to litigate, even temporarily, concurrently in multiple fora.

169. Renco contends that the severability principle is a general principle of international
law, as demonstrated by the authorities set out above. Renco submits that it does
not consider its reservation as important or essential to its consent. Renco submits
that the Tribunal should therefore sever the non-essential reservation of rights from
its waiver. On this basis, Renco submits that it should be treated as if it had complied
with the Treaty’s waiver requirements from the outset of this arbitration even though
any defect will have been eliminated at a point in time after Peru received Renco’s
Amended Notice of Arbitration.

170. The Tribunal observes that the severability principle has been applied by
international courts and tribunals in the context of State reservations to treaties or
reservations contained in declarations by States accepting the compulsory
jurisdiction of an international court. The principle has also been cited by investment
tribunals in the context of the severability of an arbitration agreement from the main
contract in which such an agreement is contained. However, the principle has not
been applied by an investor-state tribunal in order to sever invalid language from a
claimant’s written waiver.

171.

The Tribunal also observes that States are entitled, by virtue of their sovereignty, to
apply such reservations to treaties as are permitted by Article 19 of the VCLT.
Investors have no equivalent power to insert reservations into their acceptances of
a State’s standing offer to arbitrate under an investment treaty. In a system of
arbitration without privity, a State is entitled to “shape its consent as it sees fit by
providing the conditions under which it is given—in other words, the conditions
subject to which an ‘offer to arbitrate’ is made to the foreign investors”.°

172. Even if the Tribunal were to conclude that severability was a general principle of
international law and that Renco’s reservation of rights was a non-essential
component of the waiver, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the severability principle
could be applied in the particular context of this case. This is because of the same
timing issue set out above. The Tribunal has concluded that no arbitration

39 ST-AD GmbH v Bulgaria PCA Case No. 2011-06 (ST-BG), Award on Jurisdiction, July 18, 2013 § 337.

43

agreement ever came into existence as a result of Renco’s non-compliance with
Article 10.18(2)(b). If the severability principle were applied to sever the reservation
of rights from Renco’s waiver, the Tribunal would be assuming (incorrectly) that it is
a valid tribunal with authority, and in effect creating an arbitration agreement for the
Parties. The Tribunal would face the same “bootstraps” obstacle which it
encountered in relation to the application of the Mavrommatis doctrine.

173. Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that it has no power to sever the reservation of

rights from Renco’s waiver and remedy Renco’s non-compliance with the formal
requirement of Article 10.18(2)(b).

(4) Abuse of rights

174. Renco’s final argument, raised briefly in its final written submission to the Tribunal,

is that Peru’s arguments and conduct in relation to its waiver objection constitute an
abuse of rights. Renco submits that the abuse of rights doctrine proscribes the
exercise of a legitimate legal right for improper or abusive purposes or to evade an
obligation. As stated by Bin Cheng:*°

The reasonable and bona fide exercise of a right implies an exercise which is
genuinely in pursuit of those interests which the right is destined to protect and which
is not calculated to cause any unfair prejudice to the legitimate interests of another
State, whether these interests be secured by treaty or by general international law.

175. The abuse of rights doctrine is an aspect of the principle of good faith and is a well-

established general principle of international law. The doctrine has been cited and
applied on numerous occasions by international courts and tribunals.*t The
development of the abuse of rights doctrine in international law is discussed in detail
in Venezuela Holdings BV v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.” The tribunal
observed that many ICSID tribunals have considered whether the conduct of an

40 Bin Cheng General Principles of Law as applied by International Courts and Tribunals (CUP, 1987) at 131-
132.

4

For example, Peru invoked the abuse of rights doctrine in the Tacna-Arica arbitration: The Tacna-Arica
Question (Chile v Peru) (1925) Il RIAA 921. The arbitrator, President Calvin Coolidge, found that Chile had
committed an abuse of authority in the disputed provinces of Tacna and Arica, which were subject to
Chilean authority under the Treaty of Ancon. President Coolidge found that “in a considerable number of
cases, particularly in the year 1923, the Chilean conscription laws have been used not so much for the
obtaining of recruits ... but with the result, if not the purpose, of driving young Peruvians from the provinces.
So far as this has been done, the Arbitrator holds it to be an abuse of Chilean authority” (at 941).
Venezuela Holdings BV v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela \CSID Case No. ARB/07/27, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 10 June 2010 4 169-185.

44

investor who engages in a corporate restructuring to obtain the benefit of investment
treaty protection commits “an abuse of the convention purposes”, “an abuse of legal
personality”, an “abuse of corporate form” or an “abuse of the system of international
investment protection”.*?

176. The abuse of rights doctrine is not restricted to the exercise of treaty rights by

investors. In Saijpem SpA v The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, the tribunal
observed that ‘“[i]t is generally acknowledged in international law that a State
exercising a right for a purpose that is different from that for which that right was
created commits an abuse of rights”.‘* The tribunal concluded that the Bangladeshi
courts had abused their supervisory jurisdiction over the arbitration process by
revoking the authority of an ICC tribunal despite any showing of misconduct.

177. Itis clear that the threshold for establishing an abuse of rights is high. As the arbitral

tribunal put it in Chevron Corp v Republic of Ecuador:

[I]n all legal systems, the doctrines of abuse of rights, estoppel and waiver are subject
to ahigh threshold. Any right leads normally and automatically to a claim for its holder.
It is only in very exceptional circumstances that a holder of a right can nevertheless
not raise and enforce the resulting claim. The high threshold also results from the
seriousness of a charge of bad faith amounting to abuse of process. As Judge Higgins
stated in her 2003 Separate Opinion in the Oil Platforms case, there is “a general
agreement that the graver the charge the more confidence must there be in the
evidence relied on.”

178. Renco submits that Peru’s abuse of rights in the present case is clear: Peru suffers

no prejudice as a result of the reservation of rights in Renco’s waiver. At the hearing,
the Tribunal asked Peru whether it would suffer any prejudice in this case if the
Tribunal were to “write [the additional language] out, in effect, make it disappear”.*6
Peru responded that the Tribunal lacked the power to do so, but it did not articulate
any prejudice that it would suffer.*”

179. Renco submits that there is no scenario in which the additional language prevents

the waiver provision in the Treaty from having its full force and effect. In these

Ibid 4 176.

Saipem SpA v The People’s Republic of Bangladesh ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Award, 30 June 2009 4
160.

Chevron Corp v Republic of Ecuador PCA Case No. AA 277, Interim Award, 1 December 2008 { 143,
citing Case Concerning Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v United States of America) Judgment,
November 6, 2006 [2006] ICJ Rep 225, Separate Opinion of Judge Higgins 4 33.

Hearing Transcript, p. 63.

Hearing Transcript, pp. 63-66.

45

180.

181.

182.

circumstances, Renco submits that Peru’s motive is not to ensure that its waiver
rights are respected or that the waiver provision’s objectives are served. Rather,
Renco submits that Peru’s true motive is to evade its duty to arbitrate Renco’s claims
under the Treaty. Because that it is an improper motive, Renco submits that Peru’s
objections are an abuse of rights.

The Tribunal has already referred to the fact that it has been troubled by the manner
in which Peru’s waiver objection arose in this arbitration. Renco’s Notice of
Arbitration was filed on April 4, 2011 and its Amended Notice of Arbitration was filed
on August 9, 2011. Both documents contained Renco’s waiver, including the
reservation of rights. Yet Renco’s compliance with the formal and material
requirements of Article 10.18(2)(b) was not put in issue until Peru filed its Notification
of Preliminary Objections on March 21, 2014, nearly three years after Renco had
submitted its claims to arbitration. Under the heading “Renco’s violation of the
Treaty’s waiver provision”, Peru made the following submissions:

As Peru will discuss and amplify in its submissions, Renco has presented an invalid
waiver in this proceeding because it does not conform with the language required by
the Treaty, and that Doe Run Peru S.R.Ltda. (“Doe Run Peru”) was required to submit
a waiver and improperly purported to withdraw its waiver submitted with Claimants’
Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim of April 4, 2011. In addition, through the
initiation and continuation of certain proceedings with respect to measures alleged to
constitute a breach by Renco, both Renco and Doe Run Peru also have violated the
waiver requirement.

Pursuant to the Treaty, Peru’s consent, and therefore the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, is

subject to the submission of valid waivers by Renco and Doe Run Peru, which are

lacking here. This objection thus clearly falls within the scope of Article 10.20.4.
Although Peru submitted in this document that Renco’s waiver “does not conform
with the language required by the Treaty”, the focus of Peru’s waiver objections
appeared to have been the absence of a written waiver by DRP and the conduct of
the Peruvian bankruptcy proceedings, rather than the inclusion of the reservation of
rights in Renco’s waiver.

Indeed, while Peru had complained to Renco many years ago that it considered the
domestic Peruvian bankruptcy proceedings involving DRP violated Article 10.18(2),
Peru did not raise any clear and specific objection in relation to Renco’s reservation
of rights until Peru filed its Comments on the submission of the United States of

46

183.

184.

185.

186.

America on September 10, 2014. At paragraph 30, Peru submitted that Renco had
violated the Treaty’s waiver requirements because:
(i) Renco and its affiliate, Doe Run Peru, filed waivers that impermissibly reserved the

right to bring claims in other fora; (ii) Renco later filed a separate waiver that contained
the same reservation ...

This submission was not developed in any depth until Peru filed its Memorial on
Waiver in July 2015, where Renco’s compliance with the formal requirement of
Article 10.18(2)(b), by reason of the reservation of rights, was placed squarely in
issue.

The Tribunal has concluded that Renco failed to comply with the formal requirement
of Article 10.18(2) and that it has no power to allow Renco to cure this defect (as
noted above, one member of the Tribunal did not join in this conclusion) or to sever
the reservation of rights. However, the consequences for Renco may be extreme in
the following scenario. If Renco should decide to file a new Notice of Arbitration
accompanied by a “clean” waiver, Peru may be minded to argue that Renco’s claims
have become time-barred because more than three years have elapsed since
Renco first acquired knowledge of the breaches alleged under Article 10.16(1) of the
Treaty.

In these circumstances, while the possible operation of a 3 year time bar on the facts
of this case cannot change the analysis of Article 10.18(2)(b) (i.e. the analysis must
be the same, even if the objection had been raised at the outset of the arbitration),
the question which arises is whether Peru’s conduct with regard to the late raising
of its waiver objection rises to the level of an abuse of rights. The test to be applied
is whether Peru has sought to raise this objection for an improper motive or — as
Renco puts it, whether Peru is seeking to evade its duty to arbitrate Renco’s claims
under the Treaty rather than ensure that its waiver rights are respected or that the
waiver provision’s objectives are served.

Having considered the issue with great care, the Tribunal has concluded that, in
raising its waiver objection, Peru has sought to vindicate its right to receive a waiver
which complies with the formal requirement of Article 10.18(2)(b) and a waiver which
does not undermine the object and purpose of that Article. In so finding, the Tribunal
does not accept the contention that Peru’s waiver objection is tainted by an ulterior

47

187.

188.

189.

190.

motive to evade its duty to arbitrate Renco’s claims. Indeed, Peru has no duty to
arbitrate Renco’s claims under the Treaty unless Renco submits a waiver which
complies with Article 10.18(2)(b).

In reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal does not wish to rule out the possibility that
an abuse of rights might be found to exist if Peru were to argue in any future
proceeding that Renco’s claims were now time-barred under Article 10.18(1). To
date, Peru has suffered no material prejudice as a result of the reservation of rights
in Renco’s waiver. However, Renco would suffer material prejudice if Peru were to
claim in any subsequent arbitration that Renco’s claims were now time-barred under
Article 10.18(1).

While this Tribunal cannot prevent Peru from exercising in the future what it then
considers to be its legal rights, the Tribunal can, and it does, admonish Peru to bear
in mind, if that scenario should arise, Renco’s submission that Peru’s conduct with
respect to its late raising of the waiver objection constitutes an abuse of rights. In
the unanimous view of the Tribunal, justice would be served if Peru accepted that
time stopped running for the purposes of Article 10.18(1) when Renco filed its
Amended Notice of Arbitration on August 9, 2011.

(5) Conclusion

It follows from the Tribunal’s findings in this section of the Partial Award that Renco
has failed to establish the requirements for Peru’s consent to arbitrate under the
Treaty. Renco’s claims must therefore be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.

F. Other Objections

In the light of the Tribunal’s conclusion that Renco has failed to comply with the
formal requirement of Article 10.18(2)(b) of the Treaty, the Tribunal concludes that
it is unnecessary to consider Peru’s second contention, namely that Renco has
failed to comply with the formal requirement of Article 10.18(2) because DRP has
not provided a waiver in Renco’s Amended Notice of Arbitration. It is also
unnecessary to consider Peru’s further contentions regarding DRP’s conduct in the
Peruvian bankruptcy proceedings. The Tribunal therefore expresses no view on
these matters.

48

191.

Vi.

192.

COSTS

The Tribunal defers the question of costs and invites the Parties to present written
submissions on costs within 30 days of the date of this Partial Award.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

The Tribunal is conscious that these proceedings have been on foot for some years.
In reaching the decision to now dismiss Renco’s claims, the Tribunal has not done
so lightly. Careful consideration over a number of months has been given to each of
the many helpful and challenging submissions provided by counsel for both sides.
The Tribunal wishes to express its sincere gratitude to counsel for their high degree
of professionalism throughout this period.

49

Vil. FORMAL AWARD

193. For all of the foregoing reasons, and rejecting all submissions, claims and
counterclaims to the contrary, the Tribunal HEREBY FINDS DECLARES AND
AWARDS as follows. But for the view of one Member of the Tribunal that Renco

should have been permitted to cure its defective waiver by withdrawing the

reservation of rights (paragraph (b) below), all other conclusions of the Tribunal are

unanimous.

(a)

(f)

Renco has failed to comply with the formal requirement of Article 10.18(2)(b)

by including the reservation of rights in the waiver accompanying its Amended

Notice of Arbitration because:

(i) | The reservation of rights is not permitted by the express terms of Article
10.18(2)(b);

(ii) | The reservation of rights undermines the object and purpose of Article
10.18(2)(b);

(iii) |The reservation of rights is incompatible with the “no U-turn” structure of
Article 10.18(2)(b); and

(iv) The reservation of rights is not superfluous.

Renco cannot unilaterally cure its defective waiver by withdrawing the

reservation of rights.

The Tribunal has no power to sever the reservation of rights from Renco’s

waiver and remedy Renco’s non-compliance with Article 10.18(2)(b).

Peru’s waiver objection is not tainted by any ulterior motive to evade its duty

to arbitrate Renco’s claims.

It follows that Renco has failed to establish the requirements for Peru’s

consent to arbitrate under the Treaty.

Renco’s claims must therefore be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.

194. The Tribunal hereby reserves the question of costs pending receipt of submissions
from the Parties after which the Tribunal will render a Final Award.

Made in Paris, France

Place of Arbitration: Paris, France

Dated: July 15, 2016

50

[Signature] [Signature]

 

The Honorable L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC Mr. Toby T. Landau, QC
Arbitrator Arbitrator

[Signature]

Dr. Michael J. Moser
Presiding Arbitrator

51

