INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON D.C.
IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN
THE ROMPETROL GROUP N.V.
(Claimant)
and

ROMANIA
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3)

 

Decision of the Tribunal
on the Participation of a Counsel

 

Members of the Tribunal:
Sir Franklin Berman, KCMG, QC

Mr. Donald Francis Donovan, Esq.
The Honourable Marc Lalonde PC, OC, QC

Secretary of the Tribunal: Ms. Milanka Kostadinova

Assistant to the Tribunal: Mr. Jeremy Marc Brier

Representing the Claimant: Representing the Respondent:

Messrs. Barton Legum Mr. Michael E. Schneider, Dr.

and Jeffrey Hertzfeld Veijo Heiskanen & Mr. Matthias

SCP Salans & Associés, Paris Scherer

and Lalive, Geneva

Mr. George Burn and

Salans, London Dr. Victor Tanasescu & Dr.
Crenguta Leaua & Ms. Carina
Tanasescu

Tanasescu Leaua Cadar &
Asociatii, Bucharest
DATE: 14 January 2010

1. This is the Tribunal’s Decision on the Respondent’s application dated 21 August 2009,
in which the Respondent seeks an order from the Tribunal requiring the Claimant “to
remove Mr. [Barton] Legum from the case and to forbid him from participating in it in

any way.”' The Respondent cites as the ground for its application that Mr. Legum was
until 31 December 2008 employed by a law firm of which one of the Members of the

Tribunal is a member.
2. The application is opposed by the Claimant. The background is as follows.
I. Factual Background

3. The Claimant’s legal representation in the Arbitration is entrusted to the law firm of
Salans & Associés (Salans), acting through their offices in Paris, New York, London,
and Bucharest. The Minutes of the Tribunal’s first Session, held on 28 February 2007,
list by name in the usual way the persons who appeared as the Claimant’s duly
authorized legal representatives, at the head of them Mrs. Sarah Frangois-Poncet of the
Paris office; Mrs. Frangois-Poncet signed the Claimant’s written pleadings and appeared
before the Tribunal to argue the Claimant’s case at the oral hearings on the
Respondent’s Preliminary Objections held in September 2007. On 30 December 2008,
Mrs. Frangois-Poncet wrote to the Centre and to the Tribunal (copied to the legal
representatives of the Respondent) to inform them that, on her departure from private
practice, she would be withdrawing from the case with effect from the following day,
but that the case would continue to be handled by Salans. There is some dispute
between the Parties as to whether that event led to discussion between them of an
eventual replacement for Mrs. Frangois-Poncet, but in the Tribunal’s view that is

irrelevant to the question it has for decision.

4. Some months later, on 21 July 2009, Salans informed the Centre by letter out of the

Paris office that the legal representation of the Claimant would from then on be in the

' Tt is not clear from the syntax whether the intention was to have the Tribunal require the Claimant to withdraw Mr.
Legum, or whether it was that the Tribunal should do so directly (see further paragraph 24 below).

2

hands of Mr. Barton Legum and two of his colleagues at the firm. As the Respondent

points out, the letter was signed by Mr. Legum himself, as a Partner in the firm.

On 31 July 2009 the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal, stating that Mr. Legum and the
Member of the Tribunal appointed by the Claimant had until recently been members of
the same law firm, and demanded that the Claimant make ‘full disclosure of all
relations, past and present’ between both Mr. Legum ‘and any other member of the firm
of Claimant’s counsel’ with the member of the Tribunal in question. The Respondent
invoked ‘the integrity of the Tribunal and the arbitral process, as well as its total

independence.’

On 3 August 2009 the Claimant (by letter again signed by Mr. Legum) denied the
existence of any disclosure obligation or of any reasonable basis for inferring an
infringement of the Tribunal’s independence. The letter disputed also that Mr. Legum
had ever been more than a salaried employee of the firm in question, with no
participation in the firm’s profits or losses, a position from which he had resigned at the

end of 2008.

By letter dated 5 August 2009, the Respondent maintained its request for “full
disclosure.” It did not however seek to contest the Claimant’s assertions as to Mr.

Legum’s status while with the firm or that he had left that position at the end of 2008.

On 10 August 2009 (and without prejudice to its continued denial of any disclosure
obligation) a further letter from Mr. Legum on behalf of the Claimant described what it
referred to as the limited nature of Mr. Legum’s dealings with the Member of the
Tribunal during a four-year period Mr. Legum had spent with the law firm in question;
the period covered ran from 2004 to 2008, i.e. between Mr. Legum’s joining the firm’s
employ on departure from a responsible position in the US State Department and his

resignation from the firm as described in paragraph 6 above.

On 21 August 2009 the Respondent contested the completeness of this disclosure by

reference to activities on the public record undertaken jointly by the Member of the

3

Tribunal and Mr. Legum during a much earlier period ending in January 2000, when
Mr. Legum had also been employed at the firm prior to joining the US State

Department; and launched the present Application (see paragraph | above).

The Tribunal thereupon permitted a further round of short submissions from each
Party. These focussed on the existence and scope of any disclosure obligation, whether
there was a time limit for applications of the present kind, whether it was open to a
Party to challenge the other side’s counsel (as opposed to an arbitrator), and whether the

circumstances disclosed any threat to the integrity of the arbitration.

The Tribunal should preface its decision on the application presented to it by saying
that the circumstances underlying the application, including the information put on the
record by the series of letters from the parties beginning very shortly after Mr. Legum’s
appearance in the proceeding, have been discussed in detail between the Members of the
Tribunal, who are unanimously of the view that these circumstances do not now — and
(once the Parties had registered the matter in their letters of 31 July and 3 August 2009
described in paragraphs 5 & 6 above) did not at the time — call for any further disclosure
on the part of the Member of the Tribunal whose professional association with Mr.

Legum has been put at issue.

The Tribunal also notes that the Respondent has stressed from the outset that it seeks
only Mr. Legum’s disqualification and does not, either directly or indirectly, challenge
the Tribunal itself or any of its Members. There could in any event have been no
possible basis for a retrospective challenge of that kind in respect of the past activity of
the Tribunal, notably its Decision of 18 April 2008 on the Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections on Jurisdiction and Admissibility. So far as prospective effect is concerned
(prospective, that is, from the time of Mr. Legum’s appointment to represent the
Claimant in these proceedings), the Tribunal understands the Respondent to have made
its election: namely, to challenge Mr. Legum’s position on the basis that the
composition of the Tribunal is established and uncontested, rather than to challenge the
continued functioning of the Tribunal or any of its members on the basis that Mr.
Legum’s participation is fait accompli.

4

13.

It will be evident that to grant the relief sought by the Respondent in the present

application would presuppose the following:

1) _ that an ICSID Tribunal does in principle possess an inherent or implied power
to control a Party’s representation before it in arbitral proceedings;

2) an understanding as to the scope and extent of such a power;

3) acceptance that the particular circumstances met the necessary requirements for
the exercise of such a power.

We consider each of these points in turn.

II. The Power to Control a Party’s Representation

It is common ground between the Parties that the rules governing the present arbitration
proceedings, i.e. the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules, contain no provision
allowing in terms for a challenge to the appointment by a Party of counsel to represent it
in an ICSID arbitration. Some other source for such a challenge must therefore be
found, which the Respondent seeks to do by implication from the general tenor of the
Arbitration Rules, and by invoking an inherent general power on the part of any tribunal
to police the integrity of its proceedings. The only authority the Respondent cites in
support of the existence of a power to exclude counsel and its exercise in specific
circumstances is the recent decision of another ICSID Tribunal (in the case of Hrvatska
Elektropriveda d.d. vy. Republic of Slovenia’), read in conjunction with the IBA
Guidelines of 2004 on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration (themselves

considered in that decision).*

The Hrvatska decision is not of course a binding precedent. The Tribunal observes
simply that, if it indeed be correct to attribute to an ICSID Tribunal the powers implied

by the Hrvatska Tribunal, they would remain powers to be exercised only in

? Ruling of 6 May 2008, available at

http://icsid. worldbank.org/ICSID/FrontServlet?request lype=CasesRH&actionVal=showl docIld=DC950_En&c
aseld=C69). See also the Note in Arbitration International, Vo. 25, no. 4, at p.615, which appeared after the Parties
had made their submissions.

> It may be worth remarking that the IBA Guidelines direct themselves to the position of an arbitrator, and say
nothing about a power on the part of a tribunal to intervene over the nomination of counsel.

5

extraordinary circumstances, these being cir which inely touch on the
integrity of the arbitral process as assessed by the Tribunal itself; the mere subjective
claim by one Party to an arbitration that a professional association between counsel and
an arbitrator might be misunderstood can clearly not suffice, unless the claim is found
by the Tribunal itself to be well grounded on some objective and dispassionate
assessment of the circumstances of the individual case. As the matter was put in a
leading decision of the UK House of Lords, the test is “whether [a] fair-minded and
informed observer, having considered the facts, would conclude that there was a real

possibility that the tribunal was biased.”*

It is not without significance that this
decision was delivered in the context of Article 6 of the European Convention on
Human Rights (right to a fair trial), and takes account of the jurisprudence of the

European Court of Human Rights on that article (see further below).

16. A power on the part of a judicial tribunal of any kind to exercise a control over the
representation of the parties in proceedings before it is by definition a weighty
instrument, the more so if the proposition is that the control ought to be exercised by
excluding or overriding a party’s own choice. One would normally expect to see such
a power specifically provided for in the legal texts governing the tribunal and its
operation. Absent express provision, the only justification for the tribunal to award
itself the power by extrapolation would be an overriding and undeniable need to
safeguard the essential integrity of the entire arbitral process. It plainly follows that a
control of that kind would fall to be exercised rarely, and then only in compelling

circumstances.

17. Quite what would constitute such a threat to the essential integrity of the arbitral
process, as for example in arbitral proceedings under the ICSID Convention, is however
not entirely easy to discern. In the case of a challenge (as now) based upon a prior
association alleged to exist between counsel for a party and an individual member of an

arbitral tribunal, the argument would presumably be that the party was gaining for itself,

4 Porter v. Magill [2002] 2 WLR 37, per Lord Hope. See also general standard 2(c) in the IBA Guidelines (‘if a
reasonable and informed third party would reach the conclusion that there was a likelihood that the arbitrator may
be influenced by factors other than the merits of the case as presented by the parties in reaching his or her
decision’).

through its choice of counsel, an automatic (and unfair) advantage in the litigation.
And the advantage would presumably have to reside in an assumption that the arbitrator
in question would have a natural sympathy, because of the prior association between
them, for the arguments put forward in the litigation by the counsel in question as
spokesperson for his or her client. Or at the very least there would have to be an
appreciable risk of that happening, severe enough so as to jeopardize public confidence

in the arbitral process.

To restate the underlying proposition in that way immediately shows, however, that the

apprehension is one of potential bias on the part of the tribunal leading to a possible

 

advantage to one litigating party. If such a risk did genuinely exist in a particular case
it might provide grounds for a challenge to the composition of the tribunal under
Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID Convention (read together with Rule 9 of the
Arbitration Rules), leading ultimately to the possible ‘disqualification’ of one or more
of the members of the tribunal; the use of the term ‘disqualification’ in the Convention
shows that the challenge would have to be based on the allegation that the member or
members in question do not meet the qualifications required of an arbitrator under
Article 14(1) of the Convention. Those qualifications, as is well known and widely
understood, are that the arbitrator must be a person ‘of high moral character and
recognized competence ... who may be relied upon to exercise independent judgment.’
So the question is: does a person acknowledged to have possessed those qualifications
at the time of appointment (as, for example, in the Hrvatska case itself) lose them
because from now onwards some or all of the argument presented to him, while still the
argument of the same litigating party, will be delivered through the mouth of a different

counsel with whom he has had some form of prior association?

If that be the regime applying to an arbitrator, the ICSID Convention contains nothing
of a remotely similar kind in respect of the persons representing a Party in a dispute

duly brought before the Centre, and remitted to a Tribunal under the Convention. Nor

do either the Institution Rules or the Arbitration Rules.* This silence cannot be
accidental, and surely derives from the fundamentally different duties inherent in the
roles of arbitrator and of counsel. The duty of the arbitrator is to judge independently
and impartially, free from any influence other than the strength of the cases presented to
him. Counsel, on the other hand, is not required to be ‘impartial’ at all, nor
‘independent’ in the sense demanded of an arbitrator, since counsel will by definition be
retained, and paid, by one of the Parties. Counsel’s duty is to present his Party’s case,
with the degree of dependence and partiality that the role implies, so long as he does so
with diligence and with honesty, and in due compliance with the applicable rules of

professional conduct and ethics.

20. The importance of the interests at stake can readily be illustrated by reference to Article
6 (right to a fair trial) of the European Convention on Human Rights.° It is not simply
that that Article provides, in its paragraph (1), that “[i]n the determination of his civil

rights and obligations everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a

 

reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law”, but also
that the same Article lays down in its paragraph (3), as one of the individual’s basic
rights in this connection, the right “to defend himself in person or through legal
assistance of his own choosing” (emphasis supplied). Admittedly, this is put in the
context of defence against criminal charges, but that arises from the overall context of
the Convention, and there is no room for any suggestion that the provision is not simply
one illustration of a more fundamental principle still about a litigant’s basic rights in
pursuing or defending legal proceedings.’ The fact that the two elements appear side
by side in the same Article shows that each goes hand in hand with the other as essential

elements of what constitutes a fair trial.

* Nor is there even a corresponding rubric in the Second Edition (just published) of the leading Commentary on the
Convention by Schreuer et al.

° See paragraph 15 above.

” Cf. also the exactly similar provisions in Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of
16 December 1966.

21. The Tribunal is not therefore convinced that there is any necessary tension between the
two basic principles: the independence and impartiality of the tribunal (coupled with the
associated principle of the immutability of a tribunal duly established) vs. the litigant’s
right to be represented by persons of his or her own free choice. If special
circumstances were to arise in a specific case such that these two basic principles did
come into collision with one another, it would be the tribunal’s duty to find a way of
bringing them into balance, not to assign priority to either over the other. To put the
matter bluntly, there should be no room for any idea to gain ground that challenging
counsel is a handy alternative to raising a challenge against the tribunal itself, with all

the consequences that the latter implies.

22. The decision of the Hrvatska Tribunal cites the doctrine and practice supporting the
inherent authority of an international court or tribunal to exercise such powers as are
necessary to preserve the integrity and effectiveness of its proceedings. Whether such
general authority does or should extend to the exclusion of counsel is however a more
open question. The domestic court decisions on the matter are directed to a different
issue, namely the possibility that counsel for one party might have gained (or might
have been able to gain) access to privileged information of the other party. As the
Tribunal has already pointed out (paragraph 17 above), the only justification for such
extension in the arbitral context would be a clear need to safeguard the essential
integrity of the arbitral process, on the basis that that integrity would be compromised
were the exclusion not ordered. For that, there is however very little support, if any, in
the established practice in international litigation involving States.* It is by no means
uncommon, for example, that a State appearing before the International Court of Justice
as Applicant or as Respondent might quite properly be represented before the Court by
an Agent, or by Counsel, who until recently had been working in close and continuing
association with a person who had in the meanwhile been elected to serve as Judge on
the Court; similar situations can readily be envisaged before the European Court of

Human Rights or the European Court of Justice, in litigation pitting a private party

* See, for example, “Article 17”, in the Commentary on the Statute of the International Court of Justice (ed.
Zimmermann, Tomuschat & Oellers-Frahm).

against the State.? But, as the Tribunal understands matters, there is no trace of this
being regarded by those standing judicial organs as a circumstance impugning either the
proper composition of the Court itself or the right of the State’s chosen representatives
to audience before it. Similarly, but in the converse direction, the Tribunal is reluctant
to lend encouragement to any practice over and above the accepted rules of professional
conduct and ethics that might end up casting a blight over the investor’s freedom to find
the most appropriate person to represent it in promoting its claims within the ICSID

system.
III. The Extent of a Tribunal’s Powers

23. The Tribunal turns now to the second point in paragraph 13 above: assuming that
there does exist in some limited circumstances a power to control a party’s choice of
counsel, how far does the power extend, and what remedies is an ICSID tribunal
authorized to grant? This seems to the Tribunal to be a separate question in its own
right — although it may be that the answer to it casts some reflected light on the
underlying assumption as to whether the power itself should be admitted. The point
may be illustrated by reference to the Hrvatska case mentioned above. There, it would
appear that the Claimant asked the Tribunal to “recommend to the Respondent” that it
“refrain from using the services of the counsel in question at the hearing” (the term
“recommend” no doubt being borrowed by analogy from Rule 39 of the Arbitration
Rules on provisional measures). In its Decision, the Tribunal rephrases this so as to
read that the Claimant seeks an order from the Tribunal that the Respondent “refrain
from using the services of” the counsel in question, tout court. When it comes to its
final decision on the point, though, what the Tribunal in fact rules is that the barrister in

question “may not participate as counsel in this case.”

24. That progression may well evidence an underlying uncertainty over just what it is that
an ICSID tribunal is empowered to do when confronted with sufficiently compelling

circumstances. So, to take an obvious example, the differences between “refrain from

° It seems not inappropriate to cite these European examples in a Netherlands/Romania context.

10

25.

using the services of X at a hearing” and “order that X may not participate as counsel in
the case” are stark; and it may be questioned what possible risk of bias could be created
by, say, the provision of private advice by X on the party’s handling of its case, or even
X’s participation in settling the terms of submissions to be put before the tribunal in
writing or orally. But there seems to be no persuasive logic in admitting that an
individual might advise the litigating party, draft its pleadings and submissions,
interview the witnesses, and retain the experts — so long as that individual doesn’t sign
the pleadings or appear to present the argument in person. The Respondent, to its
credit, accepts the logic of the situation, by asking the Tribunal (see paragraph | above)
to “remove Mr. Legum from the case and to forbid him from participating in it in any

way,” but at the cost of framing its request in strikingly absolute and sweeping terms.

IV. The Circumstances of the Present Case

Having reached this point in its analysis, the Tribunal does not consider, for the
reasons that follow to do with the actual circumstances of the present case, that it is
called upon to decide definitively what the limits are of any power an ICSID tribunal
might possess to exclude counsel, beyond its finding in paragraph 16 above that any
such power as may exist would be one to be exercised only rarely, and in compelling
circumstances. The Tribunal is however conscious of the fact that its analysis above
might imply that the Hrvatska Tribunal was in some way not sufficiently attuned to the
several principles at issue in situations of this kind, and would like to make it clear that
that is emphatically not the case. There are ample indications on the face of its Decision
that the Hrvatska Tribunal tried to look at matters in the round and, having done so,
balanced out the particular circumstances that were before it in the way we can now see.
It is obviously not for this Tribunal to second-guess that assessment, or to express its
own view on a professional association between counsel and arbitrator in that case
which both of them had affirmed to be nominal and not of a kind to affect the
arbitrator’s independence of judgement. It may also be that the Hrvatska Tribunal was

influenced by the secondary role that was to have been played by the newly appointed

counsel,'° as well as by the somewhat surprising remark that the objecting Party had
indicated that withdrawal of the counsel in question would “eliminate the problem
entirely” from its standpoint.'' What is however plain beyond a shadow of doubt is
that the Hrvatska Tribunal was influenced to a material degree by the late
announcement of the new appointment as counsel, coupled with the light that had been
cast on the surrounding circumstances by the adamant refusal of the appointing Party’s
representatives to make any disclosure until the very last minute — which they
themselves acknowledged before the Tribunal had been an error of judgement. Viewed
from this perspective, the Hrvatska Decision might better be seen as an ad hoc sanction
for the failure to make proper disclosure in good time than as a holding of more general

scope.

26. At all events, whatever amongst these factors might have been the one that most
moved the Hrvatska Tribunal, none of them is present in this case. In the present case,
the Tribunal has taken the opportunity available to it to consider with full and due
reflection the explanations offered by both parties of the association between Mr.
Legum and one of its Members, and cannot as a result find anything in it that might, on
the Porter v. Magill standard of the UK House of Lords, '? raise “a real possibility that
the tribunal was biased,” or that might provide a reasonable basis, in terms of Article 14
of the ICSID Convention and Article 6 of the Rules, for questioning the ability of the
Tribunal or any of its Members to judge fairly or exercise independent judgment.
There is moreover no dispute that the association in question is in the past and raises no
issue as to either person having a present or future financial or material interest in the
other’s professional activity. Finally, the circumstances were put on the record within a
short time after new counsel’s appearance, and well before the hearing was to take place

or other decisions needed to be made.

'° Relating to quantum only, so it would seem.
*! With its overtones that the object of the exercise was to satisfy the objector’s concerns rather than to arrive at the
Tribunal’s own dispassionate assessment.
2
See paragraph 15 above.

27. — Insum, the Tribunal can find in the circumstances before it no basis for any suggestion
that it should interfere in the choice by Claimant of its counsel for these proceedings, or
indeed for any suggestion that the preservation of the integrity of these proceedings

requires it to consider doing so. The Respondent’s application is accordingly denied.

/signed/ /signed/
Mr. Marc Lalonde, P.C., O.C, Q.C. Mr. Donald Francis Donovan, Esq.
Arbitrator Arbitrator
/signed/

Sir Franklin Berman, KCMG, Q.C.
President

