INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

The Carlyle Group L.P., Carlyle Investment Management L.L.C., Carlyle
Commodity Management L.L.C., and others

v.
Kingdom of Morocco

(ICSID Case No. ARB/18/29)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 4
Decision on Bifurcation

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Juan Fernéndez-Armesto, President of the Tribunal
Dr. Horacio A. Grigera Na6n
Mr. Samuel Wordsworth, QC

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Ella Rosenberg

Assistant to the Tribunal
Ms. Krystle M. Baptista

 

January 20, 2020

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

Procedural Order No. 4

 

Table of Contents
WHEREAS 3
PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 4 w.cscsssssssssssessssessssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssessssesssssssssssseses 4
1. Respondent's position

 

A. Objections that would warrant mandatory bifurcation
B. Objections that would warrant discretionary bifurcation

2. Claimants’ position

 

A. Objections that would warrant mandatory bifurcation ....
B. Objections that would warrant discretionary bifurcation ...

 

3. Decision. 15

A. Discretionary bifurcation under Article 41(2) of the Convention..
B. Mandatory Bifurcation under Article 10.19.4 of the FTA.
C. Summary.

 
  

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

Procedural Order No. 4

WHEREAS

This arbitration arises between The Carlyle Group L.P.; Carlyle Investment
Management L.L.C.; CCM, TC Group, L.L.C.; TC Group Investment Holdings,
L.P.; Celadon Commodities Fund, LP; and Celadon Partners, LLC [“Claimants”
or “Carlyle”] against the Kingdom of Morocco [“Morocco” or “Respondent”]
under the United States-Morocco Free Trade Agreement signed on June 15, 2004
[the “Treaty” or the “FTA”]. Claimants and Respondent shall be jointly referred
to as the “Parties”.

On July 31, 2019 Claimants filed their Memorial.

On October 11, 2019 Respondent submitted its Application for Bifurcation of the
Proceedings [the “Request”].

On November 20, 2019 Claimants filed their Observations on the Request
[“Claimants’ Observations”).

In the procedural calendars attached to Procedural Order No. 1 as Annex B, the
Tribunal foresaw a period of two months to issue the decision on bifurcation.

After deliberations, the Tribunal now issues its decision on bifurcation within the
established time period.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

Procedural Order No. 4

PROCEDURAL ORDER

 

The Tribunal will summarize the Parties’ positions regarding bifurcation of the
proceedings.

RESPONDENT’S POSITION

Respondent has presented five grounds for bifurcation of the proceedings. Three of
those grounds — according to Respondent — warrant mandatory bifurcation pursuant
to Article 10.19.4 of the Treaty (A.).! The other two grounds for bifurcation are
discretionary pursuant to Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention supplemented by
Article 41(3) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules (B.).”

As a preliminary matter, Respondent argues that if it raises an objection falling
within the scope of Article 10.19.4, the Tribunal must suspend the proceedings on
the merits until the application is resolved. This applies to any objection capable of
resolution under its terms, including jurisdictional objections that do not require
determinations of contested factual matters. Respondent considers that this is made
clear by:?

- The use of the words “any objection” in the chapeau to Article 10.19.4;

- The provision in Article 10.19.4 that “[t]he respondent does not waive any
objection as to competence or any argument on the merits merely because the
respondent did or did not raise an objection under this paragraph or make use
of the expedited procedure set out in paragraph 5”; and

- The object and purpose of Article 10.19.4 to provide a method for resolving
claims which do not involve contested factual matters as a preliminary matter.

A. Objections that would warrant mandatory bifurcation

Respondent raises three different objections that would allegedly require mandatory
bifurcation: the First Objection relates to the merits of the case (a.) but the Second
(b.) and Third Objections (c.) are jurisdictional.

a. First Objection

Respondent’s first objection turns on a specific aspect of Claimants’ case
[“Claimants’ alternative case”]:+ Claimants’ allegation of misconduct by

' Request, paras. 6-14.

? Request, para:

15-18.

 

3 Request, para. 13.
+ Respondent in para. 33 of the Request defines Claimants’ alternative case as that the Moroccan
government:

- seized SAMIR’s assets, forcing the company to shut down, and ordered SAMIR to dispose of
the Commodities, giving rise to an expropriation (Article 10.6 of the Treaty) and a breach of fair
and equitable treatment [“FET”] (Article 10.5.1 of the Treaty), and

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

Procedural Order No. 4

Morocco against SAMIR (a company in which Claimants have no proprietary
interest) amounting to expropriation and a violation of FET.* Respondent argues
that Claimants’ alternative case is misconceived because it reveals no pleaded
breach of the Treaty and the alleged losses are too remote for a claim under the
Treaty:

- No breach can be derived from actions of the Moroccan government against
its own nationals (SAMIR) in which Claimants have no proprietary interest
and do not exercise control;’ the Treaty does not provide a cause of action for
a creditor to claim damages in respect of the alleged mistreatment of a third-
party company which is a national of the host state;* furthermore, Claimants
present no evidence of wrongdoing by Morocco against SAMIR.”

- Claimants’ claim based on SAMIR’s insolvency involves alleged damages
that are too remote to be recoverable under international law!”; the parties to
the Treaty cannot possibly have considered this kind of claim to give rise to
an actionable loss under Article 10.5.1 of the Treaty.!!

Respondent insists that this objection gives rise to a pure question of law,
concerning remoteness and the law of state responsibility.!? It constitutes an
objection that “as a matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an
award in favour of the claimant may be made under Article 10.25” within the
meaning of Article 10.19.4 of the Treaty.

b. Second Objection

Respondent’s Second Objection is that Claimants lack standing to bring a claim
with respect to assets and/or losses of Cayman entities. None of the US-domiciled
Claimants directly owns the claimed investments (the Investment Agreements and
the Commodities), which seem to belong to Cayman entities. And the Claimants
themselves were never parties to the Investment Agreements.!*

Respondent avers that this objection is fatal and must necessarily dispose of the
entire claim, since under international law, the company is distinct from its
shareholders.'* And under the Treaty only the company — but not a shareholder,
which is what Claimants are vis-a-vis the Cayman entities — has the capacity to

- forced SAMIR into liquidation and then blocked outside bids to purchase the refinery, amounting
to a breach of FET.

5 Request, paras. 35-36.
6 Request, paras. 36-46.
7 Request, para. 38.1.
8 Request, para. 38.1.
° Request, para. 38.2.

© Reque
"! Reque

para. 41.
para. 45.

 

"2 Request, para. 46.

'3 Request, para. 47. Where it refers to Investment Agreements below, the Tribunal does so for convenience
only and does not enter into the question of whether there is any investment in this case.

4 Request, para. 48, citing to HICEE v. Slovak Republic.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

Procedural Order No. 4

bring claims with respect to company’s assets.!° Nowhere in Article 10.15.1 of the
Treaty is it provided that a claimant is entitled to submit a claim on behalf of an
investment vehicle incorporated in a third state.!® It follows that such a claim is
outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

15. Respondent argues that this objection requires bifurcation under Article 10.19.4
since:

- The facts required to substantiate the claim have been admitted by Claimants
in their Memorial, and

- The objection is a pure question of law that, if upheld, will dispose of the entire
case, such that no award in their favour can be made under Article 10.25 of
the Treaty.

c. Third Objection

16. Respondent’s Third Objection is that Claimants’ investments do not meet the
jurisdictional requirements of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention or Article
10.27 of the Treaty.

17. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention requires, in order for ICSID to have
jurisdiction over a dispute, that the claimant establish that it has an investment in
the territory of the host state. Case law has established that “investment” has an
inherent meaning, entailing:

- (i) contributions by the investor of
- (ii) certain duration and
- (iii) assuming a level of risk.!”

Such requirements are also reflected in Article 10.27 of the Treaty which defines
“investment” as “every asset [...] that has the characteristics of an investment,
including such characteristics as the commitment of capital and other resources, the
expectation of gain or profit, or the assumption of risk”.'®

18. Respondent argues that Claimants’ alleged investments do not satisfy any of the
requirements, mainly because:

- First, Claimants have provided no evidence that they made any contributions,
financial or otherwise to the Cayman entities, and thus to the Investment

'S Request, paras, 48-49, citing to Postova banka v. Greece, RL-0006, AAPL v. Sri Lanka, RL-0007, Karkey
v. Pakistan, RL-0008, ST-AD v. Bulgaria, RL-0009, and Enkev v. Poland, RL-0010.

'6 Request, paras. 51-52, citing to Bilon v. Canada, RL-0011.

"7 Request, para. 55.

'S Request, para. 56.

 

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

Procedural Order No. 4

Agreements and Commodities; and the money provided under the letters of
credit was provided directly to the suppliers in third states;!?

- Second, Claimants operations with SAMIR lacked the necessary duration to
constitute an investment; each of the individual Transactions was intended to
be entirely closed within a handful of months and the entire arrangement was
only on foot for approximately six months;?° despite Claimants’ allegation,
none of them made a commitment under the Commitment Letter written by
SAMIR.”!

- Third, the risk of losing the Commodities is not a qualifying species of risk.

19. Respondent submits that this objection is a discrete legal point and therefore
warrants mandatory bifurcation under Article 10.19.4.2> Alternatively, it would be
a strong ground for discretionary bifurcation, since it can be dealt with shortly, it is
not intertwined with the merits and, if granted, would dispose of the whole
proceeding.*+

B. Qbjections that would warrant discretionary bifurcation

20. As regards the Tribunal’s discretion to bifurcate the proceedings under Articles
41(2) of the ICSID Convention and 41(3) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
Respondent argues that the Tribunal must consider the following factors:”>

- Whether the request is substantial or frivolous;

- Whether the request, if granted, would lead to a material reduction in the
proceedings at the next stage; and

- Whether bifurcation is impractical in the sense that the issues are too
intertwined with the merits.

21. Respondent argues that its two discretionary objections (the Fourth and Fifth
Objection):?°

- Are substantial and in no way frivolous;

- If resolved in favour of Morocco, they would dispose of the entire case or
materially reduce its scope; and

'° Request, para. 58.

2 Request, para. 59.

2! Request, para. 60.

2 Request, paras. 61-63.
23 Request, para. 64.

24 Request, para. 64.

25 Request, para. 17, citing to Emmis v. Hungary, RL-0003.
26 , para. 18.

 

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

22.

23.

24.

25.

Procedural Order No. 4

- Are not overtly intertwined with the merits or would require the Tribunal to
embark on extensive fact-finding exercises.

a. Fourth Objection

Morocco’s objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the basis that Claimants
have failed to establish that they are investors for the purposes of Article 10.27 of
the Treaty for three reasons:

First, Claimants have not provided any proof that they own or control the Cayman
entities that directly transacted with SAMIR.2’ On Claimant’s case, their
investments are directly owned and controlled by the Cayman entities. But
Claimants simply provide assertions, but no documentary evidence, on their
relationship with the Cayman entities.

Second, the Investment Agreements (save the CSA) cannot be considered
investments “in the territory of Morocco”.”* In order to constitute an investment in
the territory of Morocco, the Investment Agreements would need to give rise to
rights in Moroccan law, such that Morocco became the contractual situs.?? Only the
CSA is governed by Moroccan law, all other Investment Agreements are governed
by New York law.*° Thus, the majority of the Investment Agreements cannot be
considered investment “in the territory of Morocco”. The acceptance of this
objection by the Tribunal would result in the dismissal of all the claims based on
contractual rights derived from the Investment Agreements.*!

Third, pursuant to the Investment Agreements, the Claimants never legally owned
or controlled the Commodities.” If contractual rights arising from the Investment
Agreements are not considered investments pursuant to Article 10.27 of the Treaty,
there would only be two possible investments on which the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
can be founded: the CSA and the Commodities themselves.*? The capacity of the
CSA to give rise to a claim depends, however, on the question of who holds title to
the Commodities.** Despite Claimants’ factual recount of the case, Respondent
submits that pursuant to the terms of the MCTA, the Cayman Entities never had
title to the Commodities, as has been confirmed by a judgement of the
Commercial Court of Casablanca.*°

27 Request, paras, 70-73.
28 Request, paras. 74-79.

36

 

paras. 83-85.

Request, para. 86.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

  

Procedural Order No. 4
b. Fifth Objection

Respondent’s final objection to the Tribunal’s ratione personae jurisdiction arises
out of the requirement of Article 10.27 of the Treaty that an entity can only be
considered an investor if it “concretely attempts to make, is making or has made an
investment in the territory of the other Party”.*” Respondent alleges that the word
“concretely” is key, because it implies that the investor must be active in the process
of investment.°®

Respondent submits that there is no evidence that Claimants have been anything
other than the passive beneficiaries of the Cayman entities’ investment efforts.*? As
such they cannot be said to have concretely made an investment in accordance with
Article 10.27 of the Treaty.

Furthermore, Claimants’ case is that CCM was the investment adviser to Celadon
Commodities Fund LP, Celadon Cayman and VMF, but Claimants do not allege
that CCM had any ownership or financial interest in the entities it advised.*° Thus,
CCM cannot be considered an investor. As the only thing CCM provided to VMF
was advisory and/or management services, it is difficult to see it could have
“concretely” made an investment within the meaning of Article 10.27 of the
Treaty.*!

CLAIMANTS?’ POSITION

Claimants submit that bifurcation in this case should be rejected both because
Respondent’s arguments are substantially wrong and because to bifurcate would be
inefficient and unjust to Claimants.*?

Claimants’ arguments regarding each of Respondent’s objections are summarized
below.

A. Objections that would warrant mandatory bifurcation

Claimants argue that Respondent’s application based on mandatory grounds is
untenable because Respondent has blatantly mischaracterized Claimants’ claims
and mistreated the pertinent legal standard on causation (a.) and due to lack of
timelines under the plain language of the Treaty (b.).

a. First Objection

Claimants submit that in the First Objection Respondent attempts to build an
objection pursuant to Article 10.19.4 by:

57 Request, paras, 88-98.

para. 88.
para. 93.
para. 94.
, para, 96.

® Claimants’ Observations, para. 2.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

Procedural Order No. 4

- Enrroneously asserting that the basis of Claimants’ case is the impact of the
Government’s actions in SAMIR and SAMIR’s insolvency;

- Deliberately presenting out-of-context statements from Claimants’ pending
litigation in New York to mislead the Tribunal; and

- Concocting a causation argument that is premised on an_ incorrect
representation of Claimants’ case and is not supported by the law.

First, Claimants allege that Respondent grossly mischaracterizes Claimants’ case
by ignoring that it is based on Morocco’s wrongful seizure of assets and freezing
and sweeping of accounts belonging to Claimants, and instead insisting that the
impact of those actions on SAMIR and SAMIR’s “insolvency”/bankruptcy does not
give rise to a cognizable claim under the Treaty.*?

Reading the Memorial in its totality (rather than the isolated passages that
Respondent focuses on), there can be no question that Claimants’ principal
allegation is that the Government:

- Directed SAMIR to sell Carlyle’s Commodities into the open market without
Carlyle’s consent;

- Prevented Carlyle from ever receiving any of the proceeds from the
unauthorized sales of its Commodities or from making any other business
arrangements that would allow for such payments;

- Arranged to sweep the proceeds from the unauthorized sales of Carlyle’s
Commodities from SAMIR’s accounts; and

- Instructed local distributors to pay the Government directly for Carlyle’s
Commodities.

Thus, the Government’s actions had the direct effect of depriving a U.S. investor
(Carlyle) of its covered investments (Carlyle’s Commodities and contractual rights)
in violation of the Government’s obligations under the Treaty.**

Second, Respondent presents out-of-context statements from Claimants’ pending
insurance litigation in New York state court to mislead the Tribunal, when there is
nothing inconsistent about Claimants’ allegations in either proceeding, and
Claimants have unequivocally stated a cognizable claim against Respondent in this
arbitration.*°

Third, Respondent makes a “remoteness” argument based on an entirely false
premise and a misstatement of Claimants’ case.” Claimants have indeed met the

3 Claimants’ Observations, para. 26.
“4 Claimants’ Observations, para. 28.
45 Claimants’ Observations, para. 32.

46

Claimants’ Observations, paras. 33-34.

7 Claimants’ Observations, para. 35.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

38.

39.

40.

Al.

Procedural Order No. 4

standard of causation by alleging that, among other things, the Government directed
SAMIR to dispose of the Commodities, and that, but for the Government’s
subsequent actions, Claimants may have been able to recover the hundreds of
millions of US dollars’ worth of Commodities stored in SAMIR’s facilities.**

b. — Second and Third Objections

The Second and the Third Objection are treated together because, preliminarily,
Claimants consider that there is no mandatory bifurcation under Article 10.19.4 of
the Treaty with regards to jurisdictional objections. This would, thus, result in the
dismissal of both objections.

Claimants allege that under the Treaty, the proper procedure for obtaining
mandatory bifurcation of preliminary jurisdictional objections is pursuant to Article
10.19.5. However, Article 10.19.5 provides a window of only 45 days after the
constitution of the Tribunal for Respondent to submit preliminary jurisdictional
objections, and any submission after the 45 days is untimely. Having neglected to
avail itself of Article 10.19.5 within the appropriate time, Respondent is not now
entitled to mandatory bifurcation of its preliminary jurisdictional objections under
Article 10.19.4.°

Furthermore, when evaluating an objection under Article 10.19.4, a tribunal must
assume that all of claimant’s factual allegations in support of its claims are true.
Were Article 10.19.4 intended to cover jurisdictional objections, the express
language of subsection (c) would effectively preclude the tribunal from assessing
any such jurisdictional objection because the tribunal would be required to assume
that claimant’s factual allegations, including as to its standing, are true. Therefore,
purely jurisdictional objections — such as those raised in Respondent’s Application
— are not and cannot be covered by the mandatory bifurcation process set forth in
Article 10.19.4.5°

Substance of the Second Objection

As regards the Second Objection, which deals with Claimants’ alleged lack of
standing, Claimants submit that their investments in Morocco were:

- Commodities, stored in SAMIR’s tanks pursuant to the Transactions and
owned by Claimants under the Investment Agreements, which are protectable
as “movable property” under Article 10.27(h) of the Treaty; and

- Contractual rights derived from the Investment Agreements, such as the Put
Right, protectable as an “option” under Article 10.27(d) of the Treaty.

48 Claimants’ Observations, para. 37.
*° Claimants’ Observations, para. 10.
5° Claimants’ Observations, para. 13.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

42.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

47.

Procedural Order No. 4

No investments were made “in” SAMIR by any of the Claimants or the Cayman
entities owned and/or controlled by Claimants.

If Respondent’s point is that Claimants did not directly make the investments at
issue, that does not disqualify Claimants from being “investors” whose investments
are protected by the Treaty.*' And, even if Claimants were not deemed to wholly
own or control the Cayman entities (quod non) and were mere shareholders in the
Cayman entities, Claimants would still not be barred by their position as
shareholders and would have standing under international law to bring the present
claim against Morocco.”

Finally, at all relevant times Claimants exercised complete control over the entities
involved in the investments and took ownership of the flow of money to and from
SAMIR.» In sum, the documentation presented by Claimants establishes without
question that Claimants owned and/or controlled the entities that were parties to the
Investment Agreements with SAMIR, and that through those entities, Claimants
owned and/or controlled the investments.*4

Substance of the Third Objection

As regards the Third Objection, Claimants submit that their investments do comply
with the jurisdictional requirements of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention or
Article 10.27 of the Treaty.

First, nothing in the Treaty’s definition of investment requires each Claimant to
have individually committed capital or other resources; rather, the definition
indicates that one of the characteristics of the investment itself is the commitment
of capital or other resources. Claimants’ investments involved the commitment of
capital, as Carlyle issued more than US $400 million in letters of credit to purchase
the Commodities that were stored in SAMIR’s tanks in accordance with the
Investment Agreements.*>

Second, Respondent’s characterization of the investment as a six-month investment
is incorrect, because the executed commitment letter demonstrates that Claimants
committed to engage in a long series of commodities investments for a minimum
of three years.*° In any case, the definition of “investment” in Article 10.27 of the
Treaty provides no specific minimum durational requirement.>”

Finally, Claimants assumed the risk of both the diminution of value of their
Commodities and the physical loss of their Commodities. The distinction that
Respondent attempts to draw between “operational” risks (which allegedly qualify)

5! Claimants’ Observations, para. 58.
52 Claimants’ Observations, para. 65.
*} Claimants’ Observations, paras. 66-70.
*4 Claimants’ Observations, para. 70.
55 Claimants’ Observations, para. 80.

56

Claimants’ Observations, para. 82.

57 Claimants’ Observations, para. 81.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

Procedural Order No. 4

and “commercial” risks (which allegedly do not qualify) comes from mere dicta in
the Postova Banka v. Greece case and should not be given significant
consideration.**

B. Qbjections that would warrant discretionary bifurcation

Claimants aver that Respondent’s application for bifurcation cannot be saved by
requesting discretionary bifurcation, because it would not result in procedural
efficiency and the objections are meritless.

First, Respondent’s application is frivolous.*? Claimants insist that much of the
documentation that Respondent alleges is missing from the record has already been
provided.® Thus, granting Respondent’s Request in the present circumstances
would wrongly lend credence to what was nothing more than a delay tactic.°!

Second, Respondent’s argument that the jurisdictional issues are not intertwined
with the merits is exceedingly weak and must be rejected. Since the Government’s
various wrongful actions are essentially undisputed, a correct and comprehensive
understanding of the Investment Agreements and Carlyle’s contractual rights
therein and how they were affected by the Government’s actions is at the very heart
of Claimants’ case. It would thus be entirely inefficient for the parties and the
Tribunal to engage in an extensive review and analysis of the ownership and control
issue twice over the course of multiple years.

Third, bifurcation of Respondent’s jurisdictional objections will not meaningfully
narrow the scope of the arbitration.™ This is clear from the documents submitted so
far by Claimants. In addition, assuming that the Tribunal rejects Respondent’s
flawed readings of the Investment Agreements and flawed understanding of
Claimants’ corporate structure, then the scope of the case would remain exactly the
same: did Respondent’s wrongful actions harm those investments? And did
Respondent take those actions knowing that the Investments belonged to
Claimants?

a. Fourth Objection
Morocco’s gave three reasons to object the jurisdiction of the tribunal on the basis

that Claimants had failed to establish that they are investors for the purposes of
Article 10.27 of the Treaty:

58 Claimants’ Observations, para. 83.
5° Claimants’ Observations, paras. 42-46.
© Claimants’ Observations, paras. 42-46.
°! Claimants’ Observations, para. 46.
© Claimants’ Observations, paras. 47-52.
© Claimants’ Observations, para. 50.
© Claimants’ Observations, paras. 53-55.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

53.

54.

55.

56.

Procedural Order No. 4

- That Claimants have not provided any proof that they own or control the
Cayman entities that directly transacted with SAMIR(i.);°

- That the Investment Agreements (save the CSA) cannot be considered
investments “in the territory of Morocco”(ii.) and;°°

- That pursuant to the Investment Agreements, the Claimants never legally
owned or controlled the Commodities (iii.).°”

(i.) Claimants’ response to the first argument was already addressed in Claimants’
observations to the Second Objection.

(ii.) Claimants argue that Respondent is incorrect in contending that the Investment
Agreements were not “in the territory” of Morocco simply because not every one
of the Investment Agreements was governed by Moroccan law. Respondent does
not contest that the Commodities are “in the territory” of Morocco. And as to the
contractual rights arising under the Investment Agreements, a myriad of
characteristics show that the Investment Agreements were “in the territory” of
Morocco for purposes of Article 10.27 of the Treaty (i.e. the Transactions were
approved by the Moroccan Foreign Exchange Office). In any case, no case law
requires investment options to arise under agreements that have a choice of law
provision designating the respondent State’s law, in order to be considered “in the
territory” of the respondent State.°?

(iii.) Claimants submit that Respondent’s argument, that Claimants “never legally
owned or controlled the Commodities” under the Investment Agreements, is wrong
as a matter of contract interpretation. Respondent simply ignores the plain language
of both the MCTA and the CSA that unequivocally attribute ownership to
Claimants.” SAMIR also expressly reaffirmed Claimants’ ownership of the
Commodities in the Forbearance Agreement, which declared that SAMIR “[did]
not have any ownership or property right, title or interest in or to Commodities.””!

b. Fifth Objection

Finally, Claimants submit that Respondent’s interpretation of the word “concretely”
in the definition of “investor of a Party” under Article 10.27 of the Treaty, pursuant
to which Claimants allegedly must be “active” investors, does not comport with the
Treaty (which defines “investment” broadly) or with international law (which does
not set forth any particular standard with regard to the “activity” of the investor).””

65 Request, paras. 70-73.

66

Reque!
57 Reque

paras. 74-79.
, paras, 80-86.

   

°$ Claimants’ Observations, para. 75.
© Claimants’ Observations, para. 76.
7 Claimants’ Observations, para. 71.
7! Claimants’ Observations, para. 72.
™ Claimants’ Observations, fn. 87.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

Procedural Order No. 4

In any event, even if Respondent’s interpretation were to be adopted for the sake of
argument, Claimants clearly made an active investment in oil and facilitated the
arrangement by providing funds in advance.”

DECISION

The Tribunal observed in its communication of 22 May 2019 that bifurcation may
take place because:”

“- the objection has been validly raised under Art. 10.19.4 of the FTA
(which warrants a mandatory bifurcation); or

- the objection falls outside the scope of Art. 10.19.4 of the FTA, but
the Tribunal in its discretion finds that it should be dealt with as a
preliminary question; or

- there is at least one objection in each previous category.”
Claimants submit that they made two types of investments in Morocco:7>

- Commodities stored in SAMIR’s tanks pursuant to the Transactions and
owned by Claimants under the Investment Agreements, constituting “movable
property” under Article 10.27(h) of the FTA; and

- Contractual rights against SAMIR derived from the Investment Agreements,
such as the Put Right, which are protected as an “option” under Article
10.27(d) of the FTA.

These investments were made between February and August 2015.’° Claimants
aver that they had accepted a commitment to continue the transactions for a three-
year period.””

Claimants are Delaware corporations, which are alleged to be controlled by The
Carlyle Group LP, also a Delaware corporation. The Investment Agreements were
entered into between certain Cayman entities and SAMIR, a Moroccan corporation.
Claimants say that they wholly own and/or legally control the Cayman entities, but
even assuming arguendo that were not the case, Claimants had de facto control over
such entities and investments.’* Claimants took ownership of the flows of money
to and from SAMIR.”

Claimants’ Observations, fn. 87.

™ Letter to the Parties of 22 May 2019, para. 24.
75 Claimants’ Memorial, para. 27.

76 Claimants’ Memorial, para. 11.

77 Claimants’ Observations, para. 82.

78 Claimants’ Observations, para. 64.

79 Claimants’ Observations, para. 67.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

Procedural Order No. 4

Claimants submit that Morocco’s actions constitute a breach of the Treaty, and
more specifically of the FET obligation under Article 10.5.1°° and the obligation
not to expropriate without just compensation under Article 10.6 of the Treaty.*!

Respondent raises five objections. The Tribunal will first analyse discretionary
bifurcation under Article 41(2) of the Convention (A.), and thereafter mandatory
bifurcation under Article 10.19.4 of the FTA (B.).

A. Discretionary bifurcation under Article 41(2) of the Convention

Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention grants arbitral tribunals the power to
bifurcate proceedings in order to address admissibility and jurisdictional objections
as a preliminary matter:

“Any objection by a party to the dispute that that dispute is not within
the jurisdiction of the Centre, or for other reasons is not within the
competence of the Tribunal, shall be considered by the Tribunal which
shall determine whether to deal with it as a preliminary question or to
join it to the merits of the dispute.”

The Convention is supplemented by Article 41(3) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
which reaffirms the tribunal’s discretion to suspend proceedings on the merits in
order to decide objections:

“Upon the formal raising of an objection relating to the dispute, the
Tribunal may decide to suspend the proceeding on the merits. [...]”

The Parties agree that the Tribunal should consider the following criteria in order
to decide whether to bifurcate the objections raised by Respondent on discretionary
grounds:

- Whether bifurcation would promote procedural efficiency;*”

- Whether the request is substantial or frivolous;®?

- Whether the request, if granted, would lead to a material reduction in the
proceedings at the next stage;*“ and

- Whether bifurcation is impractical because the issues are too intertwined with
the merits.*°

80 Claimants’ Memorial, paras. 84-130.

8! Claimants’ Memorial, paras. 131-171.

82 Claimants’ Observations, paras. 40-41.

85 Request, para. 17; Claimants’ Observations, para. 41.

* Reque

para. 17; Claimants’ Observations, para. 41,

 

85 Request, para. 17; Claimants’ Observations, para. 41.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

86

Procedural Order No. 4
a. Fourth Objection

Under the Fourth Objection Respondent submits that Claimants are not investors
for the purposes of Article 10.27 of the Treaty for three reasons:

- First, Claimants have not proven that they own or control the Cayman
entities;°°

- Second, Respondent alleges that the Investment Agreements cannot be
considered investments in the “territory of Morocco”, because these
agreements do not give rights under Moroccan law;*”

- Third, Respondent submits that Claimants never legally owned or controlled
the Commodities.**

The Fourth Objection appears to be prima facie substantial and the Arbitral
Tribunal is of the view that clarifying from the outset whether Claimants are
investors under the Treaty and whether their alleged investments meet the Treaty
criteria will enhance procedural efficiency; furthermore if the Fourth Objection
were to be accepted, it would lead to a complete dismissal of Claimants’ claims.

Thus, the Tribunal decides that the Fourth Objection should be bifurcated.
b. Fifth Objection

Under this Objection Respondent argues that the Treaty definition of investment
requires the investor to be active in the process of investment — and submits that
Claimants (and especially CCM which provided advisory and/or management
services) were passive investors.

Since the Tribunal has decided to bifurcate the Fourth Objection, reasons of
procedural efficiency and the factors at para. 66 above support that the Fifth
Objection also be bifurcated and the Tribunal so decides.

c. Second and Third Objections

The Second Objection is a ratione personae jurisdictional objection — that
Claimants lack standing to bring a claim with respect to assets and/or losses of
entities incorporated in a third state (i.e. the Cayman Islands). And the Third
Objection is a ratione materiae jurisdictional objection — that Claimants’
investments do not meet the “inherent-meaning-of-investment-test” pursuant to the
FTA.

Both objections are, to a greater or less extent, factually and legally linked to the
Fourth Objection, and if decided in favor of the Respondent would dispose of the
case. Since the Tribunal has already decided that the Fourth Objection should be

Request, para. 70.

87 Request, para. 74.
88 Request, para. 80.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

Procedural Order No. 4

bifurcated, and bearing in mind the factors at para. 66 above, the Tribunal, using
the discretionary powers conferred by Article 41 of the ICSID Convention, decides
that the Second and Third Objections should also be bifurcated.

B. Mandatory bifurcation under Article 10.19.4 of the FTA

74. Article 10.19.4 of the FTA requires that the Tribunal bifurcate the procedure in
order to address specific objections as a preliminary question:

“4, Without prejudice to a tribunal’s authority to address other
objections as a preliminary question, a tribunal shall address and
decide as a preliminary ion any obj by the r
that, as a matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which
an award in favor of the claimant may be made under Article 10.25.

(a) Such objection shall be submitted to the tribunal as soon as possible
after the tribunal is constituted, and in no event later than the date the
tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its counter-memorial (or, in
the case of an amendment to the notice of arbitration, the date the
tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its response to the
amendment).

(b) On receipt of an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal
shall suspend any proceedings on the merits, establish a schedule for
considering the objection consistent with any schedule it has established
for considering any other preliminary question, and issue a decision or
award on the objection, stating the grounds therefor.

(c) In deciding an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall
assume to be true claimant’s factual allegations in support of any
claim in the notice of arbitration (or any amendment thereof) and, in
disputes brought under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the
statement of claim referred to in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules. The tribunal may also consider any relevant facts not
in dispute.

(d) [...]”. [Emphasis added]

75. Article 10.25 of the Treaty, referenced in the chapeau of Article 10.19.4 provides
as follows:

“Where a tribunal makes a final award against a respondent, the tribunal
may award, separately or in combination, only:

(a) monetary damages and interest, as appropriate; and
(b) restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide that

the respondent may pay monetary damages and interest, as appropriate,
in lieu of restitution.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

Procedural Order No. 4

A tribunal may also award costs and attorney’s fees in accordance with
this Section and the applicable arbitration rules.”

In accordance with the FTA, a Tribunal is obliged to bifurcate “any objection by
the respondent”, provided that such objection meets the following requirements:

- First, the objection must refer to a claim for which as “a matter of law” no
award in favor of claimant can be made;

- Second, the objection must be submitted no later than the date the tribunal
fixes for the respondent to submit its counter-memorial;

- Third, the objection must assume that the factual allegations, as pleaded in
the claimant’s submissions, are true.

a. First Objection

Under this Objection Respondent submits that a part of Claimants’ factual
allegations cannot be held to be a breach of the Treaty and that the alleged losses
are too remote to be recoverable under international law.*? Respondent avers that
this objection gives rise to a pure question of law, concerning the law of State
responsibility and the requirement that there be a close connection between breach
and damage, and that consequently bifurcation is mandatory under Article 10.19.4
of the Treaty.”

Claimants say that Respondent grossly mischaracterizes Claimants’ case, by
ignoring that it is based on Morocco’s wrongful seizure of assets and freezing and
sweeping of accounts belonging to Claimants, and instead insisting that the impact
of those actions on SAMIR and SAMIR’s bankruptcy does not give rise to a
cognizable claim under the Treaty.*!

In the Tribunal’s opinion, the First Objection does not meet one of the requirements
set forth under Article 10.19.4 of the Treaty: it does not accept that the totality of
the factual allegations, as pleaded by Claimants in their Memorial, are true.

As Claimants have convincingly shown, their factual allegations have a different,
and much wider scope, than those portrayed in Respondent’s First Objection. In
their memorial Claimants allege that:

- Respondent directed SAMIR to sell Carlyle’s Commodities into the open
market without Carlyle’s consent;

- Respondent prevented Carlyle from ever receiving any of the proceeds from
the unauthorized sales of its Commodities or from making any other business
arrangements that would allow for such payments;

® Request, paras, 36-46.

% Reque

  

, para, 46.

°! Claimants’ Observations, para. 26.

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

Procedural Order No. 4

- Respondent arranged to sweep the proceeds from the unauthorized sales of
Carlyle’s Commodities from SAMIR’s accounts; and that

- Respondent instructed local distributors to pay the Government directly for
Carlyle’s Commodities.”

These actions — Claimants say — constitute violations of Morocco’s obligations
under the Treaty which resulted in Claimants being deprived of their investments.”*

Respondent in fact acknowledges that the First Objection does not assume the
totality of Claimants’ factual allegations, when it admits that it “turns on one
specific aspect of the Claimants’ case”.**

Under Article 10.19.4 of the Treaty, Respondent is not authorized to select certain
facts from Claimants’ allegations, in order to argue that such facts by themselves
do not amount to a breach of the Treaty. Respondent must accept the totality of the
facts as pleaded by Claimants. The necessary consequence is that the First
Objection does not meet the requirements to constitute an objection which must be
mandatorily bifurcated under such provision.

Adjudication of the First Objection requires a full review of the facts. For this
reason, the Tribunal finds that the more appropriate approach for the First Objection
would be to adjudicate it jointly with the merits of the case.

b. — Second and Third Objections

The Parties have discussed as a preliminary question whether jurisdictional
objections can constitute objections giving rise to mandatory bifurcation under
Article 10.19.4 of the FTA. The Tribunal has already decided that the Second and
Third Objections should be bifurcated under Article 41(2) of the ICSID
Convention. Consequently, the issue whether the Second and Third Objection
should also be bifurcated under Article 10.19.4 of the FTA has become moot, and
need not be addressed.

C. Summary

For the reasons stated above, the Arbitral Tribunal decides that the Second, Third,
Fourth and Fifth Objections should be bifurcated, and that the First Objection
should be joined to the merits phase (if any).

Consequently, the procedural calendar established in Scenario 3 (Annex B to
Procedural Order No. 1) will be followed. The Arbitral Tribunal proposes the
following alternative dates for the Hearing on Jurisdiction:

°2 Claimants’ Observations, para. 28.
°3 Claimants’ Observations, para. 32.
°4 Request, para. 35.

20

The Carlyle Group L.P. and others v. Kingdom of Morocco
(ICSID Case No. ARB/I8/29)

 

87.

Procedural Order No. 4
- January 11, 2021
- January 18, 2021
The Arbitral Tribunal would appreciate if the Parties could confer and agree on the

hearing dates, the place of the hearing and all other dates still to be determined
under the procedural calendar, and inform the Tribunal by February 13, 2020.

On behalf of the Arbitral Tribunal,

[Signed]

Prof. Juan Fernandez-Armesto
President of the Arbitral Tribunal
Date: January 20, 2020

21

