IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION PROCEEDING UNDER CHAPTER 10 OF THE UNITED STATES —
PERU TRADE PROMOTION AGREEMENT AND
THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES (2010)

In the arbitration proceeding between

THE RENCO GROUP, INC.
Claimant

and

REPUBLIC OF PERU
Respondent

UNCT/13/1

 

DECISION AS TO THE SCOPE OF THE
RESPONDENT’S PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS UNDER ARTICLE 10.20.4

 

Members of the Tribunal
Dr. Michael J. Moser, Presiding Arbitrator
The Honorable L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC, Arbitrator
Mr. Toby T. Landau, QC, Arbitrator

Tribunal Secretary
Ms. Natali Sequeira

Date

December 18, 2014

Representation of the Parties

Representing The Renco Group, Inc.:

Mr. Edward G. Kehoe

Mr. Guillermo Aguilar Alvarez

Mr. Henry G. Burnett

Ms. Caline Mouawad

King & Spalding LLP

1185 Avenue of the Americas
New York, New York 10036-4003

Representing the Republic of Peru:

Mr. Jonathan C. Hamilton
Ms. Andrea J. Menaker
White & Case LLP

701 Thirteenth Street N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20005

and

Mr. Eduardo Ferrero Costa
Ms. Maricarmen Tovar Gil
Estudio Echecopar

De la Floresta 497, Piso 5
San Borja, Lima, Peru

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONG..........c:ccccccsscsssssseseseseseseseseseseseseecsessseesseeeseess 6
A. Introduction 6
B. Peru’s Notification of Preliminary Objections under Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty........ 6

(1) Violation of the Treaty’s Waiver Provisions ...........c.ccccccscseseseseeeseeeseeesteesteestenseeees 7

(2) Lack of Jurisdiction Ratione TEMPOSIS...........ccccccscceccescseseeesseeseeeseeesseesteeseenseeess 8

(3) Failure of Claims under the Plain Language of the Contract

Peru’s Position Regarding its Entitlement to Notify Preliminary Objections under
Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty

(1

 

 

The Treaty Provides a Procedure for Preliminary Objections

 

 

 

(2) Investment Treaty Jurisprudence Confirms that Peru’s Objections are within the
Scope of Article 10.20.4 1
(3) Peru's Exercise of Its Treaty Rights Cannot be Circumscribed..............:cccee 15
(4) The Non-Disputing Party Submission of the USG Underscores that the Tribunal
Can, and Should, Decide All Preliminary Objections at this Juncture.................. 16
(5) Request for Relief 17
Renco’s Submissions Challenging the Scope of Peru’s Preliminary Objections ........ 17
(1) The Respondent's Interpretation of Article 10.20.4 Lacks Any Merit ............0... 19

(a) Peru Dismisses as Irrelevant Critical Text of the Treaty, Thereby Confusing
the Mandatory Aspects of Article 10.20.4 with the Tribunal’s Discretionary
Authority to Decide Competence Objections as Preliminary Questions ........ 20

(b) The Text and Context of Article 10.20.4.........ccccseeeeeeeteeeneeeteeeteneteeenenenenes 20
(c) The Text and Context of Article 10.20.5.....
(d) The No Waiver Provision in Article 10.20.4(d) .
(2) The Cases to Which the Respondents Cite Do Not Support the Respondent's 05

 

 

 

Argument
(3) Excerpts of Summaries of Negotiation Sessions Held Four to Five Years Prior to
Enactment Do Not Support the Respondent's Reading of Article 10.20.4.......... 27

(4) Disputed Factual Issues Permeate the Respondent's Competence Objections .28

(5) The Non-Disputing Party Submission of the USG Confirms that All Competence
Objections Fall Outside the Scope of Article 10.20.4...........ccccccsesssseteseteneteneees 29

(6) Request for Relief 30

E. Submission of the USG Pursuant to Article 10.20.2 Regarding the Interpretation of

Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty
(1) Expedited Review Mechanisms in U.S. International Investment Agreements ...31

 

(2) Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 of the Treaty........cccccccsccsceeseseseeeseeeseeeseeestenseeeseees 32

 

 

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISIONS .....0..0.ccccecece cece cece eee eee tees eeseeeteeaeeee 33
A. The Relevant Issues 33
B. The Relevant Treaty Provisions 34
C. Interpretation of the Scope of Article 10.20.4.........cccsccsesesesesseesteesteeeteneneeeneneteeneees 35

(1) The Question Presented and the Tribunal's Remit.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) Principles of Treaty Interpretation ..
(3) Textual Analysi 37
(4) Object and Purpose 45
(5) Treaty Negotiations 46
(6) Investment Treaty JUriSprUdeNCe ............ccccceccccsesceeseeeseeeseeeseetseeeseenseenseenseenseees! 48
(7) Other. 49
(8) Conclusion 49
D. The Respondent's Preliminary Objections.............cccccscccscceseceseseseseseeeseeeseenstenseenseees 50
E. Summary and Decisions 52
COSTS 53
OTHER MATTERS 53

 

iii

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Claimant

Claimant's Memorial

Claimant’s Submission, April 3, 2014

Claimant's Submission, May 7, 2014

Claimant's Submission, October 3, 2014

Commerce Group v. El Salvador or
Commerce Group

Commerce Group v. El Salvador Award

Cremades Article

Cremades Letter

DR-CAFTA

First Session

Herrera Letter

The Renco Group, Inc.

Claimant’s Memorial on Liability submitted on
February 20, 2014

Claimant’s submission challenging the scope of the
Respondent's preliminary objections submitted on
April 3, 2014

Claimant's Reply on the Scope of Respondent's
Article 10.20.4 Objections submitted on May 7, 2014

Claimant's Comments on the Submission of the
United States of America regarding the
Interpretation of Article 10.20.4 submitted on
October 3, 2014

Commerce Group Corp. et al. v. El Salvador, |\CSID
Case No. ARB/09/17

Commerce Group Corp. et al. v. El Salvador, ICSID
Case No. ARB/09/17, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17,
Award of March 14, 2011

Bernardo M. Cremades, “The Use of Preliminary
Objections in ICSID Annulment Proceedings”,
Kluwer Arbitration Blog dated September 4, 2013

Letter to the Tribunal from Mr. Bernardo M.
Cremades dated September 16, 2014

The Dominican Republic—Central America Free
Trade Agreement signed on August 5, 2004

The first procedural session of the Tribunal and the
Parties held at the International Dispute Resolution
Centre (IDRC) in London on July 18, 2013

Letter from Mr. Carlos Herrera Perret, Executive
Director of PROINVERSION, Peru's Private
Investment Promotion Agency

ICSID Arbitration Rules

ICSID Convention

Methanex Corp. v. USA or Methanex

MINCETUR

Pac Rim v. El Salvador or Pac Rim

Pac Rim v. El Salvador Decision on
Respondent's Preliminary Objections

Parties

Peru

Professor Reisman’s Letter

RDC v. Guatemala or RDC

RDC v. Guatemala Decision on
Objections to Jurisdiction

RDC v. Guatemala Second Decision on
Objections to Jurisdiction

Renco
Respondent

Respondent's Submission, April 23, 2014

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (Arbitration Rules) as amended and in
effect from April 10, 2006

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other
States dated March 18, 1965

Methanex Corporation v. United States of America,
NAFTA/UNCITRAL

Peru’s Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism

Pac Rim Cayman LLC v. Republic of El Salvador,
ICSID Case No. ARB/09/12

Pac Rim Cayman LLC v. Republic of El Salvador,
ICSID Case No. ARB/09/12, Decision on the
Respondent's Preliminary Objections under CAFTA
Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 of August 2, 2010

The Renco Group, Inc.( the Claimant) and the
Republic of Peru (the Respondent)

The Republic of Peru

Letter from Professor W. Michael Reisman to Mr.
Jonathan Hamilton dated April 22, 2014, Annex A to
Respondent’s Submission of April 23, 2014

Railroad Development Corp. v. Republic of
Guatemala, |CSID Case No. ARB/07/23

Railroad Development Corp. v. Republic of
Guatemala, |CSID Case No. ARB/07/23, Decision
on Objection to Jurisdiction CAFTA Article 10.20.5
of November 17, 2008

Railroad Development Corp. v. Republic of
Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/23, Second
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of May 18,
2010

The Renco Group, Inc.

The Republic of Peru

Respondent’s submission on the scope of the
preliminary objections submitted on April 23, 2014

Respondent's Submission, October 4,
2014 (as amended)”

Secretary-General

Treaty

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

Unofficial Translation of the MINCETUR
6th Round Negotiations

Unofficial Translation of the MINCETUR
7th Round Negotiations

Unofficial Translation of the MINCETUR
8th Round Negotiations

USG

USG’s Submission, September 10, 2014

Vienna Convention

Respondent’s submission commenting on the
Submission of the United States of America,
submitted on October 4, 2014 (as amended)

The Secretary-General for the time being of ICSID

The United States - Peru Trade Promotion
Agreement signed on April 12, 2006

United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law Arbitration Rules (revised 2010)

Peru’s Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism
(“MINCETUR’), 6th Round of Negotiations in
Tucson, Arizona, United States, November 29-
December 5, 2004 (unofficial translation)

MINCETUR, 7th Round of Negotiations in
Cartagena, Colombia, February 7-11, 2005
(unofficial translation)

MINCETUR, 8th Round of Negotiations in
Washington, United States, March 14-18, 2005
(unofficial translation)

The Government of the United States of America

Awritten submission filed by the Government of the
United States of America as a non-disputing State
Party pursuant to Article 10.20.2 of the United
States - Peru Trade Promotion Agreement,
submitted on September 10, 2014

The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, May
23, 1969, Article 31(1), 1155 U.N.T.S. 331

vi

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This case concerns a dispute submitted on the basis of the United States - Peru Trade
Promotion Agreement dated April 12, 2006 (the “Treaty”) and the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules (2010).

The Claimant is The Renco Group, Inc. and is hereinafter referred to as “Renco” or the
“Claimant.”

The Respondent is the Republic of Peru and is hereinafter referred to as “Peru” or the
“Respondent.”

The Claimant and the Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the
“Parties.” The Parties’ respective representatives and their addresses are listed above
on page (i).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On December 29, 2010, the Claimant served its Notice of Intent to Commence
Arbitration.

On April 4, 2011, the Claimant served its Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim,
which it subsequently amended on August 9, 2011.

By a communication dated February 5, 2013, the Parties informed ICSID that the
Claimant had appointed The Honorable L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC, a Canadian national,
as its party-appointed arbitrator and that the Respondent had appointed Mr. Toby T.
Landau, QC, a British national, as its party-appointed arbitrator in these proceedings.
The Parties further requested the Secretary-General of ICSID to carry out the role of
Appointing Authority for the appointment of the Presiding Arbitrator pursuant to Article
10.19.4 of the Treaty and the procedure jointly agreed by the Parties.

By letter dated February 6, 2013, the Secretary-General accepted the Parties’ request
and invited the Parties to provide “a copy of the Notice of Intent to commence arbitration
or other such document.” On the same date the Centre received a copy of the
Claimant's Amended Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim dated August 9,
2011.

On April 3, 2013, the Secretary-General informed the Parties that according to the
procedure jointly agreed by the Parties, the Parties concurred to the designation of Dr.
Michael J. Moser, an Austrian national, as the Presiding Arbitrator.

On April 8, 2013, the Secretary-General informed the Parties that Dr. Michael J. Moser
had accepted his appointment.

On April 23, 2013, ICSID received a request from the Parties to act as Administering
Authority in this proceeding.

On May 8, 2013, the Centre informed the Parties that the reference number of the
proceeding would be UNCT/13/1 and invited the Parties to submit copies of any
communications that were exchanged between the Parties prior to the appointment of
ICSID as the Administering Authority and that should be transmitted to the Tribunal as
part of the case record.

On May 10, 2013, the Claimant informed the Centre that the Parties considered that it
was not necessary to provide the Tribunal with any correspondence exchanged
between counsel to date and that both Parties reserved their right to produce any such
correspondence at a future date.

On the same date, the Respondent submitted its Response to the Claimant's Amended
Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim dated August 9, 2011.

On May 13, 2013, the Centre circulated the statements of independence duly signed by
the three members of the Tribunal pursuant to Article 11 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules.

The first procedural session of the Tribunal and the Parties was held at the International
Dispute Resolution Centre (IDRC) in London on July 18, 2013 (the “First Session”).
Present at the First Session were:

Members of the Tribunal:

Dr. Michael J. Moser, Presiding Arbitrator

The Honorable Mr. L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC, Arbitrator
Mr. Toby T. Landau, QC, Arbitrator

1

ICSID Secretariat:
Ms. Natali Sequeira, Tribunal Secretary

Assistant to The Honorable Mr. L. Yves Fortier CC, QC:
Ms. Annie Lespérance'

 

Attending on behalf of the Claimant:

Mr. Dennis A. Sadlowski, The Renco Group, Inc.
Mr. Edward G. Kehoe, King & Spalding LLP

Mr. Henry G. Burnett, King & Spalding LLP

Attending on behalf of the Respondent:

Mr. Carlos José Valderrama, Ministry of Economy and Finance of the Republic of Peru
Mr. Jonathan C. Hamilton, White & Case LLP

Ms. Andrea J. Menaker, White & Case LLP

Mr. Maricarmen Tovar Gil, Estudio Echecopar

Mr. Jacob S. Stoehr, White & Case LLP

Mr. Alejandro Manrique, Embassy of Peru in the United Kingdom

During the First Session the Parties confirmed that the Tribunal was properly
constituted and that the Parties had no objections to the appointment of any member of
the Tribunal. It was agreed, inter alia, that the proceedings are to be conducted in
accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, as revised in 2010, except as
modified by Chapter Ten of the Treaty and the provisions of Procedural Order No.1.
The Parties further agreed that the procedural languages of the arbitration shall be
English and Spanish; that the place of the arbitration shall be Paris, France; and that
the location of hearings shall be Washington, D.C., but that the Tribunal may designate
alternate locations for hearings (in the Americas, Paris or otherwise) upon further
consultation with the Parties. During the First Session, the Parties further agreed on a
procedural schedule (“Procedural Schedule”).

The agreements of the Parties reached during the First Session were embodied in
Procedural Order No. 1, signed by the three Members of the Tribunal and circulated to
the Parties on August 22, 2013.

Attending as an observer.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

On February 20, 2014, the Claimant submitted its Memorial on Liability, including
Witness Statements and Expert Reports.

On March 21, 2014, the Respondent submitted a Notice of its intention to make a
submission on preliminary objections pursuant to Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty.

On April 3, 2014, the Claimant filed a submission challenging the scope of the
Respondent's preliminary objections.

On April 8, 2014, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to provide further submissions
regarding the scope of Article 10.20.4 by April 23, 2014 and invited the Claimant to
reply by May 7, 2014.

On April 23, 2014, Peru filed a submission on the scope of the preliminary objections.

On May 7, 2014, the Claimant filed a reply on the scope of the Respondent's Article
10.20.4 Preliminary Objections.

By letter dated May 27, 2014, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it had benefited
from the extensive written submissions and appended materials provided by the Parties
on the meaning and ambit of Article 10.20.4 and that the Tribunal was comfortable to
proceed to deliberations and render a preliminary decision as to the scope of the
Respondent's preliminary objections on the basis of the materials as they stood. The
Tribunal requested the Parties to confirm whether oral submissions were necessary.

On the same date the Claimant advised the Tribunal that it did not request any further
argument.

On May 30, 2014, the Respondent indicated that “[wJhile not calling for a hearing, Peru
remains available to address at a hearing or otherwise any issues of particular concern
should they be identified by the Tribunal, if of assistance.”

On June 6, 2014, the Tribunal noted that as neither Party had requested a hearing to
make oral submissions, the Tribunal would “proceed to deliberations based on the
materials in hand.”

By letter dated July 8, 2014, the Tribunal informed the Parties that, in accordance with
Article 10.20.2, it proposed to invite the Government of the United States of America
(the “USG”), as a non-disputing Party, to comment on the issues of interpretation in

4

30.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

dispute between the Parties in relation to the Article 10.20.4 proceedings, and thereafter
to request the Parties to comment on the submissions of the USG. The Tribunal also
attached to its letter an article by Bernardo M. Cremades, entitled “The Use of

02

Preliminary Objections in ICSID Annulment Proceedings,’~ and invited the Parties’

comments thereon.

On July 31, 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 providing that “[i]n
accordance with Article 10.20.2 of the Peru-United States Trade Promotion Agreement
(the “Treaty”) [it considered it] appropriate to invite the Government of the United States
of America (the ‘USG’), as the ‘non-disputing Party,’ to comment on issues of Treaty
interpretation in dispute between the Parties in relation to Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty.”

Procedural Order No. 2 also indicated (i) that the USG shall be invited to indicate,
together with its written submission, whether it wished to make oral submissions to the
Tribunal; and (ii) that the Parties shall be invited to provide comments on the non-
disputing Party submission filed by the USG within three weeks from the date of receipt
of said submission.

In accordance with Procedural Order No. 2, on August 5, 2014, the Parties sent a joint
letter to the USG inviting it to comment on the interpretation of Article 10.20.4 of the
Treaty within twenty-one (21) calendar days, and requesting the USG to confirm
whether it wished to make oral submissions.

On August 21, 2014, the USG requested an extension to file its comments.

On August 26, 2014, the Tribunal informed the USG and the Parties that it granted the
extension requested by the USG for filing its non-disputing Party submission.

On September 10, 2014, the USG filed a written submission as a non-disputing Party
regarding the interpretation of Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty and informing that it did not
wish “to exercise its right to make an oral submission at this time.”

On September 30, 2014, the Parties requested the Tribunal to grant an extension for
the submission of their comments on the USG’s non-disputing Party submission. On
October 1, 2014, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it granted the extension.

Bernardo M. Cremades, “The Use of Preliminary Objections in ICSID Annulment Proceedings”, Kluwer Arbitration
Blog, www. kluwerarbitrationblog.com, September 4, 2013 (“Cremades Article”).

5

37.

38.

39.

40.

4.

On October 3, 2014, the Claimant filed comments on the USG’s non-disputing Party
submission. The Respondent filed its comments on October 4, 2014. Both submissions
were simultaneously circulated by the Centre to the Members of the Tribunal on
October 4, 2014. The Respondent filed a revised version of its submission on October
6, 2014.

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
A. Introduction

The Tribunal has had the benefit of extensive written submissions by both Parties in this
case, as well as on behalf of the USG, a summary of which is set out by the Tribunal in
this section. The Parties have however raised a number of ancillary issues and
arguments in their written submissions. For the avoidance of doubt, even if not
specifically noted in the summary below, all of these issues and arguments have been
carefully considered by the Tribunal in reaching its decisions.

The Tribunal’s own analysis of the issues is reserved to Section IV below.

B. Peru’s Notification of Preliminary Objections under Article 10.20.4 of the
Treaty

Article 10.20.4 of the “Treaty” provides, inter alia, that:

Without prejudice to a tribunal's authority to address other objections
as a preliminary question, such as an objection that a dispute is not
within the tribunal’s competence, a tribunal shall address and decide
as a preliminary question any objection by the respondent that, as a
matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award in
favor of the claimant may be made under Article 10.26. 1.

By letter dated March 21, 2014, Peru notified its intention to make three preliminary
objections under Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty relating to (1) Renco’s violation of the
Treaty’s waiver provisions; (2) the lack of jurisdiction ratione temporis; and (3) the
failure of claims under the plain language of the contract. Peru contends that, in each
instance, Renco’s claims fail as a matter of law.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

For the purposes of making its Article 10.20.4 preliminary objections, Peru states that it
assumes Renco’s factual allegations to be true, despite considering them inaccurate
and incomplete. Peru does however specifically indicate that it does not otherwise
accept the truth of any of Renco’s allegations and expressly reserves all of its rights.

According to the Respondent, even a cursory examination of its three preliminary
objections “confirms that no further factual development or adjudication is needed to
decide them as a matter of law” and that “they concern threshold issues that may
extinguish, or alternatively, narrow or clarify the scope of the claims once decided.”®

The bases of each of Peru's preliminary objections under Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty
are set out below.

(1) Violation of the Treaty’s Waiver Provisions

It is Peru's position that, according to the Treaty, its consent to arbitrate, and therefore
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, is subject to the submission of valid waivers, as set forth in
Article 10.18 of the Treaty.*

The Respondent argues that the submission of such valid waivers has not taken place
as (i) Renco presented an invalid waiver which does not conform with the language
required by the Treaty, and (ii) Doe Run Peru S.R. Ltda. (“Doe Run Peru”), which was
also required to submit a waiver, improperly purported to withdraw the waiver submitted
with the Claimants’ Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim of April 4, 2011.

In addition, the Respondent contends that both Renco and Doe Run Peru have violated
the waiver requirement through their initiation and continuation of certain proceedings
with respect to measures alleged to constitute a breach by Renco.

Respondent's Submission commenting on the Submission of the United States of America, submitted on October
4, 2014 (as amended) (the “Respondent's Submission, October 4, 2014 (as amended)’), at J 28.

“No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section unless [...] the notice of arbitration is accompanied
for claims submitted to arbitration under Article 10.16.1(a), by the claimant's written waiver, and for claims
submitted to arbitration under Article 10.16.1(b), by the claimant's and the enterprise's written waivers of any right
to initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court under the law of any Party, or other dispute
settlement procedures, any proceeding with respect to any measure alleged to constitute a breach referred to in
Article 10.16.” Article 10.18 of the Treaty.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

(2) Lack of Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis

According to the Respondent, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione temporis over
certain claims made in this arbitration for three reasons.

First, Renco has submitted claims that arose before the entry into force of the Treaty in
2009.

Second, Renco has submitted claims based on facts that pre-date the entry into force of
the Treaty.

Third, Renco has submitted claims relating to alleged breaches that occurred more than
three years after Renco first acquired knowledge, or should have first acquired
knowledge, of the alleged breach.

(3) Failure of Claims under the Plain Language of the Contract

It is Peru's position that, even assuming that the facts alleged by Renco are true, as a
matter of law, Peru could not have breached the Stock Transfer Agreement (the
“Contract”).

According to Peru, it is Renco's case that “Peru’s refusal to assume liability for the
claims in the St. Louis Lawsuits violates the Treaty because it breaches the Guarantee
Agreement and the Contract, which together constitute an Investment Agreement.”®
Further, Renco argues, the Guarantee Agreement makes Peru liable for the contractual

obligations undertaken by Centromin in the Contract.

It is Peru's case that the plain language of Clauses 6.5 and 8.14 of the Contract
concern third-party claims relating to Doe Run Peru, the entity referred to in those
clauses. However, because Doe Run Peru is not a party to the St. Louis Lawsuits, even
assuming that the facts alleged by Renco are true, Peru, as a matter of law, could not
have breached the Contract.

Claimant's Memorial § IV(A)-(B). 1. Renco describes the St. Louis Lawsuits as follows: “Plaintiffs seek damages

for alleged personal injuries and punitive damages, and name as defendants Renco and Doe Run Resources, as
well as their affiliated companies DR Acquisition Corp. and Renco Holdings, Inc., and directors and officers
Marvin K. Kaiser, Albert Bruce Neil, Jeffery L. Zelms, Theodore P. Fox Ill, Daniel L. Vornberg, and Ira L. Rennert
(collectively, the ‘Renco Defendants’). The plaintiffs did not bring claims against Centromin’s successor, Activos
Mineros, nor against the Republic of Peru, or Doe Run Peru, and instead chose to sue Doe Run Peru's U.S.-
based affiliates in the courts of the United States.” Claimant's Memorial at § 78.

8

55.

56.

57.

58.

Peru further contends that given that neither Renco nor Doe Run Peru has followed the
procedure mandated by the Contract for the referral of matters to decision by a
technical expert, as a matter of law, Peru cannot be deemed to have breached any
contractual obligation with respect to the St. Louis Lawsuits.

In this respect Peru relies on Clauses 5.3 and 5.4 of the Contract which provide that
“any controversy on the determination of whether ... the standards or practices used by
the Company were or were not less protective of the environment or of the public health
than those that were applied by Centromin”, or “in those cases in which no consensus
was reached between Centromin and the Company with regard to the causes of the
presumed damage that is the subject of the claim or with regard to the manner in which
liability will be shared amongst them ...”, the matter is to be submitted to the decision of
a technical expert.

C. Peru’s Position Regarding its Entitlement to Notify Preliminary Objections
under Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty

In its letter dated March 21, 2014, notifying three preliminary objections under Article
10.20.4 of the Treaty, and in its further observations on the scope of those preliminary
objections (including a letter from Professor W. Michael Reisman to Mr. Jonathan
Hamilton) © Peru outlined its position regarding its entitlement to notify and the
permissible scope of preliminary objections under Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty.

Peru further supplemented this position when it filed its comments on the Submission of
the USG regarding the interpretation of Article 10.20.4 on October 4, 2014 and in the
subsequently filed revised version on October 6, 2014. The Respondent's comments on
the submission of the USG were accompanied by a letter from Mr. Carlos Herrera
Perret, Executive Director of PROINVERSION, Peru’s Private Investment Promotion
Agency.’

Letter from Professor W. Michael Reisman to Mr. Jonathan Hamilton dated April 22, 2014, Annex A to
Respondent's Submission of April 23, 2014 (“Professor Reisman’s Letter’).

Letter from Mr. Carlos Herrera Perret, Executive Director of PROINVERSION, Peru's Private Investment
Promotion Agency (“Herrera Letter”).

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

(1) The Treaty Provides a Procedure for Preliminary Objections

It is the Respondent’s case that Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty was designed to provide
respondent States with a mechanism to avoid the time and expense of an evidentiary
phase if the claims presented would fail as a matter of law.

According to the Respondent, pursuant to the Vienna Convention, Article 10.20.4 of the
Treaty must be interpreted “in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be

given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in light of its object and purpose.”*

On its case, which in its view is supported by the Submission of the USG as a non-
disputing Party, the object and purpose of Article 10.20.4 is to provide a respondent
State the means to efficiently and quickly dispose of, or curtail, at an early stage in the
proceedings claims that cannot prevail as a matter of law — and thus avoid unnecessary
burden in terms of time and cost.°

The Respondent also relies on the Submission of the USG and the letter of Mr. Carlos
Herrera submitted therewith as confirmation of the critical function of preliminary
objections in the provision of such mechanism for the efficient disposal of claims. It
states that, by tracing back the preliminary objections provision in the Treaty (and in
other investment treaties to which the USG is a party), the USG’s submission highlights
the importance of preliminary treaty mechanisms for the prompt and efficient resolution
of claims and demonstrates that both the United States and Peru had had experiences
that motivated them to provide procedures in their treaties to ensure that preliminary
objections would be heard at an early phase of the proceedings.

The Respondent rejects the argument that Article 10.20.4 should be considered to be
an equivalent of a preliminary motion under U.S. Federal Rules of Civil Procedure Rule
12(b)(6) for failure to state a claim on the basis that the text and negotiating history of
the Treaty demonstrate that Article 10.20.4 is not limited to “frivolous” claims, and

Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention.

The Respondent states that the origins of the provision may be traced back to the NAFTA case Methanex
Corporation v. United States of America, NAFTA/UNCITRAL, (“Methanex Corp. v USA” or “Methanex’), where the
United States argued at an early stage that the claims were inadmissible because the claims were without legal
merit. The tribunal ruled that it could not address this issue in a preliminary phase and eventually, after years of
costly proceedings, the tribunal determined that it did not have jurisdiction and the claims had no legal merit. The
United States began incorporating language similar to Article 10.20.4 in free trade agreements in 2002-2003, and
in its Model Bilateral Investment Treaty in 2004. See, e.g., US-Singapore FTA, June 26, 2002, Article 15.19.4;
US-Chile FTA, June 6, 2003, Article 10.19.4; U.S. 2004 Model BIT, Article 28.4.

10

instead does contemplate competence objections. In support of this argument, the
Respondent cites the Pac Rim v. El Salvador case."°

64. Thus, according to the Respondent, consistent with the principles of treaty
interpretation, Article 10.20.4 broadly establishes Peru’s right to make “any objection”
as a preliminary matter, provided it meets two basic conditions:

(1) the objection provides a basis for dismissal of a claim as a matter of law, such that
no award in favor Renco could be made on that claim; and

(2) the objection assumes the facts as alleged by Renco to be true, or otherwise
involves facts not in dispute, per Article 10.20.4(c).

65. According to the Respondent, its conclusion that a respondent may raise competence
objections under Article 10.20.4 and that such objections can be decided as a
preliminary question, is supported by (1) the use of the word “competence” in Article
10.20.4; (2) certain documents from Peruvian negotiators of the Treaty which

demonstrate that both the United States of America and Peru intended that the Article

1"

10.20.4 procedure must include competence objections, "' and (3) the opinion of

Professor Reisman." In relation to its second point, Peru argues that no evidence has
been introduced by Renco or otherwise, to counter the contemporaneous documents
provided by Peru.

'° There is “no reason to equate such common law court procedures to provisions in [the Treaty] agreed by
Contracting Parties with different legal traditions and national court procedures.” Pac Rim Cayman LLC v. The
Republic of El Salvador, \CSID Case No. ARB/09/12 (“Pac Rim v. El Salvador’ or “Pac Rim”), Decision on the
Respondent's Preliminary Objections under CAFTA Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 of August 2, 2010 (“Pac Rim v.
El Salvador Decision on Respondent's Preliminary Objections”) at § 117.

Peru's Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism (“MINCETUR”), 6th Round of Negotiations in Tucson, Arizona,
United States, November 29 — December 5, 2004 (unofficial translation)(“Unofficial Translation of the MINCETUR
6th Round Negotiations”); MINCETUR, 7th Round of Negotiations in Cartagena, Colombia, February 7-11, 2005
(unofficial translation) (“Unofficial Translation of the MINCETUR 7th Round Negotiations”) and MINCETUR, 8th
Round of Negotiations in Washington, United States, March 14-18, 2005 (unofficial translation) (“Unofficial
Translation of the MINCETUR 8th Round Negotiations”). For Peru's argument that the negotiating history makes
clear that the Treaty includes express reference to “competence” objections in Article 10.20.4 see Respondent's
Submission, April 23, 2014, at §{] 6-23; Letter from Peru to the Tribunal, July 29, 2013, at 2-4; Professor
Reisman’s Letter, Note 6 at 4-5. In this respect, in the Respondent's Submission, October 4, 2014 (as amended)
at 5-6, Peru takes issue with the USG’s non-disputing Party submission on the basis that, while it links the
experience of the United States in the case to the of ments,
the USG failed to address the negotiations that gave rise to the Treaty relevant in this case and, in in particular,
Article 10.20.4 thereof. See Methanex Corp. v. USA, Note 9.

"Professor Reisman’s Letter, Note 6.

11

66. The Respondent disagrees with the Claimant's reliance on the first phrase of Article
10.20.4'*to exclude competence objections from its scope. For the Respondent, the
“without prejudice” language simply confirms that a tribunal may address other
objections, such as competence objections, in a separate phase prior to the merits.
Thus, Article 10.20.4 objections are “without prejudice” to such “authority.” Peru states
that it relied on this right in choosing to forego the possibility of bifurcation with respect
to issues of competence later in the proceeding.

67. Although the USG also suggests that Article 10.20.4 provides “a further ground for
dismissal”, separate and apart from objections to a tribunal's competence, “* according
to the Respondent, (1) this is not supported by the text of the Treaty or the negotiating
history and (2) the decision on the scope of preliminary objections rests solely with the
Tribunal.

68. In relation to the first point the Respondent argues that if competence objections were
excluded from Article 10.20.4, the Treaty would not offer a solution to the issue that
arose in Methanex'® — which all parties agree, the preliminary objections mechanism in
Article 10.20.4 was intended to do."

69. In relation to the second point the Respondent highlights Article 10.20.2 of the Treaty
which provides that a non-disputing Party submission may address matters of Treaty
interpretation, but is not intended to “go beyond interpretation and become a fact
specific exercise.” Thus, numerous tribunals have considered submissions by non-
disputing Parties, and reached different conclusions with respect to matters of Treaty
interpretation."’ It is the Respondent's position that the Tribunal should do the same
here.

This first sentence states that objections are “[wJithout prejudice to a tribunal's authority to address other

objections as a preliminary question, such as an objection that a dispute is not within the tribunal's competence,”
Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty. [emphasis added].

USG's Submission, September 10, 2014, at 76.

See Methanex Corp. v. USA, Note 9.

It is the USG's position — and the Respondent agrees — that it was this ruling that prompted the United States to
include the preliminary objections mechanism in Article 10.20.4 in subsequent treaties. According to the
Respondent, if “competence” objections were excluded from Article 10.20.4, this objective — on which both State
Parties to the Treaty agree — would not be met. The Respondent argues that this is because competence is
generally understood to include concepts including both jurisdiction and admissibility. Indeed, competence and
admissibility have been described as “two sides of one and the same conceptual coin.” See Respondent's
Submission, October 4, 2014 (as amended), at § 20 n. 42, citing Veijo Heiskanen, Ménage A Trois? Jurisdiction,
Admissibility and Competence In Investment Treaty Arbitration, \CSID Review (2013), at 13.

Respondent's Submission, October 4, 2014 (as amended), at § 35, citing GAMI Investments, Inc. v. Government
of the United Mexican States, UNCITRAL, Final Award of November 15, 2004, at 9 29-30; The Loewen Group,

12

70. Further, the Respondent argues that if all competence objections were excluded from
the scope of Article 10.20.4, as Renco contends, it would be superfluous for the Treaty
to provide, as it does in sub-paragraph (d) of Article 10.20.4, that a “respondent does
not waive any objection as to competence ... merely because the respondent did or did
not raise an objection under this paragraph ...” The Respondent relies on Professor

Reisman’s Letter to support its position in this respect."®

According to the Respondent
the purpose of this language is to ensure that, whether or not a respondent raises
competence objections pursuant to Article 10.20.4 (when it may not rely on disputed
facts), it may still raise them later in the proceeding (including when factual issues are in

dispute).

71. The Respondent argues that if a tribunal lacks jurisdiction over a claim or if a claim is
inadmissible, then, as a matter of law, it is not a claim for which an award in favor the
claimant may be made as provided for in Article 10.20.4.

72. Finally, according to the Respondent, when looked at in the context of other Treaty
provisions, the broad scope of permissible objections under Article 10.20.4 is confirmed.
In the Respondent's view, Article 10.20.5 offers a respondent the choice to pursue an
expedited procedure for Article 10.20.4 objections so as to seek faster resolution of
preliminary objections, but it does not curtail the scope of available objections as
provided under other provisions. Not only would this view be contrary to the object and
purpose of the right to make preliminary objections if the scope of objections for Article
10.20.5’s expedited procedure is broader than that of Article 10.20.4, which does not
contain a fast-track procedure, it would also raise serious issues of interpretation and
practical problems. In particular, the Respondent asserts that if the Article 10.20.5
procedure is not limited to accepting the facts as stated in the Notice of Arbitration, the
expedited procedure would include objections to competence that also involved
disputes about facts which would hardly be consistent with an expedited procedure.
Additionally, this interpretation would compel a respondent to always rely on the
expedited procedure for objections as to competence, as this would be its only
opportunity to do so.

 

Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of America, |ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, Decision on

Jurisdiction of January 5, 2001, at § 52; Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. United Mexican States, \CSID Case No.
‘8 ARB(AF)/99/1, Interim Decision on Preliminary Jurisdictional Issues of December 6, 2000, at § 44.

Professor Reisman’s Letter, Note 6.

13

73.

74.

75.

76.

Thus, it is the Respondent’s case that, by its own terms, the scope of the Treaty is
clear:

= It grants Peru the right to make any objection under Article 10.20.4, including
jurisdictional and other objections;

= Article 10.20.4 is drafted in mandatory terms and these objections shall be decided
as a preliminary matter; and

= In determining Peru’s objections, facts alleged by Renco in support of claims in its
notice of arbitration, as amended, and statement of claim are presumed to be true.

The Respondent claims that, as long as an objection, including any jurisdictional
objection, assumes the facts as pleaded by a claimant (without the need to consider or
weigh disputed evidence) thus providing a basis for outright dismissal as a matter of
law, the objection should be considered as properly within the scope of Article 10.20.4.

(2) Investment Treaty Jurisprudence Confirms that Peru’s Objections are
within the Scope of Article 10.20.4

The Respondent notes that while this is the first investment arbitration brought under
the Treaty, Article 10.20.4 is analogous to the preliminary objection provision contained
in the Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement (“DR-CAFTA”)
which has been considered by at least three arbitral tribunals, each of which has
confirmed that the proper scope of Article 10.20.4 does encompasses competence
objections — including, the type of objections that Peru has raised in this case. '°

The Respondent also refers to the 2006 modification to the ICSID Arbitration Rules
which added a preliminary objections phase under Rule 41(5), providing that “a party
may, no later than 30 days after the constitution of the Tribunal, and in any event before

See Pac Rim v. El Salvador Decision on Respondent's Preliminary Objections, Note 10; Railroad Development

Corp. v. Republic of Guatemala, |\CSID Case No. ARB/07/23 (“RDC v. Guatemala” or “RDC”"), Decision on
Objection to Jurisdiction CAFTA Article 10.20.5 of November 17, 2008 (“RDC v. Guatemala Decision on
Objections to Jurisdiction”); RDC v. Guatemala Second Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of May 18, 2010
(‘RDC v. Guatemala Second Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction”); Commerce Group Corp. et al. v. El
Salvador, \CSID Case No. ARB/09/17 (“Commerce Group v. El Salvador’ or “Commerce Group”) Award of March
14, 2011 (“Commerce Group v. El Salvador Award”). All available at icsid.worldbank.org. The Respondent also
relies on the review of ICSID annulment decisions in the Cremades Article, to support its interpretation of the
scope of preliminary objections available under Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty, as, according to the Respondent, in
that article Mr. Cremades concludes that patently unmeritorious claims warranting early dismissal include claims
where the tribunal lacks competence. See the Cremades Article, Note 2.

14

the first session of the Tribunal, file an objection that a claim is manifestly without legal
merit.” The Respondent notes that Rule 41(5) also provides that the preliminary
objections are without prejudice to other jurisdictional objections or merits arguments
that a party may raise later in the proceeding.

77. The Respondent asserts that this provision is roughly analogous to the standard
applicable under Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty and notes that a number of ICSID
tribunals have ruled that the language of Rule 41(5) encompasses objections as to both
jurisdiction and merits.”°

78. Finally the Respondent argues that, beyond the text of the Treaty itself, the DR-CAFTA
and ICSID precedents construing the meaning of “manifestly without legal merit” further
confirm that the Claimant's interpretation of Article 10.20.4 is unfounded as tribunals
have refused to limit preliminary objections to “frivolous” claims or “failure to state a
claim” type objections.

(3) Peru’s Exercise of Its Treaty Rights Cannot be Circumscribed

79. It is also the Respondent's case that the Procedural Schedule adopted by the Tribunal
in Procedural Order No. 1 established an organized procedure for Peru’s Article 10.20.4
objections, duly reflecting the procedural concerns and due process rights of both
Parties. The Respondent considers that to modify such structure would curtail Peru’s
Treaty rights in plain violation of those rights and the process already implemented to
protect both Parties’ rights.

80. The Respondent notes that the Claimant has raised several procedural concerns with
respect to the Respondent's right to submit Article 10.20.4 objections. In particular, the
Claimant has stated that (1) there is “a very short period of time to deal with
jurisdictional issues” in this Phase; and (2) Peru may “receive two bites at the apple on
the issue of the Tribunal’s competence, with no risk of loss at the preliminary stage.” In
reply, the Respondent states as follows.

81. First, the Respondent states that, given the discrete nature of the objections that it has
raised, all of its preliminary objections can be addressed within the timeframe fixed for
the Article 10.20.4 Phase as provided in Procedural Order No. 1. The Respondent

2 See, e.g., Brandes Investment Partners, LP v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/3.

15

further notes that the Claimant's concern as to the time periods has already been
addressed in the Procedural Schedule, which includes a mechanism for scheduling
adjustments, should they be required.

82. Second, the Respondent points out that the Claimant chose to pursue its claims under
the Treaty, and it cannot now unilaterally circumscribe the rights that the Treaty affords
the Respondent. The so-called “two bites at the apple” is a mechanism expressly
provided under the Treaty as part of the protections offered to respondent States. If any
claims remain after the preliminary objections phase, Peru may raise, together, any
competence and merits defenses that turn on disputed factual issues. Thus, the
Respondent contends that there would be no “two bites at the apple” for the
competence issues decided under Article 10.20.4.

(4) The Non-Disputing Party Submission of the USG Underscores that the
Tribunal Can, and Should, Decide All Preliminary Objections at this
Juncture

83. The Respondent submits that even if its preliminary objections do not fall within the
mandatory scope of Article 10.20.4, the objections still can and should be decided at
this point of the proceedings to safeguard due process and to ensure efficiency.

84. Respondent points to the non-disputing Party Submission of the USG and, in particular,
the statement made therein that “reasons of economy and efficiency will often weigh in
favor of competence objections being decided preliminarily and at the same time as
objections made under paragraph 4”,°' to suggest that Article 10.20.4 supplements,
rather than displaces or limits, the Tribunal’s authority to decide preliminary objections.
Thus, according to the Respondent and, on its submission, as supported by the USG,
the Tribunal retains the authority to decide competence objections as a preliminary
matter, whether or not they fall within the scope of mandatory objections under Article
10.20.4.

85. In light of this, the Respondent requests that the Tribunal determine all of its preliminary
objections under the authority granted to it by Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty or,
alternatively, pursuant to Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. It is Peru’s
case that reasons of economy and efficiency favor hearing all of its objections during

21 USG's Submission, September 10, 2014, at § 11.

the preliminary phase, as determining these objections now may serve to resolve
certain claims outright or to clarify the scope of issues to be decided at a later stage.

(5) Request for Relief

86. Peru requests that the Tribunal rule that the case should proceed to a full briefing of
each of its preliminary objections pursuant to the Treaty.

D. Renco’s Submissions Challenging the Scope of Peru’s Preliminary Objections

87. On April 3, 2014, the Claimant submitted a letter challenging the scope of the
Respondent's preliminary objections raised in Peru’s letter dated March 21, 2014. On
May 7, 2014, the Claimant submitted its Reply on the Scope of the Respondent's
Preliminary Objections.

88. The Claimant further supplemented its position when it filed its comments on the
Submission of the USG regarding the interpretation of Article 10.20.4 on October 3,
2014 and the accompanying letter to the Tribunal from Mr. Bernardo Cremades,
submitted by the Claimant in response to the Tribunal’s invitation of July 8, 2014.”

89. According to the Claimant, the Respondent’s submissions comprise the following six
preliminary objections (1) presentation of an invalid waiver; (2) violation of the waiver;
(3) lack of jurisdiction ratione temporis; (4) violation of the Treaty’s three-year limitation
period; (5) failure to state a claim for breach of the investment agreement; and (6)
failure to submit two factual issues for determination by a technical expert prior to
commencement of the arbitration.

90. The Claimant characterizes objections (1) through (4) as relating to the Tribunal’s
competence, or jurisdiction over the dispute, while it characterizes objections (5) and (6)
as objections for “failure of claims under the plain language of the Contract.” However, it
is the Claimant's position that Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty does not give the
Respondent the right to bring objections (1) through (4) and (6) as preliminary
objections.

22 | etter to the Tribunal from Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades dated September 16, 2014 (“Cremades Letter”).

17

92.

93.

94.

95.

The Claimant argues that by reading Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 together, rather than
in isolation, as the Respondent chooses to, it is clear that the preliminary objections that
a respondent may bring for failure to state a viable legal claim are different from
preliminary objections that a respondent may raise as to the competence of the tribunal,
and that these types of preliminary questions are to be treated differently.

According to the Claimant, there is a significant difference between objecting to the
viability of a claim as a matter of law (assuming all facts asserted by a claimant to be
true), and objecting to a tribunal's competence to hear and decide a claim. The question
under Article 10.20.4 is whether the facts as alleged by the Claimant are capable of
constituting a breach of a legal right protected by the Treaty, whereas an objection to
the Tribunal’s competence is concerned with the question whether the Tribunal is
competent to hear the claim, irrespective of the claim’s legal merit. It is the Claimant's
position that preliminary objections as to the Tribunal’s competence must therefore be
brought under Article 10.20.5, not Article 10.20.4.

According to the Claimant, to allow the Respondent to bring preliminary objections as to
the Tribunal’s alleged lack of competence under Article 10.20.4 would be inconsistent
with the terms of the Treaty, would prejudice the Claimant unfairly, and the
Respondent's attempt to improperly “shoehorn” what the Respondent itself describes as
jurisdictional objections into an Article 10.20.4 application, would effectively allow it to
receive “two bites at the apple on the issue of the Tribunal’s competence, with no risk of
loss at the preliminary stage.”

Further, the Claimant argues that, if the Respondent truly wished to receive a
preliminary decision on issues of the Tribunal’s competence, the Respondent should
have brought a timely application under Article 10.20.5, and the Tribunal could then
have decided the disputed legal and factual issues. However, the Claimant notes the
Respondent chose not to pursue that course.

According to the Claimant, the question now before the Tribunal is whether Article
10.20.4 of the Treaty requires the Tribunal to entertain, at this preliminary stage, the five
competence objections that the Respondent has raised as preliminary objections. This
is clear from the Procedural Order No. 1 and it is common ground between the Parties.
The question is not whether the Tribunal has the discretion to hear competence
objections as a preliminary matter outside the mandatory scope of Article 10.20.4.

18

96. The Claimant asserts that the Parties have agreed, and the Tribunal has endorsed
through Procedural Order No. 1 that, to the extent one or more of the Respondent's
proposed Article 10.20.4 objections fall outside the mandatory scope of Article 10.20.4,
the Tribunal will not hear such objection(s) in this preliminary phase. Instead, the
Respondent, should it wish to bring objections outside the scope of Article 10.20.4,
would have to pursue them later in these proceedings pursuant to the schedule
established by Annex A of Procedural Order No. 1. The Claimant states that it would not
have agreed to the Procedural Schedule adopted in Procedural Order No. 1 if the
Respondent were to be permitted to bring preliminary objections outside the mandatory
scope of Article 10.20.4, during the 10.20.4 Phase of the proceedings.

97. Therefore, for the reasons set out below, in Claimant's view, objections (1) through (4)
and (6) fall outside the scope of the Article 10.20.4 Phase established in Procedural
Order No. 1 and objection (5) is the only “proper objection” under Article 10.20.4.

98. The Claimant supports its view with the following arguments.

(1) The Respondent's Interpretation of Article 10.20.4 Lacks Any Merit

99. The Claimant states that Article 10.20.4 does not authorize the Respondent to raise
“any” objection as a preliminary question. Rather, it only allows the Respondent to raise
as a preliminary question “any objection . . . that, as a matter of law, a claim submitted
is not_a claim for which an award in favor of the claimant may be made under Article
10.26.” [Emphasis added] The Claimant points out that, according to the Respondent’s

 

interpretation, the underlined language would be superfluous. It is the Claimant’s case
that the Respondent's reading of Article 10.20.4 thus violates the effet utile principle and
must be rejected by the Tribunal.

100. The Claimant further argues that the Respondent would not waive its jurisdictional
objections under the Treaty by bringing an Article 10.20.4 objection. According to the
Claimant, the clarifying language in paragraph (d) * avoids that potential confusion, and
it in no way converts a preliminary objection for failure to state a claim into a preliminary
objection to competence, as it is alleged by the Respondent.

23 Article 10.20.4(d) of the Treaty states that: “The respondent does not waive any objection as to competence or
any argument on the merits merely because the respondent did or did not raise an objection under this paragraph
or make use of the expedited procedure set out in paragraph.”

19

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

(a) Peru Dismisses as Irrelevant Critical Text of the Treaty, Thereby
Confusing the Mandatory Aspects of Article 10.20.4 with the
Tribunal’s Discretionary Authority to Decide Competence Objections
as Preliminary Questions
The Claimant claims that the fundamental flaw in the Respondent's analysis is to allege
that the text of Article 10.20.4 treats objections to a tribunal’s competence to hear a
dispute differently than objections as to the legal sufficiency of claims.

According to the Claimant's reading, Article 10.20.5 requires a tribunal to decide an
objection to its competence on an expedited basis if the respondent so requests within
45 days after the tribunal is constituted. If a tribunal’s competence is not challenged
under Article 10.20.5 in this way, a tribunal thereafter may, but is not required to decide
competence objections as a preliminary question, but not as part of a 10.20.4
proceeding.

The Claimant further states that a tribunal’s discretionary authority to decide
competence objections, either as a preliminary question, or later in the Procedural
Schedule, derives in this case from Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules. This Article
provides that “[t]he arbitral tribunal may rule on a plea referred to in paragraph 2
[objecting to the tribunal's jurisdiction] either as a preliminary question or in an award on
the merits.”

The Claimant argues that the Respondent errs by not distinguishing between the
Tribunal’s authority to decide competence as a preliminary question in its discretion
under, for example, Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules, and the limited scope of
objections that the Tribunal is compelled by Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty to decide as a
preliminary question.

(b) The Text and Context of Article 10.20.4

For the Claimant it is clear that when Article 10.20.4 refers to “an objection that a
dispute is not within the tribunal's competence” as an “other” objection, it means that a
competence objection is not included within, and is not the same as, “an objection that,
as a matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award in favor of the
claimant may be made under Article 10.26.”

According to the Claimant, the Respondent pretends that the Treaty makes no
distinction between an objection to a tribunal's competence to hear a dispute and

20

24

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

objections for failure to state a viable legal claim upon which an ultimate award may be
rendered under Treaty Article 10.26.

The Claimant suggests that the USG, in its non-disputing Party Submission, followed
the same approach as the Claimant with respect to the interpretation of Article 10.20.4.
In particular, the Claimant points to the USG’s approval of the proposition that the
second clause of Article 10.20.4 should be read together, both with Article 10.20.5 and
with the “without prejudice” clause of Article 10.20.4, which refers to an “objection that a
dispute is not within the tribunal’s competence,” as an “other” objection.*4 According to
the Claimant, the USG’s position is in agreement with the Claimant's to the effect that
an objection to the tribunal’s competence “fall[s] outside [the] scope”*° of Article 10.20.4.

The Claimant further states that the language of Article 10.20.4 makes it clear that the
Treaty is not divesting a tribunal of its discretionary “authority” to address “other”
objections (such as objections to a tribunal's competence over a dispute) either as a
preliminary question, or later in the process such as during the merits phase, as Article
23 of the UNCITRAL Rules allows, but that they should not be addressed under Article
10.20.4.

The Claimant further argues that if one accepts that Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty does
treat objections to competence and objections for failure to state a viable legal claim
differently, the Tribunal cannot have the “discretionary authority” to either address
competence objections as a preliminary question, or defer the question until later (as
Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules provides and the first clause of Article 10.20.4
recognizes), while concurrently being “required” by the second clause Article 10.20.4 to
address competence objections as a preliminary question.

The Claimant notes that an objection to a tribunal’s competence to decide a dispute is
fundamentally different than an objection for failure to state a viable legal claim — and
Article 10.20.4 “requires” only that a tribunal decide the latter type of objection as a
preliminary question.

According to the Claimant, Article 10.20.4 only constrains the Tribunal’s authority in that
it requires the Tribunal to address, as a preliminary question, any objection that, as a
matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award in favor of the

USG's Submission, September 10, 2014, at 96 n.4.
5 Ibid.

21

claimant may be made under Article 10.26. Because objections to a tribunal's
competence are different, Article 10.20.4 does not require the Tribunal to address and
decide an objection to the Tribunal’s competence under Article 10.20.4. °° Thus,
according to the Claimant, the Respondent may bring any competence objections in the
merits phase of the case, as reflected in the Procedural Schedule.

112. The Claimant also considers that the Respondent's criticism with respect to the
Claimant's reliance on jurisprudence from the United States is not well founded. In this
respect the Claimant asserts that Article 10.20.4 was inspired by and based upon the
“motion to dismiss” procedure of Rule 12(b)(6) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure,
and that it is common ground between the Parties that Article 10.20.4 “is similar to the
motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief may be granted pursuant
to Rule 12(b)(6) of the U.S. Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.”

113. The Claimant recalls that during the First Session in London, it expressed its consent to
a schedule by which the Tribunal could decide on “jurisdiction and failure to state a
claim” at the same time on the same schedule that the Tribunal also would be deciding
any claim objections under Article 10.20.4. However, according to the Claimant, in this
scenario the Respondent's two types of objections would have proceeded under two
entirely different legal bases. The competence objections would have proceeded as a
preliminary question under the Tribunal’s discretionary authority (e.g., Article 23(3) of
the UNCITRAL Rules), and the claim objections would have proceeded (during the
same timeframe) pursuant to Article 10.20.4, which “requires” the Tribunal to decide
claim objections as a preliminary question.

114. The Claimant argues that the distinction is quite meaningful, because the Respondent’s
efforts to “shoehorn” only some of its competence objections into an Article 10.20.4
application would ensure that the Respondent cannot lose the application (because all
facts are assumed to be true under 10.20.4). It would also guarantee that the
Respondent would have two opportunities to bring its competence objections, first it
could bring the claims improperly under 10.20.4 and then again later with the merits.

26 The Claimant also relies on the USG’s statement at 9 of its non-disputing Party submission where the US states
that the “evidentiary standard” set forth in Article 10.20.4(c) “facilitates an efficient and expeditious process for
eliminating claims that lack legal merit’, and that the sub-paragraph “does not address, and does not govern,
other objections, such as an objection to competence, which the tribunal may already have authority to consider”
in support of its argument.

22

11

11

11

11

11

5.

6.

7.

8.

o

According to the Claimant, during the First Session the Respondent rejected its
invitation to have the Tribunal decide all competence objections as a preliminary
question. Instead, the Parties agreed (as reflected in the Procedural Schedule attached
to Procedural Order No. 1), that the Tribunal would address competence objections
during the merits phase, except, and only to the extent that, the Treaty requires the
Tribunal to decide on its competence as a preliminary question under Article 10.20.4.
The Claimant contends that because Article 10.20.4 does not require the Tribunal to
decide competence as a preliminary question, all of the Respondent's competence
objections should be addressed in the merits phase.

The Claimant further states that when, at the First Session and in correspondence, it
acknowledged that jurisdictional objections could be brought with a 10.20.4 application,
it was referring to the schedule that the Parties and the Tribunal were discussing and
not to the substantive right of Peru to bring these objections under Article 10.20.4,
which the Claimant has rejected from the outset.

(c) The Text and Context of Article 10.20.5

The Claimant also relies on the first sentence of Article 10.20.5 which provides that “an
objection under paragraph 4 and any objection that the dispute is not within the
tribunal’s competence” [emphasis added]. This is an additional confirmation that an
objection under Article 10.20.4 regarding the substantive viability of a legal claim is
different than an objection that the dispute is not within the tribunal's competence.

The Claimant explains that its argument is not that Article 10.20.5 somehow “limits” the
Respondent's rights under Article 10.20.4 or that it “curtails” the scope of the objections
that a respondent may raise under the Treaty. Rather, the Claimant contends that the
language of Article 10.20.5 provides additional evidence that the Respondent simply
does not have the right to bring a competence objection under Article 10.20.4.

. Article 10.20.5 provides that a tribunal shall decide on an expedited basis an objection

under paragraph 4 and any objection that a dispute is not within the tribunal's
competence in the event that the respondent so requests within 45 days after the
tribunal is constituted. Thus, according to the Claimant's interpretation, if a respondent
seeks expedited resolution of a claim objection that arises substantively under Article
10.20.4, the respondent may bring the objection under the expedited procedure

23

2

7

120.

121.

122.

provided for in Article 10.20.5. In such case, all facts will be assumed to be true
pursuant to Article 10.20.4(c). However, if a respondent brings a competence objection
under Article 10.20.5, the facts are not assumed to be true because Article 10.20.4 is
not applicable in that scenario and Article 10.20.5 does not provide so.

In addressing the arguments raised by Professor Reisman that, if objections to
competence are not included in paragraph 4 of Article 10.20, the expedited procedure
(pursuant to paragraph 5) would perforce include objections involving disputed facts
“which would hardly lend themselves to an expedited procedure”,”’ the Claimant points
to the possibility that a tribunal may resolve simple factual issues in an Article 10.20.5
proceeding, while deferring complex factual disputes until a later phase of the
proceeding. Moreover, according to the Claimant, a tribunal could decide competence
objections under Article 10.20.5 and still exercise its authority pursuant to Article 23(3)
of the UNCITRAL Rules to determine competence as a preliminary question.

The Claimant also takes issue with Professor Reisman’s opinion that Articles 10.20.4
and 10.20.5 “would compel a respondent to always use the expedited procedure for any
objection to competence, as this would be its only opportunity to do so.”** The Claimant
argues that this view is incorrect, and that the expedited procedure under Article
10.20.5 is not in fact the Respondent’s “only opportunity” to raise competence
objections as a preliminary question, as a respondent could make an application to a
tribunal to hear any and all competence objections as a preliminary question under
Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules.”®

The Claimant further argues that while in a claim objection brought by a respondent
under Article 10.20.4, all facts are assumed to be true, the same does not apply to
competence objections that a respondent brings under Article 10.20.5. The text
supporting this position is Article 10.20.4(c) which provides that in deciding an objection
under Article 10.20.4, the tribunal shall assume to be true the claimant's factual
allegations. No equivalent text appears with respect to Article 10.20.5.

Professor Reisman’s Letter, Note 6, at 6.
Ibid.

The Claimant requests the Tribunal, when weighing the probative value of Professor Reisman’s Letter, to treat the
opinion as a submission by the Respondent itself, and not as an independent “expert opinion.” The Claimant does
not seek to strike Professor Reisman’s opinion, but it requests that it be given weight equal to that of the
arguments advanced by the Respondent itself. See the Claimant's Submission, May 7, 2014, at 5.

24

123.

o

124.

125.

126.

127.

(d) The No Waiver Provision in Article 10.20.4(d)

Article 10.20.4(d) of the Treaty provides that “[t]he respondent does not waive any
objection as to competence or any argument on the merits merely because the
respondent did or did not raise an objection under this paragraph or make use of the
expedited procedure set out in paragraph 5.”

For the Claimant, the reason for this “without prejudice” language, heavily relied on by
the Respondent, is easily understood when one recognizes the similarities between
Article 10.20.4 and Rule 12(b)(6) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

The Claimant explains that if a defendant in a United States federal court litigation
chooses to bring a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss a claim for its alleged legal
insufficiency, the defendant also must simultaneously bring a motion objecting to the
court’s jurisdiction, and failure to do so will result in a waiver of such jurisdictional
objections. Thus, the Claimant contends that the language in Article 10.20.4(d) was
included to confirm that there will be no similar waiver under the Treaty, notwithstanding
its similarity to Rule 12(b)(6).

(2) The Cases the Respondent Cites Do Not Support the Respondent’s
Argument

While the Claimant agrees with the Respondent that the language in Article 10.20.4 of
the Treaty is nearly identical to Article 10.20.4 of the DR-CAFTA, the Claimant does not
agree that the three tribunals that have dealt with this provision (Pac Rim v. El
Salvador,°° Commerce Group v. El Salvador' and RDC v. Guatemala®), support the
Respondent's position. Nor, on the Claimant's case, do prior tribunals’ interpretations of
ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5) have any relevance for the purpose of interpreting Article
10.20.4 of the Treaty.

The Claimant asserts that the Pac Rim v. El Salvador and Commerce Group v. El
Salvador cases support the Claimant’s interpretation of the Treaty, and not the
Respondent's, while the tribunal in RDC v. Guatemala “clearly misapplied” Article
10.20.4 of the DR-CAFTA treaty by considering competence objections under Article

: See Pac Rim v. El Salvador Decision on Respondent's Preliminary Objections, Note 10.

See Commerce Group v. El Salvador Award, Note 19.
* See RDC v. Guatemala, Note 19.

25

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

133.

10.20.4 and reviewing and adjudicating disputed facts, meaning the decision in that
case should not be given any weight in these proceedings.

For the Claimant, the central distinction between the Pac Rim v. El Salvador and
Commerce Group v. El Salvador cases and these proceedings is that the respondents
in those cases brought preliminary objections to the tribunal’s competence under Article
10.20.5. The Respondent has not done that here and the Claimant considers it
“unlikely” that the Respondent’s decision to proceed only under Article 10.20.4,
foregoing Article 10.20.5 altogether, was an oversight.

First, counsel for the Claimant repeatedly objected to the Respondent's proposal to
reach an “agreement” that it would bring jurisdictional objections under Article 10.20.4,
noting that the Treaty did not allow it.

Second, counsel for the Respondent referred to the DR-CAFTA cases prior to the First
Session in London, and in its subsequent letter dated March 21, 2014, and, as
mentioned above, all of these cases involved Article 10.20.5.

The Claimant argues that the Pac Rim v. El Salvador tribunal's analysis of Articles
10.20.4 and 10.20.5 supports Renco’s interpretation of the scope of these provisions. In
particular, the Pac Rim tribunal noted that “[a]s regards the expedited procedure under
Article 10.20.5, it is twinned with the procedure under Article 10.20.4 with an additional
ground of objection as to competence.” [Emphasis added] The Pac Rim tribunal thus
recognized that competence is an additional ground for preliminary objections afforded
by Article 10.20.5, not found in Article 10.20.4.

In Commerce Group v. El Salvador, the respondent only raised objections related to the
waiver under Article 10.20.5 of the DR-CAFTA. Thus, the tribunal in Commerce Group
did not address the scope of these provisions because it dismissed the entire dispute
for lack of jurisdiction in the Article 10.20.5 phase.**

In RDC v. Guatemala, the respondent first raised a competence objection predicated on
waiver under Article 10.20.5 of the DR-CAFTA. After the tribunal rejected this objection,
the respondent raised two further preliminary competence objections (ratione temporis
and ratione materiae) under Article 10.20.4. The claimant apparently failed to point out

83 Pac Rim v. El Salvador Decision on Respondent's Preliminary Objections, at § 106, Note 10.
*4 See Commerce Group v. El Salvador Award, Note 19.

26

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

that these objections fell outside the scope of Article 10.20.4. In any event, the RDC
tribunal did not address the scope of Article 10.20.4 objections in its decision.

Further, it is the Claimant's case that, contrary to the Respondent's assertions, prior
tribunals’ interpretations of ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(5) are irrelevant for purposes of
Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty.

For the Claimant, while Article 10.20.4 distinguishes between preliminary objections to
competence and preliminary objections for failure to state a claim upon which relief may
be granted, ICSID Rule 41(5) provides simply that “a party may ... file an objection that
a claim is manifestly without legal merit’, without any reference to competence or
jurisdiction.

To support its position the Claimant, in response to the Tribunal’s letter of July 8, 2014,
invited Mr. Bernardo Cremades to comment on his article regarding the application of
Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Rules. Mr. Cremades states in his letter to the Tribunal of
September 16, 2014 that ICSID Rule 41(5) is irrelevant for the purposes of this dispute
and indicates that he agrees with the Claimant's interpretation of Treaty Article
10.20.4.%

According to the Claimant, if the Tribunal entertains under Article 10.20.4 the
Respondent's preliminary objections as to competence, this will only add an inefficient
and iniquitous process into these proceedings that would allow the Respondent to
advance competence objections with no risk of an adverse ruling (because all of the
Claimant's facts are assumed to be true). The Respondent's strategy is inconsistent
with the Treaty language and with the schedule to which the Parties agreed and the
Tribunal ordered in Procedural Order No. 1.

(3) Excerpts of Summaries of Negotiation Sessions Held Four to Five Years
Prior to Enactment Do Not Support the Respondent’s Reading of Article
10.20.4

In response to Respondent's argument that certain documents from Peruvian
negotiators of the Treaty demonstrate that both the United States of America and Peru

*5 See RDC v. Guatemala, Note 19.
%® See the Cremades Letter, Note 22.

27

139.

140.

141.

142.

intended that the Article 10.20.4 procedure must include competence objections, the
Claimant asserts that the Respondent is relying on incomplete portions of the
documents, concerning early negotiations that occurred between 2004 and 2005, i.e.,
almost five years prior to the enactment of the Treaty.

Further, according to the Claimant, the comments are not in conflict with the final
version of the Treaty because the Respondents’ argument seems to be based on what
appears to be a faulty premise that the statements made during these early negotiations
regarding preliminary objections, relate only to Article 10.20.4 in the final version of the
Treaty. According to the Claimant, the summaries of negotiations provided by the
Respondent simply make clear that a respondent may bring a preliminary objection to
the tribunal’s competence under the Treaty. However, the Claimant contends that the
question before the Tribunal is not whether the Treaty permits a respondent to raise a
preliminary objection to the tribunal's competence, but instead whether a tribunal is
required to hear a preliminary objection of competence pursuant to Article 10.20.4.

(4) Disputed Factual Issues Permeate the Respondent’s Competence
Objections

The Claimant considers that merely grouping six objections under three headings, as
indicated by the Respondent in paragraphs 25 to 27 of its submission of April 23, 2014,
does not suffice to alter the real number of objections submitted by the Respondent.

The Claimant reiterates that five of these six objections fall outside the scope of Article
10.20.4 because they relate only to the Tribunal’s competence and have nothing to do
with a cognizable “claim” as required by Article 10.20.4.

Moreover, each of these five competence objections involves an abundance of disputed
facts. Thus it would be virtually impossible for the Tribunal to determine the
Respondent's competence objections without a factual inquiry. In the Claimant’s opinion
this shows that the Respondent simply wishes to secure two opportunities to bring
exactly the same competence objections in two different phases of the case.

28

(5) The Non-Disputing Party Submission of the USG Confirms that All
Competence Objections Fall Outside the Scope of Article 10.20.4

143. For the Claimant, the USG’s Submission confirms its interpretation of Article 20.10.4 by
agreeing that an objection to the tribunal’s competence “fall[s] outside [the] scope” of
Article 10.20.4 and that “objections asserted under [Article 10.20.4] are distinct from
objections to the tribunal’s competence”,*’ thereby rejecting the Respondent's argument
that a preliminary objection to the tribunal's competence as a matter of law falls within
the scope of Article 10.20.4.

144. The Claimant finds support for its position in the USG’s Submission, including, inter alia,
that:

= Article 10.20.4(c) only encompasses objections to the legal sufficiency of a claim
and therefore if an objection to the tribunal's competence falls within the scope of
Article 10.20.4, then Article 10.20.4(c) would require the tribunal to assume to be
true all of the claimant's factual allegations in the notice of arbitration and the
statement of claim, and not just those “in support of any claim.” Thus, the USG
supports the Claimant's position that the inclusion of the phrase “in support of any
claim” in Article 10.20.4(c) confirms that objections to the tribunal’s competence fall
outside the scope of Article 10.20.4.

= “Subparagraph (d) confirms that a respondent is not required to request a
preliminary decision on an objection to competence when invoking the procedures
under paragraph 4 (or paragraph 5). That is, the applicable arbitration rules permit,
but do not require, a respondent to seek a preliminary decision on any objections
to competence, and paragraph 4 does not alter those rules.”*® According to the

Claimant, this evidences USG’s rejection of the Respondent's “necessary

corollary” argument*® and adopts the Claimant’s reading of Article 10.20.4(d).

87 USG's Submission, September 10, 2014, at 6 n.4.

%8 id, at] 10

89 According ‘to the Respondent, “[t]he necessary corollary of this provision is that a respondent may raise an
objection as to competence under Article 10.20.4”, because “[i]f all competence objections truly were outside the
scope of Article 10.20.4, as Renco argues, it would be superfluous to provide that a respondent does not waive a
competence objection by raising (or not) an objection under Article 10.20.4.” See Respondent's Submission, April
23, 2014, at $13.

29

= “[A]n objection under paragraph 4 and any objection that the dispute is not within
the tribunal’s competence” emphasiz[es] that objections asserted under paragraph
4 are distinct from objections to the tribunal's competence.””° For the Claimant this
statement by the USG is consistent with its position that “the words ‘an objection
under paragraph 4 and any objection that the dispute is not within the tribunal's
competence’ is additional confirmation that an objection under paragraph 4 of
Article 10.20 regarding the substantive viability of a claim is different than, and not
included within, an objection that the dispute is not within the tribunal's
competence. Any other reading impermissibly would cause the words of the Treaty

to be in conflict.”*"

(6) Request for Relief

145. Based on the above arguments and “as unequivocally confirmed by the USG’s
Submission,” “* the Claimant contends that the Respondent’s five competence
objections fall outside the scope of Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty and that the Tribunal is
not required or compelled to hear them in the Article 10.20.4 Phase of this arbitration,
as argued by the Respondent.

146. The Claimant requests that the Tribunal issue an award declaring that the Respondent’s
competence objections fall outside Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty, and that, pursuant to
the agreement between the Parties as reflected in Procedural Order No. 1, the
Respondent will bring its objections to the Tribunal’s competence during the merits
phase of the case.

E. Submission of the USG Pursuant to Article 10.20.2 Regarding the
Interpretation of Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty

147. On September 10, 2014, the USG filed a written submission as a non-disputing Party
pursuant to Article 10.20.2 of the Treaty, regarding the interpretation of Article 10.20.4
and informed the Tribunal that it did not wish “to exercise its right to make an oral
submission at this time.”

‘ USG's Submission, September 10, 2014, at § 6 n. 4 (emphasis in the original).
Claimant's Submission, April 3, 2014, at 6; Claimant's Submission, May 7, 2014, at 13-14.
42 Claimant's Submission, October 3, 2014, at 14.

30

148. The USG observed that it was not taking a position on how its interpretation applies to
the facts of this case and noted that no inference should be drawn from the absence of
comment on any issue not addressed in its Submission.

149. The Parties' respective positions on the USG's Submission are summarized in parts
C(4) and D(5) of Section III of this Decision above.

(1) Expedited Review Mechanisms in U.S. International Investment
Agreements

150. The USG’s non-disputing Party Submission traces the origins of the expedited review
mechanisms, introduced by the USG in recent investment agreements, to the USG’s
experience in the Methanex Corp. v. USA case.**

151. In the Methanex case, the arbitral tribunal constituted under NAFTA Chapter Eleven,
concluded that it lacked authority to rule on the USG’s preliminary objection that, even
accepting all of the claimant's allegations of fact, the claims should be dismissed for

“lack of legal merit.”“*

152. The Methanex tribunal ultimately dismissed all claims for lack of jurisdiction but,
according to the USG, this was possible only after spending a significant amount of time
and resources pleading on jurisdiction and merits.

153.

oo

Accordingly, in all subsequent investment agreements concluded to date by the USG, it
has negotiated expedited review mechanisms that allow a respondent State to assert
preliminary objections in an efficient manner.“°

See Methanex Corp. v. USA, Note 9.

Methanex Corp. v. USA, Partial Award, August 7, 2002, at 4 109, 126.

The Claimant submits that the USG’s explanation of the origin of the expedited review mechanisms pursuant to
Article 10.20.4 and Article 10.20.5, is fully consistent with its position that objections to the tribunal’s competence
“fall outside [the] scope” of Article 10.20.4. The Claimant explains that in its Partial Award (during the jurisdictional
phase of the i the tribunal i the USG’s challenge to jurisdiction i
decision pending its receipt of further pleadings and evidential materials from the parties), while concluding that it
“lacked authority” to rule on the USG's objection to the legal sufficiency of Methanex’s claims. In the Claimant's
view, the introduction of the Article 10.20.4 procedure in further treaties was therefore clearly intended to provide
tribunals with the authority that the Methanex tribunal lacked, while the introduction of the Article 10.20.5
procedure was intended to provide an expedited review mechanism both for Article 10.20.4 objections and for
objections to the tribunal's competence under the applicable arbitration rules. See Methanex Corp. v USA, Note 9.

31

 

154.

155.

156.

157.

158.

159.

(2) Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 of the Treaty

The USG states that paragraphs 4 and 5 of Article 10.20 establish efficient and cost-
effective mechanisms for a respondent State to dispose of claims that cannot prevail as
a matter of law, potentially together with any preliminary objections to the tribunal’s
competence.

The USG observes that paragraph 4 allows a respondent to submit “any objection” that,
“as a matter of law’, a claim is not one for which the tribunal may issue an award in
favor of the claimant. The USG also notes that paragraph 4 further clarifies that it
operates “[w]ithout prejudice to a tribunal’s authority to address other objections as a
preliminary question.”

Thus, according to the USG, paragraph 4 of Article 10.20 provides a further ground for
dismissal, in addition to “other objections’, such as preliminary objections to the
tribunal’s competence. The USG considers that in view of the “without prejudice”
clause, a tribunal may also hear preliminary objections to competence asserted under
the applicable arbitration rules.

The USG further indicates that paragraph 5 of Article 10.20 establishes that a tribunal
shall decide on an expedited basis “an objection under paragraph 4 and any objection
that the dispute is not within the tribunal’s competence’, [emphasis added] thus
emphasizing that objections asserted under paragraph 4 are distinct from objections to
the tribunal’s competence. Likewise, the chapeau of paragraph 4 gives as an example
of the “other objections” that fall outside its scope, “an objection that a dispute is not

within the tribunal’s competence.”*°

Regarding paragraph 4, the USG also notes that sub-paragraph (a) requires any such
objections to be submitted “as soon as possible after the tribunal is constituted”, and
generally no later than the date for the submission of the counter-memorial, contrasting
with the expedited procedures contained in paragraph 5.

As to sub-paragraph (b), the USG observes that it provides a mandatory requirement
(“a tribunal “shall” hear and decide as a preliminary question any objection made under
paragraph 4”). Thus, this requirement complements the tribunal's discretion, under the

48 USG's Submission, September 10, 2014, at 6 n.4.

32

160.

161.

162.

163.

164.

165.

applicable arbitration rules, to decide an objection to competence as a preliminary
matter.

The USG states that the evidentiary standard in sub-paragraph (c) facilitates an efficient
and expeditious process for eliminating claims that lack legal merit. The USG notes that
sub-paragraph (c) does not address, and does not govern, other objections, such as an
objection to competence.

The USG further indicates that sub-paragraph (d) confirms that a respondent is not
required to request a preliminary decision on an objection to competence when invoking
the procedures under paragraph 4 (or paragraph 5). Thus, the applicable arbitration
rules may allow, but do not require, a respondent to seek a preliminary decision on any
objections to competence, and paragraph 4 does not modify those rules.

For the USG, Article 10.20.4 supplements the tribunal's authority under the available
arbitration rules to decide preliminary objections, such as competence objections,
separately from the merits.

Thus, according to the USG’s submission, if a respondent makes a preliminary
objection under Article 20.10.4, the tribunal retains its authority under the applicable
arbitration rules to hear any preliminary objections to competence. However, reasons of
procedural economy “will often weigh in favor of deciding competence objections as a
preliminary matter and at the same time as objections made under paragraph 4.”“”

Finally, the USG states that the expedited procedure provided for in Article 10.20.5
refers to all preliminary objections, whether permitted by paragraph 4 or the applicable
arbitral rules. Thus, the USG submits that Article 10.20.5 modifies the applicable
arbitration rules, requiring a tribunal to decide on an expedited basis any Article 10.20.4
objection as well as any objection to competence, provided that such request is made
within 45 days of the date of the tribunal's constitution.

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS AND DECISIONS
A. The Relevant Issues

The key questions for determination by the Tribunal are two:

47 id.at9 11.

33

166.

167.

(1) Does Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty encompass within its scope preliminary
objections which may be characterized as relating to competence?

(2) Which, if any, of the preliminary objections raised by the Respondent should be
permitted to proceed to scheduling and full briefing for final decision in the Article
10.20.4 Phase of these proceedings?

In this decision, the Tribunal addresses only the limited procedural issues raised by the
Respondent's preliminary objections under Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty. For the
avoidance of doubt, the Tribunal does not otherwise address or decide any other
procedural issues or any of the merits of the claims advanced or denied by the Parties.

B. The Relevant Treaty Provisions

The relevant Treaty provisions at issue are found in Article 10.20.4. Although not
engaged on the facts here, Article 10.20.5 is also of relevance to the extent that it
assists in the proper interpretation of Article 10.20.4. For convenience, these two

provisions are set out in full as follows:
Article 10.20.4:

“4. Without prejudice to a tribunal's authority to address other objections as a
preliminary question, such as an objection that a dispute is not within the
tribunal's competence, a tribunal shall address and decide as a preliminary
question any objection by the respondent that, as a matter of law, a claim
submitted is not a claim for which an award in favor of the claimant may be made
under Article 10.26.

(a) Such objection shall be submitted to the tribunal as soon as possible after
the tribunal is constituted, and in no event later than the date the tribunal
fixes for the respondent to submit its counter-memorial (or, in the case of
an amendment to the notice of arbitration, the date the tribunal fixes for
the respondent to submit its response to the amendment);

(b) On receipt of an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall
suspend any proceedings on the merits, establish a schedule for
considering the objection consistent with any schedule it has established

34

for considering any other preliminary question, and issue a decision or
award on the objection, stating the grounds therefor.

(c) In deciding an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal shall assume
to be true claimant's factual allegations in support of any claim in the
notice of arbitration (or any amendment thereof) and, in disputes brought
under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the statement of claim referred to
in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The tribunal may also
consider any relevant facts not in dispute.

(d) The respondent does not waive any objection as to competence or any
argument on the merits merely because the respondent did or did not
raise an objection under this paragraph or make use of the expedited
procedure set out in paragraph 5.”

Article 10.20.5:

“5. In the event that the respondent so requests within 45 days after the tribunal is
constituted, the tribunal shall decide on an expedited basis an objection under
paragraph 4 and any objection that the dispute is not within the tribunal's
competence. The tribunal shall suspend any proceedings on the merits and issue
a decision or award on the objection(s), stating the grounds therefor, no later
than 150 days after the date of the request. However, if a disputing party
requests a hearing, the tribunal may take an additional 30 days to issue the
decision or award. Regardless of whether a hearing is requested, a tribunal may,
on a showing of extraordinary cause, delay issuing its decision or award by an
additional brief period, which may not exceed 30 days.”

C. Interpretation of the Scope of Article 10.20.4

(1) The Question Presented and the Tribunal's Remit

168. The question presented for decision by the Tribunal relates to the proper scope of
Article 10.20.4. The issue is one of considerable importance, not least because it is a
matter of first impression under the Treaty.

35

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

174.

175.

At the outset, the Tribunal notes that the two State Contracting Parties to the Treaty, the
Republic of Peru and the United States of America, have adopted different views as to
the ambit of Article 10.20.4.

Peru has set out its view in its extensive written submissions in these proceedings. In
short, Peru argues that Article 10.20.4 requires this Tribunal to address and decide “any
objection” that a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award in favor of the

Claimant may be made under Treaty Article 10.26. Peru contends that “any objection
includes both objections as to the merits and to competence.

The USG has provided its interpretation of the scope and effect of Article 10.20.4 in its
non-disputing Party submission. The position of the USG is that “objections asserted
under paragraph 4 [of Article 10.20] are distinct from objections to the tribunal's
competence” and that “an objection that a dispute is not within the tribunal's
competence” falls “outside the scope” of Article 10.20.4.

The Tribunal credits the views of both State Contracting Parties with the highest
respect. However, the Tribunal is not bound by the views of either party.“®

Further, the Tribunal has taken note that the Free Trade Commission, established
pursuant to the Treaty and authorized to issue binding interpretations as to the Treaty's
provisions, has issued no interpretation of Article 10.20.4 to date.

Under the circumstances, the proper interpretation of Article 10.20.4 and how it should
be applied to the facts of this case are tasks which reside exclusively with this Tribunal.

(2) Principles of Treaty Interpretation

As emphasized by all Parties in this case, the starting point for the Tribunal's analysis of
Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty must be Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties, by which a treaty is to be interpreted “in good faith in accordance with the
ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in light of its
object and purpose.”

See Meg N. Kinnear, Andrea K. Bjorklund, et al., Article 1128-Participation by a Party in Investment Disputes
under NAFTA: An Annotated Guide to NAFTA Chapter 11, Supplement No. 1, March 2008 (Kluwer Law
International 2006) at 1128-1-1128-5, 1128-4; see also Respondent's Submission October 4, 2014, at 35 and
the materials cited at Note 73.

36

176.

177.

178.

179.

180.

181.

182.

It is generally accepted that Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention requires that a treaty

should be interpreted first on the basis of its “plain language.”“°

The Tribunal also notes that the principle of effectiveness (effet utile) is broadly
accepted as a fundamental principle of treaty interpretation. This principle requires that
provisions of a treaty be read together and that “every provision in a treaty be

interpreted in a way that renders it meaningful rather than meaningless (or inutile) .”°°

In addition, Article 32 of the Vienna Convention provides that in the interpretation of a
treaty recourse may be had to “the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances
of its conclusion”, either to “confirm the meaning” of the treaty provisions interpreted in
accordance with Article 31 or “to determine the meaning” when the interpretation of
treaty provisions leaves the meaning “ambiguous or obscure” or leads to a result which
is “manifestly absurd or unreasonable.”

In interpreting the Treaty provisions in issue here, the Tribunal will be guided by the
fundamental principles set out above.

(3) Textual Analysis
The Tribunal now turns to the interpretation of the text of the relevant Treaty provisions.

For the reasons set out below, the Tribunal has concluded that the plain language of
Article 10.20.4, interpreted in accordance with the ordinary meaning of the terms in their
context, clearly shows that objections as to competence are not included within the
scope of Article 10.20.4 objections.

The Tribunal begins with an overview of the structure and scheme of Article 10.20.4 and
its companion Article 10.20.5.

See, e.g., Yukos Universal Ltd. v. the Russian Federation, PCA Case AA 227IIC 416 (2009), Interim Award on

Jurisdiction and Admissibility of November 30, 2009, at § 411 (“According to Article 31 of the [Vienna Convention],
a treaty must be interpreted first on the basis of its plain language.”).

See Oppenheim's International Law 1280-81 (R. Jennings & A. Watts eds., 9" ed. 1996) (“The parties are
assumed to intend provisions of a treaty to have a certain effect, and not to be meaningless: the maxim is ut res
magis valeat quam pereat. Therefore, an interpretation is not admissible which would make a provision
meaningless, or ineffective.") See also Eureko B.V. v. Republic of Poland, ad hoc, Partial Award of August 19,
2005, at § 248 (‘It is a cardinal rule of the interpretation of treaties that each and every operative clause of a treaty
is to be interpreted as meaningful rather than meaningless. [T]reaties, and hence their clauses, are to be
interpreted so as to render them effective rather than ineffective.” For further cases and materials on point, see
Cremades Letter, Note 22 at 6-8.

37

183.

o

184.

185.

186.

187.

188.

189.

Article 10.20.4 consists of a chapeau containing two clauses: (1) a principal clause and
(2) a preceding subordinate clause. The chapeau is followed by four separate sub-
paragraphs (a)-(d).

The principal clause states:

‘{A] tribunal shall address and decide as a preliminary question any objection by
the respondent that, as a matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which
an award in favor of the claimant may be made under Article 10.26.”

The effect of the principal clause is to establish a special regime that requires a tribunal
to deal with a certain category of objections—namely, objections by a respondent to the
legal sufficiency of claims brought by the claimant—as preliminary questions. These
objections are hereafter referred to as “Article 10.20.4 objections.”

The preceding subordinate clause in the chapeau to Article 10.20.4 states that the
principal clause is:

“[w]ithout prejudice to a tribunal's authority to address other objections as a
preliminary question, such as an objection that a dispute is not within the
tribunal's competence.”

The subordinate clause thus provides clarification that the mandatory procedure for
addressing Article 10.20.4 objections established by the primary clause is to operate
without detriment to or effect on a tribunal's power to deal with “other objections”
(including competence objections) as preliminary questions.

It is common ground between the Parties that a “tribunal's authority” to deal with “other
objections” is derived from the applicable arbitration rules.°' Where the 2010 UNCITRAL
Rules apply (as is the case here), Article 23(3) of the Rules grants the tribunal the
authority, exercisable at its discretion, to deal with an objection to jurisdiction as a
preliminary question.

Sub-paragraphs (a)-(d) of Article 10.20.4 follow the principal clause of the chapeau and
provide certain procedural rules when dealing with Article 10.20.4 objections. Thus:

(a) “Such objection” must be submitted to the tribunal within the time limit specified.

51 Claimant's Submission, May 7, 2014, at 1-2; Respondent's Submission, October 4, 2014, at 23.

38

190.

°

191.

(b) Upon receiving “an objection under this paragraph”, the tribunal shall suspend the
proceedings on the merits and establish a timetable for dealing with the objection.
Such timetable shall be “consistent with any schedule [the tribunal] has established
for considering any other preliminary question.” This is a clear reference to
preliminary questions dealt with under the applicable arbitration rules and accords
with the general purpose of the article to ensure an efficient and cost-effective
procedure for disposing of preliminary objections.

(c) When deciding “an objection under this paragraph,” the tribunal is required to
adopt an evidentiary standard which assumes that all of claimant's factual
allegations in support of its claim as set out in the pleadings are true.

(d) The respondent is not deemed to have waived “any objection as to competence or
any argument on the merits” merely because it did or did not raise “an objection
under this paragraph’ or under Article 10.20.5.

Article 10.20.5 is a companion provision to Article 10.20.4 which provides for an
expedited procedure for dealing with preliminary objections. Article 10.20.5 provides:

“...Upon the request of the respondent within 45 days after the tribunal is
constituted, the tribunal shall decide on an expedited basis an objection under
paragraph 4 and any objection that the dispute is not within the tribunal's
competence...”

As the above exposition of Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 demonstrates, the Treaty draws
a Clear distinction between three different categories of procedures for dealing with
preliminary objections. Thus:

(1) The principal (“shall address and decide”) clause in Article 10.20.4 refers to
objections alleging the insufficiency of a claim as a matter of law which a tribunal is
mandated to decide as a preliminary issue based on assumed facts.

(2) The subordinate (“without prejudice”) clause in Article 10.20.4 preserves a
tribunal's right to decide “other objections” (including competence objections) as
preliminary questions pursuant to the applicable arbitration rules.

39

192.

193.

194.

195.

196.

(3) Article 10.20.5 provides for a special expedited procedure, at a respondent's
option, for dealing with preliminary objections under both (1) and (2).

In the Tribunal's view, the underlying scheme established by the provisions and the
plain language found in the text make it clear that competence objections were not
intended to come within the scope of the Article 10.20.4 objections referred to in
category (1) above.

First, it is noteworthy that the principal clause in Article 10.20.4 (preliminary objections
category 1) makes no explicit reference to competence objections. This is to be
contrasted with the express references to “objections to the tribunal's competence”
contained in both the subordinate clause of Article 10.20.4 (category 2) and in Article

10.20.5 (category 3).

If the State Contracting Parties to the Treaty had intended competence objections to fall
within the scope of Article 10.20.4 objections, they could have easily drafted language
for inclusion in the principal clause of Article 10.20.4 to achieve this.°* However, both
the language and the logic of the provisions suggest that this was not done because the
drafters intended to draw a distinction between Article 10.20.4 objections on the one
hand and “other objections”, such as competence objections, on the other.

In the Tribunal's view, the use of the words “other objections” in the subordinate clause
of Article 10.20.4 must be seen to be a reference to objections that are other than,
meaning different from, the objections referred to in the article's primary clause. If Article
10.20.4 objections included objections to competence, there would plainly be no need
to describe competence objections as “other objections.” Therefore, in order to invest
logic and meaning in the provision as a whole, the Tribunal considers that competence
objections must be understood to fall outside the scope of the Article 10.20.4 objections.

Further support for this reading of the Treaty's language is to be found in Article
10.20.5. As stated above, Article 10.20.5 was intended to provide an expedited pathway
for the disposal of preliminary objections. By its terms, Article 10.20.5 is not limited to
Article 10.20.4 objections.

5° See Cremades Letter, Note 22 at 5-6.

40

197. The first sentence of Article 10.20.5 makes plain that the expedited procedure applies to
both “...an objection under paragraph 4 and any objection that the dispute is not within
the tribunal's competence.” [Emphasis added]

198. In the Tribunal's view, this sentence provides additional and cogent confirmation that
the Treaty drafters intended to draw a clear demarcation between Article 10.20.4
objections and objections as to competence, and that the latter do not fall within the
scope of the Article 10.20.4 objections.

199. As noted by Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades, if competence objections were already
included within the scope of Article 10.20.4 then the words “and any objection that the
dispute is not within the tribunal's competence” at the end of the first sentence of Article
10.20.5 would be superfluous.** The principle of effet utile requires that a treaty be
interpreted so that every operative clause is “meaningful rather than meaningless.” In
the Tribunal's judgment, to ascribe to the provision the meaning contended for by the
Respondent would offend against this important principle.

200. Further support for the distinction drawn in the Treaty provisions between Article
10.20.4 objections and competence objections can be seen in the way in which the
timetabling of preliminary issues is addressed.™* Sub-paragraph (b) of Article 10.20.4
provides that upon the receipt of a preliminary objection under that Article, the tribunal
shall establish a schedule for considering the objection which is “consistent with any
schedule it has established for considering any other preliminary question...” As
discussed above, the purpose of this phrase is to require, on grounds of efficiency, that
Article 10.20.4 objections and competence objections brought under the applicable
arbitration rules are dealt with on parallel briefing schedules. By contrast, Article 10.20.5
contains no such provision. This is obviously because Article 10.20.5 (unlike Article
10.20.4) already includes objections to competence within its scope.

201. The Respondent argues that the phrase “any objection” in the principal clause of Article
10.20.4 clearly establishes Peru's right to bring objections to competence in the Article
10.20.4 Phase. The Respondent is supported by Professor Michael Reisman who

asserts: “[T]he ordinary meaning of the words ‘any objection’ is any objection.”®°

53 Cremades Letter, Note 22 at 7- 8.
8 id. ats.
55 Professor Reisman’s Letter, Note 6 at 4.

4

202.

203.

204.

205.

The Tribunal considers it would be wrong to read the words “any objection” in isolation.
The Vienna Convention on the interpretation of treaties requires that the words must be
construed in their proper context. When viewed in the context of the provision as a
whole it is clear that the words “any objection” are not open ended. Rather, they are
qualified - and circumscribed - by the preceding subordinate clause. Read together, it is
clear that in this context, contrary to the Respondent's case, “any” does not mean “any”
without qualification, but rather “any” within a limited universe that excludes those types
of objections which are identified in the subordinate clause, and which are the subject of
separate provisions elsewhere.

Further,”any” refers to a specific category of objections, namely “any objection by the
respondent that, as a matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award
in favor of the claimant may be made.” [Emphasis added]

The Claimant's submission is that there is a difference between “objecting to the viability
of a particular claim as a matter of law (assuming all facts asserted by claimant to be

true), and objecting to a tribunal's competence to hear and decide a claim.”*

[Emphasis
in original] The Respondent disagrees and argues that the word “claim” is broad enough
to include jurisdictional or competence objections. In this regard, the Respondent relies
on the opinion of Professor Reisman that “dismissal of a claim on jurisdictional grounds

is a dismissal as a matter of law.”*”

Having carefully considered the views of both Parties, the Tribunal is persuaded that the
better view is that there is a meaningful distinction between an objection that mounts a
challenge to the sustainability of a legal claim, and an objection to a tribunal's
competence to hear a dispute. As Professor Jan Paulsson has noted:

‘[A] motion to dismiss for failure to state a cause of action, or, to use the
expression current in England, a strike-out application...is a defense on the
merits and not a matter of admissibility [or jurisdiction]. The USA was not arguing
[in Methanex] that the case was unhearable, but that it was legally hopeless.

5° Claimant's Submission, April 3, 2014 at 6.
57 Professor Reisman’s Letter, Note 6 at 4.

42

59
60
61

206.

207.

208.

Jan Paulsson, Jurisdiction and issibility, in Global i ol
Resolution, Liber Amicorum in Honour of Robert Briner 607-08 (2005).

That is precisely how one should understand the difference between a challenge
58

of inadmissibility and a strike-out application.
In the case at hand, the distinction drawn by Professor Paulsson is apparent from the
fact that when addressing an Article 10.20.4 objection for legal insufficiency of a claim,
a tribunal will be called to decide whether the claim is “legally hopeless.” Consideration
of an objection to competence, however, requires a tribunal to ask a different kind of
question: whether the objection is “hearable” at all, irrespective of a party's substantive
Treaty rights or the legal merit of the claim.

Moreover, even if an objection to a tribunal's competence provides a basis for
“dismissal as a matter of law’, Article 10.20.4 only requires a tribunal to decide as a
preliminary question an objection which is directed at the legal sustainability of a claim,
not the tribunal's jurisdiction.®° This follows from the distinction created by the structure
of Article 10.20.4 which, as discussed above, © confirms that objections as to
competence are “other objections”, which are different from objections that “as a matter
of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award in favor of the claimant may
be made...”

Further, the Tribunal is persuaded by the Claimant's submission that the text of sub-
paragraph (c) of Article 10.20.4 provides a further indication that the scope of Article
10.20.4 objections is limited to objections to the legal sufficiency of a claim.®' Under
sub-paragraph (c), when deciding an Article 10.20.4 objection “the tribunal shall assume
to be true claimant's factual allegations in support of any claim...” [Emphasis added] If
the word “claim” were intended to include objections to competence, then sub-
paragraph (c) would require a tribunal to assume the entirety of the claimant's factual
allegations in the pleadings to be true, not only those factual allegations “in support of
any claim.” In the Tribunal's view, the inclusion of the words “in support of any claim” is
consistent with the view that competence objections fall outside the scope of Article
10.20.4 objections. To interpret the language in sub-paragraph (c) otherwise would be
impermissible under the principle of effet utile, as it would to render the phrase “in
support of any claim” meaningless.

 

in Ir i Law, Ci and Dispute

Claimant's Submission, May 7, 2014 at 6.
See supra at § 182-191.
Claimant's Submission, October 1, 2014 at 8-9.

43

209. Accordingly, based on the foregoing, the Tribunal has concluded that the Respondent's
contention that the word “claim” in the primary clause of Article 10.20.4 should be
interpreted broadly to include competence objections is without merit.

210. The Respondent also contends that sub-paragraph (d) of Article 10.20.4 provides
support for its argument that competence objections should be included within the ambit
of Article 10.20.4 objections. The Respondent has stated:

“Article 10.20.4(d) confirms Peru's right to raise competence objections under
Article 10.20.4, by providing that a respondent State 'does not waive any
objection as to competence or any argument on the merits merely because the
respondent did or did not raise an objection under this paragraph’. The necessary
corollary to this provision is that a State may raise an objection as to competence
under Article 10.20.4.”° [Emphasis in original]

211. In the Tribunal's view, this is incorrect. Sub-paragraph (d) reads in full as follows:

“[t]he respondent does not waive any objection as to competence or any
argument on the merits merely because the respondent did or did not raise an
objection under this paragraph or make use of the expedited procedure set out in
paragraph 5.” [Emphasis added]

212. When read in its entirety, it is plain that the cross-reference to Article 10.20.5 (which
includes objections as to competence) explains the earlier reference in sub-paragraph
(d) to the non-waiver of competence objections. Therefore, in the Tribunal's judgment,
the better view of sub-paragraph (d) is that the provision draws the same distinction
between Article 10.20.4 objections and objections to competence as is found in the
principal and subordinate clauses of Article 10.20.4 and in Article 10.20.5. As such, the
Tribunal concludes that the provision does not support the Respondent's argument but
confirms that competence objections are excluded from the scope of Article 10.20.4
objections.

213. In conclusion, having carefully considered all of the submissions of both Parties and the
relevant Treaty texts, the Tribunal has determined that on a proper interpretation of the

© Respondent's Submission, October 4, 2014 at 8.
8 In reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal has found it unnecessary to address the Claimant's arguments based on
the U.S. Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, on which it expresses no opinion.

44

214.

215.

216.

217.

218.

219.

text of the Treaty provisions, objections as to a tribunal's competence are outside the
scope of Article 10.20.4.

(4) Object and Purpose

It is common ground between the Parties that the object and purpose of Article 10.20.4
and its companion Article 20.10.5 is to provide an efficient and cost-effective
mechanism for respondent States to assert preliminary objections to dispose of claims
at an early stage in the arbitration proceedings.

Further, both State Contracting Parties to the Treaty have traced the origins of the
provisions contained in Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 to the NAFTA case of Methanex v.
United States.

In Methanex, the United States was confronted with claims that it contended were
without legal merit, even assuming the truth of the claimant's allegations. However, the
tribunal ruled that it could not address such objections in a preliminary phase. Only after
protracted and costly proceedings did the tribunal ultimately decide that it did not have
jurisdiction and that the claims should be dismissed

In the light of Methanex, the United States and Peru agreed to include in the Treaty
provisions which would allow a respondent State to assert preliminary objections in an
efficient manner and thus avoid the unnecessary time and expense of adjudicating a
legally meritless claim.

The Respondent contends that in order for Article 10.20.4 to fulfil its intended object and
purpose, the provision must be interpreted to include competence objections within its
scope. If this is not done, the Respondent argues, the preliminary objections
mechanism provided for in the Treaty would be incapable of solving the issues which
surfaced in Methanex and which they were originally intended to address.

In the Tribunal's view, the Respondent's argument is unavailing. As discussed above,
the scheme put into place by Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 of the Treaty provides for
three different procedural options for dealing with preliminary objections. These include
(1) the special procedure for dealing with Article 10.20.4 objections; (2) the provisions

4 See the Respondent's Submission, April 23, 2014, at 4; the USG's Submission, September 10 2014, at {§ 2-3.

45

contained (in this case) in Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules for dealing with
jurisdictional objections as preliminary questions; and, importantly, (3) the expedited
procedure provided for under Article 10.20.5 which materially enhances the efficient
handling of preliminary objections brought under both (1) and (2). Taken together, these
provisions address the issues confronted by the respondent in Methanex.

220. The Tribunal is unpersuaded by Professor Reisman’s suggestion that preliminary
objections in which there may be disputed issues of fact (as per Article 23(3) of the
UNCITRAL Rules, and Article 10.20.5 of the Treaty, and unlike Article 10.20.4 of the
Treaty) are somehow incapable of being determined with expedition.©

221. Further, the Tribunal doubts that the accepted object and purpose of the Treaty would
be achieved if objections as to the Tribunal’s competence could be brought more than
once (i.e. under Article 10.20.4, on the basis of assumed facts, and thereafter as a
preliminary objection under — in this case — Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules).

222. In summary, the Tribunal concludes that the provisions contained in Articles 10.20.4
and 10.20.5 provide for an efficient mechanism for disposing of claims at an early stage
in the arbitral proceedings which is fully consonant with the object and purpose intended
by the Parties.

(5) Treaty Negotiations

223. Peru contends that the negotiating history of the Treaty demonstrates that the Parties
agreed that the scope of Article 10.20.4 would encompass both competence objections
and objections as to the merits.

224. In support, Peru has submitted excerpts from the negotiation summaries prepared by
Peru's Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism. Peru contends that the negotiation
summaries demonstrate that the possibility of raising preliminary objections to the
competence of the tribunal was one of the “objectives” of Peru in the negotiations with
the United States during the Six (2004) and Seventh (2005) Rounds of negotiations.
Further, Peru contends that the negotiation summary for the Eight Round (2005) of

®5 Professor Reisman’s Letter, Note 6 at 6: “... objections that included disputes about facts, with all that entails
procedurally, would hardly lend themselves to an expedited procedure.”
Unofficial Translation of the MINCETUR 6th Round Negotiations, Note 11 at 29-30 and Unofficial Translation of
the MINCETUR 7th Round Negotiations, Note 11 at 37.

46

67
68.
69

225.

226.

227.

228.

negotiations shows that Peru and the United States “agreed to include in this article, in
paragraph 4, an express reference to the possibility to challenge the tribunal's

competence to hear and rule over the complaints.”

In addition, Peru has submitted a letter from Mr. Carlos Herrera Perret who formerly
served as “team leader” of negotiations for the investment chapters of the Treaty. Mr.
Herrera states: “[B]ased on my role in the negotiations, the issue of the interpretation of
Article 10.20.4 of Chapter 10 of the Treaty is unequivocal: the scope of the provision is

very broad and reflects the position that Peru sought in the negotiations.”

The negotiation summaries and the Herrera Letter have presumably been put forward
by Peru as evidence of “preparatory work” within the meaning of Article 32 of the
Vienna Convention. However, these materials appear to reflect only Peru's own
position, objectives, and understanding in the course of the negotiations.

The utility of unilateral evidence emanating from one of the negotiating sides of a treaty
in investor-state disputes has been the subject of analysis by numerous commentators
and tribunals. For example, Dr Thomas Walde has noted:

“One has to be careful with the views, in particular ex post, of participants in the
negotiations. Like witnesses in court, they will interpret what has happened
through the lens of their own—as a rule limited and one-sided—perspective,
views on desirability, and interests of their principals. They will tend to suppress
‘cognitive dissonance’ and rather confirm what has happened is what they think
should have happened.”®

Similarly, Anthony Aust has stated:

“The summary record of a conference prepared by an independent and
experience secretariat will carry more weight than an unagreed record produced
by [a] participating state. However, even the records of a conference served by a
skilled secretariat will generally not tell the whole story. The most important parts
of negotiating and drafting often take place informally, with no agreed record

Unofficial Translation of the MINCETUR 8th Round Negotiations, Note 11 at 15.

Herrera Letter, Note 7.

Thomas W. Walde, “Interpreting Investment Treaties: Experiences and Examples’, in Christina Binder et al., eds.,
International Investment Law for the 21% Century: Essays in Honour of Christoph Schreuer (Oxford University
Press, 2009), at 778.

47

being kept. The reasons why a particular compromise formula was adopted, and
what it was intended to mean, may be difficult to establish.”

229. Hence tribunals in investor-state arbitrations have tended to approach the testimony of
state officials and negotiators with caution.”

230. In any event, under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention a tribunal may have recourse to
“supplementary means of interpretation”, such as reference to a treaty's “preparatory
work”, in only limited circumstances. These are (i) to “confirm the meaning” of treaty
provisions interpreted in accordance with Article 31, or (ii) to “determine the meaning” of
treaty provisions when interpretation leaves the meaning of treaty provisions
“ambiguous or obscure” or to a result which is “manifestly absurd or unreasonable.”

231. In this case, this Tribunal has already determined that Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty,
when interpreted in accordance with Article 31 of the Vienna Convention, clearly and
unambiguously excludes competence objections from its scope. Therefore, the Tribunal
sees no need to refer to supplementary interpretation to either confirm or determine the
meaning of the Treaty provisions.

(6) Investment Treaty Jurisprudence

232. The Respondent has also argued that investment treaty jurisprudence supports its
position that Article 10.20.4 should be interpreted to include competence objections
within the scope of the provision.

233. In particular, the Respondent has referred to the RDC v. Guatemala Decision on
Objections to Jurisdiction; the RDC v. Guatemala Second Decision on Objections to
Jurisdiction; the Pac Rim v. El Salvador Decision on Respondent's Preliminary
Objections; and the Commerce Group v. El Salvador Award.”*

234. In addition, the Respondent has relied on comparisons between ICSID Arbitration Rule
41.5 and the provisions contained in Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty.

7 Anthony Aust, Handbook of International Law (Cambridge University Press, 2005) at 5.

™ See e.g., Eureko B.V. (The Netherlands) v. Republic of Poland, ad hoc Arbitration, Partial Award of August 19,
2005, at § 185; Tza Yap Shum v. Republic of Peru, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/6, Award of July 7, 2011, at 4 166-
171, 212.

7 See Pac Rim v. El Salvador Decision on Respondent's Preliminary Objections, Note 10 and Commerce Group v.
El Salvador Award, Note 19.

48

237.

S

238.

239.

240.

. The Tribunal has carefully considered the legal materials submitted by the Respondent

referred to above and to the submissions of both Parties with respect thereto.

. The Tribunal has not been materially assisted by the decisions of other arbitral tribunals

construing provisions found in DR-CAFTA which are analogous (if not identical) to
Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 of the Treaty. As not all the same points on construction
were apparently argued in these cases as have been argued here, and, in so far as
they differ from the points set out above, ultimately the Tribunal is unpersuaded by the
analysis and conclusions of these other tribunals. In this Tribunal's view, none of these
decisions is precisely on point with the issues presented in this case and as such can
provide only limited guidance here.

Similarly, the Tribunal has not been materially assisted by comparisons between the
provisions contained in ICSID Arbitration Rule 41.5 and the Treaty provisions of
concern in this case. In the Tribunal's judgment, ICSID Rule 41.5 contains language
that is very different from that found in Articles 10.20.4 and 10.20.5 of the Treaty. Nor
does ICSID Rule 41.5 share precisely the same object and purpose as Articles 10.20.4
and 10.20.5 of the Treaty.

For the above reasons, the Tribunal has placed no reliance on the above materials in
reaching its decision here.

(7) Other

The Parties have raised a number of ancillary issues and arguments in their written
submissions. For the avoidance of doubt, all of these issues and arguments have been
carefully considered by the Tribunal in reaching its decisions even if each and every
one has not been specifically referred to herein.

(8) Conclusion

For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal has concluded that objections to a tribunal's
competence fall outside the scope of Article 10.20.4. Therefore, the Treaty does not
mandate or require this Tribunal to address and decide objections as to competence in
the Article 10.20.4 Phase of the arbitration proceedings.

49

241.

242.

243.

The Tribunal's decision follows from its interpretation of Treaty Articles 10.20.4 and
10.20.5. This interpretation has been based upon the principles of treaty interpretation
declared in Article 31 of the Vienna Convention, including the ordinary meaning of the
terms contained in the Treaty, viewed in their context and in light of the Treaty's object
and purpose.

D. The Respondent's Preliminary Objections

The Tribunal now turns to the question of which of the Respondent's preliminary
objections should proceed to scheduling and briefing in the Article 10.20.4 Phase of
these proceedings.

In its submission dated March 21, 2014 the Respondent noticed three preliminary
objections pursuant to Article 10.20.4:

(1) Violation of the Treaty's Waiver Provisions. Peru contends that Renco has
presented an invalid waiver in this arbitration, in violation of Article 10.16.1(b) of
the Treaty. In addition, Peru contends that, through the initiation and continuation
of certain proceedings, Renco has acted in violation of the Treaty's waiver
requirement.

(2) Lack of Jurisdiction Ratione Termporis. Peru asserts that the Treaty limits
arbitrable claims to those that arise from facts that took place after the Treaty came
into force in 2009. Further, Peru argues that the Treaty precludes the submission
of claims more than three years after a claimant knew or should have known of an
alleged breach. Peru contends that the claims advanced by Renco in these
proceedings violate both temporal limitations.

Ss

Failure of Claims Under the Plain Language of the Contract. Peru contends that
Renco's Treaty claims are based on alleged breaches of the Stock Transfer
Agreement in connection with the tort suits proceeding against Renco in the United
States. Peru argues that these contract claims must fail as a matter of law because
the party to the Stock Transfer Agreement is not a defendant in the U.S lawsuits.
Further, Peru argues that Renco failed to submit a claim for determination by a
technical expert as required by the Stock Transfer Agreement. Therefore, Peru

50

244.

245.

246.

247.

248.

249.

contends that it cannot be deemed to have breached a contractual obligation with
respect to the U.S. lawsuits as asserted by Renco.

Peru contends that each of the above preliminary objections falls within the scope of
Article 10.2.4 and should be considered and decided by the Tribunal in the Article
10.20.4 Phase of these proceedings.

The Claimant considers that the three preliminary objections noticed by Peru in its letter
dated March 21, 2014 include six different preliminary objections. These are:
(1) presentation of an invalid waiver; (2) violation of the waiver; (3) lack of jurisdiction
ratione termporis; (4) violation of the Treaty's three-year limitations period; (5) failure to
state a claim for breach of the investment agreement; and (6) failure to submit two
factual issues for determination by a technical expert prior to commencement of the

arbitration.

The Claimant contends that Peru's objections (1)-(4) and (6) above all relate to the
Tribunal's competence or jurisdiction over this dispute. As such, the Claimant argues
that they fall outside the scope of the Article 10.20.4 Phase established by Procedural
Order No. 1. As to Peru's preliminary objection (5), the Claimant accepts that the Treaty
allows Peru to bring this objection as a preliminary question under Article 10.20.4.

Peru has asserted that the preliminary objections it has raised under the heading
“Violation of the Treaty's Waiver Provisions” (characterized by the Claimant as
objections (1) and (2)) implicate “the Tribunal's jurisdiction.”

As to the objections raised under the heading “Lack of Jurisdiction Ratione Termporis”
(characterized by the Claimant as objections (3) and (4)) Peru has asserted: “The
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over these claims.”

As regards Peru's preliminary objection based on the failure to submit two factual issues
for determination by a technical expert prior to the commencement of the arbitration
(characterized by the Claimant as objection (6)), this objection is one of admissibility. As
such, Peru's objection here clearly goes to the competency of the Tribunal. In its own

51

submissions, Peru has accepted that competence and admissibility are “two sides of

one and the same conceptual coin.””®

250. In view of the foregoing, and in light of the Tribunal's finding above that on a proper
interpretation of Treaty Article 10.20.4 objections relating to the Tribunal's competence
fall outside the mandatory scope of Article 10.20.4, the Tribunal declines to hear Peru's
competence objections in the Article 10.20.4 Phase of these proceedings. Peru may
bring its competency objections later in these proceedings in accordance with the
timetable agreed in Annex A of Procedural Order No. 1.

251. There remains the question of Peru's preliminary objection based on the Claimant's
alleged failure to state a claim for breach of the investment agreement (what the
Claimant has characterized as preliminary objection (5)).

252. Both Parties agree that this objection properly falls within the scope of Article 10.20.4.
Accordingly, the Tribunal decides that this objection shall be briefed and heard as a
preliminary objection in the Article 10.20.4 Phase of these proceedings in accordance
with a timetable to be set by the Tribunal following further submissions from the Parties.

E. Summary and Decisions

253. The Procedural Schedule annexed to Procedural Order No. 1 requires the Tribunal to
make a preliminary decision (or full or partial deferral of decision) on the Respondent's
preliminary objections after hearing from the Parties.

254. Having carefully considered all of the submissions of both Parties, the Tribunal decides
that on a proper interpretation of the Treaty provisions the Respondent's objections as
to the Tribunal's competence fall outside the scope of Article 10.20.4.

255. In view of the above, only one of the various preliminary objections noticed by the
Respondent, namely, the Claimant's alleged failure to state a claim for breach of the
investment agreement, will be considered and decided in the Article 10.20.4 Phase of
these proceedings.

3 Respondent's Submission, October 4, 2014, at 8, citing with approval Veijo Heiskanen, Menage A Trois?
isdictic issibility and Co In Treaty itration, ICSID Review (2013), at 13.

52

256.

257.

258.

Vi.

259.

The Respondent's other preliminary objections, which relate to competence, may be
brought by the Respondent together with its Counter-Memorial on Liability in
accordance with the timetable set out in Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1.

In order to fix the timetable for the Article 10.20.4 Phase, the Parties are directed to file
their submissions on the scheduling implications of this Decision within fourteen (14)
days from the date hereof.

COSTS

The Tribunal decides to make no order as to costs at this stage under Article 10.20.6 of
the Treaty but to reserve its decision to the final stage of these arbitration proceedings.

OTHER MATTERS

As to all other matters, the Tribunal retains its full power to decide any further matters in
these arbitration proceedings, whether by order, decision or award.

Made in Paris, France

Date: December 18, 2014

53

2 Aaa

 

The Honorable L. Yves Fortler, CC, QC. Mr. Toby T, Landau, QC
Arbitrator Arbitrator

 

bee

Dr. Michael J. Moser
Presiding Arbitrator

