KING & Sp ALDING King & Spalding LLP

1185 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10036-4003
Tel: +1 212 556 2100

Fax: +1 212 556 2222
www.kslaw.com

Edward G. Kehoe

Partner

Direct Dial: +1 212 556 2246
Direct Fax: +1 212 556 2222
ekehoe @kslaw.com

June 10, 2015
VIA EMAIL

Dr. Michael J. Moser

Mr. Toby L. Landau QC
Hon. L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC
c/o Ms. Natali Sequeira

ICSID — The World Bank Group
MSN J2-200

1818 H Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433

Re: The Renco Group, Inc. v. The Republic of Peru
Dear Members of the Tribunal:

Renco respectfully requests that the Tribunal (i) reinstate that portion of its December 18,
2014 Decision on the scope of Article 10.20(4) which required Peru to bring its preliminary
objections on the Tribunal’s competence together with its Counter-Memorial on Liability in
accordance the timetable set out in Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1, and in doing so, (ii)
reconsider that portion of its June 2, 2015 Decision Regarding Respondent's Requests for Relief,
in which the Tribunal reversed its prior ruling with respect to Respondent's jurisdictional
“waiver” objection.

L Summary Overview

On December 18, 2014, the Tribunal issued its Decision on the Scope of Article 10.20.4
(the “Scope Decision”) in which the Tribunal noted that Respondent sought to bring its
jurisdictional objections as a preliminary questions pursuant to Article 10.20.4 of the Treaty, or
alternatively, pursuant to Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules. (see, e.g., Scope Decision,
85: "[T]he Respondent requests that the Tribunal determine all of its preliminary objections
under the authority granted to it by Article 10.20(4) of the Treaty or, alternatively, pursuant to
Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.").

Members of the Tribunal
June 10, 2015
Page 2

As addressed in greater detail below, the Tribunal properly rejected Respondent's
applications and directed Respondent to bring any competence objections together with its
Counter-Memorial on Liability. (Scope Decision, (256: “[T]he Respondent’s other preliminary
objections, which related to competence, may be brought by the Respondent together with its
Counter-Memorial on Liability in accordance with the timetable set out in Annex A to
Procedural Order No. 1.”) The Tribunal made this ruling after confirming that it had
considered each and every issue and argument that the Parties made (Scope Decision, {| 239:
“[T]he Parties have raised a number of ancillary issues and arguments in their written
submission. For the avoidance of doubt, all of these issues and arguments have been carefully
considered by the Tribunal in reaching its decisions even if each and every one has not been
specifically referred to herein.”) In directing Peru to bring any competence objections with its
Counter-Memorial on Liability, the Tribunal was appropriately following the agreement that the
Parties had reached earlier, which they reflected in Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1 that the
Tribunal accepted and endorsed. This agreement was reached through substantial compromise
by both Parties.

Part of the compromise resulting in the agreed-upon schedule and procedure set forth in
Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1 was that Renco agreed to file its Memorial and
accompanying witness statements and expert reports at an early stage of the case (which it did on
February 20, 2014 pursuant to the schedule set forth in the Procedural Order); in return, Peru
abandoned its right to bring competence objections as preliminary questions unless those
competence objections could be brought pursuant to the Article 10.20.4 process. This is why in
its Scope Decision, after finding that Peru's competence objections (including waiver) did not
fall within the ambit of Article 10.20(4), the Tribunal rejected Peru’s alternative request to have
its competence objections decided as a preliminary question under Article 23(3) of the
UNCITRAL Rules. It would have been patently unfair to bifurcate competence questions and
decide them as preliminary issues under Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules, when the Parties
and Tribunal had already agreed that competence objections would not be addressed as
preliminary questions unless they fell within the ambit of Article 10.20(4), as reflected in Annex
A to Procedural order No. 1. It was improper for the Respondent to even make the request in
light of the agreement reflected in Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1.

Notwithstanding the Tribunal’s ruling in the Scope Decision, by letter dated April 29,
2015, Respondent petitioned the Tribunal, again, to take up Respondent’s competence objection
relating to waiver as a preliminary objection under Article 23 of the UNCITRAL Rules.
Importantly, Respondent argued, and apparently caused the Tribunal to believe, that the Tribunal
“did not address Peru’s alternative request under Article 23(3)” (Respondent’s April 29, 2015
letter, p. 6), when in fact it had. Peru also recycled the waiver arguments it made throughout the
lengthy 10.20(4) phase, which were all considered and rejected by the Tribunal in the Scope
Decision. As explained more fully below, Peru also sought to create a false sense of urgency by
referencing a purported new event that, in reality, is no such thing.

In its June 2, 2015 Decision, based on Respondent's potentially misleading, and certainly
inaccurate, submission, the Tribunal ordered the Parties to address Respondent's waiver
objection as a preliminary question pursuant to Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules, on a

Members of the Tribunal
June 10, 2015
Page 3

separate timetable. (June 2, 2015 Decision, { 73). In doing so, the Tribunal stated, “Peru is
invited to note that there will be cost consequences in the event Peru's application does not
succeed.” (Jd. at {| 74). With great respect, an award of costs is not sufficient to overcome the
Tribunal’s reversal of its Scope Decision on this issue. This goes to the issues of prejudice,
fundamental fairness, and the integrity of these arbitral proceedings.

 

For these reasons, Claimant respectfully requests that the Tribunal reinstate its Scope
Decision, which directed Peru to bring any competence objections with its Counter-Memorial on
Liability per Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1, and in so doing, reconsider that portion of its
June 2, 2015 Decision requiring the Parties to establish a preliminary schedule to brief
Respondent's competence objection relating to waiver as a preliminary matter. If Respondent
wishes to bring that objection in these proceedings, it should be directed to do so with its
Counter-Memorial on Liability, as the Parties agreed, as Procedural Order No. | reflects, and as
the Tribunal originally directed in its Scope Decision.

IL. The Parties Agreed that Peru Will Bring its Competence Objections, if any, with its
Counter-Memorial on Liability, and not as a Preliminary Question as Reflected in
Procedural Order No. 1

Recalling the discussion that led to the agreement memorialized in Procedural Order No.
1 is important because it puts into context why the Tribunal's decision to reverse its Scope
Decision concerning Respondent's jurisdictional waiver objection is so unfair to Claimant. At
the First Procedural Meeting in London on July 18, 2013, which laid the foundation for
Procedural Order No. 1 that followed shortly thereafter, Peru made it clear that it would not seek
to bifurcate the jurisdictional phase of the case from the merits. Claimant had invited such a
process, but Respondent rejected it and the Parties went off on a different direction that included
Claimant instead filing its Memorial and related submissions early in the case, with confidence
that jurisdictional objections would be addressed in the merits stage unless the competence
objection fell within the mandatory ambit of Treaty Article 10.20(4). For example, the following
exchanges occurred at the hearing, demonstrating that Respondent stated that it had relinquished
the right to seek bifurcation of the jurisdictional and liability phases of the case, and this formed
part of the basis for the agreement the Parties thereafter reached as reflected in Annex A to
Procedural Order No. 1.

In response to a question on this topic by the Honorable Mr. Fortier, counsel for Peru
stated:

Ms. MENAKER: What I should have said is we are not
seeking to have a separate phase, two
separate jurisdictional phases,
bifurcation, in other words. But it is
always the case, and the treaty makes very
clear, that you are not precluded from
raising additional objections, even if they go

Members of the Tribunal
June 10, 2015
Page 4

to jurisdiction, because the scope of 10.20.4
is itself so limited. (Transcript, p. 143-144)

Later in the hearing, counsel for Peru stated:

MR. HAMILTON: [Interposing] And just to underscore, it was
a significant effort, on Respondent’s part,
that we gave up what was in the first
version that went to the tribunal, which was
Article 10.20.4 plus reserving the
possibility that we may seek bifurcation.

MR Moser: Yes.

MR HAMILTON: And that was a long and extensive process
that we went through, on our end, with all
relevant participants, to reach the decision
to abandon that possibility, which we have
done. And is reflected in the schedule.
(Transcript, p. 152)

And further:

MR. HAMILTON: [...] The second thing was the possibility of
bifurcation. The further possibility, as
would not be uncommon, that in a counter
memorial, we would raise a jurisdictional
objection and then seek bifurcation. In other
words, the first draft that went to you, left —
we left open to ourselves — Peru left open to
itself, to be more precise, because these
positions depend on various consultations,
the scenario of 10.20.4, which obviously is
a right that Peru has, and the possibility of
seeking bifurcation at the time of the counter
memorial, with respect to other types of
issues. We have abandoned that. That
was a long process that we have been
through over the past three weeks to get to
that point. (Transcript, p. 164-65)

Accordingly, Annex A of Procedural Order No. | states that after the Tribunal’s Decision
on any Article 10.20(4) submission, the next pleading due would be “Respondent’s Counter-
Memorial on Liability (including any counter-claims and/or jurisdictional objections).” In
the period leading to the issuance of the Procedural Order, Renco offered to bifurcate the

Members of the Tribunal
June 10, 2015
Page 5

proceedings between jurisdiction and liability, but Peru instead agreed that it would bring any
jurisdictional objections with the merits. This agreement was the subject of extensive discussion
and eventual agreement at the First Procedural Meeting, and the Tribunal was privy to that
agreement, memorializing it through its issuance of Procedural Order No. 1 and Annex A
thereto.

Procedural Order No. 1 (including its Annex A) is entitled to particular deference, not
least because it forms part of the arbitral procedure agreed to by the Parties [see New York
Convention, art. V(1)(d)], upon which Claimant relied in filing its full Memorial early in the
case.

Ill. The Tribunal's Scope Decision Considered Peru's Request for Bifurcation of
competence objections Under Article 23 of the UNCITRAL Rules

In contravention of its statements at the procedural hearing and agreement reflected in
Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1, Peru advanced an alternative argument during the 10.20(4)
scope phase of this arbitration that asked the Tribunal to address Peru's jurisdictional waiver
argument as a preliminary question through its discretionary authority under UNCITRAL Rule
Article 23(3).

For example, in its October 3, 2014 submission, Respondent stated:

For the avoidance of any doubt, Peru thus request that the
Tribunal determine to decide all of the preliminary objections that
Peru has notified under the authority granted it by Article 10.20.4
of the Treaty or, alternatively, under its authority pursuant to
Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. Indeed,
determining these threshold questions now may serve to resolve
certain claims outright — or, in the alternative, to clarify the scope
of issues to be decided at a later stage. Delaying resolution of any
of the objections will unduly prolong this already drawn-out
proceeding, and aggravate the complexity of the dispute. Further
to the observations in the Submission, reasons of economy and
efficiency weigh heavily in favor of hearing all of the objections
during the preliminary phase. (at 147)

In its Article 10.20(4) scope submissions, Claimant argued against bifurcation of
jurisdictional objections from the merits under UNCITRAL Article 23(3), based on the
agreement that the Parties had reached, as reflected in Annex A to Procedural order No. 1, noting
that Claimant would not have agreed to the procedural schedule reflected in Annex A if
Respondent were permitted to bring competence objections outside the mandatory scope of
Article 10.20(4) of the Treaty. And the Tribunal noted Claimant's position in its Scope
Decision:

Members of the Tribunal
June 10, 2015
Page 6

The Claimant asserts that the Parties have agreed, and the Tribunal
has endorsed through Procedural Order No. | that to the extent one
or more of the Respondent’s proposed Article 10.20.4 objections
[including its waiver objection] fall outside the mandatory scope of
Article 10.20.4, the Tribunal will not hear such objection(s) in this
preliminary phase. Instead, the Respondent, should it wish to
bring objections outside the scope of 10.20.4, would have to
pursue them later in these proceedings pursuant to the schedule
established by Annex A of Procedural Order No. 1. The Claimant
states that it would not have agreed to the Procedural Schedule
adopted in Procedural Order No. 1 if the Respondent were
permitted to bring preliminary objections outside the mandatory
scope of Article 10.20.4, during the 10.20.4 Phase of the
proceedings. (Scope Decision, 96)

The Tribunal went on to specifically consider Respondent's alternative request for
bifurcation of jurisdictional objections under Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules, and rightly
denied it:

[T]he Respondent requests that the Tribunal determine all of its
preliminary objections under the authority granted to it by Article
10.20.4 of the Treaty or, alternatively, pursuant to Article 23(3)
of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. (Scope Decision, 85)

[T]he Parties have raised a number of ancillary issues and
arguments in their written submission. For the avoidance of doubt,
all of these issues and arguments have been carefully
considered by the Tribunal in reaching its decisions even if
each and every one has not been specifically referred to herein.
(Scope Decision, 239)

[T]he Respondent’s other preliminary objections, which related to
competence, may be brought by the Respondent together with its
Counter-Memorial on Liability in accordance with the
timetable set out in Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1. (Scope
Decision, 256)

Thus, after consideration of both Parties’ extensive submissions, which were prepared at
great cost — both in time and expense — the Tribunal denied Peru’s request to hear Peru’s waiver
objection as a preliminary matter and ordered that all competence objections “be brought by the
Respondent together with its Counter-Memorial on Liability in accordance with the timetable set
out in Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1.”

Under French law, the law of the seat of this arbitration, the Scope Decision may be
considered an award that has, in its definitive disposition of Peru’s request that the Tribunal

Members of the Tribunal
June 10, 2015
Page 7

address Peru’s waiver objection as a preliminary matter, acquired either the status of res judicata
or is at least the law of the case binding upon the Parties as well as the Tribunal itself at all
subsequent phases of these proceedings (see Code de procédure civile (édition 2012, Dalloz),
Ancien art. 1472, p. 1059 (“La qualification de sentence n’est pas fonction des termes retenus par
l’arbitre ou les parties”).

Dissatisfied with the Tribunal’s Scope Decision, Peru launched an apoplectic series of
letters, beginning with its April 29, 2015 demand that the Tribunal decide its waiver objection as
a preliminary matter pursuant to Article 23(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules, describing the issue as
urgent (which it is not), and then erroneously informing the Tribunal that it “did not address
Peru’s alternative request under Article 23(3)” in the Scope Decision (Respondent’s April 29,
2015 letter, p. 6). As demonstrated above, however, the Tribunal did consider and address
Respondent's alternative argument to bifurcate jurisdictional issues and hear them as preliminary
questions under UNCITRAL Rule 23, and properly denied it.

Even without regard to legal principles of res judicata and law of the case, fundamental
notions of fairness and due process should cause the Tribunal to stand by its original
determination in the Scope Decision, and not allow Respondent's hyperbolic, baseless claims of
"urgency" and questionable briefing strategy to cause the Tribunal to reverse itself and render a
new decision that is egregiously unfair to Claimant. The Tribunal is respectfully reminded that,
prior to its June 2, 2015 Decision, these proceedings were already trifurcated (10.20(4) phase;
liability and jurisdiction phase and quantum phase). With this new decision, the Tribunal would
have the Parties undergo four stages of proceedings.

IV. The Alleged New Fact, Which Appears to be the Sole Reason for the Tribunal’s June
2, 2015 Decision Reversing its Scope Decision, Is Not a New Fact and Does Not
Change the Status Quo

Even assuming arguendo that the Tribunal were inclined to derogate from the Parties’
agreement and Procedural Order No. 1, and that the Scope Decision does not form part of the
law of the case in respect of the waiver objection, the Tribunal should reverse its Scope Decision
only for very good reasons, and Claimant is entitled to know what those reasons are. The only
new circumstance that has arisen since the Tribunal’s Scope Decision, the single act that Peru
states is an “aggravation of the dispute” and part of the supposed “ongoing violations of the
Treaty”, is the following: “[s]pecifically, Peru has recently become aware that, on 26 March
2015, Renco’s subsidiary DRC requested a ruling from the Supreme Court of Peru regarding a
cassation appeal in the administrative law action 368-2012 (“Action 368-2012”), filed in
violation of the Treaty.” (Respondent’s April 29, 2015 letter, p. 4)

A simple and routine filing in a local litigation that has been ongoing for years cannot be
considered sufficient reason to overturn a point that was so vigorously argued for over one year,
and decided by this Tribunal just a few months ago. Appended to this letter is the entirety of the
March 26, 2015 request that Peru complains of. It is a bare, half-page letter that merely seeks the
resolution of a case that was already pending at the Peruvian Supreme Court at the time the
Scope Decision was rendered, and which the Tribunal was aware of through the Parties’

Members of the Tribunal
June 10, 2015
Page 8

briefing. Sending letters of this nature is entirely routine in cases pending before the Peruvian
Supreme Court, where cases ripe for decision sometimes take many months, even years, to
decide. The Tribunal is invited to review the appended letter, and Renco has no doubt that it will
conclude that this could not possibly be a reason to disturb the Scope Decision.

Furthermore, while reserving all of Claimant’s substantive arguments on the waiver
issue, the following points must be made in respect of the cassation appeal itself: first, the
original case was filed on December 28, 2010 — almost five years ago, and is thus by no means
an aggravation of the status quo. Peru has known about these bankruptcy matters involving Doe
Run Peru Ltda. (“DRP”), as debtor, and Doe Run Cayman Ltd. (“DRC”), as creditor, for years.
Accordingly, Peru’s feigning urgency or surprise is disingenuous. Second, the case was not
commenced by Renco, the Claimant in this arbitration, such that the Treaty’s waiver provision
would not even apply. Third, in any event, it is a defensive action by DRP, the debtor in
bankruptcy, to protect the bankruptcy estate, and DRCL, a creditor in that action, to protect its
bankruptcy credit. Fourth, even if this action was, quod non, a violation of Renco’s waiver
obligation, it would not dispose of the entirety of this arbitration, as any allegations related to
MEM’s assertion of a $160 million credit in the bankruptcy proceedings are readily severable
from the arbitration.

Vv. Conclusion

For all the foregoing reasons, Renco respectfully submits that the Tribunal’s December
18, 2015 Scope Decision in respect of Peru’s waiver objection be reinstated. In that regard,
Claimant respectfully requests that the Tribunal reconsider and reverse the portion of its June 2,
2015 Decision requiring full briefing on Peru’s objection that Renco violated the waiver
provisions of the Treaty, and reaffirm its previous ruling that such objection be brought by Peru
together with its Counter-Memorial on Liability in accordance with the timetable set out in
Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1. Any other result would be highly unfair and prejudicial to
Renco, and would violate fundamental tenets of due process.

Very truly yours,

Ep-Phe

Edward G. Kehoe
ce: Ms. Ruth Stackpool-Moore

Mr. Jonathan C. Hamilton

Ms. Andrea J. Menaker

Mr. Guillermo Aguilar-Alvarez
Mr. Henry G. Burnett

Mr. Thomas C. Childs

25782676

