INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.
In the arbitration proceeding between

THE ROMPETROL GROUP N.V.
Claimant

and

ROMANIA
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3

 

Award

 

Members of the Tribunal:
Sir Franklin Berman, KCMG, QC, President
Mr. Donald Francis Donovan, Esq.
The Honourable Marc Lalonde PC, OC, QC

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Ms. Aurélia Antonietti

Representing the Claimant: Representing the Respondent:
Mr. Barton Legum Mr. Michael E. Schneider
Ms. Ioana Petculescu Dr. Veijo Heiskanen
Dentons, Paris Mr. Matthias Scherer

Lalive, Geneva
and
and
Mr. George Burn
Dentons, London Dr. Victor Tanasescu
Ms. Carina Tanasescu
Tanasescu & Asociatii, Bucharest

and
Dr. Crenguta Leaua

Mr. Marius Grigorescu
Leaua & Asociatii, Bucharest

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 6 May 2013

TABLE OF CONTENTS

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND... 5
Al. Request for Arbitration and Notice of Registration 5
A2. Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal. 6
A3. The First Session 6
A4. Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility......0.0.00c cece 6
AS. Written submissions on the Merits .........c.cccccccsessesceseseeeseeeseeesteneaneneas 7
A6. Requests for Production of Document ............cccceceeee teeta 7
AT. Proposal for disqualification of a counsel by the Respondent ................ 8
A8. The Hearing on the Mevits......0.0..ccceecceeeceeeee eee eeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeteneeees 8
AQ. Post-Hearing submissions and correspondence ............c.ccceseeseseeseseeeee 10

B. THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND. ........c.ccccesesessesseeseeeeeeseeseeseesessssseneeneeseesee 12
Bl. Privatisation of Rompetrol S.A... eeeeeeeeceee eects tees eeneeeneeeeeeee 12
B2. Changes in structure and ownerShip...........0cccccseee eee eeeeeeeeneeeeeeee 13
B3. The Underlying Dispute 0.00.0... eee eseeeeeeneneeeeeeeeneneeees 13

C. THE ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES .........:cscssesseessessesseeseeseesessnssseseeseeseesee 14
Cl. Claimant’s arguments ......0...cc cece cece ee eeneeeeeeeeeeeteceteteseneneneneeaeaeee 15

C1.A. The Request for Arbitration ..0...0.c ccc cececenenee eee tees teeeeeeeneneeaeeeee 15
C1.B. Memorial on the Merits ...........ccccccscsceessseeeseeesceseseeseseesesnensaneneaneneas 20
CL.C. Claimant’s Reply 24
C2. Respondent’s ar; 31
C2.A. Respondent’s Answer to the Request for Arbitration «0.0.0... 31
C2.B. The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial (Statement of Defence)............. 33
C2.C. The Respondent’s Rejoinder 0... cece ceeeseneseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeneneeeeeeee 40

D. THE HEARING 44

D1. Opening S 44
D1.A. Claimant 44
D1.B. Respondent 46

D2. Fact Witnesses 48
D2.A. Claimant’s Witnesses ...........cccccccccccsseessseeeseeseseeseseessseeseseesesnesestensseeneas 48
D2.B. Respondent’s Witnesses ..........c cece eeeeseseeseeseeeeetseeteeeeeseneeeaeaeee 52

D3. Expert Witnesses 53
D3.1. Legal Expert: 53

D3.1.A. Claimant 53

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

D3.1.B. Respondent ........c cece eee ee eeeeneneeeeeesesceesteeeeeeeneneeeeiees 54

D3.2. Damages Experts 56

D3.2.A. Claimant 57
D3.2.B. Respondent... ccc ccc cece cece eeneeseeeeesesestetsteseteseneneneneaees 58
D4. Closing S 61

D4.A. Claimant 61

D4.B. Respondent 63

D4.C. The Tribunal 65
POST-HEARING SUBMISSIONS ..........sccscessessesssessesessesseeseeseesessssnsenseneeseenese 66
El. Claimant 66

E1.A. Claimant’s First Post-Hearing Brief.........000ccccc cece eeeeeeneeeeeeee 66

E1.B. Claimant’s Answer to the Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief.

E2. Respondent 71

E2.A. Respondent’s First Post-Hearing Brief.

E2.B. Respondent’s Answer to Claimant’s First Post-Hearing Brief ............. 75
COSTS SUBMISSIONS 716
Fl. Claimant’s Costs SUBMISSIONS ...........0.cccsceseesesteteseeestesestesestesesteneseenees 76
F2. Respondent’s Costs Submissions ...........00ccceecseseee eset eeeeeeneneneeneee 77
THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS ..........0..cescescesessesseesseseeseeseeseeseeseessssensenseneeneesee 71
Part I: PREMINARY ISSUES...

A. — The inadmissibility objection ....0.0.. ccc eee cece teeeeeteneeeeeeeee 81

B. Local remedies 83

Cc. The European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)... 85

D. Local law 88

E. Burden and standard Of proof ...........c.ccescsseseeseseesesteeseesestesesteseseeseseeness 90

F. Damage 96
THE INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF THE BIT ............0:cc00 98
Part II.A: THE FACTUAL EVIDENCE ...........csscssesssessesesseeseesesseeseseeneeseeneesee 104

(a) | The Rompetrol and Petromidia privatisations......0.0.0.00ceeeeeee 104

(b) | The Libyan receivable

 

 

(c) The Talpes report.
(d) The instigation of the criminal investigations (the Talpes report) ...... 110

(e) The alleged procedural irregularities in the criminal investigations ... 120

ecrAss

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(f) | The GPO (DIICOT) prosecutors .
Part II.B: SPECIFIC FACTUAL ALLEGATIONS .........c:cecesessesseessesneeeeseesee 132
(g) | The attachment of RRC shares uu... cence
(h) The arrest and attempted imprisonment of Messrs. Patriciu and
Stephenson 134
(i) The PNA and GPO press releases ...........cccccese eee eeeeeeneseteteeeeeeetees 136
(Gj) The interception of Mr. Patriciu’s and/or RRC’s telephone
conversations 138
(k) | The requests for information from bankS «0.0.0.0... cece 141
() The tax CONIOIS 2.0... eeceeceseseseeseseeeeeeseseeeeseaeeescseeeeeseeeeesaeeeeeeaeeeeeeaeenees 143
Ss y 145
LOSS AND DAMAGE 151
DIRECT DAMAGE AND MORAL (REPUTATIONAL) DAMAGE ............. 157
OTHER RELIEF 160
COSTS 161
. CONCLUSIONS 162

 

Al

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

Request for Arbitration and Notice of Registration

On 20 December 2005, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID”) received a request for arbitration dated 14 December 2005 (“the Request”) from
The Rompetrol Group N.V. (“TRG” or “the Claimant”) against the Republic of Romania

(“Romania” or “the Respondent”).

TRG was described in the Request as a company incorporated on 4 November 1999 as a
private limited liability company in The Netherlands and registered on 17 November 1999 in
the commercial register of the Chamber of Commerce Rotterdam as No. 24297754. On
18 April 2000, the company changed its name from Waverton B.V. to The Rompetrol Group
B.V. and, on 28 May 2002, it changed its legal form from a private limited liability company
(B.V.) to a public limited liability company (N.V.).

The Request relates to a dispute arising from the Claimant’s investment in the Romanian oil
sector and, in particular, the purchase of shares by the Claimant in Rompetrol Rafinare S.A.
(“RRC”), a privatised Romanian company which owns and operates an oil refinery and
petrochemical complex. The Claimant alleges that the Romanian government ordered
‘extraordinary and unreasonable’ investigations of RRC and its management, as well as
‘discriminatory and arbitrary’ treatment of the company, which according to the Claimant
amount to violations of the Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments between the Kingdom of The Netherlands and Romania which came into force on
1 February 1995 (“the BIT” or “the Treaty”). The Request invokes the ICSID arbitration

provisions in the Treaty.

On 14 February 2006, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID sent the Claimant and the
Respondent a Notice of Registration in accordance with Article 36(3) of the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (“ICSID

Convention” or “Convention”).

In issuing the Notice, the Acting Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute
an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Rule 7(d) of the Centre’s Rules of

Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings.

A2.

A3.

Ad.

Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal

As recalled in the Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary Objections on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility of 18 April 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal was constituted on 20 December 2006, in
accordance with Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 3 of the Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules”). Its members are
Mr. Donald Francis Donovan, Esq., a national of the United States of America, appointed by
the Claimant, the Honourable Marc Lalonde PC, OC, QC, a national of Canada, appointed by
the Respondent, and Sir Franklin Berman KCMG, QC, a national of the United Kingdom,

appointed by the co-arbitrators, as President.

Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson, Counsel, ICSID, was designated to serve as Secretary of the
Tribunal. She was subsequently replaced by Mr. Marat Umerov, Consultant, ICSID, and
Ms. Aurélia Antonietti, Senior Counsel, ICSID.

The First Session

The first session of the Tribunal was held on 28 February 2007 at the World Bank in Paris,
France. At the session the Parties expressed their agreement that the Tribunal had been
properly constituted in accordance with the relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention and
the Institution Rules. The Parties also agreed upon a number of procedural matters reflected in

written minutes signed by the President and the Secretary of the Tribunal.

At the first session, it was agreed that the proceedings on the merits would be suspended in
accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(3) to enable the objections to be dealt with in a
preliminary phase of the proceedings. It was agreed that the preliminary phase of the
proceedings would not be confined to a narrow interpretation of the term ‘jurisdiction’ but
would include all the objections of a preliminary character that were contained in the Answer
filed by the Respondent on 22 December 2006, whether the objection related strictly to

jurisdiction, or to competence or admissibility.

Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

Each Party filed its written pleadings for the preliminary phase of the proceeding pursuant to
the procedural calendar agreed at the first session and further to a hearing on jurisdiction on 25
and 26 September 2007, the Tribunal rendered a Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary

6

AS.

12.

A6

Objections on Jurisdiction and Admissibility on 18 April 2008 (“Decision on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility”). A copy of the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility is

appended to the present Award as an integral part of it.

In its Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of 18 April 2008, the Tribunal decided as

follows:

a. The Respondent’s jurisdictional objection is dismissed.

b. The Respondent’s admissibility objection (to the extent that it retains its force in
the light of the Pleadings as they develop) is joined to the merits.

c. The Respondent’s abuse of process objection is not one which the Tribunal needs
to entertain at this stage of the proceedings.

d._ The allocation of the costs of this preliminary phase of the arbitration is reserved

for later.

Written submissions on the Merits

The schedule for the Parties’ submissions on the merits was as follows:

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits (“Statement of Claims”) on 8 December 2008;
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial (“Statement of Defence”) on 24 July 2009;
Claimant’s Reply on 12 November 2009; and

Respondent’s Rejoinder on 31 March 2010.

These submissions are analysed in more details under paragraphs 48 et seq. below.

Requests for Production of Documents

TRG filed a request for the production of documents on 17 August 2009. Further to exchanges
of submissions, the Tribunal ruled on the issue of production of documents in a letter of
29 October 2009 attaching a Redfern Schedule and in its Procedural Order No. 1 dated
3 November 2009.

By letter of 4 November 2009, Romania requested the Tribunal to clarify its understanding of

the scope of the production of documents ordered by Procedural Order of 3 November 2009

regarding the Claimant’s Request No. 7. On 17 November 2009, the Tribunal gave further

clarification.

15. On 4 December 2009, TRG requested the Tribunal to order the Respondent to produce
documents relating to the Claimant’s document Requests Nos. 1, 2 and 7, and to draw an
adverse inference in case the Respondent failed to do so. The Tribunal ruled on the Claimant’s

request in its Procedural Order No. 2 dated 21 January 2010.

A7. Proposal for disqualification of a counsel by the Respondent

16. By letter dated 21 July 2009, the Claimant’s Counsel, Salans & Associés (Salans), currently
Dentons, Paris office, informed the Centre that the legal representation of the Claimant would

from then on be in the hands of Mr. Barton Legum and two of his colleagues at the firm.

17. On 31 July 2009, the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal, stating that Mr. Legum and the
Member of the Tribunal appointed by the Claimant had until recently been members of the
same law firm, and demanded that the Claimant make “full disclosure of all relations, past and
present, between both Mr. Legum and any other member of the firm of Claimant’s counsel”!

with the member of the Tribunal in question.

18. Having heard both Parties in writing, the Tribunal ruled on 14 January 2010 on the

Respondent’s application to disqualify Mr. Barton Legum and decided:

In sum, the Tribunal can find in the circumstances before it no basis for any suggestion that it
should interfere in the choice by Claimant of its counsel for these proceedings, or indeed for
any suggestion that the preservation of the integrity of these proceedings requires it to
consider doing so. The Respondent’s application is accordingly denied?

A8. The Hearing on the Merits

19. The President of the Tribunal held a pre-hearing conference with the Parties by telephone on
14 April 2010 to discuss the details of the organization of the hearing on the merits, which

were embodied in minutes circulated by the Secretary on 27 April 2010.

' Respondent’s letter to the Tribunal, 3 July 2009, p. 2.
> Decision of the Tribunal on the Participation of Counsel, 14 January 2010, { 27.

8

20.

21.

22.

The hearing on the merits was held at the World Bank in Paris from 3 May 2010 to 10 May
2010.

The Parties were represented as follows:

Claimant
Mr. Jeffrey Hertzfeld, Special counsel;
Mr. Barton Legum, Salans;
Mr. George Burn, Salans;
Mr. William Kirtley, Salans;
Mr. Viorel Dinu, Salans;
Ms. Anca Vatasoiu, Salans;
Mr. Gabriel Albu, Local counsel for Salans;
Mr. Obie Moore, Special counsel to The Rompetrol Group N.V.;
Mr. Alexey Golovin, The Rompetrol Group N.V.

Respondent
Mr. Michael E. Schneider, LALIVE Attorneys-at-law;
Dr. Matthias Scherer, LALIVE Attorneys-at-law;
Dr. Veijo Heiskanen, LALIVE Attorneys-at-law;
Mr. Antoine Romanetti, LALIVE Attorneys-at-law;
Mr. Sam Moss, LALIVE Attorneys-at-law;
Mr. Jaime Gallego, LALIVE Attorneys-at-law;
Mr. David Bonifacio, LALIVE Attorneys-at-law;
Ms. Anne-Marie Loong, LALIVE Attorneys-at-law;
Dr. Victor Tanasescu, Tanasescu & Asociatii Law Firm;
Dr. Crenguta Leaua, Leaua & Asociatii Law Firm;
Ms. Carina Tanasescu, Tanasescu & Asociatii Law Firm;

Mr. Marius Grigorescu, Leaua & Asociatii Law Firm.

After the opening arguments, the examination of witnesses and experts started with the

following witnesses for the Claimant:

Mr. George Philip Stephenson, former TRG officer;
Mr. Dan Costache Patriciu, former TRG CEO;

23.

AY.

24.

25.

Mr. Sorin Rosca Stanescu, journalist;
Mr. Dan Ioan Popescu, former Minister of the Economy;
Mr. Ovidiu Budusan, criminal defense counsel and former prosecutor;

Mr. Karim Benabderrazik, the former Managing Director of Vector AG, TRG’s
international trading arm.

And two witnesses for the Respondent:
Ms. Cecilia Morariu, spokesperson for the Superior Council of Magistracy;

Ms. Valeria Nistor, legal counsel — General Legal Directorate of the National Agency
for Fiscal Administration.

These witnesses were followed by the examination and cross-examination of the Claimant’s
legal experts:
Professor Corneliu-Liviu Popescu, Romanian Public and Constitutional Law expert;

Mr. Alexandru Boroi (by video conference on May 6, 2010), Romanian Criminal Law
expert.

And then of the Respondent’s legal experts:
Dr. Lucian Mihai, former President of the Constitutional Court of Romania;

Dr. Hans-Heiner Kiihne, Expert on criminal procedure and human right guarantees.

As far as damages experts are concerned, Messrs. Chudozie Okongwu and Timothy McKenna,
NERA, were heard on behalf of the Claimant and Messrs. James Dow and Carlos Lapuerta,
The Brattle Group, Ltd, were heard on behalf of the Respondent. On 8 May 2010, the Tribunal

heard the damages experts in conference.

The closing arguments were presented by both Parties on 10 May 2010.

Post-Hearing submissions and correspondence

In a letter dated 21 May 2010, the Secretary of the Tribunal informed the Parties of the
schedule to be followed for the rest of the proceeding. The schedule was subsequently revised
on 16 July 2010, 28 July 2010, 2 September 2010 and 7 September 2010 to accommodate

requests emanating from the Parties.

Ultimately the schedule for the Parties’ post-hearing written submissions was therefore as

follows:

26.

27.

28.

29.

Parties’ simultaneous Post-Hearing Briefs on 4 August 2010;
Parties’ simultaneous answer to Post-Hearing Briefs on 27 September 2010;
Parties’ Statements of Costs on 8 October 2010; and

Parties’ comments on the Statements of Costs on 22 October 2010.

On 4 August 2010, the Parties filed their first round of post-hearing pleadings. On 13 August
2010, Romania submitted a letter alleging that TRG introduced in its Post-Hearing Brief ‘new
evidence,’ namely a new method of quantification, asking the Tribunal to exclude the new
material. On 27 August 2010, TRG contested Romania’s arguments affirming that no new
evidence was filed in their Post-Hearing submission by explaining the methodology applied in
it and they suggested an extension of four weeks to file the second round of the Post-Hearing
submissions. Further to another exchange on this topic, the Tribunal ruled on this issue by
letter of 2 September 2010 deciding that no new evidence was to be accepted, unless otherwise

required by the Tribunal.

The Claimant submitted its Statement of Costs on 8 October 2010 and the Respondent on
9 October 2010. They were followed by each Party’s observations on the other Party’s

Statement of Costs, and a further round of comments.

The Tribunal issued directions on 20 September 2010 and on 6 September 2011 indicating that
it did not wish to receive any further submissions from the Parties without leave having been

sought and granted in advance.

On 17 August 2011, the Claimant applied for leave to submit the statement of the reasons of
the High Court of Cassation and Justice for a decision it rendered on 18 February 2011
regarding the wiretapping of TRG’s former CEO. By letter of 24 August 2011, the
Respondent objected to this application. By letter of 6 September 2011, the Tribunal ruled that
“the document which the Claimant now seeks leave to admit contains the statement of the High
Court of Cassation and Justice’s reasons for declining to review a decision of the Court of
Appeals that has been commented on extensively by both Parties in the course of argument.
Given that the judgment of the Court of Appeals is already part of the record of the
Arbitration, the Tribunal is of the view that it should not exclude from consideration the
decision of a higher court that forms part of the process of appeal or review of that judgment.”
The Tribunal invited both Parties to agree on which parts of the decision were relevant and to

submit an agreed translation. In the absence of agreement, the Claimant in due course

11

30.

31.

32.

B1.

33.

34.

submitted into the record the full text of the decision on 21 October 2011 in a translation that

incorporated the Respondent’s comments.

On 26 June 2012, the Respondent filed with the Tribunal a decision of the European Court of
Human Rights (“ECHR”) rendered on 17 January 2012 in the case of Dan Costache Patriciu v.
Romania. The Tribunal indicated that it was reluctant to admit further argument at such a late
stage but invited the Respondent to make a reasoned request to submit the decision following
which the Claimant would have the opportunity to comment. On 5 July 2012, the Respondent
applied for formal leave to admit the above mentioned decision. The Claimant objected by
letter of 10 July 2012. By letter of 17 August 2012, the Centre informed the Parties that
“[h]aving considered with care the submissions of both Parties in the correspondence cited
above, the Tribunal is of the view that they do not make out a sufficient case for the admission
of the Decision into the record at this stage of the proceedings; the Respondent’s application is
therefore denied. The Tribunal will accordingly not take cognizance of any portions of the
correspondence referred to above (or the letter on the same subject from the Respondent dated

June 26, 2012) which relate to the substantive contents of the ECHR Decision.”

By letter of 10 September 2012, the Claimant applied for leave to submit a further decision
from the Bucharest Court, First Criminal Division on 28 August 2012, to which the
Respondent objected on 13 September 2012. Having received observations from both Parties
on 21 and 24 of September 2012, the Centre informed the Parties by letter of 25 September
2012 that the Tribunal was unable to find a strong showing of substantive relevance to the

issues for decision in the arbitration and denied the application.
By letter of 21 December 2012, the Parties were informed that the proceedings had been closed

in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 38.

THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND

Privatisation of Rompetrol S.A.

The general background to the present dispute lies in the extensive reconstruction of

Romania’s political and economic system during the past two decades.

Following the downfall of the Ceausescu regime in 1989, Romania engaged in a process of

attempting to build a market economy, inter alia through privatising companies which were

12

35.

B2.

36.

37.

B3.

38.

formerly owned by the State. In 1993, the second-largest State-owned company in Romania,
Rompetrol S.A., was privatised by way of a management and employee buy-out. In 1998, an
investor group led by Mr. Dan Costache Patriciu, a Romanian national, purchased a controlling

stake in Rompetrol S.A.

In parallel with its domestic economic reforms, Romania began developing greater political
and economic ties with the European Union in the early 1990s, which paved the way for
Romania’s eventual accession to membership of the European Union in January 2007

following extensive negotiations.

Changes in structure and ownership

The state of the shareholdings in Rompetrol S.A. and the changes that took place over time are
described in paragraphs 35-44 of the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility.
Paragraphs 45-47 of the Decision set out the detail of TRG’s acquisition of a controlling stake
in S.C. Petromidia Rafinare S.A. (“Petromidia’”) from the Romanian State Ownership Fund,
and the re-naming of Petromidia as Rompetrol Rafinare S.A. (“RRC”), which in the period

since 2003 was producing about 30% of Romania’s needs for refined petroleum products.

In August 2007, 75% of Mr. Patriciu’s holding in TRG was sold to KazMunaiGaz, the State-
owned energy company of Kazakhstan. As of late 2008, therefore, Mr. Patriciu was the 100%
shareholder in Rompetrol Holding S.A., which retained a 25% shareholding in TRG after the
sale to KazMunaiGaz. Some time thereafter, the name of Rompetrol Holding S.A. was
changed to DP Holding S.A., which however no longer owns any stake in TRG, as its
remaining 25% stake in TRG was sold to KazMunaiGaz in June 2009. From that point on,

Mr. Patriciu has not held any position with TRG.

The Underlying Dispute

The substantive dispute in this arbitration arises out of investigations commenced in May 2004
by the National Anti-Corruption Office of Romania (“the PNA”) relating to the privatisation of
Petromidia, shortly after the sale of the controlling shares to the Claimant. In September 2004,
the file was transferred from the PNA to the General Prosecutor’s Office (“the GPO”) which

has jurisdiction, inter alia, for investigating alleged economic crimes, and in January 2005 the

39.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

GPO opened an investigation into Rompetrol Rafinare S.A. As part of this investigation,

Mr. Patriciu was briefly detained in May 2005.

In brief, the Claimant asserts that these investigations are oppressive and in breach of the
treatment to which TRG’s investment is entitled under the BIT. The Respondent answers that
the investigations are simply part of the implementation of Romania’s National
Anti-Corruption Strategy first introduced in 2001, and pursued since then with increasing

emphasis in the perspective of Romania’s move towards membership of the European Union.

THE ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES

Three documents were served by each of the Parties prior to the hearing, which set out and
refined their positions and are summarized below. At the hearing, each side’s case was
developed further and the Parties finalised their submissions in two rounds of Post-Hearing

Briefs, along with two sets of submissions and further correspondence in relation to costs.

The initial statements of case are found in the Request for Arbitration filed by the Claimant on

14 December 2005 and in the Answer to the Request for Arbitration dated 22 December 2006.

The Statement of Claims is dated 8 December 2008, and the Statement of Defence is dated
24 July 2009. The Claimant filed a Reply brief dated 12 November 2009, and the Respondent
filed a Rejoinder dated 31 March 2010.

The Parties’ submissions were further developed at the Hearing, held at premises of the World
Bank in Paris for seven days in early May 2010. At the conclusion of the Hearing, the
Tribunal ruled, on the basis of a joint request from the Parties, that Post-Hearing Briefs would
be filed simultaneously within three months, followed by reply briefs, limited to 50 pages,
seven weeks later. The Post-Hearing Briefs were duly filed on 4 August 2010, and the replies
on 27 September 2010.

Great care and skill has been deployed in the preparation and presentation of the written and
oral submissions of each Party. The summaries that follow are not intended to repeat or deal
with every point raised, but to capture the essence of the arguments presented, which, as one
might expect in litigation of this scale, developed over time at the various stages of the

proceedings as they took their course.

C1. Claimant’s arguments

4S.

46.

CLA. The Request for Arbitration

Aside from introductory and jurisdictional matters, the Request for Arbitration describes TRG
as having contributed a considerable quantity not just of financial investment but of
management attention to RRC, turning the company into profitability and leading to growth of
more than US$500 million between 2001 and 2005. TRG claims that it is precisely this

success that “turned Rompetrol into a target of State-orchestrated harassment,”>

citing the
activities of Mr. Ioan Talpes, former head of the National Security Department of the
Presidential Administration, the National Anti-Corruption Prosecution Office (“PNA”) and the

Prosecutor’s Office attached to the High Court of Justice (“GPO”).4

The State conduct complained about was grouped under four headings, each covering the time
period after mid-March 2004. Under the first heading, the Request for Arbitration argued that
the State had harassed TRG since 2001 by conducting “an extraordinary and unreasonable
array of fiscal and other governmental controls,” i.e. 120 controls between 2001 and 2004.5

More detailed complaints were set out under the following four headings:

a. The Talpes Report:° The Request argues that Mr. Talpes had sought to pressure
Mr. Patriciu into merging RRC with RAFO Onesti, a competing Romanian
refinery, and, when that failed, the Presidential Administration, so as to damage
TRG for its refusal, leaked to the press a report that was later formally forwarded
to the then President of Romania and stamped as an official document of the
National Security Department of the Presidential Administration (referred to
hereafter as “the Talpes report”). The Request describes the Talpes report as
containing “various accusations (with criminal implications) relating to the
Petromidia refinery Privatization Contract and to the post-privatization activity of
RRC,”" and as relying in this respect on information obtained by the fiscal controls
already referred to that had been conducted since 2001,* and finally alleges that the

Report was deliberately leaked to the press:

> Request for Arbitration, { 21.
* Request for Arbitration, 21.
> Request for Arbi
© Request for
7 Request for
§ Request for Arbitration, { 28.

  
  
  

“The Talpes Report marked the launch of a concerted and sustained government
effort to publicly discredit and harm Rompetrol’s interests, through multiple and
overlapping investigations against it and its management that were conducted in
breach of Romanian procedural law and international standards of due process

and in clear violation of Romania’s Dutch-Romanian BIT obligations...”°

b. Misconduct of the PNA:'° The Request alleges that it was only through a press
release dated 24 March 2004 (hard on the heels of the Talpes report) that TRG
learned that the PNA had commenced activities preliminary to a criminal
investigation, arising from the privatisation of Petromidia, and prompted by the

Talpes report. u

These activities then became a general criminal investigation (in
rem investigation), according to a press release of 31 May 2004.'? The Request
argues that the use of this device, rather than specific criminal investigations
against individuals (in personam investigations), had the effect of evading the
procedural guarantees that would otherwise be triggered under Romanian law.
The Request argues that the PNA conducted its investigation in “an abusive and
non-transparent manner that amounted to unfair and inequitable treatment, in

iolation of Re ian law and R ia’s inte ional treaty obligations.”"3 It is

further alleged that TRG learned in October 2004 that the PNA had closed its

 

investigation because no corruption within its area of competence had been
discovered, and that the file had been passed to the GPO, but all of this only from

press releases or reports of television interviews.

c. Misconduct of the GPO:" The Request alleges that in September 2004 the GPO
commenced in personam investigations against three members of the RRC
management in connection inter alia with the privatization of Petromidia and the
making of ‘in-kind’ loans. The Request draws a link between these events and the

transfer to the GPO of Ms. Adriana Cristescu, the investigator who had conducted

° Request for Arbitration, {[ 30.
' Request for Arbitration, { 31 - 36.
" Request for Arbitration, J 31.
!? Request for Arbitration, J 32.
'8 Request for Arbitration, J 35.
' Request for Arbitration, { 37 - 145.

the PNA in rem investigation, and who led the GPO investigation against
Rompetrol officers. Under her responsibility, the Request alleges, the GPO put out
press releases in January 2005 and subsequently which contained conclusory
statements as to the guilt of those under investigation. TRG argued that these
investigations were conducted in a manner “wholly lacking in transparency and in

”'> itemised as follows: '°

breach of ... international standards of due process,
i. Disregarding evidence from the competent authority certifying that TRG

complied with its privatization obligations under the Privatization Contract;

ii. Singling out only RRC for sanctions in connection with the industry-wide
practice of swap transactions imposed by the Government’s own oil products

custodian;

iii. Prosecuting RRC management for actions reasonably taken in reliance on
valid Romanian court decisions, thereby unfairly and inequitably disregarding

valid court decisions;
iv. Bringing unreasonable charges of fraud and money laundering against
Rompetrol managers despite prior full disclosure to the Government of

Romania;

v. Violating due process standards in connection with Mr. Patriciu’s arrest and

detention on 26 and 27 May 2005;

vi. Imposing an unreasonable travel ban on TRG’s CEO, Mr. Patriciu.

d. The Request also complains about further charges brought in August 2005 against

Mr. Patriciu and Mr. Stephenson, following notice of the commencement of the

'S Request for Arbitration, { 41.
' Listed at Request for Arbitration, J 41.

present proceedings a month earlier. The Request further alleges the following

specific breaches of procedural rights under Romanian and international law: 0

iii.

vi.

Failing to notify defence counsel of the dates and times of interviews of

witnesses;

When counsel was so notified, excluding them from attending witness interviews

relating to these charges;

In the event they were permitted to attend, refusing to record the attendance of
defence counsel and forbidding such counsel from participating or asking questions

during the course of the interview;

Refusing to make certain corrections to the record of the witness interview when

explicitly requested to do so by defence counsel;

Influencing witnesses by the way questions were phrased; and

Demanding the production of all documents regarding all banking operations of
approximately sixty individuals since January 2001, fourteen of whom were current
or former Rompetrol employees, directors or shareholders, and the others were

connected with Mr. Patriciu or TRG.

Collusion between GPO Prosecutor and the RAFO Group:'* The Request
alleges continuing collusion between State officials and the RAFO Group, offering
as hard evidence in support that in October 2005 a confidential document prepared
by Ms. Adriana Cristescu appeared as an annex in a lawsuit filed against TRG as
co-defendant, which sought the cancellation of the Petromidia privatization. The
document dated from between March and October 2004 and concerned inter alia

themes for an investigation into the Petromidia privatization (referred to by TRG

”” Request for Arbitration, | 44 and 45.
'8 Request for Arbitration, | 46 - 4 52.

47.

as the Cristescu Themes), and must, the Request alleges, have been illegally

leaked.'?

The Request alleges in sum”” that the conduct described above breached the Respondent’ s
obligations under the Dutch-Romanian BIT, the Energy Charter Treaty (“ECT”),”" and
international law, and claims inter alia the following relief, without prejudice to any other or

further claims to which it might be entitled:”

a. A declaration that the Republic of Romania has breached Article 3(1) of the BIT,

Article 10(1) of the ECT, Romanian law, and international law;

b. A declaration that the Republic of Romania has breached the Claimant’s and its
directors’, managers’, and employees’ procedural (due process) rights under

Romanian law, as well as international standards of due process;

c. Order the Respondent to take urgent action to ensure that the perpetrators of such

violations are disciplined;

d. Order the Respondent to cease conducting the GPO investigation in breach of

TRG’s and its directors’, managers’, and employees’ procedural rights;

e. Order the Respondent to pay damages in an amount to be established, but which

the Claimant estimated to be an amount in excess of US$100 million; and

f. Order the Respondent to pay costs and interest.

' Request for Arbitration, 49.

°° Request for Arbitration, {[ 56.

2! ‘TRG explained that the ECT was within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal by virtue of Article 3(5) of the BIT,
which provided that “If the provisions of law of either Contracting Party or obligations under international
agreements existing at present or established hereafter between the Contracting Parties in addition to the
present Agreement contain a regulation, whether general or specific, entitling investments by investors of the
other Contracting Party to a treatment more favourable than is provided for by the present Agreement, such
regulation shall to the extent that it is more favourable prevail over the present agreement.”

» Request for Arbitration, {{ 60.

19

48.

49.

50.

C1.B. Memorial on the Merits

The Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits (or “Statement of Claims”), filed on 8 December
2008, was accompanied by factual exhibits, a witness statement of Mr. Patriciu and the second
witness statement of Mr. George Philip Stephenson, a Legal Opinion of Professor Alexandru
Boroi (“the Boroi Opinion”) and an expert Report on damages of Dr. Frederick Dunbar of
National Economic Research Associates, Inc. (NERA) (‘the Dunbar report’), and expressly

incorporated by reference TRG’s previous pleadings.”

The Memorial disclaims any challenge to the Respondent’s “power to investigate and

24

prosecute crimes within its jurisdiction. Instead, what TRG requests the Tribunal to

examine are:

the measures taken by Respondent in commencing and pursuing these investigations and
proceedings and to determine that such measures have been in breach of the specific
protections afforded by, and of legally binding commitments undertaken by, Romania to Dutch
investors under the Treaty. 25

The Memorial expands upon, and backs with documentary evidence, the substantive
complaints set out in earlier pleadings,”° but adds to them three further matters said to
constitute egregious instances of heightened harassment and persecution of TRG, Rompetrol

and their executives and management;

a. the illegal interception of Mr. Patriciu’s personal and business telephone calls

since 2003 (‘the Wiretapping Complaint”);7”

b. the GPO’s attempts to have Mr. Patriciu and Mr. Stephenson arrested on the basis
that they were a ‘danger to the public order’ and responsible for ‘excessive media
broadcasting’ of the investigation which was damaging to Romanian society,” and

were seeking to influence criminal investigations by bringing ICSID arbitral

* Statement of Claims, J 2.

*4 Statement of Claims, 4.

* Statement of Claims, 5.

°6 Statement of Claims, 6 - | 17.
*” Statement of Claims, { 18.

°8 Statement of Claims, { 19.

20

51.

52.

proceedings; whilst these requests were not accepted by the Romanian courts, they

had “taken their toll””? on TRG and its executives;

c. the GPO’s ordinance of 21 February 2006 imposing an attachment on RRC shares
held by TRG (“the GPO Attachment Ordinance”), which took seven months to
remove by Court Order, causing loss in the form of lost security for loans and a

technical default under existing financial arrangements.

As an explanation for the ‘apparent motivations’ of the state in orchestrating this alleged

harassment, the Memorial on the Merits advances:

d. Mr. Patriciu’s status as a former politician with political enemies, which has led to
vendettas against him through misconduct directed at TRG, allegedly at the

direction of President Basescu (“the Political Motivations”).*°

e. Secondly, the Memorial argues that there were “clearly strong commercial forces
at play in motivating the State’s conduct as well,”*! citing specifically the
circumstances of the release of the Talpes report and the ensuing investigations as
indicating that State entities were seeking to assist the RAFO Group to acquire

RRC, which had been turned around by TRG.”

The Memorial on the Merits argues that these acts engaged the international responsibility of
the State as soon as the State’s conduct, or any conduct attributable to it, was in breach of its
international obligations, citing Articles 1 and 2 of the International Law Commission’s
Articles on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts.> Under
Article 4(1), conduct of a State organ is attributable to the State “whether the organ exercises

legislative, executive, judicial or any other functions, whatever position it holds in the

» Statement of Claims, { 19.
* Statement of Claims, { 23.
*! Statement of Claims, { 24.
> Statement of Claims, { 24 - | 34.
* Statement of Claims, { 38.

21

53.

54.

organization of the State.”*4 Accordingly, all of the actions complained of are attributable to

the Romanian State.*°

On the basis of the guarantees contained in the BIT and (via the most-favoured-nation clause)
the Energy Charter Treaty of 1994 and in customary international law, the Memorial on the

Merits claims the benefit of the following standards of treatment:

a. Fair and Equitable Treatment.*° This standard is said to contain the following
sub-elements from arbitral case law: (1) Transparency and the protection of the
investor’s basic expectations; (2) Freedom from harassment; (3) Procedural

propriety and due process; and (4) Good faith.

b. Protection and Security,*’ which included both physical and other forms of
security, including security of the investment, and protection from State
harassment. This standard was said to require a broader interpretation of the Fair

and Equitable Treatment standard.

c. Protection against Unreasonable or Discriminatory Measures,** which was said

to be related to the Fair and Equitable Treatment standard.

In support of its claim that the actions of the Respondent breached these standards:

a. First, it is argued that Mr. Talpes and his office lacked any powers to investigate
the privatization of Petromidia, and that the excess of authority demonstrated by

the report breached the fair and equitable treatment standard.”

b. Secondly, it is argued that the conduct of the investigations by the PNA
intentionally circumvented procedural requirements by artificially maintaining in

rem investigations in breach of Article 6(3)(a) of the ECHR and Romanian law.”?

* Statement of Claims, { 39.

* Statement of Claims, { 40.

> Statement of Claims, {49 - 72.

37 Statement of Claims, { 73 - J 83.

38 Statement of Claims, { 84 - J 85.

* Statement of Claims, 4 95, referring to PSEG Global Inc. and Konya Ilgin Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret
Limited Sirketi v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/S.

22

c. Thirdly, it is argued that the GPO blatantly ignored valid Romanian court decisions
in RRC’s favour that vindicated the conduct of its executives, rendering any

investigation into such matters abusive harassment.*!

d. Fourthly, these investigations included arrests and attempted arrests of key TRG

executives, in violation of due process requirements.’”

e. Fifthly, non-compliance with the applicable banking legislation in pursuing the

GPO investigation was abusive and a breach of the duty to act in good faith.

f. Sixthly, the GPO committed gross procedural violations in failing to keep
investigations secret, failing to notify defence counsel of dates and times of
interviews and excluding counsel from participation in such interviews etc. (see

paragraph 47(d) above).

g. Seventhly, the Wiretapping was said to be illegal, and to have engendered fear and

a lack of confidence among Rompetrol employees.**

h. Eighthly, the GPO Attachment Ordinance over TRG-owned shares in RRC (see
paragraph 50(c) above) was said to be in breach of Article 3(1) of the Treaty by

impairing TRG’s ability, as a protected investor, to dispose of these shares.*°

55. The Memorial on the Merits argues that each of these eight matters is sufficient to engage
Romania’s international responsibility since they are in utter disregard of the protections and

rights guaranteed by the Dutch-Romanian BIT and the ECT, as well as international standards

 

* Statement of Claims, { 98.

4! Statement of Claims, { 104 - 124.
® Statement of Claims, {125 - 138.
4 Statement of Claims, { 139 - J 142.
Statement of Claims, { 143 - J 157.
+ Statement of Claims, { 158 - { 168.
4© Statement of Claims, { 169 - J 174.

23

56.

57.

58.

of due process and good faith; in addition, if these various failings are “viewed collectively,

there can be no doubt that Respondent is in breach of its Treaty obligations.”*""

As to the damages claimed, the Memorial on the Merits relies on Article 31 of the ILC Articles
on State Responsibility, and the well-known principle set out by the Permanent Court of
International Justice in the Chorzéw Factory case that “reparation must, as far as possible,
wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and re-establish the situation which would, in

all probability, have existed if that act had not been committed.”**

As to the quantum of damages due, TRG submits the expert opinion in the Dunbar report,
which takes as its objective to calculate the impact on TRG’s market value as a result of
identified acts of the Respondent that caused loss to TRG, employing for that purpose the
‘event study’ method, and basing itself on a selection of such acts over a shorter period than all
of the conduct complained of by TRG; the claim is thus characterised by TRG as
‘conservative,’ and amounts to a total claim for compensation in the amount of
US$139,385,084 as at 28 March 2006, plus interest. TRG further claims reimbursement of its

costs in the arbitration.

Cc Claimant’s Reply

In its Reply, filed in response to Romania’s Statement of Defence, TRG makes three broad
points: that Romania misconstrues the Claimant’s case as a claim for denial of justice and thus
misunderstands the relevance of local remedies; secondly, that the primary contentions of fact
set forth in the witness statements of Mr. Patriciu and Mr. Stephenson’s second witness
statement are effectively uncontested, Romania’s counter-evidence being beside the point;”
thirdly, the Claimant responds to the criticisms of the Dunbar report’s methodology and its
application to the facts, and maintains its contention that the record establishes that Romania’s
breaches caused Rompetrol significant damage. TRG further submits that, given the important
circumstance that the Respondent has exclusive access to the bulk of the evidence going to the
explanation of the acts of harassment against RRC, the factual burden of proof has shifted to
the Respondent to disprove the prima facie case established by the evidence submitted by the

Claimant.

*” Statement of Claims, {] 175.
+8 Chorzéw Factory Case (Germany v. Poland) 1928 PCI (Ser A) No. 17,1 40.
* Reply, {.2.

24

59.

60.

Accompanying the Reply were further witness statements from Mr. Patriciu and
Mr. Stephenson, and statements from five new witness: Mr. Karim Benabderrazik (former
Managing Director of Vector AG, TRG’s international trading arm); Mr. Adrian Volintiru
(former RRC CFO); Mr. Dan Ioan Popescu (former Minister of the Economy); Mr. Sorin
Rosca Stanescu (a journalist); and, Mr. Ovidiu Budusan (former Romanian prosecutor and
criminal defence counsel to Mr. Patriciu and Mr. Stephenson). In addition, TRG filed three
further expert reports: a second legal opinion by Professor Alexandru Boroi (“the Second
Boroi Opinion”); an expert opinion (on Romanian public and constitutional law) by Professor
Coreneliu-Liviu Popescu (“the Popescu opinion’); and, a further report on quantum from
Dr. Chudozie Okongwu of NERA (“Okongwu report”) (replacing Dr. Dunbar, who had in the
interim been appointed to the US Securities and Exchange Commission) in response to the

Respondent’s expert report by Dow and Lapuerta.

The first broad point made by TRG, that Romania responds to a case that TRG did not advance

(denial of justice), divides into four parts:

a. First, that Romania misunderstands the proper place of local remedies.*° TRG
argues that Article 26 of the BIT is a waiver of the local remedies rule, and that in
any event TRG’s complaints are not about the conduct of the courts, but of the
prosecutors. TRG relies in this regard on the Award of an ICSID Tribunal in
Benvenuti & Bonfant v. Congo," and the judgments of the ICJ in LaGrand
(Germany v. us)? and Avena (Mexico v. us) TRG asserts, in reliance on the
ICJ judgment in ELSI (US v. Italy),°4 that findings of local courts might be
“relevant to an argument that it was also arbitrary’® but that could not be

determinative.

b. Second, that TRG’s case is not about the adequacy of Romania’s administration of

justice but about its abuse.*°

*° Reply, { 19 - 29.

5! S A.R.L. Benvenuti & Bonfant v. People’s Republic of Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/77/2, Award, 8 August
1980, {4.59 and J 4.62. Exhibit CLA-83.

* Judgment (27 June 2001) 2001 ICJ 466, pp. 497-498. Exhibit CLA-93.

*3 Judgment (31 March 2004) 2004 ICJ 12, pp. 50-51. Exhibit CLA-81.

* Judgment (20 July 1989) 1989 ICJ 15, p.74. Exhibit CLA-85.

% Thid., Y 124, p. 74.

*© Reply, {31 - 433.

25

c. Thirdly, that Romania’s system of justice is not in any event as transparent or

functional as asserted by Romania.”

d. Lastly, that Romania’s reliance on human rights jurisprudence is misplaced.** The
key argument here is that Romania is wrong to claim that the Convention supplies
the appropriate standard for BIT, and to argue that if the ECHR standard is
respected then there can be no breach of the Treaty standard. TRG instead argues
that human rights standards set a ‘floor,’ but not a ‘ceiling’ that would limit the
level of protection that might be granted under the Treaty, so that ECHR case law

can only be of assistance by analogy.”

61. The Reply equally contests Romania’s factual assertions that its conduct was legitimate and
justified, pointing to the absence of any evidence to counter that of Mr. Patriciu and

Mr. Stephenson in their witness statements, in particular:

a. The threats made by Mr. Talpes in the context of mentioning the competing

refinery RAFO Onesti that “Romanian enterprises must work together”;

b. That in early March, Mr. Patriciu was threatened by a representative of RAFO that
a report by Mr. Talpes would be published that would be damaging to TRG if he

would not agree to a merger with the RAFO Group;
c. That the Talpes report was leaked to the press;

d. That the allegations in the Talpes report were rejected by the competent State

organs;*!

e. That the PNA shortly thereafter announced criminal investigations against TRG

executives; and

57 Reply, {34 - (38.

*8 Reply, 39 - 46.

» Reply, {45 and { 109.
© WS Patriciu 1, { 12.
©! WS Patriciu 1, | 20.

26

62.

63.

64.

65.

f. That the investigations hampered the ability of TRG to access financing or

achieving its business goals.

In response to Romania’s argument (see paragraph 79b. below) that no ‘orchestrator’ of the
supposed campaign of harassment has been identified by TRG, the Reply asserts that there in
fact were two orchestrators: first, the former General and Presidential Counsellor, Mr. Talpes

and, second, after he rose to office, President Basescu.

In support, the Reply invokes the written evidence of Mr. Stanescu™ and Former Minister
Popescu,” in which Mr. Stanescu says that Mr. Talpes was a controversial figure in Romanian
society who became interested in the energy sector and was associated with Mr. Tender, a
leading figure in RAFO Onesti, and Mr. Popescu says that the Talpes report was subjective
and unreliable. The Reply notes that Romania accepts that the Talpes report led to
investigations led by Ms. Cristescu, who is alleged in a Romanian press report to be connected

to Mr. Talpes.

In relation to President Basescu, Mr. Stanescu’s witness statement says that President
Basescu threatened Mr. Patriciu because of his political opposition,” and that it was only once

President Basescu was in office that the GPO investigation commenced.
The Reply also takes issue with Romania’s justification of its investigations:

a. The privatization of Petromidia:* TRG argues that the Romanian privatization
agency concluded that there were no irregularities, and that in any event the RRC
managers were appointed after the decrease in share price which is the subject of

Romania’s investigation.

b. The privatization of Vega: TRG counters as untenable Romania’s claim that the
court decision that the privatization of Vega had been properly conducted did not

preclude its invalidation on the basis of fraud by pointing out that the supposedly

© WS Stephenson 2, { 39.
Reply, 1 56 - | 68.

© WS Stanescu, {{ 22.

5 WS Popescu, 19.

° Reply, { 69 - 177.

© WS Stanescu, {7 - 18.
© Reply, { 84 - 87.

© Reply, { 88 - G91.

27

fraudulent misrepresentation was about the amount of the State’s own

shareholding.

c. Alleged unpaid excise taxes:”” TRG argues that the logical step, in the event of
unpaid excise taxes, would be to commence collection action, not to institute
criminal proceedings for alleged tax evasion; but there was in any case a court
decision to the effect that no such excise taxes were due: “TRG has no obligation
to pay excise taxes for the fuel owned by SC Rafinarie Steaua Romana SA held in

its custody, an issue definitively settled by the abovementioned decisions.”

d. The Libyan receivable:’* TRG argues that there was no justification for the action
taken against inter alia Mr. Patriciu and Mr. Stephenson, because there were clear
Romanian court decisions” to the effect that the company and not the State owned
the receivable (and the same applied to a variety of other similar companies who
also had receivable).”

5

e. Alleged market manipulation:’ According to Mr. Stephenson’s witness

statement” the relevant listing of shares had been investigated and cleared by both

the Bucharest Securities Exchange Board and the National Securities Council.

66. TRG further argues that, far from the actions of Romania being legitimate and justified, in
fact they breached international law standards in each of the following ways, and by taking

these events together:

a. The Talpes report:”” Professor Popescu’s Opinion” was that there was no
authority for the production of the report and as a matter of Romanian

constitutional law it was an abuse of power to produce such a report; former

Reply, 1 92 - 4 94.

7 Reply, { 94. Exhibit C-127, Minutes of the Bucharest Court — 1 Criminal Division, in file No.
10352/3/2006, 27 March 2006, p. 42.

? Reply, 195 - J 100.

™ TRG referred as an example to the Supreme Court decision to this effect at Exhibit C-165.

™ See WS Stephenson 3, { 29 - 34.

™ Reply, 1 101 - J 106.

7 WS Stephenson 3, { 11.

7 Reply, | 113 - J 124.

78 Popescu Opinion, pp. 6-25.

28

minister Mr. Popescu’s written evidence” was that he had never seen the
Presidential Administration deal with issues of privatization in the energy sector.
In short Romania had no answer to the argument that this report was part of an

orchestrated abuse of state power in order to inflict maximum damage on TRG.

b. The Media Campaign:*° TRG argues that press releases were conclusory, and

were timed so as to inflict damage on it,*' and that the content of the press releases
was false, and did not represent what Romania describes as a “delicate balance”
between the right to privacy and the presumption of innocence on the one hand,

and the public interest in knowing about investigations on the other hand.

c. Attempts to Incarcerate TRG executives:*? TRG notes that the facts of
Romania’s attempts to incarcerate its executives are not contested, and that
Romania’s expert, Professor Kiihne, is not qualified, by contrast with TRG’s
witnesses, Professor Boroi and Mr. Budusan, to give expert evidence on whether
the State’s actions were justified under Romanian law. TRG further argues that
international law is in any case the appropriate standard, not Romanian law, and
that seeking to imprison TRG’s CEO on the basis that TRG had brought arbitral
proceedings under the BIT is per se a violation of the fair and equitable treatment
standard, citing Compania de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal SA v.
The Argentine Republic.*

d. The seizure of Rompetrol’s shares: TRG points out that Romania does not
contest that its actions to seize these shares was found to be illegal but relies
instead on Professor Kiihne’s Opinion about practice in other countries and on its
argument that it was a good faith difference of interpretation of what the law
permitted. TRG contests that there was any room on the facts for an argument as to

‘good faith interpretation,’ and that the subsequent prevarications of the GPO

7 WS Popescu, {{ 13.

® Reply, { 125 - J 137.

S! WS Patriciu, 36.

® Statement of Defence, J 200.

53 Reply, | 138 - J 145.

* Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal SA y. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Award, 20 August 2007, 7.4.45, p. 221, Exhibit CLA-41.

85 Reply, {146 - J 153.

29

67.

68.

slowing down resolution of the seizure, were deliberate and a manifest cause of

harm to TRG, provoking an event of default under TRG’s financing arrangements.

e. The PNA and GPO’s abuse of powers:*° TRG reiterates that the appropriate
standard for assessing its complaints about the extent of investigations, the failure
to provide access to prosecutorial papers, the conducting of ex parte interviews,
and use of ‘technical scientific assessment reports’ to achieve biased evidence
rather than independent experts, is not (as Romania asserts) the ECHR or ‘good
faith,’ but the terms of the BIT, while rejecting also the suggestion that there is no

evidence of bad faith; the wiretapping in particular is clear evidence of illegality.

f. Tax audits:*’ TRG tenders Mr. Volintiru’s evidence to the effect that the tax

audits were oppressive and damaging.**

Finally, in relation to the second broad point that the actions of Romania were legitimate and
justified, TRG reiterates that the burden of proof shifts®’ to Romania to disprove the
complaints in circumstances where most of the relevant information is not available to TRG,
but TRG has given prima facie evidence of bad faith and oppressive conduct orchestrated by

the State.

The third broad point of the Claimant’s Reply is that there are clear indications of significant
damage caused to TRG,” shown not only by the Dunbar report, but also the Okongwu report.
TRG repeats that the ‘event-study method’ for calculating damages is a reliable way to
calculate loss which accords with the BIT. In particular, the Okongwu report explains: (i) that
NERA analysed the right shares (RRC’s shares were the only ones traded, and since they did
not carry a premium were a conservative estimate of any loss); (ii) that the prosecutorial events
are the correct events (they were not justified, but politically motivated wrongs); (iii) that
NERA’s calculation is accurate (that the events were selected with hindsight is not a problem,
but ensures accuracy); and (iv) NERA did not fail to include significant events, nor make

technical errors and did use ‘reality checks’. Furthermore TRG tenders in corroboration the

8 Reply, | 154 -G 171.
§7 Reply, | 172 - 175.
88 WS Volintiru, {3 - J 19.
® Reply, 1 176 - J 195.
°° Reply, | 176 - | 195.

30

C2.

69.

70.

71.

witness statement of Mr. Benabderrazik as to the financial impact of the Romanian conduct

complained about.

Respondent’s arguments

Cc espondent’s Answer to the Request for Arbitration

Romania’s response to TRG’s Request for Arbitration sets out in some detail the historical
context for the claim, explaining in particular, with reference to the post-Ceausescu period
after the fall of Communism in 1989, that “many of the privatizations that took place during
this period are considered seriously flawed.” This was a period in which, according to
Romania, a legacy of corruption hindered economic restructuring, and in 2001 the State
intensified efforts to fight corruption, tax evasion and economic crime as part of a process that

led to accession to the European Union (EU) in 2007.

Romania explains that in the spring of 2004 the European Commission focussed on full
implementation of the rule of law as a core part of preparation for accession to the Eu.
Accordingly, Romania revised its 2001 anti-corruption measures in early 2005. Further, in
October 2005, the European Commission published a comprehensive monitoring report that
concluded that whilst significant steps had been taken, there was still a key need to tackle
corruption, “particularly for high-level political corruption.”?> Another report in May 2006
noted continued progress, but stated that further action was required to ensure “that all judges
have sufficient specialist knowledge to hear and judge complex economic and financial cases
based on DNA’s [a then new anti-corruption agency] recent investigations into fraud in
privatisations and public procurement.”°®

Romania claims that systematic efforts to root out corruption were bound to cause a level of

interference with business activities of foreign and domestic investors and points out that “any

°" Answer to the Request for Arbitration, {| 12.

* Answer to the Request for Arbitration, {| 13.

°S Answer to the Request for Arbitration, {| 15.

°* Answer to the Request for Arbitration, {| 16.

°5 ‘Romania: 2005 Comprehensive Monitoring Report’ European Commission, SEC (2005) 1354, Brussels,
25 October 2005.

°° ‘Romania: May 2006 Monitoring Report’ Commission of the European Communities, SEC (2006) 596,
Brussels, 16 May 2006, p. 8, Exhibit R-4.

31

72.

723.

74.

75.

76.

seriously conducted investigations into economic crime are likely to be perceived as

‘harassment’ by those affected.””"

Romania argues that its methods for conducting such investigations were already subject to the
watchful eyes of the international community, and in particular the safeguards provided by the

European Convention on Human Rights.**

Romania goes on to describe the investigations which TRG complains about as being part of
the picture of its anti-corruption activities, and argues that “/t/he Claimant presents the
Government’s anti-corruption campaign out of context, as if Mr. Patriciu and his colleagues,
and the companies controlled by them, had been the sole target of the Government’s

999

investigations. Romania explains that other commercial actors have been subject to

investigations, including the managers of the RAFO Group, which TRG claimed were
colluding with Romania to its detriment.'°° Romania describes the transfer of Ms. Adriana
Cristescu from the PNA to the GPO as entirely innocent; she had been with the PNA on
secondment from the GPO, and was returned there with the file to ensure continuity of the

criminal investigations, a key objective of the National Anti-Corruption Strategy 2005-2007. !°!

Romania alleges that, far from its investigations being inappropriate and not targeted on TRG,

to the contrary, it was TRG which in the course of 2005 began a concerted effort to pressurise

. a woe 102
the Government into ceasing its investigations.

Romania complains in particular that:

the Claimant has not made any attempt to identify the specific acts or omissions attributable to
the Respondent which, in the Claimant’s view, constitute breaches of the relevant standards in
Article 3(1) of the Dutch Romanian BIT, or to link such acts or omissions to the relevant treaty
standards.‘

Romania responds to the specific claims as follows:

°7 Answer to the Request for Arbitration, 21.
°8 Answer to the Request for Arbitration, {| 23.
°° Answer to the Request for Arbitration, | 26.
1 Answer to the Request for Arbitration, {{ 27.
11 Answer to the Request for Arbitration, { 29.
1 Answer to the Request for Arbitration, {] 32 - 133.

103 Answer to the Request for Arbitration, {| 63.

32

77.

78.

a. Out of the 120 fiscal controls referred to by TRG, most of them were requested by
one of the companies concerned, or were otherwise “limited in scope and lasted no

more than a day”; 104

b. Given the importance of the matters at stake, it would have been a “cause for

concern” '® if the matters set out in the Talpes report had not been investigated;

c. The transfer from the PNA to the GPO was not a signal of the end of the PNA’s
investigation, rather it was that information had come to light that economic crimes
may have been committed which lay within the competence of the GPO and not

the PNA;'°°

d. The investigations of Mr. Patriciu and his colleagues were founded on evidence,'”
and the claim that detaining Mr. Patriciu for one day was a breach of due process is
denied, but ought in any event to be heard elsewhere and there is no legal basis for

the complaint. 108

The Respondent’s Answer also criticises the relief claimed on the basis that the Tribunal has
no jurisdiction to consider the violation of Romanian law, and on the basis that no
explanation is given as to why the ECT standards are thought to be higher than those contained

in the BIT.'"°

C2.B. The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial (Statement of Defence

The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial (“Statement of Defence”), filed on 24 July 2009, refutes
generally all elements of the Statement of Claims. Not all of the facts alleged by TRG are
disputed, but their characterisation by the Claimant is regularly challenged by the Respondent
which puts forward alternative interpretations of its own. The Counter-Memorial is

accompanied by factual exhibits and by the witness statements of Ms. Cecilia Morariu (of the

14 Answer to the Request for Arbitration, {| 65.
105 Answer to the Request for Arbitration, {] 67.
106 Answer to the Request for Arbitration, {| 68.
107 Answer to the Request for Arbitration, {| 69.
108 Answer to the Request for Arbitration, | 71 - (72.
19 Answer to the Request for Arbitration, {| 60.
"0 Answer to the Request for Arbitration, { 61.

33

79.

Superior Council of Magistracy or “CSM”) and Ms. Valeria Nistor (of the National Agency for
Fiscal Administration), an expert report on damages by Professor James Dow and Mr. Carlos
Lapuerta (“the Dow-Lapuerta report”) and an expert legal opinion by Professor Dr. H-H
Kiihne (“the Kiihne Opinion”).

There are four main strands to the Statement of Defence:

a. First, that the Claimant mischaracterized the investigations undertaken by
Romanian State agencies. The incidents referred to by the Claimant are dealt with
one by one with “detailed factual explanations ... necessary in order to put the

record straight and show that none of these incidents were in violation of

wlll

Romanian law, let alone international law. The main argument is that the

investigations were legitimate and reasonable and did not in any way breach the
State’s international obligations to TRG. The Defence further alleges that the

investigations were in fact in TRG’s interests, since they were directed at

preventing a small number of managers from using RRC to “reap illegal

wo l12

benefits, stating that “it must not be overlooked that RRC is a public company

7113 the Claimant would

with a considerable number of Romanian shareholders;
accordingly benefit from the investigations, particularly if their outcome

established wrongdoing that had caused harm to TRG.

b. Secondly, the Defence rejects TRG’s theory of orchestrated State persecution, in

particular the insinuation that Romania’s prosecutors act “at the behest of the

Government and those who run it,’'"

arguing rather that the justice system,
including the role of prosecutors, had been “the subject of profound change”'5 as
part of the process of Romania’s entry into the European Union.''® The
investigations, the subject of the complaints, are characterised by the Respondent

as part of a fresh drive to eradicate corruption in Romania, and that these changes

‘11 Statement of Defence, [7. See also | 41 - | 64.
12 Statement of Defence, { 6.

"5 Statement of Defence, 15.

"4 Statement of Defene, {{ 19.

"'S Statement of Defence, [ 21.

"© Statement of Defence, J 20 and {23 - { 40.

34

80.

come as somewhat of a surprise to Mr. Patriciu, who as a Romanian has not been

used to such investigations in his country until this point.!!”

c. Thirdly, the Defence argues that the complaints amount to a series of technical
complaints about Romanian procedure, which cannot and do not amount to
breaches of its obligations under the BIT, which would instead require evidence of

a denial of justice,''®

and that the real purpose of the arbitral proceedings was to
apply pressure as a litigation tactic to undermine the domestic criminal

proceedings. "9

d. Finally, the Defence takes fundamental issue with the Claimant’s approach to
quantum, arguing that the Dunbar report is unreliable and that the approach to loss
on a proper view could give rise to no sure losses; moreover many incidents which
formed the basis of a complaint are not linked to any loss, and can therefore be

disregarded by the Tribunal. 120

The Defence proffers material to show that the investigations complained about were justified
by evidence, in relation to four issues: (1) suspected wrongdoing in relation to the privatisation
of Petromidia; (2) suspected tax evasion by RRC; (3) suspected market manipulation in
relation to the sale of RRC shares on the Bucharest Stock Exchange; and (4) the failure by
RRC to pay US$85 million to the Romanian government arising from an oil and gas project
initiated in Libya in the 1980’s (“the Libyan receivable”). The Defence argues that each of
these investigations was justified, but only the last two had thus far crystallised into criminal

charges by way of an indictment dated 7 September 2006 (“‘the Indictment”):

a. First, the Petromidia privatisation investigations were justified 7! on the basis that
there was evidence that indicated that the price of shares decreased five times
during the privatization process, even though this decrease was not justified by the

financial state of the company. There appeared to be irregularities in the final

"7 Statement of Defence, {[ 22.

''8 Statement of Defence, {{ 12, referring to Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9,
Award, 16 September 2003, { 20.33, Exhibit RLA-41. See also Statement of Defence, { 100.

' Statement of Defence, | 13.

°° Statement of Defence, 15.

"1 Statement of Defence, | 45 - 51.

35

price that TRG paid and the manner in which the privatization was structured that
justified investigation. The GPO investigations into the matter, in personam,
uncovered evidence suggesting that assets belonging to Petromidia SA had been
transferred by TRG in breach of the privatization contract. Criminal allegations of
fraud and money laundering were investigated on the basis of plausible concern.
These investigations were still in train at the date of filing of the Counter-

Memorial.

b. Secondly, tax fraud allegations were at the date of the Statement of Defence still
under way in relation to the suspicion that RRC had failed to pay certain excise
taxes as a result of sales of oil products made to Steaua Romana, and for failure to
record income for sales that had been made to RAFO Onesti.'”*

"23 formed part of the Indictment. The nub of

c. Thirdly, the Libyan receivable issue
this issue was whether the Libyan receivable, which had been agreed prior to the
privatization, was due to be paid for the benefit of RRC or that of the State. The
Indictment set out the view that the money belonged to the State and that the
individuals charged had conspired to launder the funds giving rise to charges of

money laundering, embezzlement and complicity in embezzlement.

d. Fourthly, the Indictment also contained evidence of charges of market
manipulation in relation to what the GPO regarded as highly suspicious trading
that took place on the Bucharest Stock Exchange on the first days of trading RRC
shares, namely that RRC shares appeared to have been undersold in a coordinated

fashion to manipulate the share prices. ad

The Defence argues that, although accused individuals are entitled to the presumption of
innocence until proven guilty, there was clearly sufficient evidence to warrant investigations

and, where they had been brought, prosecutions. The Respondent claimed therefore that TRG’s

'® Statement of Defence, { 52 - 53.
"3 Statement of Defence, J 54 - { 58.
124 Statement of Defence, {59 - | 64.

36

action in bringing the present proceedings was geared towards “escaping the reality of’ the

criminal investigations and ought to be regarded as spurious.'?°

82. In relation to TRG’s theory of orchestrated persecution, which the Defence cites TRG as

126

describing as at the “heart” of its case, ~” the following points are advanced:

a. The Claimant offers no orchestrator for its orchestration theory; 7

b. The reference by the Claimant to President Basescu does not make sense in light of
the complaints made, e.g. the Talpes report was published during President
Tliescu’s term of office, but Mr. Talpes left office when President Basescu (who

was a member of a different political party to President Iliescu) took office; 128

c. The idea that the State sought to assist RAFO Onesti is baseless. In fact members
of the RAFO Group have been jailed and subject to criminal proceedings, and
RAFO was forced into bankruptcy. This is not a company that enjoyed the

patronage and protection of the State; 129

d. No proof is given that the prosecutors had any ulterior motives, and no Romanian
court has adopted this view. Consequently, if there were orchestration it would
have had to include the Romanian judiciary, but no such claim of conspiracy

against the judiciary is made.'*°

83. In general, the Defence argues that the Claimant does not have any claims under international
law, but its complaints are best characterized as complaints for breaches of Romanian law,

which fall outside of the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Specifically:

a. The claims relating to the Romanian tax authorities are misguided on the basis that
the relevant tax legislation required frequent visits, these visits were justified, there

were no serious complaints by the witnesses about tax reports, and some

5 Statement of Defence, {| 65.

126 Statement of Defence, {| 66, citing the Statement of Claims, { 3.
"7 Statement of Defence, {| 67.

8 Statement of Defence, J 68 - 72.

° Statement of Defence, J 76 - 78.

'%° Statement of Defence, | 79.

37

84.

complaints merely attempt to re-litigate matters finally determined by domestic

. 3
proceedings. 131

b. The Presidential Administration acted lawfully in its investigations and in
producing the Talpes report.'* It was argued that the Report highlighted serious
concerns about Romania’s largest refinery — a matter that was essential to
Romania’s national security interests, which was wrongly defined by the Claimant.
The complaint that Mr. Patriciu should have been notified of the Report was
dismissed on the basis that it was an internal document, and this is unaffected by

the fact that the document later appeared in the public domain.

c. Finally, there is no evidential basis for the allegations of bad faith or ulterior
motive against the prosecutorial authorities which are very serious in nature and
amount to allegations of criminal conduct under Romanian law (but do not amount

‘33 Tt was noted that there have been

to violations of international law standards).
no findings by any domestic court of bad faith by any of the investigators, despite
the numerous complaints that Mr. Patriciu and TRG have brought against the
prosecutors. This section also argues that many complaints against the
prosecutions are misguided because they mischaracterise stages of investigation as
at the ‘judicial examination’ stage, rather than as within the prosecutor’s discretion
whether to proceed further,'™ and reinterprets the facts surrounding Mr. Patriciu’s
arrest. Romania also argues that the State’s conduct involved in the Wiretapping
Complaint was lawful in Romania and consistent with European human rights law
at the time it was conducted (between October 2003-January 2005), and that it
only later became unlawful as a result of a subsequent decision of the European

Court of Human Rights in 2007 in Dumitru Popescu v. Romania (“Popescu”).'°

Last of all, the Statement of Defence casts fundamental doubts on the Claimant’s approach to

damages and quantum, '*° on the basis that it did not seek to quantify direct damage, but on

13! Statement of Defence, J 82 and {85 - { 100.
'? Statement of Defence, J 101 - { 133.

'83 Statement of Defence, J 134 - 261.

'4 Statement of Defence, J 139.

135 Statement of Defence, J 184 - 191.

86 Statement of Defence, J 262 - 313.

38

‘virtual damage’ represented by share prices, which rise and fall. The Respondent also notes
the Dunbar report does not quantify any losses outside of its period and therefore noted that no
claim need therefore be determined in relation to the conduct of the tax authorities and the
Presidential Administration on the basis that no damage is quantified in respect of their
activities.'°” The Respondent also disputes the claims for interests and costs. On the strength

of the Dow-Lapuerta report, the following criticisms are levelled at the Dunbar report:

a. It analyses the wrong shares'*® — it looks at the shares of RRC, and not TRG, and
looks only at the minority shares and does not take into account the “minority
discount” when compared with the controlling holding, and does not consider the
fact that minority discount may fluctuate differently in price from one event to
another compared with those of the controlling stake in RRC. Accordingly, these

fluctuations are not a reliable indicator of actual losses.

b. It uses as ‘events’ incidents that are not the subject of a complaint by TRG™ - for
instance it does not consider that some actions taken by the State not in violation of
the Treaty may have caused a drop in the share price. Moreover, apart from the

large number of items complained about that are not listed as part of the 12

0

events, important corrections to the RRC share price have been ignored, for

instance the ‘surge’ \4!

in share price of 7.4% on the news that the Romanian
privatization agency had completed its investigations on 2 February 2007 finding
no irregularities, and also the news of the sale of Mr. Patriciu’s 75% stake in TRG
to KazMunaiGaz; these increases alone wiped out the decreases in share price.

142

c. It contains serious technical errors, ~~ notably that the 12 event days were chosen

on the basis of finding a negative impact, and thereby excluded twenty other days,
which if they had been included, would have rendered the ‘damages’ sum

statistically insignificant with a margin of error of US$O - 280 million.

'57 Statement of Defence, { 273.

'88 Statement of Defence, J 282 - | 286.

139 Statement of Defence, {| 287 - 290.

140 4 full list is given in Annex A to the Statement of Claims.
‘5! Statement of Defence, J 295.

'® Statement of Defence, J 298 - 301.

39

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

d. Finally, no ‘reality checks’ were undertaken against the results, which would have

shown that the figures were not reliable. M48

In sum, the Respondent asks the Tribunal to dismiss all the Claimant’s claims with costs.

C2.C. The Respondent’s Rejoinder

The Respondent’s Rejoinder repeats the argument that TRG advances in substance a denial of
justice claim but fails to show that domestic remedies have been exhausted and thus cannot
succeed, and reasserts that the investigations were justified and that the orchestration theory
(which Romania describes as now being two theories) fails. Further, the Respondent argues
that there are no breaches of the Treaty, individually or collectively, and that no loss has been

established.
The Rejoinder addresses these points in four sections:

a. First, by looking at the legal principles in the case, namely the issues of denial of

justice and burden of proof;

b. Secondly, addressing what Romania refers to as the new allegations related to the

State-orchestrated harassment;

c. Thirdly, Romania deals with the allegations on the facts relating to the tax

authorities, the Presidential authorities and the prosecutorial authorities; and

d. Fourthly, issues of quantum, interests and costs.

The Rejoinder is supported by a second witness statement of Ms. Nistor, a second expert report
on damages by Messrs. Dow and Lapuerta, an expert report on Romanian constitutional law by

Professor Mihai, and a second legal opinion by Professor Kiihne.

In relation to the first section about the legal principles at issue,'“* Romania first argues that

the case advanced is really one of denial of justice, but that the prerequisite of exhaustion of

143 Statement of Defence, {[ 302 - 305.
4 Rejoinder, | 39 - J 115.

40

domestic remedies is not met. Secondly, Romania argues that TRG’s approach to standard of
proof is incorrect, especially when very serious allegations of bad faith by State authorities are
advanced on the basis of what it characterises as scarce evidence. These two issues can be

summarised as follows:

a. Denial of Justice: '*° Romania argues that in asking the Tribunal to decide whether
Romanian prosecutors have abused the system of administration of justice TRG is
in effect making a denial of justice claim, which is a specific form of complaint
under the fair and equitable treatment Treaty standard and under customary
international law. Romania argues that the acts of the prosecutors are partaking in
the administration of justice, and it is irrelevant whether they are formally part of
the judiciary or the executive. Romania argue that since this is in substance a
denial of justice case there is a requirement to exhaust local remedies, which
renders the complaints premature or moot, and as such inadmissible. The only
exception to this requirement is if the system itself is regarded as inadequate or

ineffective, but no such complaint is made by TRG.

b. Burden and Standard of Proof:'*° The Rejoinder claims that TRG is seeking to
lower the standard of proof and indeed to shift the burden of proof onto Romania
because it has “no evidence to substantiate the serious claims it makes.”'*”

Whatever principles of international law may exist to shift the burden of proof in

certain circumstances should not be applied to the present allegations of State-

orchestrated harassment, largely because the allegations are so serious, amounting
to criminal conduct, and they should be measured against the need for a high level
of proof. Various international authorities indicate that clear evidence is required
of fraud or other serious conduct; !48 in the present case such evidence as has been
tendered is unreliable and emanates from interested witnesses and parties, which

does not even meet a prima facie standard.

'45 Rejoinder, 1 44 - 158.
146 Rejoinder, | 59 - | 76.
'37 Rejoinder, | 59.

"8 See the authorities discussed at Rejoinder, J 62 - 65.

41

 

90.

c. International and ECHR Standards of Due Process: '*’ The Rejoinder argues
that the criticisms levelled against the actions of the prosecutors have to be judged
against the international standard of due process, which is a subset of the fair and
equitable treatment standard (and other Treaty standards) relied on. The ECHR
standards provide relevant guidance in this connection, particularly Article 6 (right
to a fair trial), not least because the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human
Rights (“ECtHR”) offers thousands of decisions to draw on, but its relevance is as

guidance by analogy only, and is not binding. 180

Romania chides TRG with trying
to have matters both ways, both referring to ECtHR judgments and also claiming

that the Treaty imposes a higher standard.

The second section of the Rejoinder deals with TRG’s orchestration theory, arguing that the
motivation alleged to underpin it is elusive and self-defeating: the two ‘orchestrators’ are said
to have different objectives, '*! and the different objectives (a merger between TRG and RAFO
Onesti on the part of Mr. Talpes, and keeping Mr. Patriciu out of political opposition on the
part of President Basescu) conflict with one another and lack credibility. 'S2 Tt is further argued
that the State in fact assisted TRG (by allowing the restructuring of a large State debt) while
letting RAFO Onesti undergo bankruptcy, and an eventual change of ownership, which is
hardly consistent with a conspiracy to pressurize RRC in favour of RAFO Onesti. The
Rejoinder notes in this context that the original claim that the State was seeking to undermine
the privatization of RRC has now been dropped and replaced'*? by a claim that President
Basescu persecuted Mr. Patriciu for political and commercial objectives, which Romania
argues remains elusive and unexplained, particularly in respect of its allegedly commercial
objectives. Further, Romania points out that Mr. Stanescu is currently indicted for market
manipulation along with inter alia Mr. Patriciu and Mr. Stephenson, and his evidence is not to

154

be trustes The Rejoinder reiterates that the investigations were commenced for proper

purposes. '°>

14 Rejoinder, 177 - J 115.
150 Rejoinder, {{ 107.

'S! Rejoinder, 121.

'S2 Rejoinder, {141 - J 156.
'S3 Rejoinder, | 133.

'4 Rejoinder, | 136.

'55 Rejoinder, {171 - 4 201.

42

91. The third section of the Rejoinder deals with the tax authorities, the Presidential administration

and the prosecutorial authorities:

a. Tax authorities:'*° The Rejoinder argues that TRG no longer bases its arguments
on the objective evidence provided in the Statement of Claims, but instead on
tendentious and inaccurate evidence from Mr. Volintiru, for example, that the
number of copies made during investigations was in the region of 10,000, whereas
Ms. Nistor’s second witness statement shows that the true figure was

approximately 1,500. 1

b. Presidential Administration:'** The Rejoinder notes that the case has shifted
from saying that the President has no investigatory powers to saying that any
powers are merely formal, whereas Professor Mihai’s expert opinion shows that
presidential powers are real and significant, and encompass the creation of the

Talpes report.

c. Prosecutorial authorities:'’ This question occupies the most substantial part of
the Rejoinder. In arguing that there is no sufficient basis for the serious allegations
made against the prosecutorial authorities, the Rejoinder makes a number of

separate points: that there is only one complaint made for which there has been a

160

finding of a breach of Romanian law;'”” that the press releases contained nothing

that could be characterized as ‘conclusory statements’; that much of the case now
rests on the timing of the press releases, but offers no evidence of bad faith in that
respect; that the courts did indeed find that there was sufficient evidence to justify
preventive arrest,'®! but simply found that the circumstances did not warrant arrest

prior to trial (although in relation to Mr. Patriciu this was on one occasion only on

162

a majority decision); ”~ that the allegation that there was a breach of Treaty per se

when the GPO sought to justify the arrest on the basis that the ICSID proceedings

16 Rejoinder, {| 207 - | 216.

157 WS Nistor 2, J 19.

158 Rejoinder, {217 - 4 249.

159 Rejoinder, | 250 - | 412.

1 Rejoinder, {[ 255.

‘6! Rejoinder, p. 101 for the chart on the rights to arrest, and when they arise.
1© Rejoinder, | 316.

43

92.

93.

D

=

94.

had been sought to pressurise prosecutors, was “pure rhetoric?! — especially in

light of the fact that the GPO’s arrest proposal was rejected by the court.

In its fourth part, the Rejoinder returns to the arguments on damages and quantum in TRG’s
Reply, and claims that TRG has had to amend its argument and contend that the entire criminal
proceedings brought against Mr. Patriciu are illegal, otherwise it would not be able to stand by
the NERA calculations which find decreases in share price due to events that were not claimed
to be illegal by TRG (see paragraph 418 of the Rejoinder).'™* Romania also criticises the
arguments advanced in the Reply as to direct damages on the basis that Mr. Benabderrazik,
Mr. Patriciu and Mr. Stephenson tender nothing to support the assertions contained in their
witness statements. The Rejoinder re-iterates that there is no sufficient evidence of any
damage at all, and finally disputes both the amount of interest claimed and the date from which

it is claimed as being without foundation.

THE HEARING

The hearing was conducted over seven days at the premises of the World Bank in Paris

165

between 3 and 10 May 2010.” This summary of the hearing will take the following format:

e Opening statements;
e Fact witnesses;
e Experts; and

e Closing statements.

Opening Statements
D1.A. Claimant

The opening statement for TRG was given by Mr. Legum who began by noting three matters

on which the Parties were in his submission agreed:

16 Rejoinder, 319.

1 Rejoinder, | 416 - 1 418.

ions on Saturday, 8 May 2010 were held, by agreement between the Parties and the
Tribunal on private premises that had been graciously placed at the Tribunal’s disposal. The Tribunal places
on record its gratitude to Debevoise & Plimpton LLP.

44

 

95.

96.

a. The merits of the criminal charges are not relevant to the issues before the

Tribunal;

b. An abuse of the state’s prosecutorial machinery to achieve commercial or political

aims is a failure to accord fair and equitable treatment under the BIT; and

c. There is broad agreement on the legal standards to be applied. Whilst there are
some disagreements on denial of justice, exhaustion of domestic remedies, burden

of proof and other issues, the main Treaty standards are agreed.

Mr. Legum submitted that the real disagreement was on the evidence. Mr. Legum contrasted
TRG’s seven fact witnesses, all of whom were directly and personally involved in the matters
on which they testified, with Romania’s two witnesses who presented no more than an after-
the-fact analysis based on a review of the paper record, and address only peripheral issues such
as the number of tax audits of RRC and the procedure for complaints about prosecutors.
Mr. Legum stated that “/iJn many respects the most prominent feature of this hearing is the

19166

number of empty chairs, notable examples being Mr. Talpes, his assistant Mr. Sarbu, Mr.

Tender of RAFO Onesti, Prosecutors Cristescu and Nastasiu, and no-one from the presidential

administration. As the ICJ had recently pointed out in the Pulp Mills case,'®”

a respondent
should cooperate in the provision of evidence in its possession that would assist in resolving

the dispute.

Mr. Legum submitted that the Parties were however in disagreement over two important legal
issues: denial of justice and the burden of proof. In relation to denial of justice, it was
submitted that there was no reason to consider prosecutors in the same category as courts, nor
could Romania legitimately disregard Article 8(3) of the BIT which expressly waived the
exhaustion of domestic remedies. In relation to the standard of proof, Mr. Legum noted that in
Romania even criminal courts do not apply a standard of ‘beyond reasonable doubt,’ and thus
it was curious that Romania claimed that an equivalent standard should apply before the
Tribunal. As to the burden of proof, Mr. Legum cited from the Parker case: “/t/he
Commission denies the ‘right’ of the respondent to merely wait in silence in cases where it is

reasonable that it should speak ... in any case where evidence which would probably influence

166 Transcript, Day 1, p. 19, lines 24-25.
17 Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay (Argentina v. Uruguay), ICJ Reports 2010, 20 April 2010, p. 14.

45

97.

98.

99.

its decisions is peculiarly within the knowledge of the claimant or of the respondent
government, the failure to produce it unexplained may be taken into account by the
Commission in reaching a decision.”'®

As to liability, TRG’s case was based on the following five elements: the central facts of
TRG's case remained unanswered; Romania repeatedly failed to reflect the record accurately,
and mischaracterised it; Romania frustratingly continued to offer a misleading account of the
basics of its own criminal procedure; the Tribunal should draw appropriate inferences from
Romania's failure to comply with the Tribunal's document production order (on grounds
precisely the same as those the Tribunal had rejected) in relation to the requests for the
production of banking documents, and the wiretapping warrants; finally, the record established
a close causal link between the acts violating the treaty and the injury suffered by TRG.

Mr. Legum emphasised in this context that TRG’s assessment of damages was conservative.

D1.B. Respondent

Opening the case for Romania, Mr. Schneider also laid emphasis on the significance of the
facts. The facts in dispute ranged however from the important, to the less important, to the
trivial. The issue according to TRG was said to be whether the facts sustained the contentions
behind their claims; but in Romania’s submission there was also an issue about what needs to
be established to determine this. In that context, there were also a number of important legal
issues in dispute. It was agreed that it is not for the Tribunal to decide the investigations and
criminal charges pending in Romania; instead TRG sought damages under the BIT. But it

> 169

could only do so through the “prism of the Treaty.

Dr. Heiskanen pointed out that damages were not being sought either for the tax investigations
or for the Talpes report, thus showing that they were “not so much causes of action as ... legal
theories that the claimant is pursuing in support of its conspiracy theory.”\ TRG’s core
claims related to the administration of justice, in which context Romania had registered a
preliminary objection during the jurisdictional phase, which the Tribunal had joined to the
merits.'”! These core claims remained ones for denial of justice and the standard for claims of

that kind was high and went well beyond the mere erroneous application of local law. They

‘8 Transcript, Day 1, p. 29, lines 1-8.

© Transcript, Day 1, p. 61, line 20.

Transcript, Day 1, p. 63, lines 6-8.

'! Decision on Respondent's Preliminary Objections on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 1 114.

46

10

101.

S

were unavoidably subject to the requirement to exhaust local remedies, because it is an
inherent part of the delict and not a mere procedural bar that could be waived.'” TRG
persistently contradicted itself by relying on some of the decisions emerging from the
Romanian judicial system while seeking in the Arbitration to re-litigate other such decisions or
to raise issues pertinent to the Romanian judicial process.'7? In most of these cases, the proper
place for these arguments to be made was in the Romanian legal proceedings that were still

pending.

Revisiting TRG’s orchestration theory, Mr. Schneider drew attention to the precise nature of
the so-called Talpes report: in fact a document prepared by Mr. Paul Sarbu and approved by
Mr. Talpes, and forwarded to the President with the request that he (the President) request that
certain information be provided to him, which the President duly did. The entire issue of the
‘legality’ of the Report was a red herring. There was no need to call evidence from
Messrs. Talpes, Iancu, and Tender, as TRG had argued: the latter two had never been part of
the Romanian government, and the former had long since ceased to be so. The sheer
incompatibility of the events in 2004/5 with the conspiracy theory (the PNA investigation was
concluded, RRC was given a substantial tax benefit by the State, Mr. Iancu and Mr. Tender
were indicted, RAFO Onesti went bankrupt, and a new President took office) shows how
unacceptable it is for the Claimant to throw a few allegations into the air and say that that
reversed the burden of proof, and required Romania to disprove conspiracy. As stated in

comparable circumstances by the Tokios Tokelés Tribunal:!7* “

there was every reason for the
authorities to begin, and continue to press, an enquiry into the connection of [the investor’s
subsidiary] with these dubious events. There is thus an entirely plausible alternative to the
hypothesis of a [conspiracy]. It is not for the State to prove that [the investor’s subsidiary]
was guilty of economic offence, and the relevance of this material is simply to show that the
Claimant is in error in asserting that the events have no credible alternative explanation other

than a concerted, malicious and politically inspired campaign.”

Mr. Schneider concluded his submissions by analysing in greater detail, on the basis of the
documents on the record including internal e-mails within RRC, the grounds for the
investigations into (i) the Petromidia privatization, (ii) the Libyan receivable, and (ii) market

manipulation of the flotation of Petromidia shares in their initial public offering, in order to

Transcript, Day 1, p. 66, lines 6-8.
Transcript, Day 1, p. 68, lines 6-7.
Rejoinder, 4 204.

Im
173
174

47

show that in each case they met the recognized threshold for the initiation of investigations —

irrespective of whether offences were or were not ultimately proved to have been committed.

102. The opening statement was completed by Mr. Scherer who analysed examples of the conduct
of the tax authorities, the Presidential administration, and the Prosecutorate in the course of
exercising their functions, in order to show that none of them amounted to the sort of manifest
injustice or gross deficiency that would be required to constitute a breach of the standards

under the BIT.

D2. Fact Witnesses

D2.A. Claimant’s Witnesses
103. The following among the Claimant’s witnesses of fact were called for examination:

a. Mr. Stephenson” gave evidence that he sold his entire interest in TRG in 2007,
and had no current business relationship with TRG or Mr. Patriciu. He noted that
criminal charges were still pending against him in Romania, and that he had been
advised not to answer questions relating to those proceedings. Mr. Stephenson
recalled being told about the meetings Mr. Patriciu had with Mr. Talpes and Mr.
Tender, though he was not present. He explained further matters set out in his
statements. He also explained how he was aware of the detrimental impact of the
events referred to by TRG on its value, by constant monitoring of the news and the
share price, as well as to the impact on day to day business operations, such as
securing finance facilities and access to favourable interest rates. Mr. Stephenson
clarified paragraph 25 in his third witness statement as being inaccurate as a result

ps 99176
of “exuberance,

on the basis that the investigation referred to came to an end
and did not conclude that there was no evidence of a violation of securities laws in

relation to RRC shares.

b. Mr. Patriciu!” explained his professional background, and how he became

interested in the oil industry, including the acquisition of the Petromidia refinery.

" Transcript, Day 1, p. 135ff.
"© Transcript, Day 1, p. 179, line 22.
"7 Transcript, Day 2, p. 28ff.

48

In direct examination (examination in chief) Mr. Patriciu stated that the
restructuring of debt referred to in Romania’s Rejoinder was not anything like state
aid (as attested to by the European Commission and the Romanian Competition
Council) but rather this was a restructuring of a government debt, which was
converted into bonds which the company had to pay interest on.!8 Mr. Patriciu
gave evidence of the state of the oil industry in the first few years after 2000, that
some of the controls against RRC had been undertaken because RRC was
suggesting reform to improve the collection of taxes; in Romania there were many
illicit payments and therefore it was unpopular in both energy sector and political
circles to clean up the industry.” Mr. Patriciu saw the action of Mr. Talpes as
being in support of private interests. In cross examination Mr. Patriciu was
uncertain whether President Basescu was interested in causing difficulty for TRG
for political or for commercial reasons. He was referred to a press interview with
President Basescu where the latter said that if they were like RAFO Onesti they
would receive equal treatment. Mr. Patriciu understood this to mean that he was
comparing the two entities and equating TRG with a criminal entity and inviting its
prosecution. In his view this came across more clearly in another interview. In
response to Counsel’s suggestion that in fact the President was being even handed,
Mr. Patriciu said that in context the President was referring to TRG in the same
breath as the company (RAFO) he had referred to as public enemy number one,
and described Constanta Port (where the refinery was based) as Petromidia’s
fiefdom in a mafia context. He accepted that the President signed the debt
restructuring into law, which was good news for the company, but soon after that
that prosecutions started. He said that there were contacts who knew the President
had influenced the investigation, who were part of the Romanian political elite, but
could not be named. In response to the Chairman’s question that it appeared
contradictory to have increased tax revenues by such a tremendous margin and to
be the subject of targeted controls, Mr. Patriciu responded that Romania was a

tribal society, and that different factions in the government would be leading the

"* Transcript, Day 2, p. 39.
" Transcript, Day 2, pp. 46-47.

49

harassment than those who were pleased with the privatization process; there was

conflict between the “two palaces” 180

of the Prime Minister and the President.

c. In the course of his direct evidence (evidence in chief) Mr. Stanescu'*! told the
Tribunal that, very shortly before the hearing, he had reconsidered his decision to
withhold the names of those prosecutors who had told him about the political
motivation in this case, having come to the conclusion that these confidences were
not offered to him in his capacity as a journalist, but as a friend and a private
individual. He proceeded to name four individuals and described the various ways
in which each of them had come to him ‘as a friend of Mr. Patriciu’ to inform him
of the pressure that the State prosecutors were under to take action against

Mr. Patriciu.'*”

Under cross-examination, Mr. Stanescu gave further detail about the criminal
process against him in Romania, about the severance of his relations with the
Romanian Press Club, and about the closeness of his relations with Mr. Patriciu, as
exemplified by the substantial shareholding in the journal Ziua given him by
Mr. Patriciu as a wedding present, which he later sold; he was however unable to
give a figure (including in response to questioning from the Tribunal) on the profit

he made from the sale, although he did not think it was more than US$1.5 million.

d. Mr. Popescu, '83 in cross-examination, described the thorough process instituted in
his Ministry (the Ministry of Economy) for preparing its response to the Talpes
report, on the basis that the President of Romania had asked to be accurately
informed; the Ministry’s response was written on the facts and without any
personal comment about the way that the Talpes report was put together, although
he had personally been surprised to see Mr. Sarbu and Mr. Talpes dealing with this
question. In relation to the restructuring of the government debt, Mr. Popescu
gave evidence that this was not to be characterised as a benefit only to TRG, but in

fact was a way of ensuring that the interest would be paid and the debt repaid,

'8) Transcript, Day 2, p. 111, line 19.

'8! Transcript, Day 2, pp. 115ff.

'® Transcript, Day 2, pp. 119-121. Respondent's counsel protested against the surprise introduction of this
new evidence; see further paragraphs 217-218 below.

'8 Transcript, Day 2, p. 150ff.

50

which benefitted the State. The alternative, bankruptcy, would be negative for the
State as well as for TRG. The solution had been discussed in an inter-Ministerial
Committee, approved by the Cabinet, discussed and approved in Parliament, and

then formally approved by the President and signed into law.

Mr. Budusan'™ described some of the actions of the prosecutors in the opening
and conduct of their investigations which he regarded as egregious, and therefore
as indications of malicious intent. There was no cross-examination by the
Respondent on the basis that Mr. Budusan was the lawyer acting for TRG, Mr.
Patriciu and others in the criminal proceedings in Romania, so that his assertions
amounted to argument, not evidence. '85 Th answer to questions from the Tribunal,
Mr. Budusan described the political pressures he and his colleagues had felt they
were under during his service as a Prosecutor which might emerge as ‘threats and
pressures’ from the persons being investigated or interviewed and the ‘attitude’ of
some politicians. So far as he himself personally concerned, he believed that the
internal disciplinary action that led to his dismissal from the Ministry had been
politically motivated. In his opinion the irregular motivation in the present case
had as its target primarily the reversal of the Petromidia privatization in RAFO
Onesti’s favour and then to damage Mr. Patriciu as a political rival to the

Government in office. '*°

Mr. Benabderrazik'®’ confirmed that he had no subsisting business relationship
with TRG or Mr. Patriciu, and that Mr. Stephenson was a minority shareholder in
his company. He also explained the critical importance of financing to the
business model of TRG and its daughter companies in and outside Romania, as
well as the subjective assumptions that underlay his estimate of the cost to TRG’s
capital valuation of the loss of the opportunity to acquire Petromirrales.'** In
response to extensive questioning by the Tribunal, Mr. Benabderrazik offered
further explanations of (i) his assumptions of the attitudes of TRG’s and Dyneff’s

bankers, (ii) his opinion that at a certain point the focus of Romanian measure

'S Transcript, Day 3, p. 2ff.

1

5 Transcript, Day 3, p. 10.

'86 Transcript, Day 3, p. 1Off.
'87 Transcript, Day 3, p. 24ff.
'88 Transcript, Day 3, p. 30, line 5.

51

shifted from Mr. Patriciu and Mr. Stephenson personally to TRG-owned
companies, and (iii) his valuation in terms of EBITDA of the potential purchase of
Petromirrales!®’ and eventual sale of RRC, including matters he had chosen not to

mention in his witness statement in the interests of brevity.'°

D2.B. Respondent’s Witnesses
104. The fact witnesses for Romania called for examination were the following:

a. Ms. Morariu,'”! a spokesperson of the Superior Council of Magistracy, gave
evidence as to: (i) the structure and independence of the Council, (ii) how the
complaints about the conduct of judges or prosecutors were investigated and
handled, (iii) the applicable legal provisions. Under cross-examination, Ms.
Morariu was asked by Counsel for the Claimant if she had an opinion about
whether the actions of the prosecutors in this case were correct, or in accordance
with normal practice. Ms. Morariu answered that she was not permitted to express
any opinion, but only to report the facts. She confirmed that prosecutors and judges
performed different functions and there were separate disciplinary commissions for
both, within the Council.'"? Ms. Morariu gave evidence that it was very rare for a
prosecutor not to cooperate with an investigation into his or her conduct, but later
in her evidence clarified that there was no legal or employment obligation to do so.

b. Ms. Nistor,'”

explained in detail the materials on the basis of which she had
drawn up, as head of the legal service of the Romanian tax administration,
following TRG’s Request for Arbitration, her summary and analysis of the tax
controls applied in respect of RRC. She explained the different kinds of tax
controls and the reporting changes introduced by the 2004 Fiscal Code in respect
of oil companies, which allowed many controls to be exercised thereafter at desk,
without on-site verification. She had not, however, been involved personally in any

of the tax controls over RRC. Some of these controls had in fact been to RRC’s

'8° When asked in re-direct examination, Mr. Benabderrazik corrected the figure to €40-60 million. Transcript,
Day 3, p. 46, lines 3-11.

190 Transcript, Day 3, pp. 47-54.

19! Transcript, Day 3, p. 55ff.

'2 Transcript, Day 3, pp. 76-77.

'3 Transcript, Day 3, p. 143ff.

 

52

benefit, because they had been carried out to verify, for example, refunds or
rebates for which RRC had applied. Asked to comment on Mr. Patriciu’s opinion
that RRC was the most controlled oil company in Romania, she responded that
there were many taxpayers who made the same claim; but in fact the most
controlled company was RAFO Onesti, by a factor of roughly four, partly because
of the existence the criminal investigation for fiscal fraud and money laundering.
In her view Rompetrol was uniquely benefited by restructuring the RRC debt into
bonds; the same treatment was refused to RAFO Onesti, leading the tax
administration to apply for it to be declared bankrupt, though in the end the Courts
permitted a restructuring and the RAFO Onesti tax liability was repaid in full,
whereas RRC’s continued to be carried in the special bonds. Later in cross
examination, it was put to her that other companies had their debt written off.
Ms. Nistor accepted that, but only after the matter had been approved by the

Competition Commission.

D3. Expert Witnesses

D3.1. Legal Experts

D3.1.A. Claimant

105. Legal expert evidence was presented on behalf of TRG by:

a. Professor Popescu, an expert in public law, with teaching posts in both Romania

and France, 194

on the powers of the presidency and the legality of the Talpes
report. He characterized Romania as “a parliamentary regime with some elements
of a semi-presidential regime.” °> Simply because there may be political actions
of the President did not make them constitutional. Instead, the powers attached to
the role are formal or symbolic, other than as constitutional mediator. In that
context, he described in detail what he considered to be the different forms of
mediation, which governed the right of the President to information for the
purposes of the mediation function. He discounted the legal effect of political and

constitutional practice, since it was the constitutional provisions that were decisive.

'4 Transcript, Day 4, p. 2ff.

195

Transcript, Day 4, p. 6, lines 6-7.

53

It was put to the Professor that he is known publicly in Romania as an advocate of

limited powers of the presidency. 196

b. Professor Boroi, who teaches criminal procedure at a police academy in
Bucharest, but had never practiced law or been a judge or prosecutor, gave his
evidence by video link.'°’ Professor Boroi explained that ECHR case law was
automatically effective in Romania and had to be understood as having a
retroactive effect. He explained the difference between legal investigations in rem
and in personam, and the obligation on the prosecutor to identify suspects and
inform them of the charges against them as soon as possible. He analysed the
provisions of Romanian law governing public information in criminal charges and
the restrictions applicable in that respect. In his view the prosecutors acted
unlawfully by detaining Mr. Patriciu for 24 hours before he had had an opportunity
to complete his defence statement and there had been a variety of other breaches of
criminal procedure, but accepted in cross-examination that the complaints lodged
against them had not been upheld in the Romanian internal procedures. He
described the regime under Romanian law for the interception of communications
(wire-tapping) and the decisions of the ECtHR on that subject. He confirmed that
the President is responsible for the appointment of prosecutors, but does so at the
proposal of the Minister of Justice, with the endorsement of the Superior Council

of the Magistracy, from among prosecutors or judges with ten years of experience.

D3.1.B. Respondent
106. Legal expert evidence was presented on behalf of Romania by:

a. Professor Mihai'®® who gave evidence, as an expert in civil law and intellectual
property, about the powers of the presidency and the legal status of the Talpes
report. Apart from numerous academic and professional activities, Professor

Mihai had acted as expert before, as well as sitting as an ad hoc judge at the

  

16 Professor Popescu later clarified under cross-examination that by ‘mediates’ he means where one is invi
by disputing sides to mediate a dispute and that “a mediator does never intervene on his own initiative
Transcript. Day 4, p. 35, line 14.

'°7 Transcript, Day 4, p. 110ff.

'8 Transcript, Day 4, p. 86ff., and Transcript, Day 5, p. 5ff.

54

 

ECtHR. He had been for two years Secretary General of the lower Chamber of the
Romanian Parliament and was President of the Constitutional Court of Romania
from 1998 to 2001, in which capacity he had been directly involved in
approximately 1,000 judgments, and was currently a member of the Council of
Europe’s Venice Commission. In Professor Mihai’s opinion, the President was
entitled to seek and receive information in order to conduct his role to “guard the
observance of the Constitution and the proper functioning of the public
authorities” (per Article 80(2) of the Constitution). He disagreed with Professor
Popescu’s approach towards the analysis of the President’s powers via a typology
of constitutional forms, since it was more profitable to look at the particular
provisions in the particular constitution. Professor Popescu’s was an isolated view,
the commonly accepted view among experts being that the President had three
principal capacities: Head of State, head of the executive power (jointly with the
Prime Minister) and mediator between various branches of state. In the last of
these capacities he could act on his own initiative, not only on request. Moreover
the President plainly did have decision making powers in the field of national
security and national defence, as witness the express words of Articles 92, 93 and
119 of the Constitution. He referred specifically to the powers under Article 119
of the National Defence Council (over which the President presided), as regulated
by a specific law which Professor Popescu had not mentioned in his evidence. The
Decree establishing the Presidential Administration indicates that its purposes are
to support the President in the accomplishment of his duties, and the National
Security Department (which at the time Mr. Talpes had headed) was part of it.
Professor Mihai cited various legal provisions which showed that the Talpes report
and the information requested in it fell under the Department’s recognized
functions. The extensive cross-examination of Professor Mihai covered, inter alia,
the conduct of the President’s function of mediation, the appointment and

functions of the staff in his Administration, and the legislation dealing with

 

national defence, and the consequences in law if a public official exceeds his
functions. In the course of the cross-examination it was established that the Head
of the Presidential Administration by decree functioned also as Presidential

Counsel for National Defence.

55

b. Professor Kiihne,'” a specialist on human rights and the ECHR, with
considerable experience teaching criminal procedure internationally, who
described his participation in helping to revise the Criminal Procedure Code in
Romania (as well as other countries), in particular so as to take account of recent
developments in criminal procedure in Europe. He explained that, while ECtHR
jurisprudence is directly effective in Romania, until there is a decision by the
Strasbourg Court, the domestic courts are entitled to decide the matter as they see
fit, and there is no retroactivity of ECtHR judgments. He pointed to the very
extensive nature of the Strasbourg jurisprudence on the right to a fair trial, which
covered 60% of the cases heard to 2009, in 62% of which the claimant had been
successful. In his view no State was entitled to grant exemptions from criminal
law or procedure, which explained the limited impact in this field of investment
treaty obligations and the like. He described the successive stages of a criminal
investigation and charges and what procedural rights attach at various points, both
under general principles of law and as reflected in the law of Romania. It was the
daily business of the criminal process that courts disagreed with prosecutors, but
that did not amount to a ‘breach of the law’ or an ‘abuse’. He discussed the duty
of prosecutors to provide public information about investigations, but strictly
limited by the presumption of innocence. He described what he thought was the
impressive amount of detail in the indictment in the Romanian proceedings,
amounting to 700 pages. The formal structure of the Romanian prosecutorate was
familiar from other European systems, and in some respects superior to that of the
French, on which it had been modelled. His extensive cross-examination covered
various ECtHR cases, notably those on interception of communication, the
sequestration or confiscation of evidence and fair trial rights, and the nature of

Romania’s obligations under the ECHR for its system of domestic law.”

D3.2. Damages Experts

107. Each Party’s damages expert was heard and subjected to cross-examination by the other Party,

following which the experts were examined jointly in conference by the Tribunal itself.

'9 Transcript, Day 4, p. 154ff.
2 Transcript, Day 4, pp. 178-224.

56

D3.2.A. Claimant

108. Expert evidence for TRG was given by Dr. Okongwu of NERA”! who presented to the
Dunbar and Okongwu reports, and commented also on the reports of Dow and Lapuerta. He
explained the event study method, and justified its application to the circumstances of the
present arbitration, noting that the basic working premise had been that the investigations of
the PNA and the GPO were illegitimate, and as a consequence had caused harm to TRG, more
specifically in the form of the effects on RRC which could be observed in the public trading of
its shares on the Bucharest Stock Exchange. The source of the harm was taken to be the
negative effect it had on RRC's creditworthiness; RRC’s difficulty to obtain the financing it
needed, so limiting its opportunities to make productive investments; increased costs of doing
business; as well as lost management time in responding to the investigation. The performance
of RRC on the stock market had been compared to that of its peers, and showed systematic
underperformance. The 32 ‘event dates’ selected for the Dunbar report represented the
emergence of ‘new news’ about the PNA and GPO investigations linked to the precise time at
which it emerged. The event study method was simply an empirical technique, and its
appropriateness in these circumstances lay both in the fact that it offered testable and replicable
results, with a known margin of statistical error, and because it helped identify the price
movement (in terms of the share price) caused by the ‘new news’. It was of course dependent
for its validity on the existence of an efficient market and on the assumption that investors
were pricing the stock by reference to the future cash flows likely to be earned by the
underlying operating assets. The 12 specific dates selected for use in the Dunbar report on the
basis that they showed a noticeably larger than expected movement in the share price, were a
satisfactorily large return, 8 of which showed a substantial drop in the share price, and 4 of
which a rebound in the wake of favourable news. From that it was a simple matter to multiply
the price variance per share by the TRG holding in the company to arrive at a damages figure.
He explained the reasons why Dr. Dunbar had applied a ‘cap’ to the curative effect of items of
favourable news. He explained also the statistical assumptions that led Dr. Dunbar to focus on
only 12 out of the 32 ‘event days’ and exclude the remainder from his calculations, which led
to confidence in the estimate being more secure (there is less ‘noise’), and resulted in a more
conservative and accurate figure for damages. In his view, the criticism by Dow and Lapuerta

that the Dunbar report ignored a (possibly variable) ‘minority discount’ in respect of the small

°"! Transcript, Day 5, p. LOLff.
S7

109.

proportion of RRC shares traded in the open market was speculative, and not based on
evidence. Finally, he thought that the exclusion of the sale to KazMunaiGaz, and its effect on
the share price, was justifiable, as it had no connection with the PNA or GPO investigations.
Under cross-examination Dr. Okongwu accepted that, particularly over longer periods of time,
the lack of news could be regarded by the market as news in itself, with the effect, for
example, of progressively correcting for discounts earlier applied in the wake of bad news.2”
He accepted also that some of the trigger events chosen were actions other than those of the
PNA or GPO investigations themselves, but justified this on the basis that they were reactions

to PNA or GPO actions.

D3. Respondent

Expert evidence for Romania was given by Professor Dow and Mr. Lapuerta.?” They gave
their evidence together. Their presentation was centred around three elements: which shares to
study; how to pick event days; and understanding what caused the share price to move. The
NERA study, in their view: looked at the wrong shares; made an unscientific, and ultimately
incorrect, choice of event days for study (which Dow and Lapuerta had been unable
themselves to replicate on the information provided) owing to the spread out nature of the
‘event’ in time; and made an unjustified a priori assumption about what caused the share price
to move — in effect chance could explain everything. Far from there being any need to ‘prove’
the existence of a minority discount, NERA simply made the assumption that the 87% of RRC
shares held by TRG, and not traded, tracked exactly the movements of the 17% minority
shareholdings that were traded. In fact, RRC bought 87% of its inputs from various TRG
subsidiaries and sold 33% of its output to TRG subsidiaries, so that the pricings of these inputs
and outputs had a decisive effect, which could operate in a starkly differential way as between
the majority and minority stakes in RRC. That also illustrated why the minority discount
could vary in any direction over time. For a scientifically valid study, the ‘event days’ would
have to be selected in advance, and then subjected to statistical analysis, not selected in
circular fashion in terms of the effects one was trying to isolate, and then discarding the data
that doesn’t show much in the way of effects, and particularly so where one might expect to
have numerous days with relatively small pieces of news, the cumulative effect of which might

be large even though individually they were small. On the one hand, the effects that the

*” Transcript, Day 5, p. 168, lines 20-23.
°° Transcript, Day 5, p. 198ff.

58

110.

NERA reports claimed to have identified were not large enough to be identified compared to
the normal price movements that you would expect over a two - to three-year period.
Referring to the title of a Sherlock Holmes story (Silver Blaze), ‘The curious incident of the
dog in the night time,’? Professor Dow argued that the days where ‘nothing happened’ were
relevant and could not be ignored, because they could represent good news. To their mind the
NERA study arbitrarily excluded days which seem to be relevant, and where large positive
price movements took place, the first of these being the clearance of the Petromidia
privatization and the other the purchase by KazMunaiGaz of a large majority stake in TRG,
which took place in February and August 2007 respectively. A problem, moreover, as with so
many valuation studies, was the difficulty in isolating, or even defining, the appropriate
counter-factual; in this case, with the cause of action represented to be an unlawful criminal
investigation, the precise counter-factual ought to be a ‘lawful criminal investigation’ — for
want of which a qualitatively different comparator had been chosen, namely no investigation at
all. They could conceive of five competing possibilities to explain the results found by the
NERA event study: (i) nothing really happened, it was down to chance; (ii) a transfer of value
took place from the minority to the majority shareholders; (iii) the feared loss of the
Petromidia refinery; (iv) loss of the ‘political premium’(i.e. political favour or disfavour,
which had nothing to do with investment treaty claims); or (v) management distraction,
cancelled projects, cancelled investments, and increased borrowing costs. Dr. Dunbar had
opted for (v), but only by taking RRC as a proxy for TRG itself (the actual claimant), whereas
the published material in analysts’ reports and company reports showed that — for TRG — the
general sales and administration expenses as a percentage of revenue were actually going

down in the period in question.

Messrs. Dow and Lapuerta were cross-examined at length over the validity of the event study
methodology, the existence and effects of a minority discount, the selection of events, the
widening of the event window, and the relationship between the movements of the RRC share
prices and the market in general. The cross-examination established that there was a certain
period in respect of which the damages calculation had not been performed, so no damages

claimed, because it preceded the listing of the shares on the Bucharest Stock Exchange.

°4 Transcript, Day 5, pp. 211 and 261.
59

111. On Saturday, 8 May 2010, the two sets of damages experts were examined in conference by

the Tribunal. Dr. Okongwu was joined for this purpose by Mr. McKenna.”
112. In the course of this examination, it was accepted:

a. That the calculations in the NERA reports were proxy measurements, though there
was disagreement over exactly what the proxy stood for, and over whether the

proxy technique used was appropriate;

b. That the event study method had been used in situations of multiple events, for the

purposes of class actions in US courts;

c. That there would be dangers in pre-selecting events by the application of legal
criteria (breach/no breach) rather than economic criteria, but by the same token it

would be impossible to disaggregate the effects of make-up events;

d. That the major disagreement over the events excluded by the Dunbar report lay not
in the level of damages calculated, but in the effect on the confidence interval in

respect of the results;

e. That there were particular difficulties in finding a monetary value for a ‘lost
opportunity’; the alternatives to valuation by the market via share prices were
likely to give no better than a range of values, the selection between which would
have to entail applying other criteria of reasonableness; the problem was to a large
extent one of causation: can you link the lost opportunity to the event which is said

to have generated the loss of the opportunity?

f. That the NERA reports had allocated interest (at rates specified by their client,
TRG) on the basis that the damage was suffered as of the particular event day, but
had not allocated interest at all (even from the event day) when there had been a

subsequent curative event fully offsetting the initial damage.

205

Transcript, Day 6, p. 2ff.
60

113. At the conclusion of the day’s hearing, the President gave the Parties, on behalf of the
Tribunal, the following guidance as to matters on which it would like to hear from them in

their closing arguments on the final day:

... the Tribunal would be interested, in addition to the assumption we make that you will want
to use your closing statements to assess the state of the evidence and the conclusions to be
drawn from the evidence we heard during the week, to have the argument focus on breach of
treaty, which actions by whom are asserted to be a breach of treaty and on what basis; and in
particular, if you are talking about ... fair and equitable treatment, what the standard is that
you assert should be used. All of these [are] fairly standard and obvious questions.

The Tribunal would also be grateful to hear argument from the parties on causation. In other
words, insofar as damage is asserted or claimed for breach of treaty, what the link is between
the events/actions/omissions asserted to be a treaty breach and the damage which is asserted
to have been caused. I suppose connected with causation one should also incorporate, to the
extent to which you feel able to deal with it, the question of foreseeability, which in some legal
systems is an element defining claimable damage.

That branches out into two further questions. We ... would like to hear argument from the
parties on what law should govern the assessment of damage. We would also like to hear from
you on the question of the attribution of various acts that have been brought into issue to one
or other of the parties, depending of course on the identity of the act and the actor. That's a
question that goes in both directions, both to claimant and to respondent.

I think those are the main issues. I ought perhaps to say that when we are talking about
breach of treaty, we are thinking specifically of the protections that the treaty covers, and

therefore how all of the forms of damage which have been at issue can, or alternatively

cannot, be brought within the umbrella of the treaty. 206

D4. Closing Statements
D4.A. Claimant

114. Closing for the Claimant, Counsel submitted” that the evidence of the witnesses for TRG was
thoughtful, honest and probative. He sought to contrast this with the lack of utility to be
gained from the fact witnesses for Romania, who had no first-hand experience of the case,
whereas those who did have this knowledge had not been put forward as witnesses. In relation
to the evidence as to the President’s powers, Mr. Legum submitted that Professor Popescu was

right about the law and Professor Mihai (for the Respondent) was right as to the practice,

2 Transcript Day 6, pp. 76-77.
°°" Transcript, Day 7, p. LOff.

61

leading to the conclusion that the Talpes report was an excess of authority.7°* Although in
excess of authority, the actions were cloaked with governmental authority and therefore
attributable to the State in international law. Two categories of acts might be considered as
directed at TRG: acts that on their face addressed TRG or its investments in Romania
(including the attachment of TRG’s shares and the prosecutorial press releases that mentioned
TRG or its investments); and acts that addressed officers or directors of TRG or its Romanian
investments in their corporate capacity as such (including the detention of Mr. Patriciu). The
announcements by the PNA were described by Mr. Legum as “nothing more and nothing less

20° without redress. At the time Mr. Iancu and Mr. Tender

than a trial of TRG in the press,
approached Mr. Patriciu about a merger to ensure that Romanian oil companies fully
‘cooperate,’ it was common knowledge in the region that Romanian companies, led by RAFO
Onesti and supported by Mr. Talpes, were the leading supplier of oil products to Serbia during
the UN-imposed embargo of the Milosevic regime; TRG, with Western institutions as
shareholders, lenders and stakeholders, could not be involved in such practices, and Mr.
Patriciu made that plain. Although the focus later shifted from Mr. Talpes and his links to
RAFO Onesti when Mr. Basescu was elected as President, the latter was at daggers drawn with
the new Prime Minister, Mr. Tariceanu, who was close to Mr. Patriciu, which made Mr.
Patriciu a vulnerable political target. The evidence of Mr. Stanescu was particularly telling in
this regard. These two motivations for persecution of TRG had been not directly addressed by
Romania, who argued only that there were justifications for the actions of the prosecutors; he
submitted that the ends did not justify the means, which were unfair and inequitable. The
proposal by the Respondent that the Tribunal could recognize the existence of probable cause
for the prosecutors’ investigations was a red herring, and was not the role of an investment
tribunal; it was well established that actions that were legal under the local law could
nonetheless breach international law. A prosecution mounted for commercial or political
reasons is internationally wrongful regardless of probable cause. Mr. Legum submitted that
there were a number of specific actions that in and of themselves constituted breaches of the
BIT,” as well as there being an overall violation when the effect of all the Romanian
measures were put together. The key text was Article 3(1) of the BIT with its guarantee of fair
and equitable treatment, which was not qualified by any reference either to customary

international law or to the international minimum standard for the treatment of aliens. He

8 Transcript, Day 7, p. 20, lines 15-20.
2 Transcript, Day 7, p. 26, lines 18-19.
210 Transcript, Day 7, p. 40 line 24 — p. 43 line 4.

62

115.

116.

analysed in detail what TRG submitted was a pattern of abusive acts directed against TRG or
its officers, both those confirmed by Romanian court decisions and those that were established
by the record but had not been found to be breaches by the courts, mentioning in particular in
the former category the unprecedented fine levied on the GPO for failing to attend court
hearings. The consequences of breach of the BIT guarantees were regulated by international
law, which was in any case part of the law of Romania for the purposes of Article 42 of the
ICSID Convention. Therefore, as in the SD Myers v. Canada award, the Tribunal should allow
all damages flowing from the breach that were not too remote. Under the definitional structure
of the BIT there was no reason not to evaluate these damages by reference to TRG’s shares in
RRC, which constituted its investment. He marshalled the evidence showing the causal link

between the breaches of treaty and the damage being claimed.

Mr. Burn addressed matters of damage and quantum. The event study method was indeed one
amongst various alternatives, but was tried and trusted in US courts and had been accepted by
courts in other jurisdictions and deployed in other arbitrations. He submitted that the NERA
assessment provided a conservative but reliable assessment of what was likely to be a
significant underestimate of the damage actually suffered by TRG. One of its merits was to
reduce the amount of subjectivity inherent in other methods. Nothing in the witness

conferencing had shaken the methodological validity of the NERA studies.

D4.B. Respondent

Closing for Romania,”!' Counsel characterised the case as a dispute between two large clans in
the oil industry in Romania, both of which were at the time under investigation in Romania, a
country seeking to root out corruption as part of its recent accession to the EU; TRG had not in
general been treated any differently than other companies. The only exception was the
substantial financial advantage it had been granted over its tax indebtedness to the State, which
Romania had had to battle to see through against the initial opposition of the EU Commission.
The two objections raised in respect of the Talpes report (excess of power, and tax secrecy)
had both been argued exclusively in relation to domestic Romanian law, without any attempt
to show that they were Treaty breaches. It could not simply be shrugged off that none of the
Ministers to whom the Talpes report had been forwarded took objection to it, and that it was

the Ministry of Justice (not the Presidential Administration) that had forwarded it to the

*1 Transcript, Day 7, p. 63ff.
63

117.

prosecutorate. In relation to the actions of the Presidential Administration, Mr. Schneider
pointed out that Professor Mihai’s expert evidence was based on the law, but placed the
constitutional texts in the context of constitutional practice, which was as it had to be.
Ms. Nistor’s evidence was factual and put paid to any suggestion of ‘harassment’ by the tax
authorities. Once the evidence was examined, President Basescu’s television interviews of
2004 that arose during the cross examination of Mr. Patriciu showed no more than that in
rooting out corruption Petromidia, RAFO Onesti and other oil companies would be treated
equally during investigations. Mr. Stanescu’s evidence should be disregarded, on the basis of
his conduct, his record, and his evident bias, which destroy his credibility; his evidence did
not, in any case, add anything, since the ‘political’ element in the prosecutions was simply, as
had been seen, that all oil companies should be treated equally. As to the criminal
investigations themselves, there could be no question as to a State’s right or even duty to
investigate breaches of the law, or that the standard for initiating an investigation was the same
as that for conviction in court. There was no basis for the Claimant’s argument on a shifting of
the burden of proof. As to absent witnesses, most of those mentioned by the Claimant either
no longer had any connection with government or were business competitors of RRC; nor
could it possibly be appropriate to bring the prosecutors themselves to the Tribunal to discuss
the case they had under investigation. Mr. Schneider referred to the expert evidence of
Professor Kiihne about the importance of the indictment in the Romanian criminal process, and
noted the significance of the fact that there had been no complaint about the indictment;
likewise, in all the Claimant’s expert investigations of damage caused, the issuing of the
indictment did not figure. Mr. Schneider dealt with the separate charges of market
manipulation in the IPO of RRC shares, which involved Mr. Stephenson as well as

Mr. Patriciu, and drew attention to the change in Mr. Stephenson’s evidence in this regard.

Dr. Heiskanen dealt with the way in which the criminal investigations had been conducted, and
the questions of damages and quantum. As to the first, he recalled the central importance of
the applicable Treaty standard which (as expressed by other tribunals) was manifest injustice,
gross deficiency, abuse of state authority, or discrimination. International law was concerned
with systemic injustice, and did not allow interference with the state's administration of justice
until local remedies had been exhausted, and the alleged injustice had become ripe for
determination by an international tribunal. The BIT added nothing to this, but the area was a
very sensitive one which could have wide-ranging consequences for the system of investment

arbitration. Even without the local remedies rule, the Claimant’s case would fail because the

64

118.

119.

120.

applicable international law standards had not been breached, which could be confirmed by
bench-marking against the more demanding standards of the ECHR, even though the latter
were not directly applicable as such. Mr. Patriciu and his colleagues had regularly availed
themselves of local remedies, often with success. The facts showed that the wire-tapping was
entirely separate from the criminal investigations complained about. The ECHR decisions
were not about the lawfulness of individual warrants but about the overall control system for
wire-tapping. As for the attachment of shares, it appeared, not least from the dissenting

opinion of one judge, that the issue under Romanian law was far from clear.

In relation to the damages and quantum issues, international law laid down that there had to be
a loss, which meant a loss that had materialized, not a mere prospect of loss, and that the loss
must not be merely speculative. In this case there was no loss, as TRG still owned RRC, RRC
still owned Petromidia and the share price had recovered. The Claimant had not relied on best
evidence, but on a proxy approach, which ended up with no more than approximate values for
purely speculative loss, as in the famous fable of la Fontaine about the dog that dropped its
prey for the shadow, and ended up losing both; the prey being the ‘direct damages’ and the
shadow the larger prey, represented by the claimed losses to RRC, which were too remote and
too speculative to be claimed as damages. It was possible that the event study method might
have been appropriate — if, for example, RRC had in fact lost the Petromidia refinery — but that
was not the case. He recalled the methodological flaws in the NERA reports as they emerged

in the expert examination.

Winding up for the Respondent, Mr. Schneider contested TRG’s claim for pre-judgment
interest unless it could be shown that the Claimant was in fact out of pocket and had to borrow,
and contested the rate TRG had used for post-judgment interest, which ought to be the same as

for loans to the Romanian Government.

D4.C. The Tribunal

Bringing the hearing to a close, the Chairman offered further guidance to the Parties, as to

issues to be covered in the Post-Hearing Briefs:

Perhaps in that context -- but I don't make this as a formal request or guidance -- it might be
useful for the parties, in putting together their post-hearing briefs, to think about the question
of whether damage is an essential element of the kind of claims for breach that are being put
forward in this case. And if so, or if not, is it possible to conceive, even hypothetically, of a
breach of the kinds that have been spoken about which has no damage attached to it?

65

El.

121.

122.

Alternatively, if damage either is an essential element of the claim or a liability in damages
flows automatically from a breach, then the greater the clarity the Tribunal can have on the
exact nature of the damage claimed will, of course, be of enormous help in beginning to
formulate a decision on this issue. In that context, it does seem to me, on the basis of the
responses of the members of the Tribunal to the argument before us, that questions of timing of
loss will be important, as indeed will be a further development of the arguments about interest
in that connection, which have been touched upon by the respondent now but which are
certainly capable of being further developed by both sides in the course of their subsequent
written briefs?

POST-HEARING SUBMISSIONS

Claimant

ELA. Claimant’s First Post-Hearing Brief

In responding to the questions posed by the Tribunal (paragraph 120 above), the Claimant’s
First Post-Hearing Brief submits that damage is not a necessary element of its claims. Rather,
responsibility under international law flows from breach, not proof of loss. Nevertheless it
contends that TRG is well able to establish loss in this case, for which “the event study put
forward by NERA ... represents a solid and reliable basis for quantifying the damage incurred

213 and that “TRG has suffered losses at least in the magnitude assessed by

in this dispute’
NERA.”*"* The heads of direct damage are stated to be: increased legal costs, increased public
relations costs, increased financing costs, lost or diminished investment opportunities, and

moral damages.

The Post-Hearing Brief further develops the Claimant’s case in relation to specific issues that

were explored during the hearing, as follows:

215

a. The Talpes Report,” and the threatening meetings which preceded it, are said to

show principally that the subsequent investigations were not legitimate but were

212

 

‘ranscript, Day 7, pp. 126-127.

The Post-Hearing Brief also put forward in parallel an alternative basis (without prejudice to the NERA
report) for the assessment of direct damages, in the range US$178,735,927 - US$272,140,187. In its direction
dated 2 September 2010, the Tribunal ruled that it had not given leave for the submission of new evidence at
the stage of the Post-Hearing Briefs, so that new documents submitted with the Post-Hearing Briefs were not
in evidence and would not be taken into account by the Tribunal, but that it reserved the right to call for further
submissions from the Parties on the assessment of damages, although it would do so only if it found this to be
necessary for the framing of its Award.

214 Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 261.

215 Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, { 10 - 20.

66

213,

  

rather instigated on commercial motives. Secondarily, the Talpes report itself was
an excess of authority by Mr. Talpes’s Department, which had no authority

regarding the privatization of an oil refinery.

b. The PNA Press Campaign,”'° is said to have caused great damage to TRG due to
the timing of their press releases (shortly before RRC’s shares were relisted on the
Bucharest Stock Exchange), and the content of these releases, which contained
unjustifiable conclusory statements referring to fictitious share capital
contributions by Petromidia shareholders and quantifying damages that resulted.

The market understood TRG to be the target of this press campaign.

c. President Basescu’s Interview on Realitatea TV,”"” on 10 January 2005, is said
to have shown his clear intent to support unwarranted investigations against TRG,
motivated by the political objective of causing damage to the Tariceanu
government, which was supported by Mr. Patriciu and which was the principal

beneficiary of the substantial tax payments made by TRG.

d. Further Acts taken by Romania,”"* also caused damage to TRG, measured by
falls in RRC’s share price, such as the charges of embezzlement against RRC
managers and press releases on 17 January 2005 with conclusory statements that
RRC was one among several organized criminal groups under scrutiny by the
GPO; the highly publicised summons of Mr. Patriciu for interview in early May
2005; Mr. Patriciu’s arrest on 27 May 2005, and the attempt to extend this by 29
days, resulting in TRG being put on negative credit watch by Standard and Poor’s;
(iv) the release of TRG’s complaint to the prosecutorial authorities that they were
prevented from participating in witness hearings; the extensive requests in early
November 2005 for banking information from TRG’s partners, and the intelligence
service’s illegal wiretapping campaign, which caused the Black Sea Trade and
Development Bank to refuse to extend a loan; the GPO’s application for a 30-day
arrest of TRG’s chief executives, based on the fact that TRG had begun the present

ICSID proceedings, and its effect on operations at Dyneff (TRG’s newly acquired

 

*!© Claimant's
°"7 Claiman
“8 Claimant's

t Post-Hearing Brief, { 21 - 29.
t Post-Hearing Brief, 30 - 33.
irst Post-Hearing Brief, 34 - 54.

67

 

 

123.

124.

subsidiary); and finally the GPO’s unlawful ordinance seizing TRG’s ownership
interest in RRC, which was widely reported in the press, but not discharged by the
courts until months later and not before causing substantial direct damage to

TRG’s access to finance.

e. Fiscal Audits’? were conducted in bad faith according to the reliable eyewitness
evidence of Mr. Volintiru, whereas Ms. Nistor’s evidence was limited to the
general structure of tax audits and her feeling that there was nothing unusual about

the audits of RRC.

f. The impact of these actions on TRG,” were wide ranging: seventeen examples
are given in the Post-Hearing Brief, ranging from damage to reputation and
increased legal costs, to more specific matters such as losing a €100-150 million
Eurobond offering, losing the opportunity to acquire Petromirrales, and increased

borrowing costs of between 0.2 and 0.35%.

These actions are all attributable to Romania, on the authority of Article 7 of the Draft Articles

on State Responsibility; each of the acts complained of was cloaked in governmental authority.

The Post-Hearing Brief argues that there are four scenarios for which there is liability under

the BIT:

a. apattern of abusive acts by Romania;””!
b. criminal proceedings brought for political or commercial purposes;
c. individual acts by prosecutors or others breaching the Treaty;?* or

d. acombination of the above.**

laimant’ s First Post-Hearing Brief, { 55 - 56.

laimant’ s First Post-Hearing Brief, { 57 - 175.
>! Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, {| 102 - J 108.
222 Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, {| 109 - J 126.
3 Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 127 - J 135.
224 Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, { 136.

68

125.

12

12

x

128.

an

The Claimant reiterates that its case is not to be characterised as a denial of justice and
therefore conditional on the exhaustion of local remedies, on the basis that (i) GPO prosecutors
are not courts, (ii) the local remedies rule is expressly waived in the Treaty and the ICSID
Convention, and (iii) that Romania identifies no effective remedy available to TRG that was

not pursued.

The loss claimed by the Claimant is a computation in monetary terms of the results flowing
from the wrongful acts.> The NERA event study methodology is said to share this objective
with any other methodology, such as an assessment of direct damages. The Post-Hearing Brief
sets out the Claimant’s position in relation to the legal standards to be used to assess

recoverable losses, including the applicable law,”?°

228

whether damages are an essential

227

element,~’ the causation test for damages,~” the nature of the damages suffered by TRG,”

230 along with further submissions in relation

whether damages need to be fixed with certainty,
to the suitability of the NERA quantification of damages. As already noted in paragraph 121
above, the direct damages claims is accompanied by a further claim for moral damages (as

awarded in several earlier ICSID arbitrations”*!) in the sum of US$46 million.?”

. The Post-Hearing Brief itemizes in tabular form the Claimant’s submissions as to the timing of

the individual items of loss or damage, and asks for interest at 6%, compounded monthly.

E1.B. Claimant’s Answer to the Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief

In its Answer to the Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief (also called “the Claimant’s Second
Post-Hearing Brief”), the Claimant rejects again the idea that its claim is for a denial of justice,
and states that it has never advanced such a case. The Answer further claims that the
Respondent’s Post-Hearing submission repeats assertions that are demonstrated to have been
false and ignores evidence it cannot answer. In particular, the Answer responds on the

following specific matters:

5 Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, {| 168.

1
26 Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 172 - J 178.

7 Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 179 - J 185.

8 Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, {| 186 - J 195.

>? Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 196 - J 201.

250 Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, {| 202 - J 204.

231 § A.R.L. Benvenuti & Bonfant v. People’s Republic of Congo, \CSID Case No. ARB/77/2, Award, 8 August
1980, and Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/17, Award, 6 February
2008.

28° Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 262 - | 278.

69

a. The attachment of RRC shares” was founded solely on the false proposition (as
found by the Bucharest Court of Appeals) that the State had suffered damage, and
the GPO delayed lifting the sanctions by inter alia neglecting to attend three

hearing dates (which led to it being fined).

b. The arrest of (or attempt to arrest) Mr. Patriciu and Mr. Stephenson,”** contrary to
Romania’s assertion, was indeed unlawful, and it was wrong to suggest that the
attempt to arrest Mr. Patriciu following commencement of these ICSID
proceedings was inconsequential and doomed to fail. On the contrary, it had been

shown that this led to a US$70 million drop in RRC’s share value.

c. The PNA and GPO press releases**> were timed to harm TRG, and it is no
excuse to say that they coincided with key events in the investigations. Instead,
these key events always seemed to coincide with important events for TRG. In
relation to the conclusory statements, TRG agrees that the statements should be
read as a whole, and nowhere does ‘alleged’ appear to indicate that the matters are

other than a foregone conclusion.

d. The wiretapping” had been described by the Court of Appeal as being under the
‘pretext’ of national security, which should be taken in its ordinary meaning of

being an ungrounded or untrue reason invoked as justification.

e. Romania accepts that the bank requests were directed to some 60 banking

institutions,”*” but has provided no justification for doing so.

f. Romania’s case distorts the record over the PNA and GPO’s other procedural

violations.”*

jaimant’s Second Post-Hearing Brief, 46 - 52.
st-Hearing Brief, 53 - 57.

 

jaimant’s Second Post-Hearing Brief, {| 67.

70

129.

E2.

130.

13

132.

The Claimant’s Answer acknowledges that the Tribunal has not admitted into evidence the
new documentation submitted on direct damages, arguing instead that there was already on the
record evidence of direct damages of well over US$100 million; these include legal and public
relations costs, increased costs of financing, the loss of three projects or acquisitions, the
obstacles in the way of the integration of Dyneff, and moral damages for loss of reputation and

creditworthiness.”

Respondent

 

E2.A. Respondent’s First Post-Hearing Brief

The Respondent’s First Post-Hearing Brief argues that the case has far-reaching consequences
for treaty arbitration, because the context is the investigation of a politically active Romanian
national for serious economic crimes arising from the privatization of a key refinery, the
misappropriation of State assets and manipulation of the stock market. That national,
Mr. Patriciu, is seeking to influence these investigations by abusing the dispute resolution
procedure available under the BIT: he admitted as much during the Hearing, stating that he

sought the closure of “the investigation against us.

. The Tribunal is invited in these circumstances to exercise restraint where there are such high

political, social and economic interests at stake for the State, and the claims are essentially
ones for denial of justice, and the investigations are still ongoing. This restraint is said to be an
‘eminently sensible’ requirement of the law “for the proper administration of international
justice.” The Post-Hearing Brief reiterates that in the face of such serious allegations the
standard of proof that the Claimant must meet is higher than the ordinary balance of

probability.

The Respondent’s First Post-Hearing Brief further elaborates Romania’s legal arguments in
relation to what it asserts is the essential nature of TRG’s claims,” including the argument
that local remedies must first be exhausted, because (i) the claims are made against prosecutors
who are part of the justice system, (ii) exhaustion of domestic remedies is an inherent element

of a claim for denial of justice, and (iii) there cannot, accordingly, have been a ‘waiver’ of this

2° Claimant’s Second Post-Hearing Brief, | 92 - J 102.
> Transcript, Day 2, p. 102, lines 4-12.

*41 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, 8.

>” Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 19 - { 101.

71

133.

13

135.

-

inherent substantive requirement (the waiver referred to by TRG relates to a procedural
requirement for admissibility). Romania also reiterates its submissions as to the higher
standard of proof required because: “the Claimant has chosen to make its claim specifically in
terms [of] State-orchestrated conspiracy — an allegation that is by definition based on criminal
intent, bad faith and systemic abuse of State authority”?
The Post-Hearing Brief argues that TRG’s orchestration theory, which is the centre of its
case,” has collapsed, noting in particular that the early argument that tax audits from 2001-
2004 were part of state harassment has effectively been dropped, citing TRG’s opening

statement at the Hearing that this was “peripheral” to the case.745

The Post-Hearing Brief argues instead that it is now clear that there is no link between the two
orchestration theories, and also that there is no evidence that these theories led to the criminal

© which it submits are entirely justified. There was no tax investigation

investigations,”
singling out TRG, as witness Ms. Nistor’s testimony at the Hearing that “we have in Romania
many taxpayers that are saying that they are the most controlled;”™"" instead TRG was “highly
privileged by the State”***® when compared with RAFO, because it enjoyed the restructuring of

its government debts in the region of almost US$700 million.

The Post-Hearing Brief submits further that the Talpes theory collapses as confused,

2 and based on a paucity of flimsy evidence; likewise the theory

incoherent and speculative,
in relation to President Basescu also collapses,”°° as the statements to the press by President
Basescu relied on by TRG in fact show that he rejected political favouritism and sought to
eliminate corruption in Romania as part of the aim to comply with the stringent requirements
of the EU. Mr. Patriciu’s evidence that he saw blue binders in President Basescu’s office with
Rompetrol’s name on them is open to the perfectly legitimate explanation that the President
wished to remain informed. The only other witness presented was Mr. Stanescu, whose

evidence involved a dramatic volte face with respect to whether he was bound to protect his

sources because of journalistic obligations of confidentiality. His evidence was in fact

*43 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, { 73.

*4 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 102.

*45 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, {| 103, especially footnote 133.

*46 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 104 - {| 105.

*47 Transcript, Day 3, p. 150, lines 9-10, cited at Respondents First Post-Hearing Brief, | 108.
>48 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, { 109.

> Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 112 - {| 130.

250 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, J 131 - 151.

72

13

13

6.

n

worthless: he had been publicly discredited as a journalist, is under indictment for insider
trading in RRC’s shares, and is beholden to Mr. Patriciu personally — Mr. Patriciu is the

godfather of his children and has made gifts to him worth many hundred thousands of dollars

The Post-Hearing Brief reiterates Romania’s case that the investigations were justified,?*!

drawing a parallel with what the Tribunal found in the Tokios Tokelés case that there was a

992!

“plausible alternative to the hypothesis of a [conspiracy], 52 namely that the enquiries were

justified.

In relation to the four scenarios said to amount to breaches of the Treaty, the Post-Hearing
Brief argues in detail that each of them is misguided and misconstrues the facts.?°3

Specifically:

a. TRG’s case over the tax authorities?’ shifted substantially during the
proceedings, from stating that the number of controls were excessive, to recasting
this discredited argument to focus on the manner in which the controls were

conducted, which was later also discredited by Ms. Nistor’s evidence.

b. The Presidential Administration did indeed have the authority to produce the
Talpes report,” given the wide-ranging interest that the Presidency has in
matters of national security (Articles 92, 93 and 119 of the Constitution); and his
role as a mediator (Article 80 of the Constitution) requires him to remain informed,
as Professor Mihai’s evidence shows.”*° There is no evidence that the report was

deliberately leaked to the press.

c. TRG availed itself of domestic legal remedies and therefore has no complaint in
relation to the attachment of RRC shares.**” It was not the case that there was no
basis for the attachment, as shown by the dissenting Judge in the Bucharest Court

of Appeal who found that it was “possible and necessary to establish the

°5! Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 154 - { 206.

°° Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Award, 26 July 2007, {| 136, Exhibit RLA-85,
cited at Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, {| 166.

°53 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 207 - { 495.

254 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 212 - { 228.

°55 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 229 - { 280.

°56 Transcript, Day 4, p. 93, lines 8-12, cited at Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 243.

°57 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, J 281 - { 302.

73

attachment upon the shares.”?* In any event, no damage is claimed in relation to
this complaint — the Dunbar report excluded it as being statistically insignificant.
Lastly, the complaints in relation to delays of the GPO in attending hearings in
relation to the attachments are highly misleading; the prosecutorial authorities have
ruled that there was no bad faith, and the so-called ‘unprecedented fine’ amounted

to some €50.

d. The timing of the PNO and GPO press releases” either matched events in the
investigations or responded to statements made by the press concerning the
investigations, and were not targeted at TRG. There was no basis for the claim
that the press releases contained ‘conclusory statements,’ as the very purpose of
the press releases was to announce that an investigation had commenced, and
could not therefore be construed as involving final conclusions, as borne out by the

wording of the announcements taken as a whole.

e. The complaints by TRG over the arrest and further applications for arrest of
TRG executives are hollow. The arrest of Mr. Patriciu was confirmed to be
legal by the Romanian courts. The fact that the Romanian courts did not accept the
applications for further arrests does not make those applications contrary to

Romanian or international law.

f. It was wrong to interpret the Court of Appeal as saying that the wiretapping was
brought falsely on the basis of national security.7°! The Romanian word
“pretextul” in this context has a variety of nuances, and the Court of Appeal made
clear that they would not challenge the merits of a justification on the basis of
national security.? There was no evidence that in 2003-4 the wiretapping was

prima facie contrary to the ECHR.

°58 Official record of the hearing in file No. 12139/3/2006 before the Bucharest Tribunal — Ist Criminal

Division, 26 September 2006, p. 17, Exhibit C-153, cited at Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, 289.
*° Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 303 - 325.

2 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 326 - J 380.

°6! Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, { 381 - { 420.

26 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, { 389.

74

138.

139.

263

g. Requests were made of some 60 banks~” but this was neither illegal nor cause

for complaint, being merely a lawful part of legitimate investigations.

h. The court decisions alleged to have been wilfully disregarded by the GPO*™ did
not preclude legitimate criminal investigations on matters outside the scope of

those decisions.

i. The complaints about the PNA and GPO’s alleged procedural violations® are
misguided and have been universally rejected as involving no bad faith or gross

negligence on the part of the prosecutors.

The Post-Hearing Brief goes on to set out Romania’s submissions in relation to the law
applicable to damages, in particular that only damages that have materialized are not too
remote and are not speculative are recoverable as a matter of international law; the figures in
the NERA study are rejected as wholly speculative and unreliable.” If the Tribunal rejects
the contention that the investigations were motivated by a political conspiracy then the entire
NERA analysis can be disregarded.” There is no direct loss, which explains why none had
been claimed, and the claim for interest is considerably overstated, as the award of interest is

; the Tribunal is invited to decline to award interest, but the rate of 6% is accepted

 

case specifi

as appropriate if it does do so,” but not compounded, and to start only from the date of the

Award.

E2.B. Respondent’s Answer to Claimant’s First Post-Hearing Brief

In its Answer (“Comments on Claimant’s First Post-Hearing Brief,” also called “the
Respondent’s Second Post-Hearing Brief”), the Respondent argues that aside from the attempt
to introduce a fresh quantum claim, there was not much of substance that had changed in
TRG’s case, but there were rather misrepresentations or inaccuracies of presentation of the

evidence, so that Romania’s submissions in earlier pleadings stood.

°63 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, J 421 - 437.
264 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 438 - 451.
265 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 452 - { 490.
266 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 503 - 519.
°67 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 520 - { 583.
268 Respondent’s Second Post-Hearing Brief, { 589 - 595.
2 Respondent’s Second Post-Hearing Brief, { 637.

75

140. In general, Respondent’s Answer alleges that TRG is desperately looking for any finding it can

141.

Fl.

142.

143.

144.

to assist Mr. Patriciu and his associates in the context of legal and political battles in Romania.

In relation to the new quantification of damages, Romania argues that TRG sought to
restructure its case on quantum following its collapse at the Hearing, but characterised the

evidence on which it was based as misleading, inaccurate, and unreliable; specifically:

a. The claim for reputational damage is farcical, being without proof and based

arbitrarily on a third of NERA’s assessment of loss in the Dunbar report;

b. Although damages may “not be fixed with total certainty,” the Respondent has
demonstrated that the NERA calculations are statistically no different from zero,

and hence that “there is no evidence of any damage at all’27!

c. There appears to be “no causal link between the Claimant’s claims and its

. ee age 9.2
alternative quantification”; 72

d. There is no sufficient evidence to support the losses claimed.”

COSTS SUBMISSIONS

Claimant’s Costs Submissions

The Claimant’s Answer seeks recovery of the following costs: €4,524,781 plus US$3,064,481

plus £2,321, plus interest at a rate of 6% compounded monthly until full payment.

The basis for seeking this sum is that Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention gives the Tribunal
discretion in awarding costs, but commentators have noted that the principle that costs follow

the event is gaining ground.

Conversely Romania’s claimed legal costs are unreasonably high, especially in light of the fact

that it has done very little to advance or develop any positive case, but has rather confined

t Post-Hearing Brief, J 111.
7 t Post-Hearing Brief, J 147.
3 Comments on Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 148 - { 167.

76

 

145.

F2.

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

G.

itself to casting doubt on TRG’s case. TRG denies that it added to the costs of the proceedings
itself by changing its case or case theory; any amendments were only made as a result of the

unfolding of subsequent events.

In a subsequent exchange of submissions (on 2 and 8 November 2010) each Party countered

the arguments of the other as to the reasonableness of its legal costs.

Respondent’s Costs Submissions

The Respondent seeks recovery of €9,440,710.93 in costs, plus interest at a reasonable
commercial rate (6 months EURIBOR plus 2%), from the date of the final Award to the date of

payment.

The Respondent argues in particular that it is entitled to recover its costs on the basis that the
Claimant substantially contributed to the complexity of the case by way of repeatedly changing

its case theory and the substance of the allegations in the course of the arbitration.

The Claimant’s claim that in principle costs follow the event is contested; Article 61(2) gives
the Tribunal instead a discretion in the awarding of costs. The Respondent also disputes that it
should be responsible for the costs of the jurisdictional phase of the hearing and its efforts to
exclude a Counsel, on the basis that its claims were reasonable in light of the decisions of other

investment treaty tribunals.

Instead, the Respondent rests on the argument that the arbitral proceedings were brought with
the intention of disrupting domestic criminal investigations while these investigations were
ongoing, for which reason they were premature and, irrespective of the outcome, TRG should

bear the full costs.

In a subsequent exchange of submissions (see paragraph 145 above) each Party countered the

arguments of the other as to the reasonableness of its legal costs.

THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS

Part I: PREMINARY ISSUES

151.

Many arbitral tribunals feel the temptation to say that the case before them exhibits special or
unusual features. In the present instance, the Tribunal feels justified in asserting that it does.

77

The special character of the case is, in essence, that the Claimant’s claims originate in and
focus on measures taken by authorities of the Respondent State in the area of investigation and
possible prosecution of criminal offences. These measures, moreover, are or have been
directed not against the investor itself, a Dutch company, nor even for the most part against its
investments in the host State, but rather against individuals (principally Mr. Dan Costache
Patriciu and his former business associate Mr. Philip Stephenson), the link between the two
being the directing role that was played at the time by Messrs. Patriciu and Stephenson in the
affairs of Rompetrol Rafinare S.A. (“RRC”), the principal Romanian subsidiary of the
Claimant investor, as well as in the management and control of the Dutch holding company
itself.?”* There are, to be sure, certain other complaints about the treatment of RRC’s own tax
affairs, and about other actions alleged to have damaged either the Claimant or its Romanian
subsidiary, but the Claimant’s case stands or falls by whether it is able to make out its claim
that the criminal investigations have breached the rights of the Claimant itself — or (more
precisely) that these criminal investigations are incompatible with the treatment the Claimant is
entitled to expect, as a Dutch investor in Romania, under the terms of the Agreement on
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of The
Netherlands and Romania of 1995 (“the BIT”). In this context, the Tribunal notes that the
relief sought, as originally formulated in the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, included?” a
declaration that the Republic of Romania had breached the Claimant’s and its directors’,
managers’, and employees’ procedural (due process) rights under Romanian and international
law, a request that the perpetrators be disciplined, and an order for the cessation of the criminal
investigations. Since then, the remedies sought by the Claimant have, for understandable
reasons, undergone successive mutations. In the Statement of Claims, although the relief
sought was now framed in terms of the damage suffered by TRG in itself and through its
Romanian subsidiary, the conduct specifically complained of to found the relief sought was
contained in a list of eight points, six of which related, in terms, directly to the conduct of
criminal investigations against the individuals involved, first by the PNA and subsequently by

276

the GPO.”"” Associated with these were two further complaints relating, first, to the issue of a

7

report by the Presidential Administration of Romania,””” and secondly to an attachment of

shares in RRC owned by the Claimant, TRG. All of these grounds of claim the Tribunal will

274 See J 48 and { 49 of the Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent's Preliminary Objections on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, 18 April 2008.

275 See paragraph 47 above.

216 Paragraph 54 above.

27" The so-called ‘Talpes report’ — for the detailed treatment of which see paragraph 209ff. below.

78

 

152.

discuss in detail in the substantive part of this Award. For the moment, it suffices to say that
neither of these two latter grievances (the Talpes report and the share attachment) appears to
the Tribunal to constitute the primary source of TRG’s complaint about its treatment by the
Romanian authorities, nor does either of them appear to be put forward as the basis for
separate and freestanding claims on their own under the BIT. Rather their significance lies in
their alleged relationship to the criminal investigations and the way in which these were carried
out. In the Claimant’s Reply, both the complaints and the relief requested were formulated in

broadly the same way, with certain additions and refinements.”

Lastly, in finally
summarizing its overall case in the Post-Hearing Brief, the Claimant puts forward four
alternative scenarios, all of which, in its submission, give rise to liability under the BIT.” Of
these four scenarios, two implicate directly either the bringing of the criminal proceedings or
the way these proceedings had been conducted; a further scenario is described as ‘a pattern of
abusive acts,’ but on examination the overwhelming majority of the individual acts cited turn
out to be steps in or around the conduct of the criminal proceedings just mentioned; a fourth
and final scenario is then put in terms of a combination of all of the others. Subject to some of
the individual comments that will appear in the detailed reasoning below, the Tribunal finds
nothing surprising or out of the ordinary in these successive adjustments of the Claimant’s
case; it would be a sad day for investment arbitration if parties did not set out to confront in
this way the counter-arguments of their opponents and the emerging facts, so that at the end of
the day the tribunal is faced in a concrete form with the Claimant’s final case and the
Respondent’s final answer to it. The important point for present purposes is rather that the
Claimant’s case in its final version has not broken away from the criminal proceedings against
particular individuals which from the beginning were at their heart; indeed, it still revolves

around them.

That is a circumstance which poses a particular challenge to an investment tribunal, against the
background that there are very few cases indeed amongst the reported Awards which centre on
criminal proceedings against individuals, so that there is a paucity of accumulated wisdom as

to where to strike the balance in that regard between the legitimate interests of the State and

278 Paragraph 66 above.

°? Paragraph 124 above. The four scenarios are: a pattern of abusive acts by Romania; criminal proceedings
brought for political or ‘ial purposes; indivi acts by or others it the Treaty; or
a combination of the above.

79

153.

those of the foreign Investor.”*° Romania, as the Respondent, has made the argument before
the Tribunal that the proceedings about which TRG, as the Claimant, complains should be seen
as part of Romania’s vital fight against corruption, and indeed has situated this aspect
specifically within the framework of the stringent requirements placed upon Romania by the
European Union in the context of its application for membership. Moreover the Tribunal
cannot but take note of the fact that it emerges clearly from the evidence on both sides that the
specific context of the issues leading to the criminal investigations is the privatization of State
assets after Romania’s transition to a market economy — a process which has notoriously led to
acrimonious disputes in numerous other States at a similar stage of their economic
restructuring. The Tribunal wishes to make it plain from the outset that it would be acutely
sensitive to any well-founded allegation that the investment arbitration process before it was
intended to (or was in fact operating in such a way as to) block or inhibit the legitimate
operation of the State’s inherent function in the investigation, repression and punishment of
crime, including economic crime and corruption. At the same time the Tribunal acknowledges
the validity of the Claimant’s argument that the pursuit of crime — or even its mere invocation
— cannot serve on its own as a justification for conduct that breaches the rights of foreign
investors under applicable treaties. To all of which the Tribunal adds a rider of its own,
namely that association with the management of a foreign investor or a foreign investment
cannot serve to immunize individuals from the normal operation of the criminal law,
irrespective of whether the individual is a local national (Mr. Patriciu) or a foreign national

(Mr. Stephenson).

The above is enough to indicate that the Tribunal is confronted with a balancing exercise of
some considerable complexity and intricacy, which it will attempt to conduct in all objectivity,

on the basis of the evidence led before it, and with scrupulous fairness to all involved.

8° Only three such cases have been cited to the Tribunal: in Benvenuti and Bonfant v. Congo, ‘ordinary’
criminal proceedings brought against the director of an enterprise were one factor amongst many others
considered by the tribunal in the context of the investor’s claim of de facto expropriation; in Saluka
Investments v. The Czech Republic, there was a subsidiary argument over abuse of process in connection with
the periods of limitation in civil and criminal proceedings, but this did not form part of the tribunal's decision;
and in Phoenix Action v. The Czech Republic, although ‘ordinary’ criminal proceedings had been brought
against the main investor, the tribunal declined jurisdiction on the basis of the nature of the investment. The
Tribunal has noted two further cases not cited before it: in City Oriente v. Ecuador, the Tribunal’s Provisional
Measures Order of 19 November 2007 required the Respondent to desist from pursuing a criminal
investigation, but that was simply for the purpose of freezing the situation as it stood at the time of the
initiation of the arbitration, and pending the Tribunal’s Award; and in the well-known case of SGS v. Pakistan,
the Tribunal expressed itself as follows, again in the context of a Provisional Measures Order: “We cannot
enjoin a State from conducting the normal processes of criminal, administrative and civil justice within its own
territory.” (Procedural Order No. 2, 16 October 2002, p. 301, 13 ICSID Rev. — FILJ (2003))

80

  

 

154.

155.

156.

157.

158.

There remain certain other preliminary matters which the Tribunal finds it convenient to
dispose of at this point, before it proceeds to examine the detail of the evidence in front of it on
each of the Claimant’s heads of claim: the Respondent’s inadmissibility objection; the
relationship between local remedies and BIT claims; the European Convention on Human
Rights; the relationship between legality under local law and BIT claims; the burden and

standard of proof; and damage as an ingredient of BIT claims.

A. The inadmissibility objection

In its Answer to the Request for Arbitration and its Memorial on Preliminary Objections, the
Respondent advanced, in parallel with its Objections to Jurisdiction as such, a general

objection to the admissibility of the Claimant’s claims. In its Decision of 18 April 2008 on

281

Jurisdiction and Admissibility,” the Tribunal decided to join this objection to the merits,

under Arbitration Rule 41(4), “to the extent that the objection retains its force in the light of

the Pleadings as they develop.”

In that Decision,”*

the Tribunal described the admissibility objection in these terms:

As originally formulated by the Respondent in its Answer to the Request, the grounds of
inadmissibility and abuse of process were run together, on the basis that: “The Claimant’s
claims have been brought for the sole purpose of seeking to place undue pressure on the
Romanian Government in order to force it to terminate the pending criminal proceedings
against Mr. Patriciu and other managers of the Rompetrol group of companies. ... The
principal remedy that the Claimant is seeking is that the Arbitral Tribunal ‘order Respondent
to cease ducting the GPO i igation’.” Subseq ly, the inadmissibility argument was
refined into a preliminary objection in its own right, to the effect that the Claimant’s claim in
these proceedings is in substance a disguised claim for denial of justice and as such
inadmissible ratione temporis so long as local remedies have not been exhausted. This is
accordingly the essence of what the Tribunal refers to above as the Respondent's admissibility
objection.

 

 

The present question that arises is therefore whether this objection does indeed ‘retain its force

in the light of the Pleadings as they have developed’.

The key submissions in that respect are the Respondent’s Rejoinder of 31 March 2010,

paragraph 7 of which asserts that “/t/he failure of the Claimant to exhaust the remedies offered

°8! Decision on Respondent's Preliminary Objections on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 18 April 2008, | 114
and { 116(b).
8? Thid., | 111.

81

15

160.

2°

by the Romanian system precludes the Claimant from complaining before the present Tribunal
about an abuse of the system which it did not allow to function properly;” and paragraph 7 of
the Respondent’s First Post-Hearing Brief of 4 August 2010, which reads, “/t/his case in
substance concerns a claim for denial of justice. In the Respondent’s submission, it is not ripe
for adjudication by an international arbitral tribunal, as the Claimant has not yet exhausted
local remedies or, in instances where it has resorted to local remedies and has obtained relief,

it cannot re-litigate the same claim before an international tribunal. ...°. The Claimant’s
answer to these submissions, as summarized in its First and Second Post-Hearing Briefs,”** is
in part that the local remedies rule has either been waived or is inapplicable, and in part that

the available remedies have either been exhausted in fact, or else are (or would be) ineffective.

These arguments will be gone into in greater detail, so far as material, in the next following
section of this Award. For the moment, however, the question remains whether there is still in
being, at the end of the arbitral process, an inadmissibility objection as such, which the

Tribunal would therefore have to dispose of before it could proceed to the merits.

The Tribunal is not persuaded by the Respondent’s assertion that, once the Claimant’s claims
are subjected to proper legal analysis, they can be seen to be equivalent to classic claims for
denial of justice, which therefore attract all the technical rules that have grown up over the
years around claims of that kind, notably the inadmissibility of such a claim until local
remedies have been exhausted. The objection against the Respondent’s assertion is rather one
of substance. Once a Claimant investor has established its entitlement to the protection
guaranteed under an investment treaty (as the Tribunal has already decided, in TRG’s favour,
in its Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility), it becomes simply a matter as to whether the
facts which the investor alleges, if they can be substantiated, do or do not constitute
contraventions of those standards of protection, and, if they do, what the consequences are in
terms of remedies. It would not, in the Tribunal’s view, be consistent with the established
norms for the interpretation of treaties to read into a given investment protection treaty
additional conditions or limitations that could readily have been incorporated into the treaty
text had the parties so wished, but are not there. In the present Arbitration, the Claimant’s case
rests in the main on alleged breaches of the standard of ‘fair and equitable treatment’ laid down
in Article 3(1) of the BIT, and to a lesser extent on the guarantees of non-impairment and

physical security and protection laid down in the same paragraph. Article 3(1) (which will be

*83 Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, p. 52-57, and Claimant's Second Post-Hearing Brief, p. 7-10.

82

161.

162.

163.

further analyzed below) reads, in relevant part, as follows: “Each Contracting Party shall
ensure fair and equitable treatment of the investments of investors of the other Contracting
Party and shall not impair, by unreasonable or discriminatory measures, the operation,
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal thereof by those investors. Each
Contracting Party shall accord to such investments full physical security and protection.” The
Tribunal cannot find either in the terms of that paragraph, taken in its context in the BIT, or in
the rules for treaty interpretation reflected in Articles 31 et seg. of the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties, any warrant for reading into it an implied term that would subject some
claims for breach of ‘fair and equitable treatment’ to conditions or restrictions, even of a purely

temporal kind, that would not apply to other claims to the same standard of protection.

The Tribunal accordingly finds that, to the extent that an inadmissibility objection on
Respondent’s part should be regarded as still extant, it does not raise an issue calling to be
determined by the Tribunal in limine. The questions that remain under this head will therefore

be decided in connection with the merits, below.

B. Local remedies

The Respondent’s argument on the question of local remedies has however fluctuated; at
times, it has been a full-blooded admissibility objection (see above) aimed at a formal ruling
that the Claimant’s claims are not ripe for the Tribunal to pronounce on them at all; at other
times, it has been more of a defence on the merits, that the Claimant has not proved a definitive
interference with its protected rights sufficient to found an award in its favour on the merits.

This last is therefore an issue for the Tribunal to determine on the merits.

The first question to be settled in this regard would appear to be whether the Claimant’s claims
are in fact to be regarded as claims for ‘the denial of justice’ in the classic sense well known in
international law. It is a main plank of the Respondent’s argument that the claims in this
arbitration should indeed be so regarded, because that is what they amount to in substance,
regardless of whether the Claimant chooses to frame them as breaches of the fair and equitable
treatment standard in order to bring them within the framework of the BIT. That being so (the
Respondent’s argument continues), “/t/he requirement to exhaust local remedies here is
entirely different from the exemption from the local remedies rule under customary
international law, as reflected in Article 26 of the ICSID Convention and Article 8(3) of the

Treaty ... In the case of denial of justice, the requirement to exhaust local remedies is an

83

164.

165.

inherent element of the delict without which the claim is not ripe for international adjudication
.., Whereas the local remedies rule under customary international law is merely an exemption

from a procedural requirement and therefore can be waived 2

In its answers, the
Claimant takes issue with the Respondent over whether, on the normal understanding of the
local remedies rule, there do remain — in actual and specific fact — effective local remedies that
might need to be exhausted.”*5

There is also an issue between the Parties as to whether the activities of prosecutors engage the
denial of justice regime in the first place which should (so says the Claimant) be confined to
the operation of the courts. The Tribunal is hard put to find much of substance in this
disagreement. It would defy logic to suppose that international law lays down a more
demanding standard for the actions of prosecutors than it does for the operation of the courts
before which their prosecutions are brought. Nor can the Tribunal see valid grounds for
distinguishing between them on the basis that the courts enjoy judicial independence whereas
prosecutors are in a more direct sense the agents of the executive power, since (on the one
hand) international law makes no distinction between executive, legislative or judicial organs
for the purpose of attributing State responsibility, and (on the other hand) it is common ground
in the vigorously advanced submissions of both Parties before the Tribunal — the Claimant as
much as the Respondent — that the Romanian prosecutors are required to carry out their
functions in a manner that preserves their independence from executive or political

interference.

The Tribunal begins with the threshold observation that ‘denial of justice’ (with its
concomitant local remedies rule) is a legal institution which has as its very essence the
relationship between a State and aliens within its territory (or under its jurisdiction). It is not a
barrier interposed between a State and its own citizens; whatever rules apply to that
relationship originate in other chapters of international law. This may serve as a further
reminder that the claims before the Tribunal for adjudication in these proceedings are those
which allege unlawful harm to TRG, the Claimant in the arbitration, and that the Tribunal is
not competent, in general or in particular, to pronounce on actions said to have injured either
Mr. Patriciu or Mr. Stephenson, except to the extent that the latter can be shown to have

occasioned unlawful harm to TRG.

284 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, { 25.
°85 Claimant’ s Second Post-Hearing Brief, {| 16ff.

84

166.

167.

168.

Once the matter is seen in that light, then, so it seems to the Tribunal, the Respondent’s
argument simply falls away. If there have been breaches of Mr. Patriciu’s or Mr. Stephenson’s
procedural rights in the course of the criminal investigation process, of a kind that could
conceivably fall within the scope of ‘denial of justice’ (or its equivalent, in the case of Mr.
Patriciu), then — even if those breaches are duly established — they do not and cannot, in and of
themselves, constitute valid BIT claims at the instance of TRG. The rights so breached would
be personal rights of the individuals under investigation. For their breach to entail a valid BIT
claim would require a separate investigation into their direct or indirect effect on the
investments of TRG itself in Romania, and into whether that effect did or did not amount to a
failure to respect the protections guaranteed to TRG, as a foreign investor, under the BIT. But
that would be an investigation of a qualitatively different kind, applying a potentially different
standard, namely that laid down by the relevant provisions of the BIT, properly interpreted and
then applied to the facts of the case. The position is no different if (as is indeed alleged by the
Claimant in certain respects) the interests of TRG itself became incidentally caught up in steps

taken in the criminal investigations against Mr. Patriciu or Mr. Stephenson.

It matters little in this context whether the question of the availability and effectiveness of local
remedies is put in terms of a procedural issue as to whether a claim for injury is ripe for
determination by an arbitral tribunal, or in terms of a substantive issue as to whether the
alleged injury has in fact been sustained. To the mind of the Tribunal, both come down in the
end, within the context of an investment treaty arbitration, to the same qualitative evaluation of
the effects of the particular State conduct that has been put in issue by a claimant before a

tribunal.

C. The European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR

The Tribunal finds this to be the convenient place to address also the relevance to the
proceedings before it of the ECHR, and in that context of the jurisprudence of the European
Court of Human Rights (“ECtHR”) under the Convention. This was a subject to which a great
deal of attention was paid in the written and oral pleadings of both Parties, specifically in
relation to the European Court’s Judgments on the interception of communications (several of
which were decisions against Romania itself), but also in the more general context of the fair

trial provisions of the ECHR, on which the Court’s jurisprudence is very extensive indeed.?*°

°8 Cf. paragraph 106.b above.
85

169.

170.

Both aspects were considered at length in the expert legal report of Professor Kiihne (for the

Claimant), and were covered extensively in his oral evidence before the Tribunal.

The Parties are in basic agreement that the provisions of the ECHR are not directly applicable
as such to the substantive dispute between TRG as the Claimant and Romania as the
Respondent in this arbitration (although there was some suggestion that the ECHR ought to be

taken into account as relevant material for the interpretation of the BIT, under the rule in

287

Article 31(3)(c) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties) Beyond that basic

agreement though, the submissions of the Parties on the relevance of the ECHR to the issues
before the Tribunal, diverged sharply: the Respondent argued that the ECHR was designed to

set the bench-mark standard for the protection of the individual, so that it was “plainly

19288

obvious that any system or practice that met the ECHR standard would a fortiori satisfy the

requirements of the BIT for the treatment of investments; the Claimant argued, in contrast, that

the BIT represented /ex specialis, both in time and in substance, so that an ECHR standard was

289

of no more than incidental or secondary interest. In reality, however, the competing

submissions of the Parties turned out to be less straightforward than that: the Claimant, for
example, invoked judgments of the ECtHR in support of its submissions as to the illegality of

the interception of Mr. Patriciu’s and RRC’s communications,””° as to the effect of bad faith

1

on prosecution,” as to the difference between the status of a prosecutor and that of a court,”

and as to the place of local remedies;””* whereas the Respondent, in addition to claiming that
certain aspects of Romanian internal law offer a higher standard of protection than does the
ECHR,”** also advanced the proposition mentioned above in its reverse form, i.e. that if the
Claimant was unable to establish a breach of the ECHR standard, there ‘certainly’ could not be

a breach of the BIT standard.”°°

Leaving aside for the moment the issues of local law, which will be dealt with below so far as

relevant, the Tribunal’s own view of the matter is as follows. The Tribunal starts from the

°87 “There shall be taken in account, together with the context: ... any relevant rules of international law
applicable in the relations between the parties.”

288 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 40-41.

28 <4] floor but not a ceiling for Romania’s obligations,” Claimant's Reply, p. 2; see also ibid. p. 20.

20 Reply, pp. 67-68.

>" Thid., pp. 39-41.

” Thid., p. 53.

Ibid., pp. 56-59. And at one moment seemed to be asserting that the ECHR itself set the standard of legality
under international law for investment treaty purposes (Transcript, Day 7, pp. 32-33).

?°4 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, { 36.

5 Thid., p. 41.

293,

86

171.

172.

elementary proposition that it is not called upon to decide any issue under the ECHR, whether
the issue in question lies in the past or is still open. Its function is solely to decide, as between

19296

TRG and Romania, “/egal dispute[s] arising directly out of an investment’ and to do so in

accordance with “such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties,”?""

which in the present
case means essentially the BIT, in application of the appropriate rules for its interpretation.
The ECHR has its own system and functioning institutional structure for complaints of breach
against States Parties. If either Mr. Patriciu or Mr. Stephenson — or any of their colleagues —
feels that the conduct of a Romanian authority in his regard violates his Convention rights as
an individual, a Convention remedy is available him, ultimately before the only judicial body
that has the power to give an authentic and binding decision on the interpretation of
Convention rights and their application. Those remedies will continue to be available and will
be unaffected by whatever decision the Tribunal gives in the present case. Convention rights,
with their associated remedies, might also be available in appropriate circumstances to
corporate entities in respect of their presence or activities within the jurisdiction of a State
Party. That would certainly appear to be the case for RRC. Whether a Convention remedy
would equally be available to TRG itself is not a matter on which the Tribunal feels called
upon to speculate; the answer would no doubt depend on the Convention right alleged to have
been breached, the nature of the conduct by a Romanian authority alleged to have caused the

breach, and where that conduct took place.

The above leads the Tribunal to recall once more however — an observation to which it will
return on several occasions in the course of this Award — that neither Mr. Patriciu, nor Mr.
Stephenson, nor RRC, are claimants in this arbitration; the sole Claimant is TRG, the foreign
investor, on the basis of the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of 18 April

2008.

It seems to follow automatically that much of the detailed argument about the application of
specific provisions of the ECHR in the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights,
interesting and illuminating as it has been, is beside the point when it comes to the issues under
the Netherlands-Romania BIT which form the subject of the dispute before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal’s conclusions in this regard march with its conclusions above in respect of denial of

justice and local remedies, and can be summarized in condensed form as follows:

°° Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

57 Thid., Article 42(1).
87

i. The Tribunal is not competent to decide issues as to the application of the ECHR

within Romania, either to natural persons or to corporate entities;

ii. | The governing law for the issues which do fall to the Tribunal to decide is the BIT,
and notably its requirements for fair and equitable treatment and non-impairment
of, and full protection and security for, the investments of investors of one Party in

the territory of the other Party;

iii. The category of materials for the assessment in particular of fair and equitable
treatment is not a closed one, and may include, in appropriate circumstances, the
consideration of common standards under other international regimes (including
those in the area of human rights), if and to the extent that they throw useful light
on the content of fair and equitable treatment in particular sets of factual
circumstances; the examination is however very specific to the particular

circumstances, and defies definition by any general rule;

iv. The claims for decision in the arbitration are those of TRG, in respect of RRC,
TRG’s investment in Romania, which are qualitatively different in kind from
whatever complaints there might be by individuals as to the violation of their

individual rights by Romanian state authorities.

D. Local law

173. The next closely connected issue of general significance is that of the application of local law.
A very substantial portion of the argument advanced before the Tribunal, both by the Claimant
and by the Respondent, went to the legality, under the laws of Romania, of various actions
(and in some cases omissions) on the part of a range of State organs — the President of
Romania; the Presidential Administration; the tax administration; the anti-corruption authority
(PNA); the General Prosecutor and his office (GPO) being the principal bodies involved.
Although there was some dispute as to whether certain individuals, notably Mr. Talpes (see
above) and Ms. Cristescu (first at the PNA, later at the GPO), exceeded their authority or acted
out of personal motives, there was no dispute that all of the authorities and agencies in

question were at all material times organs of the Romanian State, and that their conduct was

88

174.

175.

176.

accordingly attributable to the Romanian State for the purposes of the law of State

responsibility.”*

The question for present purposes is however what relevance it holds for the Tribunal’s
decision on the dispute before it under the BIT that a particular action or course of action on
the part of an organ of the Romanian State is said to have been (or even in particular cases may
have been established to have been) unlawful under the laws of Romania. The Tribunal begins
with two elementary propositions: first, that it is well established that a breach of local law
injuring a foreigner does not, in and of itself, amount to a breach of international law; second,
that the provisions or requirements of local law cannot be advanced as an excuse for non-
compliance with an international obligation.”” Both propositions are, as indicated,
elementary, and neither is contested by either of the Parties in this Arbitration. Likewise, the
Parties are clearly in agreement that the Tribunal is not called upon to act as Romanian judge
of final instance, either to pronounce on the rightness or wrongness of the pending criminal
charges or to substitute a view of its own for the decisions of the competent Romanian
instances on individual steps in the prosecutions or preliminary investigations, or on any other

internal process.

What place, then, does this leave for the pertinence to the dispute before the Tribunal of the
question of lawfulness or unlawfulness under Romanian law? ‘Lawfulness or unlawfulness’
refers in this context of course to the substantive aspects of the dispute, not to the different
issue covered above as to applicability of the local remedies rule on broad admissibility

grounds.

Neither Party’s answer to this question is entirely clear. The Claimant’s answer would no
doubt be that a series of unlawful acts, and even more so if they form a pattern of illegality,
can at its highest be evidence of a deliberate and premeditated intention to cause injury, or at
least of a pervading animus or hostility pursued by inadmissible or improper means, either of
which would be capable of amounting to a breach of the obligations to ensure fair and
equitable treatment or non-impairment or of the obligation to accord full protection and

security. The Respondent’s answer would be a riposte largely on the factual level, to the effect

?°8 See Articles 4 and 7 of the Draft Articles on State Responsibility annexed to UN General Assembly
Resolution 56/83 of 12 December 2001.

°° Cf. Article 3 of the International Law Commission's Draft Articles on State Responsibility, 2001, and the
Commentary, which sets out in extenso the international authorities.

89

 

177.

178.

that it had not been established that there was either an intention to cause injury or a concerted
animus or hostility, and that for the greater part the asserted illegalities had either not been
made out, or had been remedied, or had been proved unfounded, and in any case had not been

shown to have caused injury.

The Tribunal does not find either of these conjectural answers to be entirely to the point, in the
formulation of its decision on the dispute before it. To take the Claimant’s position first (as
would be logical) the Tribunal would certainly not want to exclude the possibility that
deliberate and sustained illegality in the treatment of a protected investment could, in
appropriate circumstances, be suggestive of a failure to meet the applicable standards of fair
and equitable treatment or non-impairment; whether it would be equally apt to suggest a failure
to provide physical protection and security is more open to question, and would no doubt
depend to a large extent on the particular kind of unlawful conduct that was in question. But
material of this kind would be suggestive only; the Tribunal finds it difficult to see (given the
elementary propositions of international law recited in paragraph 174 above) how it could
amount in itself to the fulfilment of a claimant’s burden of proof that the applicable standard of
treatment had been breached, unless supplemented by other evidence of a sufficiently
persuasive kind. The Tribunal reverts at this point to its earlier observation that it is not Mr.
Patriciu or Mr. Stephenson who is the entitled Claimant in this arbitration but solely TRG, the
foreign investor, in respect of its investment in RRC. From this central feature of the case the
Tribunal derives the conclusion that something more would be required in order to bring
allegedly improper actions towards Mr. Patriciu or Mr. Stephenson (which represent the large
majority of TRG’s accusations in this respect) into the legitimate matrix of consideration as
indicators suggestive of internationally unlawful conduct towards TRG. What that ‘something
more’ might consist in seems to the Tribunal once again to be very much a matter of the
specific facts of the case and of the particular conduct impugned, which must therefore be
remitted to a later stage in this Award where the Tribunal considers the criteria by which it will
identify which actions are covered by the BIT and in light of that, assess the detailed evidence

brought before it.

E. Burden and standard of proof

Before proceeding to a more detailed analysis of the competing contentions advanced by the
Parties, the Tribunal thinks that a word of clarification is in order, specifically as to the burden

of proof vs. the standard of proof. The Tribunal believes that the distinction between the two

90

179.

can be stated quite simply: the burden of proof defines which party has to prove what, in order
for its case to prevail; the standard of proof defines how much evidence is needed to establish
either an individual issue or the party’s case as a whole. As soon as the distinction is stated in
that way, it becomes evident that the burden of proof is absolute, whereas the standard of proof
is relative. By this the Tribunal means (again, in simple terms) that if, according to basic
principle, it is for the one party, or for the other, to establish a particular factual assertion, that
will remain the position throughout the forensic process, starting from when the assertion is
first put forward and all the way through to the end. Operating within an international system
characterised by principle rather than procedural formality, the Tribunal is not enamoured of
arguments setting out to show that a burden of proof can under certain circumstances shift
from the party that originally bore it to the other party, and then perhaps in appropriate
circumstances shift back again to the original party. To the mind of the Tribunal, arguments of
that kind confuse, unhelpfully, the separate questions of who has to prove a particular assertion
and whether that assertion has in fact been proved on the evidence. Conversely, by stating the
standard of proof as relative, the Tribunal means that whether a proposition has in fact been
proved by the party which bears the burden of proving it depends not just on its own evidence
but on the overall assessment of the accumulated evidence put forward by one or both parties,
for the proposition or against it. A trivial example is that, if a factual allegation is put forward

by one side and conceded by the other, it no longer requires to be ‘proved’.

Against that background, the Tribunal finds that it can safely rest, so far as the burden of proof
is concerned, on the widely accepted international principle that a party in litigation bears the
burden of proving the facts relied on to support its claim or defence. This is often put as a
maxim: he who asserts must prove (onus probandi incumbit actori). A claimant before an
international tribunal must establish the facts on which it bases its case or else it will lose the
arbitration. The respondent does not in that sense bear any ‘burden of proof” of its own, but if
it fails where necessary to throw sufficient doubt on the claimant’s factual premises, it runs the
risk in turn of losing the arbitration; but only ‘the risk,’ because the particular factual premise
may not in the event turn out to be decisive in the legal analysis. Conversely, if the respondent
chooses to put forward fresh allegations of its own in order to counter or undermine the
claimant’s case, then by doing so the respondent takes upon itself the burden of proving what it
has alleged. The authorities cited by the Claimant in these proceedings under the ‘burden of
proof’ heading, as the Tribunal reads them, refer more to the inferences that a judicial organ

may draw from the failure of a party to produce necessary evidence which it must be presumed

91

180.

181.

to possess; whether any situation of that kind exists in the present case will be addressed
below, in connection with the particular factual allegations in question. It does not, however,

in the Tribunal’s view, amount to casting on a respondent a ‘burden of (dis)proof”.*°°

The Tribunal does not therefore believe that there are any serious issues as to the burden of
proof in the present arbitration. Such issues as there are relate instead to the standard of proof,
where the Parties adopt conflicting positions — though only, it must be said, in respect of
certain aspects of the factual record presented to the Tribunal. For the most part, however, the
Parties are in broad agreement that the standard of proof that must be met is the ‘normal’
standard for claims of breach of the protection provided under a bilateral investment treaty.°"!
Where they differ is over the question whether certain aspects of the Claimant’s factual case
require proof to a higher standard, on account of the nature of the allegations made. More
precisely, the Respondent submits that a settled line of international judicial authority
establishes that ‘clear and convincing evidence’ is required to sustain allegations of unlawful
or malicious conduct, or of bad faith, against a State. The Claimant retorts that this is an
evasion designed to cover the Respondent’s inability to counter the Claimant’s evidence. It
accepts that a higher standard may be applicable in particular circumstances,*”” but asserts that,
on the authorities, this is relevant only when the respondent is impugning the claimant’s

conduct, not vice versa.

The Tribunal is unable to accept, in full, the position of either Party. It starts from the position
that in international arbitration — including investment arbitration — the rules of evidence are
neither rigid nor technical. If further confirmation of that were necessary, in the specific
ICSID context, it can be found in Articles 43-45 of the Washington Convention, the intention
behind which is plainly that a tribunal should possess a large measure of discretion over how
the relevant facts are to be found and to be proved — a general principle which finds strong
reinforcement in the Arbitration Rules, notably in paragraphs (1) and (3) of Rule 34. The
overall effect of these provisions is that an ICSID tribunal is endowed with the independent
power to determine, within the context provided by the circumstances of the dispute before it,

whether particular evidence or kinds of evidence should be admitted or excluded, what weight

50 ‘As illustrated by the awkward formulation advanced by the Claimant in its Second Post-Hearing Brief
(shifting “the burden of proof to Romania to come forward with evidence”), 27.

°°! Claimant’s Second Post-Hearing Brief, | 24; Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 63.

3 «PJarticularly important or delicate questions such as allegations of bribery or fraud”: Claimant's First
Post-Hearing Brief, {| 153.

 

92

182.

(if any) should be given to particular items of evidence so admitted, whether it would like to
see further evidence of any particular kind on any issue arising in the case, and so on and so
forth. The tribunal is entitled to the cooperation of the parties in that regard, and is likewise
entitled to take account of the quality of their cooperation. When paragraph (2) of Rule 34 lays
down that “/t/he tribunal shall take formal note of the failure of a party to comply with its
obligations under [that] paragraph and of any reasons given for such failure,” it no doubt
intends, among other things, that a given tribunal is specifically authorized to draw whatever
inferences it deems appropriate from the failure of either party to produce evidence which that

party might otherwise have been expected to produce.

All of the above tells heavily against any argument that the present Tribunal should regard
itself as bound in advance to expect or to require specific levels of proof or of rebuttal in
respect of particular factual allegations advanced by the Claimant in this arbitration. That said,
the Tribunal will (in this matter as in others) draw on the accumulated experience of other
tribunals for help and guidance when it finds that they have dealt with issues of the same kind
as confront the present Tribunal. It notes in this connection that some of the cases cited to it
derive from the State-to-State dispute settlement field (where the governing principles are not
ex hypothesi identical with investor-state arbitration); and that some of the decisions have in

contemplation bad faith, or fraud, or corruption (rather than, as here, improper, irregular, or

  

potentially sanctionable conduct on the part of State offi 303

‘ials). The guidance which the
Tribunal draws from the cases is that there may well be situations in which, given the nature of
an allegation of wrongful (in the widest sense) conduct, and in the light of the position of the
person concerned, an adjudicator would be reluctant to find the allegation proved in the
absence of a sufficient weight of positive evidence — as opposed to pure probabilities or
circumstantial inferences. But the particular circumstances would be determinative, and in the
Tribunal’s view defy codification. The matter is best summed up in general and non-
prescriptive terms by Judge Higgins, “the graver the charge the more confidence must there be
in the evidence relied on.”** Or as the matter was put in greater detail (citing Judge Higgins)

by the tribunal in Libananco v. Turkey:

*° Unlike the majority in the Tokios Tokelés Award, the present Tribunal does not find it useful to approach
the matter in terms of presumptions either of regularity or of irregularity in the actions of ranking State
officers.

54 “Beyond a general agreement that the graver the charge the more confidence must there be in the evidence
relied on, there is thus little to help parties appearing before the Court (who already will know they bear the

93

183.

184.

185.

In relation to the Claimant’s contention that there should be a heightened standard of proof
for allegations of “fraud or other serious wrongdoing,” the Tribunal accepts that fraud is a
serious allegation, but it does not consider that this (without more) requires it to apply a
heightened standard of proof. While agreeing with the general proposition that —the graver
the charge, the more confidence there must be in the evidence relied on ..., this does not
necessarily entail a higher standard of proof. It may simply require more persuasive evidence,

in the case of a fact that is inherently improbable, in order for the Tribunal to be satisfied that

the burden of proof has been discharged.*”

Therefore the Tribunal, while applying the normal rule of the ‘balance of probabilities’ as the
standard appropriate to the generality of the factual issues before it, will where necessary adopt
a more nuanced approach and will decide in each discrete instance whether an allegation of
seriously wrongful conduct by a Romanian state official at either the administrative or
policymaking level has been proved on the basis of the entire body of direct and indirect

evidence before it.

Connected with the discussion above of the burden and standard of proof is the distinct (but
not unrelated) question of the state of the Respondent’s compliance with the Tribunal’s
directions on the Claimant’s requests for document disclosure. The connection between the
two arises out of the Claimant’s argument that a respondent in ICSID arbitral proceedings is
not permitted simply to sit on its hands, but is under a duty, made into a specific obligation by
Arbitration Rule 34(3), to cooperate in the production of relevant evidence; and its further
argument that, when Article 34(3) lays down that the Tribunal “shall take formal note of’ the
failure of a party to comply with this obligation, that has as an automatic consequence that the
Tribunal should be ready to draw adverse inferences from the failure. The issue is however
distinct in its substance from the burden and standard of proof except to the extent that it may
condition the circumstances under which a Tribunal may take particular factual allegations as

‘proved’ for the purpose of the arbitration.

The Tribunal begins with the observation that the statutory position under the Arbitration
Rules is not quite as simple as the Claimant would have it. Article 34(3) enjoins the Tribunal
also to take formal note of “any reasons” given by a party for a failure to comply, which

inevitably implies, in the Tribunal’s view, that certain failures might, in the particular

 

burden of proof) as to what is likely to satisfy the Court.” Separate Opinion of Judge Higgins in the Oil
Platforms case, ICJ Reports 2003, p. 234.

5 Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Award, 2 September
2011, 4 125.

94

186.

circumstances, be excused, or at least mitigated. It is also the case that Arbitration Rule 34(3)
does not have in view particular failures to comply with particularized disclosure requirements,
but rather an overall failure to comply with the broad obligation of cooperation enunciated in
the Article. Finally, the formula used (“take formal note of’) is an old one going back to the
Hague Convention of 1907 and does not necessarily imply specific consequences in the

drawing of adverse inferences that Arbitration Rule 34(3) could have stated but did not.

In the second place, the disagreement between the Parties in this regard relates to a relatively
limited part of the Tribunal’s Order on document disclosure of 29 October 2009, which
accepted some of the Claimant’s disclosure requests in qualified form, while rejecting others
on various grounds. The subsequent correspondence between the Parties, and between them
and the Tribunal, reveals that in the last analysis, the Parties are at odds only over whether the
Respondent has made a sufficiently full disclosure of the authority for the tapping of Mr.
Patriciu’s personal and business telephones in the period after 31 October 2003, and of the
requests by the PNA and GPO respectively for information from banking institutions in 2004
and 2005. The Tribunal recalls that, as to the telephone tapping, it declined to order disclosure
of the interception warrants for the time being pending a further report from the Respondent on
means by which disclosure could be made without prejudicing Romania’s essential security
interests, but did order disclosure of relevant material obtained by the interception, subject
however to the Respondent’s right to raise individual objections on security grounds. As to the
banking information, disclosure was ordered, relating to defined periods in 2004 and 2005, of
the requests made to banking institutions, and of the latter’s responses but only to the extent
that they disclosed specific protests against the requirement to provide the information
requested. The correspondence on the state of the Respondent’s compliance rests with the
Respondent’s submission to the Tribunal dated 11 December 2009, in which the Respondent
sets out in detail (against the background of the quality of the disclosures it had made under
these two heads) the reasons why, one the one hand, it was not able to make further disclosure,
and on the other hand why no further disclosure was needed in order to open the way to the
argument the Claimant had signalled it intended to make on the basis of the documentary
material in question. The Respondent’s reasons can be summarized in condensed form as
being (in relation to the banking requests) that release would alert the holders of the bank
accounts to the fact that they were under investigation, with the risk of the destruction or
concealment of important evidence and with it of irreparable harm to the investigation itself;

and (in relation to the interception warrants) that they would reveal sensitive material relating

95

18

188.

n

to intelligence sources, which bore a high level of security classification, and to which the
individuals in question would have no right of access under Romanian law; and further that
none of the individuals in question had sought to exercise the right they did have under
Romanian law to apply for the security classifications to be downgraded. The Respondent
further says that a substantial quantity of the material sought is already available to the
individuals concerned under the normal operation of internal procedures and explains why, in
its view, this is so. The Tribunal sees no need to go into the matter in greater detail, nor to
pronounce in any more formal way on whether the Respondent’s admitted partial non-
compliance is or is not justified by the reasons given. It suffices to note that the reasons put
forward by the Respondent, in some detail, are serious ones, of a kind that have been
recognized by other arbitral tribunals, and that they therefore fall comfortably within the
‘reasons’ of which an ICSID Tribunal is required ‘formally to take note’ under Arbitration
Rule 34(3). The Claimant did not, in its closing oral argument or Post-Hearing Brief, press a
request for a specific adverse inference to be drawn. All this being so, and given further the
degree of partial compliance documented in the correspondence between and from the Parties,
and given also the opportunity the Tribunal has since had, after the conclusion of the oral
hearing, to consider the final Judgment of the Romanian Supreme Court on the legality of the
telephone tapping, the Tribunal does not believe that the circumstances call for the drawing of
any adverse inferences in general or in particular. The establishment of the Claimant’s specific
factual allegations, and the arguments based upon them, rests intact, to be judged issue-by-

issue in Part II of this Award.

F. Damage

The final preliminary matter to be dealt with at this point in the Award is one that was raised
by the Tribunal with the Parties at the end of the oral hearing, namely whether damage is an
essential element of the kind of claims for breach advanced in this case. Or, to put the question
the other way round, whether it is possible to conceive, even hypothetically, of a breach of this

. . : 3
kind which occasions no damage.**°

The Claimant dealt with the issue in its Post-Hearing submissions. For the Claimant, the
simple answer is that, in international law, responsibility flows automatically from breach, not

from proof of actual loss. The Claimant cites in this respect Articles 29-31 of the International

5° See paragraph 120 above.

96

189.

Law Commission’s (ILC) draft Articles on State Responsibility, which in its view establish
both that breach of an international obligation entails legal consequences going beyond the
obligation to make full reparation for loss, and that damages are not an essential element of an
international claim. This is, it goes without saying, without prejudice to the Claimant’s
submission that it had indeed produced proof of actual economic loss, and its further
submission that TRG is in the circumstances also entitled to moral damages for harm to its
reputation.*”” The Respondent contended, to the contrary, that actual economic damage was
an essential component of the Claimant’s claims in this arbitration.“

It is convenient therefore to begin with an examination of the draft Articles on State
Responsibility, bearing in mind that their status remains that of a draft, although the degree of

approval accorded to them by the UN General Assembly*””

and in subsequent international
practice*!? amply justifies treating the draft Articles as guidelines for present purposes. While
the Tribunal cannot fault the Claimant’s submission that, under the draft Articles, breach of an
international obligation has wider consequences than the duty to pay damages, it notes (subject
to what will appear later) that, in its final form, the Claimant’s claim is primarily a claim for
damages.*!! The crux therefore lies in draft Article 31, and specifically the ILC’s commentary
to that article (read together with its commentary to draft Article 2). In both places, the ILC
states clearly that there is no general rule requiring damage as a constituent element of an
international wrong giving rise to State responsibility. The ILC goes on to say that whether
damage is or is not actually required depends on the nature of the primary obligation that has
been breached.*!? Moreover the ILC goes on to make explicit that its formulation of the rule in
terms of an automatic obligation borne by the wrongful State is designed to side-step the
problems that would otherwise be caused by the possible existence of more than one State
‘specially affected by the breach,’*? the latter being a phrase repeatedly used in the draft

Articles, along with the expression ‘injured State,’ to express the idea of a State which has

*°7 Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, [{ 179ff.

58 Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, {] 504-507.

5 See UN General Assembly Resolution 65/19 of 6 December 2010.

5! See Olleson, The Impact of the ILC’s Articles on Responsibility of States for International Wrongful Acts,
British Institute of British International Comparative Law (2004)

http://www. biicl.org/files/3107_i fthearti i inarydraftfinal.pdf.

5!" Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, {| 303; the inclusion of “other and further relief’ under e) the Tribunal
regards as entirely pro forma in the light of the substantive arguments made before it.

+2 Commentary to Article 2, {| 9, and Commentary to Article 31, {{ (6)-(7).

53 Commentary to Article 31, | (4).

97

190.

=

191.

suffered damage in some direct sense sufficient to entitle it to ‘invoke the responsibility of’ the

wrongful State.*!4

Transposing the above from the State-to-State to the investment treaty context leads, in the
Tribunal’s opinion, to the following conclusions. The starting point, as the ILC points out, is
the nature of the particular international obligation (the ‘primary obligation’) breach of which
is being invoked. In the present case, as the Tribunal has already observed, that is essentially
Article 3(1) of the BIT with its guarantees of fair and equitable treatment, non-impairment, and
physical protection and security. When Article 3(1), for example, lays upon the host State the
obligation not to “impair, by unreasonable or discriminatory measures, the operation,
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal [of the investments of investors of the
other Contracting Party] by those investors,” and Article 8 grants the investor a right to
arbitration “/fJor the purpose of solving disputes with respect to investments” between it and
the host State, the Tribunal is in no doubt that those provisions have principally in mind
‘disputes’ over breaches which occasion actual (and therefore assessable) loss or damage to the
investor. As a matter of law, though, it remains the case that breaches of that kind of
obligation under an investment treaty may give rise to claims for relief of different kinds: for
example for the cessation of host State measures against an investor, or for the re-instatement
of a status quo ante, or (if the circumstances were appropriate) for a bare declaration of breach.
To the extent, however, that a claimant chooses to put its claim (as in the present Arbitration)
in terms of monetary damages, then it must, as a matter of basic principle, be for the claimant
to prove, in addition to the fact of its loss or damage, its quantification in monetary terms and
the necessary causal link between the loss or damage and the treaty breach.*'> All of that is
matter for examination later in this Award, and the Tribunal sees no need to go further into it at
this point. The Tribunal wishes merely to recall once again that individual damage to Mr.
Patriciu or his associates is analytically distinct from damage to TRG itself, the Claimant in

this arbitration, or to TRG’s investments in Romania.

THE INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF THE BIT

Having dealt with those preliminary considerations, the Tribunal is now in a position to

proceed to the substantive part of its Award. As the Tribunal regards the case as turning to a

*4 See Part III of the draft Articles, passim.
+15 See paragraph 173 above.

98

192.

193.

very great extent on its facts, it will analyze the factual evidence in detail, in accordance with
the following schema:

(a) The Rompetrol and Petromidia privatizations;

(b) The Libyan receivable;

(c) The Talpes report;

(d) The instigation of criminal investigations against Messrs. Patriciu and
Stephenson;
(e) The procedural irregularities alleged to have occurred during the

criminal investigations —
i. The arrest proposals;
ii. The attachment of the RRC shares;

iii. The telephone interceptions;

(f) The tax investigations into RRC.

Before proceeding to a factual analysis of the Claimant’s complaints, however, it will be
convenient for the Tribunal to address the interpretation of the relevant provisions of the BIT,
in the light of the respective submissions of the Parties. This will then provide the framework
for how those provisions should be applied to the specific circumstances of the case, and will
in particular guide the Tribunal’s findings as to the relevance or otherwise of the Parties’
arguments on the facts to the issues which the Tribunal must decide. In Sections I and J, the
Tribunal will then consider the respective submissions and expert evidence tendered by the
Parties on the question of the loss or damage suffered by TRG, including the claim for moral
damages. Sections K, L, M contain the Tribunal’s decision on the dispute, and its rulings as to

costs and damages.

The Tribunal has already noted that the main substantive provision of the BIT that comes into
play in the merits phase of the present arbitration is Article 3(1), the text of which has been set

out in paragraph 160 above, but bears repeating:

Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and equitable treatment of the investments of
investors of the other Contracting Party and shall not impair, by unreasonable or
discrimii ry sures, the of ion, i
disposal thereof by those investors. Each Contracting Party shall accord to such investments
full physical security and protection.

 

use, enjoy or

99

194.

195.

The Claimant alleges that the first limb at least of this treaty guarantee has been breached by
the conduct of the Respondent in respect of its investment in Romania, and in some respects

the second and third limbs as well.

The Tribunal recalls, as set out in paragraph 165 above, and following its Decision of 18 April
2008 on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, that the ‘investor’ for the purposes of Article 3(1) is
TRG, and its ‘investment’ is its holdings in RRC.*!° The Tribunal notes that during the period
2007-2009, Rompetrol Holding S.A. sold its shares in TRG to KaiMunaiGaz, a Kazakhstan
energy company, so that that company now wholly owns TRG. Although there is some
dispute over the effect of this sale on the calculation of damage, a matter which the Tribunal
will address in Section I of this Award, there has been no suggestion that the transfer affects
TRG’s right to proceed with the claims put forward in this arbitration. The Tribunal has

accordingly proceeded on that basis.

The Claimant points out that the BIT’s reference to fair and equitable treatment is in plain

language and is unqualified, on the basis of which it submits that the Treaty standard is, in the

317

words of the Biwater Gauff tribunal,”’’ an “autonomous conventional one.”?'® This has the

319

consequence, in the Claimant’s view,” that the standard is broad and flexible, and that its

precise application is left to the tribunal in each individual case, in the light of all the
circumstances of the case before it. The Claimant subdivides the general concept of fair and
equitable treatment into four elements that have been isolated in arbitral awards, namely
transparency and consistency (including the protection of the investor’s basic expectations);
freedom from harassment; procedural propriety; and good faith." It makes a similar point
about the breadth and generality of the BIT’s references to the non-impairment standard and to
the standard of full protection and security, adding that those two standards have been found in

arbitral awards to encompass protection against both private interference and interference by

1 322

the State;**! and it invokes specifically” the dicta of the Vivendi and Eureko tribunals that

State-organized harassment would breach the full protection and security standard.

+! And certain other Romanian enterprises, though RRC seems clearly to be the primary investment.

*'7 Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of Tanzania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Award,
24 July 2008.

*!8 Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, { 88.

319 Citing F. A. Mann, 1981, Exhibit CLA-66, and Schreuer, 2005, Exhibit CLA-170.

5 Statement of Claims, {| 52ff., and Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, {J 89-90.

*! Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, 1] 95ff.

* Statement of Claims, 81.

100

196.

197.

The Respondent offers no detailed analysis of its own as to how the provisions of Article 3(1)
of the BIT should be interpreted. Its defence is largely (as has already been indicated) at the
factual level, residing in other words in its insistence that the Claimant’s claims of misconduct
are not well founded. Beyond that, the Respondent’s case rests on its characterization of the
Claimant’s claims as implicating international standards of due process, and as amounting
therefore to ‘denial of justice’ in the classic category of customary international law. These
aspects of the case have already been discussed by the Tribunal at paragraphs 163-167 of this
Award.

The Tribunal, for its own part, has no difficulty in following the Claimant’s invitation as to the
general approach to be taken towards the interpretation of Article 3(1). It sees no benefit in
engaging in an abstract debate as to whether Article 3(1), and in particular its reference to ‘fair
and equitable treatment,’ was or was not intended by the Parties simply to incorporate the
‘minimum standard’ under customary international law, still less to engage in any debate as to
what that ‘minimum standard’ should now be understood to be. It prefers instead (in keeping
with the approach adopted by other arbitral tribunals) to follow the ordinary meaning of the
words used, in their context, and in the light of the object and purpose of the BIT. In doing
so, it will take into particular account the two general elements that other tribunals have found
come into play in connection with claims to ‘fair and equitable treatment,’ namely the way in
which the foreign investor or the foreign investment have been treated by the organs of the
host State (whether in a regulatory context or otherwise), measured against the expectations
legitimately entertained by the foreign investor in making its investment. As to the parallel
guarantees of ‘non-impairment’ and ‘full protection and security,’ the Claimant does not
appear to argue that, in the concrete circumstances of this case, they cover any situation which
is not already covered by its claims under the guarantee of fair and equitable treatment. The
Tribunal will accordingly consider the application of all of these standards of protection
together, against the Claimant’s allegations of breach. The Tribunal notes however that, just as
with the ‘fair and equitable treatment’ standard, the ‘full protection and security’ standard
relates specifically to the treatment of the foreign investment as such by the host State, and
notes further that, on the terms of Article 3(1), the protection and security required is expressly
qualified as ‘physical’. Finally, so far as the ‘non-impairment’ standard is concerned, what the

treaty language has in view is the possibility of harmful effects on the operation, management

323

Cf. Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.

101

19:

°

etc. of the foreign investment itself, by the foreign investor (and then only by measures that are

‘unreasonable or discriminatory’ ).

Against that background description of the applicable legal provisions in the BIT, the Tribunal
must now return to what it has described as the cardinal feature of this case, namely how these
provisions are to be applied in circumstances in which the Claimant is the Dutch investor,
TRG, and the investment is TRG’s holdings in its subsidiary, RRC.*™* Mr. Patriciu is not the
actual or entitled claimant, nor are his (former) interests through TRG in TRG’s Romanian
subsidiaries protected interests under the BIT. This distinction is fundamental to the case. As
the Tribunal stated the matter in paragraph 151 above: “the Claimant’s case stands or falls by
whether it is able to make out its claim that the criminal investigations have breached the
rights of the Claimant itself — or (more precisely) that these criminal investigations are
incompatible with the treatment that TRG is entitled to expect, as a Dutch investor in Romania,
under the terms of the Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
between the Kingdom of The Netherlands and Romania of 1995 (‘the BIT’).”*> The focus of
the Tribunal’s attention will therefore be on actions taken by Romania against TRG itself or
against TRG’s Romanian investments, or (as the case may be) actions that affect TRG’s
management, operation and enjoyment of its Romanian investments. Such actions will be
viewed against the background of TRG’s legitimate expectations in respect of those
investments, and notably whether the evidence shows that the actions by Romania in question
were tainted by unfairness or unreasonableness, or were discriminatory. An important
element, in the particular context of unreasonableness or discrimination, will be to keep in
mind the qualitative distinction between the proposition that an investigation by the State into
potential wrongdoing was illegitimate in itself, and the proposition at a different level that
things done in the course of a legitimate investigation were wrongful, unreasonable, or
discriminatory. A final important point is that when a treaty provision such as Article 3(1)
establishes a requirement to secure “fair and equitable treatment” for the investments of
foreign investors, that requirement refers in the first instance to the host State’s treatment of
the investment, taken as a whole; the Claimant has said something similar when it framed its
complaints in terms of a ‘campaign of harassment’.*”° The requirement may however also

apply to specific individual acts attributable to the State, if the circumstances were appropriate

* See footnote 316 above.
* See also paragraphs 167 and 172.
6 Reply, {if 54ff.; see also Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 197, Second Post-Hearing Brief, { 75.

102

19

2°

and of sufficient seriousness as to lead a tribunal to conclude that the standard of ‘fair and

equitable treatment’ had been breached.

The Tribunal finds therefore that, to qualify as a violation of the guarantees laid down in the
BIT, actions or omissions by the Respondent must consist of conduct toward TRG itself, the
protected entity, or towards its investments in Romania. Such conduct can however be direct,
or it can be indirect. The great majority of the Claimant’s claims are based on indirect conduct
of this kind, i.e. conduct against individual persons, which might have been in their capacity as
the representatives of the protected investor or investment, or might have been in their personal
capacity. The Tribunal must therefore decide what additional elements would suffice to turn
actions not directed as such against an investor or his investment, but against individuals
associated with their ownership or management, into an actionable breach of the rights of the
investor itself. This is not an easy question to answer; it is one of first impression, and one on
which the Tribunal has little by way of assistance in the submissions of the Parties. The
Claimant, in its Request for Arbitration and initial pleadings, seems largely to have assumed
the existence of the necessary connection, and it was not until its closing argument at the end

7 Its

of the oral hearing that the Claimant began to focus specifically on this question.
argument then was that two categories of events should be understood as directed against
TRG. The first category was actions directly addressing TRG or its Romanian investments,
and comprised the share attachment and the mentions of Rompetrol in the GPO’s press
releases. The second category comprised actions against officers or directors of Rompetrol in
respect of things done in their corporate capacity, and included the detention (or attempted
detention) of Messrs. Patriciu and Stephenson. But this aspect of the case was not much
developed in the Claimant’s Post-Hearing submissions, except to the extent that the Claimant
elaborated briefly the exceptional circumstances which, in its view, would justify awarding
moral damages to TRG.” The Respondent, on the other hand, rested its defence against the
Claimant’s claims in the arbitration largely on the factual level, denying in other words that the
treatment of Mr. Patriciu and his associates was wrongful or malicious at all, and did not

therefore address the question of its connection to TRG.

*7T See, however, the First Witness Statement of Ovidiu Budusan (paragraph 237).

*8 Transcript, Day 7, pp. 22-23, 25ff.; Counsel did not specify what other actions might equally be so
‘included’.

>? Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, {| 272-273.

103

200.

201.

To start with, there can be no dispute that actions directed against TRG or its investments in
Romania fall within the zone of protection accorded by Article 3(1) of the BIT. Conversely,
discrete actions or even a campaign of actions directed against Mr. Patriciu or others
associated with him in their personal capacities would not in and of themselves be capable of
amounting to a breach of TRG’s treaty rights merely because of the association of those
individuals with TRG or its investments. To come within the zone of protection, something
more would be required. The Tribunal considers that the necessary link might take one of two
forms. Either the conduct complained about could have been directed against the individuals
for actions taken on behalf of and in the interest of the investor or its investment, so that that
conduct should fairly be understood as implicating the protected interests of the investor itself.
An example would be steps taken against an individual, whether in the form of criminal
charges or otherwise, in respect of actions that individual had taken to enforce or defend the
investor’s rights. Or the conduct complained about could have been directed against
individuals (even in their personal capacity) for the purpose of harming the investor or its
investment through the medium of injury to the individuals. The Tribunal accordingly reaches
the conclusion that the following (and only the following) would fall within the area of
protection under the BIT: (a) actions against the investor itself (or its investment); (b) action
against the investor’s executives for their activity on behalf of the investor; and (c) action
against the executives personally but with the intent to harm the investor. In each case, much
would turn on the facts of the particular complaint, and in particular the crucial question
whether, even if the situation fell within the zone of protection, the conduct in question did in

fact constitute a failure to respect the treaty protection at issue.

It is to the Claimant’s factual allegations, therefore, that the Tribunal must now turn, against

the legal background set out above.

Part II.A: THE FACTUAL EVIDENCE

202.

(a) The Rompetrol and Petromidia privatisations

For the most part, the facts relating to these privatizations are not in dispute between the

Parties. Reference is made in this connection to the Decision of 18 April 2008 on Jurisdiction

104

203.

20:

a

&

and Admissibility. It will suffice therefore to resume briefly the essential elements, as

background for what will follow.>*°

The Ceausescu regime in Romania fell in 1989. The privatization of companies that had
formerly been owned by the State became thereafter a key part of process of building a market
economy, leading to Romania’s eventual accession to the European Union in 2007. Rompetrol
S.A., which had been the second-largest of the State-owned companies, was privatised by way
of a management and employee buy-out in 1993. In 1998, an investor group led by Mr.
Patriciu, a Romanian national, purchased a controlling stake in Rompetrol S.A. The ownership
of Rompetrol S.A. then passed to The Rompetrol Group B.V. by a series of steps described in
paragraphs 35ff. of the Tribunal’s Decision of 18 April 2008. Rompetrol S.A. was then (as it
still was at the time this arbitration was brought) an oil refining, marketing and trading

company, active also to a limited extent in exploration and production.

TRG itself (the Claimant in this arbitration) was constituted in its present form in 2002. One
of TRG’s major additional investments in Romania was (and still is) the Petromidia oil
refinery situated at the port of Constanza on the Black Sea. TRG acquired a controlling stake

in Petromidia S.A., the owner of the oil refinery, later renamed Rompetrol Rafinare S.A., in a

331

further privatization that took place in 2000. It is the circumstances of this latter

privatization*” that have become the central issue in the present case, as well as a matter of
great political controversy within Romania. Mr. Patriciu told the Tribunal in evidence that,
when TRG acquired Petromidia, the refinery was wholly non-productive, had been shut down
for the past six months, and had no working capital or stocks of material; its debts had been

stated in the tender documents as being US$107 million, but after takeover it was discovered

333

that US$285 million was owing to the State in unpaid back taxes.””” The refinery was turned

around through the investment of considerable sums (over US$170 million) in upgrading its
equipment and technology to handle ‘sour’ crude oil, which then paid off when in due course

the price differential with ‘sweet’ crude began to increase, ultimately reaching US$9 a barrel.

330 @ full and circumstantial account is offered in the GPO’s criminal indictment against Mr. Patriciu and
others (Exhibit R-25, pp. 30ff.).

*! Ibid, WI] 45ff.

5% And that of another oil refinery, S.A. Vega S.A., located at Ploesti, Romania.

* 4 fuller and more circumstantial account of the financial situation of Petromidia, both before and after the
privatization, can be found in the Ministry of the Economy’s comments on the Talpes report (Exhibit C-66);
see further paragraphs 266ff. below.

105

205. These factual averments were not directly contested by the Respondent, which submitted

201

20)

6.

n

however that a crucial element in the revival of Rompetrol’s fortunes had been the positive
action by the State to ease the burden of the substantial tax liability by converting it into
bonded debt repayable over an extended period of time. This had not been a straightforward
matter; it required the specific approval of the legislature, and had moreover initially been
contested by the EU Commission as a prohibited State aid, which Romania had had to exert

itself to rebut. The Tribunal will revert to this matter below.

The Claimant further alleges that the burgeoning success of the revitalized Rompetrol
enterprise attracted the envious attention of the competing RAFO Group, which was running
into major financial difficulties of its own and set about trying to coerce Rompetrol into a
merger through unscrupulous methods, using or misusing for this purpose its political contacts

and influence. This is further discussed under (c) and (h) below.

(b) The Libyan receivable

One of the issues arising consequentially on the Rompetrol privatization is what has become
known in the proceedings as ‘the Libyan receivable’. It refers to an exploration and production
sharing agreement that had been concluded in the 1980s by Rompetrol S.A. (then still a State-
owned company) with the Libyan National Oil Company, Rompetrol’s rights under which
were later assigned to the Spanish oil major, Repsol, against a substantial cash down payment
in US dollars, to be followed by further instalment payments by Repsol in the total sum of
US$85 million. The assignment required, in the circumstances, the approval of the Romanian
State which was conveyed by formal Government Decrees of 1993 and 1995. The essential
point at issue was that, in these Decrees, and based both on the status of Rompetrol S.A. at the
time and on the financial investments that had been made by the Romanian State in the project,
Romania had made its consent to the assignment subject to the condition that the payments due
would accrue to the State and would be passed on accordingly by Rompetrol as and when
received. Hence ‘the Libyan receivable’. It would appear (and this was not contested before
the Tribunal) that the initial payments were indeed remitted to the State under these

3
arrangements.” 34

54 Expert report of Philip Haberman, {ff 2.2-2.13.

106

208. It was only after the privatization of Rompetrol and its passing into the ownership of TRG that
the picture changed. After one payment had been remitted, the Claimant says that Rompetrol
formed the view that it was not under an obligation similarly to remit further payments
received out of the Libyan venture, but could instead retain them for its own purposes. It is not
contested that Rompetrol informed the Ministry of Public Finance accordingly, by letter, in
December 1999, in relation to an instalment of US$10 million that was then falling due from
Repsol. Romania does however assert that, with the complicity of a senior official in the
Ministry (who, in consequence, was later indicted for complicity in embezzlement), the letter
was deliberately not forwarded to the appropriate authorities, so that no action was taken on it
— and, indeed, no reply was ever sent to Rompetrol. Subsequently, and perhaps in reliance on
this anomalous silence, Rompetrol S.A. appears to have assigned the right to future payments
to other, non-Romanian, companies in the Group, which would inevitably have had the effect
that these payments no longer passed through the hands of Rompetrol S.A. itself, and moved
therefore outside the ostensible scope of the arrangements under the Romanian Government
Decrees of 1993 and 1995 referred to above. Internal e-mails that had come to light as part of
the process of document disclosure in these proceedings were appended to the expert report of
Emst & Young attached to the Respondent’s Memorial on its Preliminary Objections. On the

strength of this, the Respondent asserts**>

that Rompetrol’s decision to evade its obligations in
respect of the Libyan receivable was conscious and deliberate; that Rompetrol subsequently
became aware of the inconsistency in its having remitted some payments to the State but then
denying its obligation to do likewise with further payments of the same kind; and that
Rompetrol then sought to cover over this inconsistency by making to the Romanian Ministry a
wholly contrived ex post facto claim to the reimbursement of the earlier remittances, which can
be shown to have been just for the record, because it was never followed up.°6 The
Respondent also says that the proceeds of the Libyan receivable are in fact inextricably linked
to the Petromidia privatization, because it was these proceeds that funded Rompetrol’s bid and

without them Rompetrol would simply have lacked the wherewithal to make a bid out of its

. 337
own resources, as it had contracted to do.

535 As set out in full in the Respondent’s First Post-Hearing Brief at Section 3.3.2. A comprehensive and

circumstantial account is offered in the GPO’s criminal indictment against Mr. Patriciu and others (Exhibit
R-25, pp. 39-58 et seq.).

°° Ibid, 9] 4.14-4.23.

357 Thid., 13.18.

107

209.

(c) The Talpes report

What has been referred to by both Parties as “the Talpes report” occupied a prominent, even a
central place in the Claimant’s case; the Tribunal will therefore devote some attention to an
analysis, in the light of the written and oral evidence and argument before it, of the facts and of
the allegations and counter-allegations put forward on the strength of those facts. The Tribunal
adopts the same short-hand term, “Talpes report,” for pure convenience, although it has not
been conclusively shown who exactly it was who drafted the document, or at whose instance,
who approved it or authorized its issue, or whose responsibility the document engages.*** Be
that as it may, the essential uncontested facts about this 20-page document are: that it issued
under the letterhead and official stamp of the National Security Department of the Presidential
Administration of Romania; that it takes the form of a Memorandum addressed to the
President, put up by Mr. Paul Sarbu, Counsellor in the National Security Department, for
approval by Mr. Talpes in his capacity of Presidential Counsellor and Head of the Presidential
Administration; that its subject is the Petromidia privatization; and that, after a lengthy and
detailed analysis of what are claimed to be serious irregularities in TRG’s performance of its
contractual obligations under the terms of its acquisition of Petromidia S.A., it recommends in

the following terms:*”

The G.E.O. no. 118/2003 considers as legal an absolutely abusive and illegal manner of
performing a privatization contract with huge financial stakes, ensuring in fact the sale of a
jewel of the Romanian industry for an effectively trivial price and gives the opportunity for
buying at the same price the difference remaining as shareholding of the state (as for example,
it is taken into account a creation of a debt to a person in whom the initial investor has an
interest, the non-payment of this debt and the conversion of it into shares at the price of the
nominal value).

Taking the foregoing into consideration, we kindly ask you to approve to request some
communications from the Ministry of Economy and Commerce, the Ministry of Public
Finances, Ministry of Justice, A.P.A.P.S., the Prosecution Department attached to the High
Court of Cassation and Justice and, as the case may be, the analysis of the opportunity to
present this memorandum to the Supreme Council of State Defence.

 

*S As submitted in the factual exhibits to the Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits (Exhibit C-60), it is described
as ‘Report no. DSN/C/1 06/2004 by the Presidential Administration of Romania - Department for National
Security (“Talpes report’)’ — but under the following Translator’s note: “Please note that professional efforts
have been made to provide as accurate a translation to this document as possible. However, because the
document is poorly written in Romanian (with grammar and punctuation mistakes, improper sentence
structures, etc.), it would be difficult to further improve the translation without rewriting the document and
perhaps changing the intended meaning of the authors' words.”

*® But see footnote 338 above.

 

108

210.

211.

It seems clear from the context that the ‘approval’ being sought for the information mentioned

to be requested from the institutions mentioned is that of the President.

The Claimant’s attack on the Talpes report was two-pronged: firstly, that the report as a whole
was ‘illegal,’ as being either altogether outside the powers of the Presidential Administration
or else as being an abuse of the powers it does rightly possess; secondly, that the report formed
the central element of a conspiracy amongst certain parts of the Romanian governmental
machine to injure Mr. Patriciu either directly or via his interests in Rompetrol, evidence of
which lay in the mysterious appearance of the report in public, no doubt as the result of its
having been deliberately leaked. By the conclusion of the argument in the case, the Claimant

was in fact ranking these two elements in the reverse order, as set out in its Post-Hearing Brief:

The main line of the story begins, from TRG’s perspective, with threats made by Presidential
Counselor Ioan Talpes to TRG’s CEO in early 2004, followed by the public release of a
document prepared by Mr. Talpes’s office referred to as the “Talpes Report,” which in turn
led to the PNA’s announcement of an inquiry preceding any formal investigation in March
2004.

TRG’s principal assertion with respect to the Talpes meeting and Report is that these events
show that the investigations were instigated based on commercial motives rather than the
pursuit of justice. TRG secondarily asserts that the Talpes Report was an excess of authority
by the Presidential Administration’s Department of National Security, which Mr. Talpes
headed.”

The ‘Talpes meeting’ referred to was covered in the evidence of Mr. Patriciu and that of Mr.
Stephenson and Mr. Stanescu: Mr. Patriciu invoked also Romanian media reports from the
period 2004-05 which were said to show Mr. Talpes’s implacable hostility to TRG and its

investments in Romania.

Mr. Patriciu said in his first witness statement that the pressure on him to accept a merger with
RAFO Onesti began with a meeting in early 2004 initiated by Messrs. Tender and Iancu, two
Romanians whom he knew to be beneficial owners of RAFO Onesti which in turn he knew to
be in financial difficulties. It continued a month later via a meeting brought about through a
mutual friend for the purpose of enabling him to come face to face with Mr. Talpes, who was
personally abusive and, with reference to RAFO, made veiled threats of a forcible merger. A

month after that Mr. Iancu had come to see him to warn him of the existence of a negative

*9 Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, { 10.

109

212.

213.

report prepared at Mr. Talpes’s request and that he (Mr. Patriciu) should reconsider his
position on a merger with RAFO or ‘be prepared to face the consequences’. Further pressure
followed in separate meetings with Mr. Iancu and with Mr. Tender, which he firmly rejected in
a meeting with Mr. Tender at Rompetrol’s offices in early March, and then, hard on their heels
in mid-March, came first the Talpes report itself, which he took to be exactly the document
about which Mr. Iancu had warned him, and the report’s emergence in public after being
leaked to Mr. Corneliu Vadim Tudor;*4! Mr. Patriciu had himself drawn attention to some of
this in a press conference in June 2004. Mr. Stephenson, by contrast, was not present at any of
these meetings or discussions, but recalled being given accounts of some of them by Mr.
Patriciu in Rompetrol’s offices at the time; he had also been told by Dr. Ruttenstorfer of the
Austrian national oil company OMV that the latter had had an approach in Vienna by some of
the same RAFO representatives, who sought to persuade him to sell OMV’s stake in TRG in
return for a promise of political support for (or at least non-interference in) OMV’s business
activities in Romania. Mr. Stanescu’s evidence (which will be dealt with in more detail below)
was on this issue no more than an account in general terms of the tension between RAFO and
Rompetrol, of RAFO’s increasing business and financial difficulties, and of the attitudes of
Mr. Talpes towards Mr. Patriciu and Rompetrol since about 2002 or 2003 and his own

attempts to persuade Mr. Talpes not to ‘attack Mr. Patriciu’s business interests’.

At this point the story of the Talpes report merges with that of the criminal investigations, to

which the Tribunal will now turn.

(d) The instigation of the criminal investigations (the Talpes report

 

The Claimant’s allegation is that the criminal investigations were triggered (improperly) by the
Talpes report. This allegation is based very largely on the coincidence in timing between the
issue and subsequent public emergence of the Talpes report (March-April 2004) and the
opening of the initial investigations by the PNA relating to the privatization of Petromidia in
May 2004. But the Claimant also supports this allegation by various items of personal
testimony, notably by Mr. Patriciu and Mr. Stephenson, and most significantly in this context
by Mr. Stanescu. In truth, however, the relevant parts of the evidence of Messrs. Patriciu and

Stephenson deal in little more than surmise, so the crux of the matter lies in the evidence of

1 Described in Mr. Stephenson’s evidence as “the leader of the extreme nationalist party in Romania.”

110

214.

215.

Mr. Stanescu, a Romanian journalist and former newspaper proprietor, which the Tribunal
342

must therefore focus on in detail.
Mr. Stanescu’s witness statement was submitted with the Claimant’s Reply in November 2009.
Its thrust is neatly summed up in its first substantive paragraph: “i]t is clear to me that the
criminal investigations against The Rompetrol Group ... and its affiliates and executives are

9343
44

politically motivate Mr. Stanescu further asserts that Mr. Talpes was involved in

initiating the prosecutions and indeed goes so far as to assert that Mr. Talpes “personally chose

1344 . ~
These are of course far-

Prosecutors Cristescu and Nastasiu to work on the Rompetrol file.’
reaching allegations and, if substantiated, would have material significance for the case. The

basis on which they are put forward is therefore something that demands closer investigation.

The Tribunal begins with Mr. Stanescu’s witness statement itself which (under the agreed
minutes of the first session of the Tribunal stands as his evidence in chief). From this it
appears that Mr. Stanescu’s general claim that the criminal investigations were politically
motivated is based on the interpretation he places on oblique or suggestive remarks made in
the course of various conversations, either face to face or over the telephone, by Mr. Traian
Basescu, who was elected President of Romania in December 2004. Mr. Stanescu invokes
also what he describes as the well-known political tension between Mr. Basescu and Mr.
Patriciu. Mr. Stanescu — as is no doubt understandable from his background — appears to be
basing himself largely on what he regards as some form of common knowledge in Romania, or
at least on what is or was at the time taken as common knowledge in journalistic circles. But
common knowledge, even if it can be shown to have existed, is not the same as proof. The
Tribunal cannot therefore regard these aspects of Mr. Stanescu’s evidence (and their
counterparts in the evidence of Messrs. Patriciu and Stephenson) as more than expressions of
opinion — coincident opinion, it is true — but opinion nonetheless, and the fact that these
opinions are strongly held does not of itself serve to establish that they are valid. Conversely,
the manner in which Mr. Stanescu links the allegedly political motivation behind the initiation
of the criminal investigations to Mr. Basescu lacks a certain conviction inasmuch as (all other
considerations aside) Mr. Basescu’s election to the Presidency did not happen until some eight

months after the investigations began; and indeed Mr. Stanescu’s witness statement speaks at

* See paragraph 232 below for the documentary evidence that does in fact establish without room for

argument the link between the initiation of the first criminal investigation and the Talpes report.
“8 WS Stanescu, { 5.
4 WS Stanescu, J 27.

111

216.

217.

the appropriate point of the ‘continuation’ of the prosecutions at the instance of Mr. Basescu,
not their initiation. In sum, however, the nature of this material seems to the Tribunal to make
it of limited forensic use in the absence of anything further in the way of confirmation or
corroboration. And the confirmation which was dangled before the Tribunal in Mr. Stanescu’s
witness statement is a mention of specific sources, albeit an opaque one: President Basescu’s
alleged order to ‘continue the criminal investigations against TRG, Mr. Patriciu and others’ is
sourced to ‘individual prosecutors,’ and President Basescu’s alleged order to ‘open the GPO
investigations against TRG’s affiliates and its executives’ (as well as his ‘interest in speeding
up the proceedings’) is sourced, rather more vaguely, to ‘some of the individuals’ who had
been on Mr. Basescu’s staff while Mayor of Bucharest and who went with him to the

Presidential Palace after his election.

In relation to the role played by Mr. Talpes, Mr. Stanescu’s claims are equally sharply pointed.
In his witness statement, he says that he ‘knows’ that Mr. Talpes was involved in initiating
what he refers to as the prosecutions (though in fact he must mean the investigations). Once
again, though, this ‘knowledge’ would appear to be based on articles in the investigative press,
although Mr. Stanescu does make mention of one attempt by himself to persuade Mr. Talpes in
person ‘not to attack Mr. Patriciu’s business interests’. It is perfectly possible that a meeting of
that kind between Mr. Stanescu and Mr. Talpes took place, but the Tribunal cannot accept Mr.
Stanescu’s subjective assertions as to his own purpose in arranging the meeting as probative
evidence of the presumed purposes or intentions of the other party to the meeting, his
interlocutor Mr. Talpes. When it comes, however, to the sharpest allegation of all — that Mr.
Talpes ‘personally chose’ the Prosecutors — Mr. Stanescu says that he has a specific source,
whom he describes as ‘someone with a high position at the GPO (General Prosecutor’s

Office)’ but, once again, does not name.

That was the evidentiary position on the eve of the oral hearing. At that stage, however, a
significant change occurred, in the shape of a decision on Mr. Stanescu’s part that he would,
after all, disclose the names of his sources as detailed above, which in due course he did in his
opening oral evidence. It remains unclear to the Tribunal exactly what it was that brought
about this somewhat dramatic change of mind. Nor indeed was the Tribunal apprised by the
Claimant (whose witness Mr. Stanescu is) of what efforts might have been made either at the

time of Mr. Stanescu’s witness statement or in the twelve months or so between then and the

112

218.

oral hearing to elicit the names and to give proper notice of them to the Respondent.*” The
sole indication offered by Mr. Stanescu himself as to why he had left matters in the vague was
the lapidary remark in his witness statement that it was ‘for reasons of confidentiality and
sensitivity’. This remark is made solely in connection with the prosecutors (not his other

informants) and is not particularly informative; it is capable of covering a journalist’s

 

protection of his sources, though it would require some imaginative interpolation to discover
that that was what it meant since the context is not the open publication of matters of public
interest, but testimony in private arbitral proceedings. At all events, the Respondent — not
surprisingly — objected vigorously to this eleventh hour development, which it characterized as
an ‘ambush’ of a kind which the procedural arrangements established between the Tribunal
and the Parties had been designed to avoid. In its defence, the Claimant made it plain that it
was itself unaware of Mr. Stanescu’s change of mind until the week before the hearing, and
could only repeat Mr. Stanescu’s own explanation: that he had originally considered that the
information in question had been given to him as a journalist, so that he felt under an
obligation to protect his sources, but that he had thought about the matter since and (to use his
own words as they came through in interpretation) that he now “understood that the statements
made by them were not given to me as a journalist but as a friend and as a private person.”**°

This unusual and unexpected turn of events posed a troubling problem for the Tribunal, which
had in the centre of its mind its overriding obligation to preserve absolute fairness and equality
between the two litigating Parties. Various options were discussed privately between the
Parties and between them and the Tribunal, some of which would almost certainly have
entailed adjourning the hearing and resuming it at some later date by which further evidence
might have been gathered to confirm — or alternatively to contradict — Mr. Stanescu’s
revelations. In the end, the Respondent, having lodged its objections, decided to acquiesce in
the new evidence being heard and remaining on the record, but declined to cross-examine Mr.

Stanescu on it, on the basis that it would be for the Tribunal to decide what weight to attach to

5 Cf. the Claimant's explicit disclaimer in this respect on Transcript, Day 7, p. 79.

© Transcript, Day 2, p. 119. The Tribunal feels bound to interpolate that it is in some difficulty in grasping
the logic why this particular internal reclassification by Mr. Stanescu was thought by him to dissolve whatever
seal of confidentiality originally attached to these communications (cf. Article 6 of the Code of Ethics of the
Romanian Press Club: Exhibit R-64); Mr. Stanescu did not himself volunteer that he had secured the consent
of his original informants nor did Claimant’s counsel seek to elicit this information from him in direct
examination. But in view of the way in which the proceedings then developed before the Tribunal, it becomes
unnecessary to pursue this matter further.

113

2

eo

220.

221.

his evidence in the light of Respondent’s submissions on the subject (and of course those of

the Claimant). The Tribunal accordingly decided to release Mr. Stanescu.*4”

. The Parties’ submissions on Mr. Stanescu’s credibility as a witness were given partly in their

closing statements on the last day of the hearing and partly in their Post-Hearing Briefs. The

Claimant’s argument rested on Mr. Stanescu’s courage in coming forward with evidence that

8

was liable to offend important and influential public personages in Romania™® and on the

Respondent’s failure to cross-examine him on the issues in question despite having every

349

opportunity to do so” For the Respondent, on the other hand, Mr. Stanescu had discredited

himself by his unexplained change of position on his duty of journalistic confidentiality

350

without apparent prior discussion with his sources; the Respondent relied also on the

closeness of Mr. Stanescu’s links to Mr. Patriciu, which cast doubt on his independence of

judgement, and on other factors which cast doubt on his probity.**!

The Tribunal does not believe that it can simply disregard these aspects of Mr. Stanescu’s

evidence on purely procedural grounds, or alternatively (a further submission put forward on

352.

Respondent’s part”””) set them aside as hearsay. If Mr. Stanescu is to be believed, it would

constitute hard evidence to suggest that what might otherwise appear as coincidence was in
fact the outcome of a conscious and deliberate design to injure Mr. Patriciu and his interests
and that that design was executed in common by several different organs of the Romanian

State. The question is therefore: is Mr. Stanescu to be believed?

There are several reasons, which in combination the Tribunal finds to be decisive, why Mr.
Stanescu’s evidence on these key points should be treated with a substantial dose of

scepticism, and should not in any event be regarded on its own, without more specific

*7 The Chairman’s statement, which can be found at p. 2-3 of the transcript of 7 May, reads as follows:

“As for the Tribunal, in the light of the degree of common ground we have detected between the parties, the
Tribunal will not pursue further the idea of putting additional questions to Mr. Stanescu during this hearing.
So he is now formally discharged as a witness and can go back home. The Tribunal looks forward, of course,
to receiving in due time, as indicated by both parties, their argument as to credibility and relevance of the
evidence in question. That being so, the Tribunal will keep the matter under review and will decide it at a
later stage during the consideration of its deliberations following this hearing whether it wishes on its own
part to call further evidence either from Mr. Stanescu or further evidence relating to the issues that
Mr. Stanescu raised in his witness statement. But for the moment we can leave matters where they are.”

8 Transcript, Day 7, p. 13.

*° Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, footnote 10, p. 5.

550 Transcript, Day 7, pp. 78-80.

55! Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, {141 ff.

552 Drawing on the Corfiu Channel case before the International Court of Justice (1949 ICJ Report, pp.16-17).

114

222.

223.

corroboration, as reaching the level of certainty necessary to establish allegations of this level

of seriousness.

In the first place, the Tribunal finds the circumstances of Mr. Stanescu’s last-minute change of
mind over the revelation of his supposed sources, and the reasons given for it, a long way short
of convincing. Paragraphs 215-217 above and footnote 346 already contain some indication of
the uncertainties and inconsistencies both in the original witness statement itself and in Mr.
Stanescu’s explanations given in oral evidence in chief, and the Tribunal has no need to go
further into them. It is not enough for the Claimant to rest on the fact that the Respondent
chose neither to cross-examine nor to seek leave to produce contradictory witnesses of its own,
since that was an option open to the Respondent, confronted with what it understandably
regarded as a last-minute ambush, so long as it did so with its eyes open to the degree of risk

that the testimony might gain greater weight through being unchallenged.

The question remains, therefore, that of the credence to be given to Mr. Stanescu’s evidence on
its own terms and in its own right. While, as indicated, the Tribunal is less than convinced by
his last-minute volte-face over his sources, it is the coincidence of this and other factors that it
finds decisive in the evaluation of his evidence. Mr. Stanescu (who was not put forward as a
witness until the Claimant’s Reply) describes himself in his witness statement as being on
friendly terms with Mr. Patriciu, and there is nothing surprising in that, but it was clearly more
than a simple friendship. The witness statement makes one incidental reference to Mr.
Stanescu and Mr. Patriciu travelling abroad together with their wives, but it was not until his
oral evidence that it emerged that Mr. Patriciu was what Mr. Stanescu described
metaphorically as his ‘matrimonial godfather’ and was also in fact godfather to both of Mr.
Stanescu’s children, and most notably, that Mr. Stanescu had in addition been the beneficiary
of Mr. Patriciu’s largesse, in the shape of a wedding gift consisting of 10% of the shares in the
newspaper ‘Ziua’ which, when sold to market, had produced a return that might have been as
large as €1 million. Mr. Stanescu’s evasiveness when questioned by a member of the Tribunal
over the actual amount realized by the sale of these shares reinforced the impression of an

attempt to play down what was recognized to be of some significance in the context of the

115

224.

225.

226

arbitration. The Tribunal can be in no doubt that the overall effect of the admitted facts was to

place Mr. Stanescu under considerable personal obligation to Mr. Patriciu.**?

All in all, therefore, the Tribunal is not in a position to regard Mr. Stanescu’s allegations as
reliable evidence on their own of political motivation and direction of the investigations into
possible criminal activity by Mr. Patriciu and his associates. Without any further specific
confirmation from other sources (and the Claimant has provided none), Mr. Stanescu’s
accusations, Mr. Patriciu’s suspicions, and Mr. Stephenson’s reflection of Mr. Patriciu’s mood
at the time, do not amount to evidence of a sufficiently persuasive quality to support the very

serious allegations of improper conduct and bad faith based upon them by the Claimant.

The argument between the Parties on the ‘legality’ of the Talpes report was a lengthy one. It
revolved around two elements: the overall scope and limits of the Presidential functions under
the Romanian Constitution; and the scope and limits of Mr. Talpes’s particular functions as
head of the Department of National Security in the Presidential Administration. Using a very
broad brush, the Claimant’s arguments can be summarized in four propositions: Mr. Talpes
held the post of Head of the Department of National Security in the Presidential
Administration; his powers were therefore limited within the scope of the President’s
attributions in the field of national security; the President had recognized, but not unlimited,
functions in this field, which did not extend either to the oil industry in general or to the
privatization of Petromidia in particular; the President’s more general functions of ‘mediation’
in public affairs were properly to be understood in a restrictive way that did not confer on him
a general licence to intervene in public administration, which remained the responsibility of the
Government, as the executive power. Both Parties tendered to the Tribunal learned expert
evidence on Romanian constitutional law, and both experts were subjected to cross-
examination and to questions from the Tribunal, on the provisions of the Romanian

Constitution and on their application in practice.

. For the Claimant, Professor Corneliu-Liviu Popescu, professor at the Law School of Bucharest
University and the University of Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne, defined the Romanian
constitutional dispensation as an attenuated semi-presidential regime, closer to a parliamentary

system than to a semi-presidential system, or alternatively as a parliamentary regime with

353,

 

The Tribunal feels it unnecessary to go into a further allegation of insider share dealing, on a tip-off by
Mr. Patriciu, since this is currently the subject of criminal investigation.

116

some elements of a semi-presidential regime.**4 The President possessed no executive power,
there were no public authorities subordinated to him, and the most significant Presidential
Decrees required the countersignature of the Prime Minister; the President’s powers were
largely symbolic and representational.*° In the national security field, the President was
commander-in-chief of the military forces (a purely formal position) and presided over the
Supreme Council of National Defence, an organ exercising a purely coordinating function, but
which the Constitutional Court had consistently held to be subject to parliamentary control.
The real decision-making power rested with the government, including over the intelligence
services.*° The Presidential Administration was a public institution, but not a public
authority; conversely the Supreme Council of National Defence was expressly qualified by law
as a public authority.>°” There was no legal text defining the attributions or functions of Mr.
Talpes as Head of the Department of National Security; by law, the personnel of the
Presidential Administration were personal appointees owing allegiance to the President not
career professionals, but by definition as a ‘counsellor’ Mr. Talpes’s role would be purely

% Article 17 of the Romanian Law concerning National Security enumerated

advisory.**
exhaustively the organs with attributions in that field, which did not include the Department of
National Security in the Presidential Administration. From that alone it followed that the
Talpes report was an abuse of power and a serious breach of the constitution.**? The
President’s function as mediator (which could apply also between the State and society)

depended on a request for him to act as such.*

227. The Respondent submitted an expert opinion of its own by Professor Lucian Mihai, of the Law
Faculty at the University of Bucharest and member of the Venice Commission for Democracy
through Law of the Council of Europe, who had also been at one time or another judge ad hoc
at the European Court of Human Rights, Secretary-General of the Chamber of Deputies of the
Romanian Parliament, and President of the Constitutional Court of Romania. In Professor
Mihai’s opinion, the powers of the President are effective and more than merely symbolic.*°!

Once one started from the general functions of the President laid down in Article 80, paragraph

54 Transcript, Day 4, pp. 5-6.

555 Tbid., pp. 10-12.

56 Tbid., pp. 13-14.

557 Thid., p. 16.

558 Thid., p. 18.

5° Thid., p. 20.

5 Thid., pp. 35 and 39.

56! Professor Mihai’s written opinion, {{ 33.

 

117

228.

229.

2, of the Romanian Constitution,*

it followed automatically that the President needed
information regarding the most important aspects of the political, economic, social, cultural
etc. life of the country, and his sources for that information would be the public media, on the
one hand, and the State authorities on the other. That would be regarded as normal practice in
any country, as would be the fact that national security was obviously an area of particular
interest, and it was nowadays universally accepted that energy was a matter involving public
security; to which one should add that at the time the Talpes report was prepared (2004)
corruption was an area of especial concern in Romania, and privatization was one of the fields
where corruption was allegedly very present.*® The President’s function as a mediator was
linked to the purposes stated in the Constitution; it was political mediation, not dispute
settlement, therefore the President was not hemmed in by the need to await a request.** The
legislative texts defining the attributions and structure of the Presidential Administration and of
the Supreme Council of National Defence, over which the President presided with full voting

rights, were before the Tribunal.*>

It is no disrespect to either of these learned witnesses when the Tribunal remarks that it
remained as unconvinced at the end of their oral evidence as it had been beforehand that the
issues which had been put before them were in reality of particular significance for the
Tribunal’s decision in the present case. This may partly be because the whole issue of the
‘legality’ of the Talpes report, although debated at great length between the Parties, has been
done in so abstractly detached a way, without sufficient focus on its effective relationship to
the matters that are properly for decision by an investment tribunal, and specifically by this

Tribunal in the specific circumstances of this case.

The Tribunal begins by noting that the Talpes report is, in terms, a request for information (sc.
to be provided for the benefit of the President of Romania). It is not immediately apparent to
the Tribunal how a request for information can be either ‘lawful’ or ‘unlawful’. As Professor
Mihai tartly put it during his oral evidence (though not quite in these words): anyone can ask,
the question being what he is given by way of an answer. The Tribunal observes in this

connection that the letter of transmission, under cover of which the Talpes report was sent out

3° “The President of Romania shall guard the observance of the Constitution and the proper functioning of the

public authoritie
* Transcript, Day 4, pp. 92-94.

5 Transcript, Day 5, pp. 7-9.

*5 Exhibits LM-12, C-51 and C-59.

 

118

to various recipients, *°°

sought ‘verification’ so that the President could be ‘correctly
informed’. In the second place, the request in this form was put to a number of responsible,
high-level State organs, any or all of whom had it within their power, in response, to limit their
answers to what they considered to be proper either as a matter of strict law or one of policy, or
to object outright if the request was considered to be altogether unacceptable, either in general
or in relation to their own particular fields. As the Respondent has pointed out, Mr. Dan Ioan
Popescu, the then Minister of Economy, overseeing the Ministries of Finance, Transport and
Agriculture (and himself a witness in the arbitration), had made it plain in his evidence that he
didn’t think much of the quality of the Talpes report but saw nothing untoward in replying to it
and setting right what he saw as its errors, after having established a small inter-ministerial
committee for the purpose. In the same vein, Professor Mihai drew the Tribunal’s attention to
the fact that, so far as the requests in the Talpes report included the administration of justice,
the report was sent to the Ministry of Justice, and the Tribunal must assume that that Ministry
would simply have declined to pass the requests on to the State Prosecutors had that been
considered an improper thing to do.*°” No direct evidence has been offered to the Tribunal to
suggest that improper pressure was brought to bear on any of the Ministries or authorities
concerned (including the tax inspectorate and prosecutors’ offices) to force them to respond, or
override their reluctance to do so, and the written record gives rise to no such suspicion. In the
third place, the entire structure of argumentation back and forth between the Parties as to
whether the Petromidia privatization and connected matters fell properly within the ambit of
‘national security,’ given Mr. Talpes’s functions as head of the National Security Department,
seemed to the Tribunal to fall to the ground once it emerged in the course of the oral evidence
that the office held by Mr. Talpes was in fact that of the head of the entire Presidential
Administration, all of the Departments of which reported to him, so that his functional
responsibilities were co-extensive with those of the Presidential Administration as a whole;
moreover that in that capacity Mr. Talpes was not a mere functionary but carried senior
Ministerial rank (equivalent in fact to that of Mr. Dan Ioan Popescu; v. sup.) and that his office

369

carried with it, by law,** membership of the Supreme Council of National Defence. It is

hardly surprising that, in these circumstances, if there was any irregularity in the Talpes report,

6° Sample versions are at Exhibits R-88-R-92; see Transcript, Day 4, for the disagreement as to its proper
translation, which does not however affect the point here.

567 Tt does however appear that the Talpes report was also sent to the Chief Prosecutor of the GPO direct; see
Exhibit R-88.

568 Article 5(3) of the Law of June 2002 on the organization and operation of the Supreme Council of National
Defence.

5 Which Professor Popescu conceded did have the quality of a ‘public authority’ (v. sup.).

119

230.

231.

232.

the irregularity was far from self-evident, as a matter of Romanian law and practice. The
Tribunal can do no more than to say that, looking at the matter entirely at large, in the light of
experience in general, it can find nothing inherently improper in a State President whose office
is endowed with a certain number at least of executive powers, seeking or being given a
briefing on a topic that was clearly a matter of public attention and public concern.*”” The
question that matters is not the fact of the briefing, or even its content, but what action, if any,

followed as a result.

The Tribunal does not by any means exclude, as a hypothetical possibility, that the production
of the Talpes report might have reflected an animus against Mr. Patriciu personally, or against
his business ventures, on the part of Mr. Talpes or those associated with him. But such animus
cannot be assumed; it would have to be proved. It is, again, hypothetically possible that a
blatant and conscious disregard of applicable legal constraints in the commissioning of the
Talpes report could serve as an evidentiary element in that direction. But if so, the Claimant
has failed to demonstrate such disregard. The issue for the Tribunal thus remains, not the
Talpes report itself, but the consequences claimed to have followed from it, notably the

criminal investigations and the tax controls, and it is to these that the Tribunal now turns.

(e) The alleged procedural irregularities in the criminal investigations

The conduct of the Romanian State prosecutors, first in the anti-corruption agency PNA and
then in the office of the General Prosecutor (GPO), carried out in the course of their
investigations into possible criminal conduct occupied the central focus of the Claimant’s
argument so far as liability for breach of the BIT is concerned. The Claimant’s allegations can
be subsumed under two heads: in the first place, that the investigations were wholly unfounded
and malicious; in the second place, that they had been carried out in an improper way which
was both wrongful in itself and confirmed the malicious intent behind the initiation of the

investigations in the first place.

As to the first of these allegations, there is not much that can be said. It will already be

apparent that the Claimant’s argument rests largely on the coincidence in time between the

 

broadly speaking, the interpretation the Tribunal places on the remark claimed to have been made to
Mr. Patriciu directly by President Basescu, to which the Claimant would attribute a sinister implication. When
the President is reported as saying “You do not think that I have to be informed as the President. I have to be
informed,” it does not seem to the Tribunal necessarily to reflect anything more than that he had indeed been
briefed on a matter which had certainly by then become one of public i st; the further colouration supplied
by Mr. Patriciu in his second witness statement is a matter of Mr. Patricit ibjective assessment.

120

 

 

233.

Talpes report and the opening of the initial investigation and on the more specific allegations
made by its witnesses, Mr. Patriciu, Mr. Stephenson, and Mr. Stanescu. The Tribunal recalls
its findings above that the combined evidence of these three witnesses (so far as it can be relied
on) is not sufficient to support allegations of the gravity the Claimant places on it. As to the
coincidence in time, by contrast, the Tribunal would itself have inclined to the view that the
thrust of the Talpes report, taken together with the bodies and authorities to whom it was in
due course forwarded, made it more probable than not that there was a connection of some
kind between the report and the initiation of the original investigation by the PNA into the
Petromidia privatization. But even with that connection as the working hypothesis, it carries
one nowhere, in the Tribunal’s opinion. The legitimacy of a criminal investigation cannot
depend on the source from which the responsible investigating authority receives the
information leading it to suspect that criminal offences may have been committed. It might be
a private complaint, or an exposure by investigative journalism, or a whistle-blower’s tip-off,
or the anonymous receipt of confidential internal documents, or a discovery made by a
regulatory authority, or indeed a request for an investigation by a responsible Government
Ministry; what matters is not the source but the quality of the information, whether more is
likely to be uncovered, and the public interest in the possible criminal conduct it implies. The
Tribunal accordingly finds that, even though it does in fact seem to have been established by
direct documentary evidence that the Talpes report had actuated the PNA’s investigation,’ 71
that could not, in and of itself, give rise to an issue as to the breach of the protection

guaranteed under Article 3(1) of the BIT.

There was at a certain stage in the proceedings some debate between the Parties as to whether
the criminal investigations were so devoid of substantial merit (ie. of real and grounded
suspicion of the possible commission of criminal offences) that they had to be presumed to
have been initiated and then pursued out of improper motives. But the Parties were in the
event agreed that it was not for this Tribunal to determine whether adequate grounds

(‘probable cause’) did or did not exist under Romanian law to justify the opening of an

5" The relevant item of documentary evidence is the PNA’s ‘Ordinance for the declination of competence’ of
6 September 2004 (Exhibit R-33), the opening paragraph of which refers specifically to what appears to be the
Talpes report as the event that triggered the opening of its investigation in rem. See also the Statement of
Defence, { 107.

121

234.

235.

236.

 
 

investigation, and by so doing either to supervise or to supplant the decisions of the competent

organs of the Romanian judicial system. 3? ‘The Tribunal can only agree.

The above is however without prejudice to the main thrust of the Claimant’s argument in
respect of the criminal investigations, namely that the manner in which these have been
conducted has been improper, to such an extent as to show a deliberate and focused intention
to cause harm to TRG either directly, or indirectly through their effect on Mr. Patriciu and his
associates, and that such harm has in fact been caused. The harm itself will be the subject of
Part I of this Award (below); the present section will focus on the manner and implications of

the conduct of the criminal investigations.

It will be convenient to begin with a résumé of the subject, timing and course of the criminal
investigations, as these emerge from the pleadings of the Parties. It is to be noted that that will
take the story up to the date of the second Post-Hearing Briefs, at which point it appears that
the investigations were still in train. The Tribunal is, naturally, not in possession of any
evidence or argument as to what may have taken place beyond that point, nor is any such of

relevance to the decision it is called upon to give on the dispute submitted to it.

There is no dispute between the Parties that the first criminal investigation began in May 2004.
It was initiated by the anti-corruption agency PNA and its subject was possible irregularities in
the Petromidia privatization. As described in the PNA press release of 21 April 2004, “/t/he
investigators verify the way and the circumstances in which the shares sale-purchase
agreement was concluded by the State Ownership Fund and the company Rompetrol Group
B.V. On the other hand, the anticorruption prosecutors analyse the way in which the
conditions to transfer the profit from SC Rompetrol Rafinare Complex Petromidia to other
trade companies were created, as well as the way in which the company’s share capital was
increased.”*" It is also common ground that the investigation was commenced ‘in rem,’
which the Tribunal understands to mean without particular suspected persons being identified
— although in due course (see below) the investigation became one ‘in personam’ against
various officers of Rompetrol, to whom were later added Messrs. Patriciu and Stephenson and
several others. A further PNA internal document (seemingly undated, referred to by the

Parties in their submissions as the ‘Cristescu themes’) describes the five potential offences

aimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, 119; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, 166.
“Specifications” issue No. 149 of the National Anti-Corruption Prosecutor’s Office, 21 April 2004, Exhibit
C67.

122

237.

under investigation as being: deliberate understatement of the real market value of assets
during the privatization process; tax evasion; and money laundering; together with two further
offences of a technical character the precise nature of which is not clear to the Tribunal. In
each case, the particular statutory prohibition that may have been breached is specified. This is
followed by some 30 pages of more detailed description of the commercial and financial
transactions under investigation (which include the Libyan receivable). Ultimately, though,
some five months later, the PNA closed its investigation, not having found a sufficient basis
for the pursuit of corruption offences, and transferred the file to the GPO, on the basis that the
offences remaining under investigation fell within the competence of the regular prosecution
authorities. The offences in question were ‘abuse of office against public interests,’ tax
evasion and money laundering. This was done by means of a formal written decision*”* which

set out in full the findings to which the PNA investigation had come.

It would appear from the evidence on the record that the GPO had in fact already begun an
investigation in parallel into offences within its own competence. With the transfer of the file
from the PNA, the continuing investigation by the GPO — specifically by its Department for
the Investigation of Organised Crime and Terrorism (DIICOT) - became the sole criminal
investigation in train.” In due course, the DIICOT investigation led to a formal indictment
dated 7 September 2006.*” The indictment prefers charges against Mr. Patriciu on various
counts, which can be summarized as involving primarily embezzlement (the Libyan
receivable), money laundering, share market manipulation (the re-listing of Rompetrol shares
on the Bucharest stock exchange), and conspiracy, together with various apparently lesser
charges associated with the above. Similar, though not identical, charges are preferred against
Mr. Stephenson and (in varied combinations) against some 10 or 11 others connected with
Rompetrol in various ways.*”” The indictment is somewhat over 400 pages long; it deals in
separate sections with the history of the investigation, the facts deriving from documentary and

witness evidence, and an analysis of the applicable law. Professor Kiihne describes it in his

54 Declination of competence,’ see Exhibit R-33, and footnote 371 above.

°5 The Claimant makes something of the fact that, when the file was transferred from PNA to GPO,
Ms. Cristescu was transferred with it, seeing in this evidence of an intention to persecute Mr. Patriciu and his
associates. In fact it would appear that Ms. Cristescu was originally on the strength of the GPO, was loaned to
the PNA for the purposes of its own investigation, and on conclusion of that investigation reverted to her old
position. Be that as it may, the Tribunal sees nothing, on the face of it, that would give Ms. Cristescu’s
transfer an untoward connotation, since it would be equally consistent with the simple aim of efficiency, unless
there was specific evidence to the contrary.

* “Rechizitoriu” in Romanian, Exhibit R-25.

57 Including Mr. Stanescu (see paragraphs 215ff. above).

123

 

 

   

238.

written*”* and oral evidence (drawing in this respect on his own experience as judge and
defence counsel) as having all the appearance of a professional piece of work. The Tribunal
can only agree. The indictment lays out in extenso the charges that are being brought against
each of the accused persons individually and identifies each charge by reference in specific
terms to the relevant statutory provisions; it sets out in specific terms the facts alleged to
ground the charges and the evidence in support of these factual allegations; and it lays out the
legal arguments said to sustain the necessary link between the facts and the offences alleged.
The indictment would thus appear, in other words, to offer the necessary basis on which each
of the accused can then set about preparing his defence. To note that is of course wholly
without prejudice to whether the factual allegations are indeed accurate and sustainable, and
the legal argument correct. As already noted however, those assessments are not for this
Tribunal to make, but are a matter for the Romanian courts. The Parties are in agreement (see
paragraph 233 above) that it is not for this Tribunal to determine whether or not there was a
substantial basis for the criminal charges against Mr. Patriciu and his associates. For present
purposes, it is enough to record the Tribunal’s conclusion that there is no evidence to show that
the initiation of the criminal investigation and the indictment in and of themselves breached the
standard of Article 3(1) of the BIT. The nature of the indictment does not, on its face, bear out
any argument that it embodies a trumped-up set of criminal allegations that are accordingly

only explicable as stemming from bias or improper motive.

That being so, the Claimant’s claims of bias and improper motive reduce to a question, not of
the basis on which the charges as such were brought, but of the persistent irregularities that
allegedly occurred in the conduct of the prior investigation, and what inferences should be
drawn from that (if these irregularities can be sustained). The Claimant advances a whole
series of actions by the State prosecutors in charge of the PNA and DIICOT investigations

which it says were unjustified or wrongful,*”?

and which it asks the Tribunal to find were part
of a pattern of deliberately oppressive conduct against Mr. Patriciu and the others under
investigation. It would be impossible for the Tribunal to investigate all of these accusations in
detail — and indeed to do so would contradict the underlying proposition (see paragraph 174
above) that it is not for an investment tribunal to set itself up as a court of final review over the

criminal justice systems of host States. The Tribunal will instead focus, in the light of the

*’8 First expert report, {| 17; Second expert report, {fl 37ff.
*”° See paragraphs 46, 49-50, and 54 above.

124

239.

evidence and argument led before it, on the set of six main issues into which the individual

allegations eventually resolved themselves. These are:*8°

e the attachment of RRC shares

e the arrest and attempted imprisonment of Messrs. Patriciu and Stephenson
e the PNA and GPO press releases;

e the interception of Mr. Patriciu’s and/or RRC’s telephone conversations;

e the requests for information addressed to the banks; and

the tax controls.**!

The Tribunal will review each alleged wrongful activity first individually, but then will
conclude by reviewing the totality of alleged conduct to see if the Claimant has sustained its

burden of proving that Romanian failed to abide by its treaty obligations.

(f) The GPO (DIICOT) prosecutors

In respect of all of these issues, the underlying facts are not in principle in dispute, as they

3 The differences

represent incidents in the investigation which are matters of record.
between the Parties relate rather to their significance and effect, including in that respect
whether the alleged irregularities were open to effective correction when they occurred. These
issues were dealt with in detail in the written and oral expert evidence of Professor Boroi (for
the Claimant) and Professor Kiihne (for the Respondent), which will be discussed below. They
were also covered to a certain extent in the evidence of one fact witness each for the Claimant
and for the Respondent. The Claimant offered the evidence of Mr. Ovidiu Budusan, Mr.
Patriciu’s principal legal counsel in the criminal proceedings against him, but who had also
had considerable inside experience at a senior level as a Romanian State prosecutor. In his

brief witness statement, Mr. Budusan listed what he considered the most glaring breaches.

58° Claimant's Second Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 24ff. The Claimant maintains also its complaints about a
number of other ‘procedural violations’ (Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 104) but for the reasons given
the Tribunal does not propose to examine them further individually.

38! Not singled out in the Claimant’s Second Post-Hearing Brief, but the Tribunal has retained it as a specific
ground of complaint all the same given the attention paid to the question at the oral hearing, but more
particularly because it is one of the limited number of examples of actions directed unambiguously against
Rompetrol as such not against individuals.

58? Although there are some factual disputes in relation to items e. and f. which will be considered below.

125

240.

According to Mr. Budusan, the interrogation of Mr. Patriciu was unduly long and
inappropriate; the prosecution conducted ex parte witness interviews without notifying defence
counsel of their time and place; during some witness interviews the witnesses were personally
threatened by the prosecutors, and at others the prosecutors often instructed the stenographers
not to record portions of the interview.*** Mr. Budusan also cites the attempts to put
Rompetrol senior management in pre-trial detention in 2005 and 2006 (which the Tribunal will
deal with below). Mr. Budusan summed up his view of the proceedings against Mr. Patriciu as
follows: “[b]Jased on my experiences as a prosecutor and as defense counsel (which admittedly
postdates the Communist era), I have never seen such a case, in which the prosecutors have
routinely and repeatedly disregarded the express provisions of the Criminal Code, Criminal

384 Mr. Budusan mentioned also what he

  

Procedure Code and basic concepts of due proc
saw as the Prosecutors’ disregard for the harm caused to the commercial interests of the
Rompetrol companies by many of the unwarranted measures taken in the investigations against

Mr. Patriciu.* The Respondent did not call Mr. Budusan for cross-examination.**°

The Respondent offered the evidence of Ms. Cecilia Morariu, who described herself as the
spokesperson for the Romanian Superior Council of Magistracy (CSM), a body which, she
said, had existed for almost a century but now had, under the revised Romanian Constitution
and a new Law of 2004, ‘an organization, functions and attributions broadly similar to the
Conseil supérieur de la magistrature in France and the Consejo General del Poder Judicial in
Spain’. Until 2003, the CSM had been subordinate to the Ministry of Justice, but then became
a constitutional organ in its own right, and independent of the Executive. As shown by its
organizational chart, the CSM contained separate sections for judges and prosecutors. Ms.
Morariu’s witness statement sets out the remedies available for prosecutorial and judicial
misconduct,**” as well as the CSM’s published guidelines explaining to the public how to file a
complaint, and gives the statistics from 2005 (when the CSM began to maintain its own

statistical database) to 2008 for the number of complaints filed against, respectively, judges

383 WS Budusan, {{ 1-7.

354 WS Budusan, {{ 7.

385 WS Budusan, { 5.

*8° Transcript, Day 3, p. 10: “Mr. Budusan is counsel for the principal protagonist in this case. What he has to
say is argument, not evidence. We don't propose to question him on this argument, just as we don’t propose to
question Mr. Legum as a witness. We have no questions.”

*87 Ms, Morariu later explained, when giving oral evidence, that the CSM was not equivalent to a court of law,
so that its internal disciplinary function was entirely without prejudice to the operation of the ordinary courts,
before which the invalidity or illegality of official acts could be (and should be) challenged.

126

241.

388 389

and prosecutors,””” the proportion of those that went on to detailed investigation,” the
proportion of the latter that were found sufficiently well grounded in fact to justify a full
adversarial procedure, *”° and the proportion of these last that led to a disciplinary sanction.*?!
The proportions are not markedly different as between complaints against prosecutors and
those against judges. These official figures seem to the Tribunal to disclose an elaborated
system of redress in full working order. The Tribunal is not of course in a position to assess
the merits of the individual disciplinary decisions reached by the CSM, nor is it required to.
But the figures show a public awareness of the existence of avenues of formal complaint
against the actions of prosecutors and judges, that the avenues of recourse are not difficult to
access, and that they do lead to an organized and systematic follow-through. Although the
proportion of complaints that led to a formal investigation is low in percentage terms, it does
nevertheless represent in numerical terms up to 440 formal investigations in a single year (on
average nearly 225 per year over the four-year period), and a substantial ‘conviction rate’ of
over 75% for the 78 complaints that survived the prior screening processes. The Tribunal
cannot see in this state of affairs evidence of any systematic arrangement designed to offer the
mere appearance of avenues of redress, against a reality characterized by justifiable complaints
disappearing into bureaucratic thickets without substantive result. The issue in this context
therefore becomes whether Mr. Patriciu et al. (or, as the case may be, TRG and RRC
themselves) took advantage in fact of their possibilities of redress and what the outcome was if

they did.

As to those questions, Ms. Morariu’s evidence was as follows. She lists 18 situations in which
complaints were filed, the great majority by Mr. Patriciu on his own account or together with
associates, but one (in relation to the attachment of RRC shares) by Mr. Patriciu, RRC and
TRG jointly.” Most of the complaints address actions by Ms. Cristescu specifically, usually
together with colleagues. Ms. Morariu summarizes the corresponding decisions of the CSM as
follows: “the CSM found that the prosecutors did not commit any disciplinary offences. This

includes the cases where, although the CSM found that prosecutors had committed some

 

” The number may in reality have been greater than 18, as one Report of the Disciplinary Commission from
August 2006 refers to 24 complaints having been lodged in respect of that case file in 2006 alone (see also
Transcript, Day 3, p. 64).

127

242.

procedural breaches, 398

gross misconduct as specified at Art. 99 (1)(h) of Law 303/200."°**

these were not found to have been committed in bad faith or with

Ms. Morariu’s evidence also describes the role of the CSM in its other, parallel function, that
of guaranteeing and protecting the independence of the judiciary (including the prosecutors),
and describes in this context two situations in which complaints were raised from within the
judicial branch in connection with the investigations against Mr. Patriciu and his associates,
one by a judge against press reporting of her alleged conflict of interest, the other by a group of
prosecutors, including Ms. Cristescu, alleging undue pressure affecting their independence and
reputation. The note on the latter, approved by the Plenum of the CSM, referred to the
perturbing and negative atmosphere surrounding the Rompetrol investigation ‘marked by a
strong feeling of indirect pressure on the prosecutors’; it points the finger at public statements
by politicians and their reporting in the media. The CSM issued a press release on the question
on 27 March 2006,*°* which traces the pressures to a meeting between the then Prime Minister
and the Minister of Justice and Mr. Patriciu and statements made in relation to Mr. Patriciu’s
case, but without disclosing further details. The CSM’s conclusions were that “the limits of the
freedom of expression were exceeded when opinions were expressed in regard to the existence
or non-existence of the deeds wherefore the investigations were performed, the guilt of the
investigated persons, the reliability of the produced evidence, as well as the observance of the
procedural norms by the prosecutors and judges on the occasion of taking procedural
measures” but stopped short of finding that there had been actual interference with the judicial
process. Many of the missing details emerge, however, from the Note of 9 March 2006 which
the CSM apparently had under consideration before it issued its press statement, and which is
now included as an attachment to Ms. Morariu’s witness statement.*° From this, it appears
that the triggering event was only to a limited extent Mr. Patriciu’s meeting with the Prime
Minister and Justice Minister and the conflicting accounts given of that meeting by the
participants, but to a much greater extent was the extensive debate and controversy that
followed in the Romanian press, involving direct and overt discussion of Mr. Patriciu’s guilt or
innocence, criticism of individual decisions taken in respect of Mr. Patriciu by named

prosecutors and judges, together with criticism of the qualifications of the prosecutors and

*°3 Tt emerged in oral evidence that procedural breaches had been established in five cases (Transcript, Day 3,
pp. 109-110).

“4 WS Morariu, {{ 20.

°°5 WS Morariu, Exhibit CM-11, drawn up by Ms. Morariu herself as press spokesperson.

*°° WS Morariu, Exhibit CM-10.

128

243.

judges involved. It is left unsaid — nor were there any submissions to the Tribunal on the
question by either Party — how far this public debate was based on critical press briefing by the

persons concerned themselves.

The Tribunal found this evidence helpful in sketching, through objectively factual reporting,
the general background to what must plainly have been a highly charged state of affairs, some
of which played itself out in public and political controversy in parallel with what was taking
place in private within the Romanian judicial system. Far less helpful, on the other hand, was
Ms. Morariu’s oral evidence when called by the Claimant for cross-examination. Ms. Morariu
had said in her witness statement that she was authorized by the President of the CSM to
appear as a witness of fact, which she then expanded to indicate that she could speak freely
about facts within her personal knowledge, but was not permitted to “express an opinion on the
decisions taken by courts, prosecutors or the CSM itself or on any ongoing judicial
proceeding.” Ms. Morariu explained this as deriving from her status as a judge.
Understandable as this is as a matter of principle, Ms. Morariu applied it on the witness stand
with adamantine rigour, and in a way that appeared to exclude any thought that her appearance
as a witness in arbitral proceedings might bring with it a duty of some kind towards the
Tribunal to assist it in its efforts to understand the material before it and the significance of that
material in the context of the arbitration. Her demeanour under cross-examination thus
reduced to something like a play-back device which could reproduce in oral form what was
already on the written page of the documents before the Tribunal, but was so constructed as to
disable it from formulating anything in the nature of an assessment or expression of opinion.
This applied equally to questions of an entirely objective character posed by members of the
Tribunal itself as it did to potentially hostile questions from the Claimant’s counsel. To take
one egregious example, Ms. Morariu flatly refused to say whether, when the CSM formally
disapproved certain conduct (by Prosecutor Cristescu), that sort of disapproval was
commonplace or wholly exceptional — even though information of that kind is essentially
factual and must have been at least to some extent within her personal knowledge as an
experienced magistrate who fulfilled a representative role within the structure of the CSM. To
take another, although Ms. Morariu had been careful in her own evidence to point to an
amendment to the law governing the magistrature and the date of its coming into operation, she
declined to express a view of any kind on the amendment’s legal effect. To take a third, Ms.
Morariu refused to commit herself, when questioned on the point by the President of the

Tribunal, as to whether a serving judge or prosecutor had a duty to cooperate with an

129

244.

245.

investigation being carried out by the CSM either sua sponte or as the result of a public

complaint.

The Tribunal’s reaction to this somewhat unusual situation is as follows. The Tribunal is of
course in full sympathy with the delicacy of Ms. Morariu’s situation, and can appreciate how
she might have felt buffeted by the not always coincident demands of her own professional
integrity and the independence and prerogatives of the CSM, in circumstances in which
important criminal investigations surrounded by great public controversy were still in train and
had not been brought to trial, still less to a verdict. It can also understand that, although the
present arbitral proceedings are not taking place in public, one or more of the persons under
investigation are closely involved with them, and were present at the hearing, so that her
comments in evidence had at least a potential for being reflected back into the turbulent
atmosphere of the continuing investigation, all this against the background that one of the
persons under investigation (Mr. Patriciu) had been bombarding the CSM with formal
complaints about the actions of the prosecutors looking into his case. All of that said,
however, Ms. Morariu was put forward as a witness by the Respondent and the expectation
must follow that such a witness was being offered on the basis of a certain degree of
cooperation with the Tribunal in achieving its task. Ms. Morariu’s demeanour, however,
which seemed to harden as the cross-examination went on, stood in sharp contrast, and the
Tribunal can only say that, whatever the value of her written evidence (see the preceding
paragraph), as an oral witness she did no credit to the Respondent’s case, and indeed raised
inevitable questions in the Tribunal’s mind to which the materials supplied provide no clear
answer. The failure of Ms. Morariu (and indeed the Respondent’s representatives as a whole)
to provide any comment or context to the specific situations, established on the documentary
record, in which Prosecutor Cristescu (and colleagues) knowingly refused to cooperate with
the investigative processes of the CSM — leading on one occasion to a specific sanction — is

particularly unfortunate.

In sum, the Respondent’s decision neither to cross-examine Mr. Budusan nor to produce any
witness (other than Ms. Morariu) to defend or explain the conduct of the prosecution leaves the
Tribunal with no evidence to counter in any direct sense the Claimant’s allegation that this was
a prosecution which went seriously awry. The Tribunal is accordingly left with a series of

possible hypotheses and no certain means of deciding between them, for example:

130

that the investigation followed a more-or-less normal course in local terms for an
investigation into complex economic crime with strong political overtones, in

which mistakes were made by the prosecutors but not beyond the ordinary limits;

alternatively, that there was a series of procedural defaults so continued and so
marked as to imply at the least a careless attitude towards the procedural niceties,

or at the worst a deliberate disregard for them;

that the conduct of the investigators can only be evaluated against the background
of a vigorously aggressive defence mounted by the suspects and their legal
representatives, which could either have been a response to a similarly aggressive
approach by the prosecutors, or alternatively the stimulus for a corresponding

tactic on the part of the prosecutors — or alternatively a mixture of both;

that the lodging of so great a number of formal complaints against the actions of

the prosecutors is evidence that the investigatory process went seriously awry;

alternatively, that the lodging of so great a number of formal complaints against
the actions of the prosecutors is evidence merely of the aggressive tactics of the

defence;

that the complaints system of the CSM worked as intended, provided a ready
avenue for redress when something went wrong, and effectively weeded out the
few cases of culpable error from the great mass of minor accusations that had no

serious consequence;

alternatively, that the complaints system of the CSM showed itself as adept at
whitewashing the conduct of the prosecutorial branch wherever possible, resorting

to findings of misconduct only when absolutely unavoidable.

Assessing such evidence as it does have at its disposal, however, and applying for this purpose
what it considers to be the appropriate burden and standard of proof (see paragraphs 178-183
above), the Tribunal concludes as follows: first that the probabilities are that there was, within

the prosecutorial staff of the DIICOT, an animus and hostility towards Mr. Patriciu, and a

131

determination to succeed in nailing criminal charges on him, which in turn infected to a certain

°°” second that if such an attitude existed it was

extent the investigation’s tactical approach;
closely associated with Ms. Cristescu and Mr. Nastasiu, but there is no positive evidence that it
affected other officials within the DIICOT or the GPO; still less is there evidence of any
corresponding bias in the attitudes of the Romanian courts when considering challenges to
prosecutorial actions; third that the complaints process before the CSM does not appear to be a
broken reed, but impresses by the serious attention shown to individual complaints, although
there are also signs of a progressive loss of patience with the continuing stream of complaints
lodged in the present case.*°* The Tribunal stresses that these conclusions have been reached
on a balance of probabilities, for the purpose of applying the protections under the BIT to the
Claimant’s claims The Tribunal stresses also that, although the existence of a remedy against
prosecutorial actions is a material part of any analysis of treaty breach, none of the domestic
Romanian instances (neither the courts nor the CSM) was called upon, as is this Tribunal, to
make an overall assessment of prosecutorial conduct in the round. The Tribunal’s final
conclusions in that respect will be found the next Section of this Award, following further
analysis of the particular items of prosecutorial conduct on which the Claimant has laid
greatest stress, measured against the proper interpretative approach as discussed in paragraphs

196-199 above.

Part II.B: SPECIFIC FACTUAL ALLEGATIONS

246. With that as background, the Tribunal moves now to consider, one by one, the six items listed
in paragraph 238 above, in the light (where applicable) of the expert legal argument offered to

it by both Parties.

(g) The attachment of RRC shares

247. In February 2006, the DIICOT prosecutors ordered the attachment of 5.4 million shares in

RRC owned by TRG in connection with the investigations arising out of the Libyan receivable.

**7 But it might be as well to complete this somewhat impressionistic finding with the remark that the
phenomenon of the crusading prosecutor is by no means unknown in various jurisdictions, and is not, in and of
itself, automatically either a good thing or a bad thing; it all depends.

*°8 The Tribunal does not regard it as an evasion, but rather a statement of legal fact, when the reported
decisions of the CSM repeatedly recall that the only place in which the nullity or ineffectiveness of challenged
prosecutorial actions can be established is before the ordinary courts of law, and that proceedings before the
CSM serve only an internal disciplinary function.

132

248.

This is a chapter that may be of special significance, as it relates directly to property owned by
TRG, the Claimant in this Arbitration, and which represents part of its investment in Romania,
so that the complaint to the CSM in this regard was, according to Ms. Morariu’s table, brought
in the names of TRG, RRC, and Mr. Patriciu jointly. It thus merits the Tribunal’s particular
attention. Mr. Patriciu testified that the attachment of the shares constituted a breach of
covenant under many of TRG’s financing agreements, and TRG executives needed to scramble

°° The Claimant asserts that its

in order to persuade the banks not to declare a default.
shareholding in RRC was attached on the orders of the prosecutors without any legal basis; the
asserted reason that the State had suffered damage from the alleged wrongdoing and that the
attachment was necessary to protect the State’s interest in recovery was then shifted in the
course of the proceedings to the money laundering statutes in an attempt retrospectively to
extend the scope of the applicable attachment powers so as to cover the property of third

parties,*°

and DIICOT then compounded the injury by deliberately delaying the legal
proceedings for the release of the attachment for which it was ultimately fined. The
attachment was eventually discharged by way of a decision of the Bucharest Court of Appeals,
but only on 22 September 2006, i.e. more than seven months after the attachment had taken
effect. The Respondent replies, first, that the original attachment order did invoke the money
laundering legislation from the outset; second, that the interpretation laid down by the
Bucharest Court (that it was only lawful to attach the assets of the defendants themselves, not
those of third parties) was anything but self-evident, as witnessed by the fact that the Court of
Appeals had divided 2 — | on precisely this issue; third, that a legal remedy had in fact been
obtained, so that there was nothing left to complain about; and finally that the delays caused by
the failure of the DIICOT to appear at the court hearing or to submit the file had already been
the subject of a complaint to the CSM which found that there had been no bad faith or gross

negligence.*”!

There is nothing of particular relevance to this issue in the legal expert opinions, except that
Professor Kiihne (for the Respondent) expresses the view that the Romanian legislation
invoked as the ground for the attachment falls well within international norms and so likewise
does the corrective process before the ordinary criminal courts as it operated in this case. As to

the legality of the attachment, and in the light of the ruling of the Romanian court, the Tribunal

> Transcript, Day 2, p. 40.
4 Claimant’ s First Post-Hearing Brief, {| 166, and Claimant’s Second Post-Hearing Brief, {| 46ff.
4°! Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, {i 281 ff.

133

  

249.

attaches greater significance not to the specific finding that the attachment was unlawful, but to
the decision of the Bucharest Criminal Court that the prosecutors’ continued delay in litigating

the issue was so egregious as to warrant fining the prosecutors.“

It is not necessary to
consider whether these facts would, standing alone, constitute a treaty breach, but the Tribunal
regards them as cogent confirmatory evidence of prosecutorial animus, as set out in paragraph
244 above, and in apparent disregard of the effect that the measure was almost certain to have

on a protected foreign investment.

(h) The arrest and attempted imprisonment of Messrs. Patriciu and Stephenson

It is uncontested that on 27 May 2005, Ms. Cristescu and a DIICOT colleague*”’ invoked their
general powers under the Criminal Code to order Mr. Patriciu’s detention for a 24-hour period,
and simultaneously initiated an application to the Court for Mr. Patriciu’s preventative arrest
for a further 29 days. Both were done by formal written notices*™ which recite in some detail
the charges under investigation and the state of the evidence resulting from the investigation to
date; the application for preventative arrest cites as its basis that, under the specified provisions
of the Criminal Procedural Code, the offences under investigation carried penalties in excess of
four years imprisonment and “that there is solid evidence regarding the fact that leaving the
defendant free represents a real danger to public order, based on art. 149 of the Criminal

9405

Procedure Code. The Claimant cites these measures as further items of oppressive

behaviour, basing itself primarily on the facts (again uncontested as such) that the 1st Criminal
Division of the Bucharest Court rejected the preventative arrest application as unfounded*®
and that, when the matter later came before the CSM, the latter decided that both formal
notices were fatally flawed by the failure of Ms. Cristescu to follow certain specified
procedural requirements under the Criminal Procedure Code. It is likewise uncontested that on
16 February 2006 Ms. Cristescu and a DIICOT colleague made a further application for
preventative arrest for a similar period, this time not only against Mr. Patriciu but against Mr.
Stephenson and one further non-Romanian defendant as well. The 2006 application,
noticeably more elaborate than the 2005 application (partly on account of the further evidence

claimed to have been gathered in the intervening period), responds also to the reasoning of the

42 Claimant’ s First Post-Hearing Brief, { 53

4°3 Although it in fact appears (see below) that the papers were signed by Ms. Cristescu alone, even though two
signatures were required by law.

4 Exhibits C-82 and C-83.

“5 Exhibit C-83.

4° Exhibit C-84.

 

134

250.

251.

Bucharest Court when it rejected the earlier application, including in respect of the
constitutional guarantee of liberty of the person and the application of the equivalent
provisions of the ECHR. It cites as the grounds for preventative arrest: in respect of Mr.
Stephenson and the other foreign defendant, their alleged attempts to evade justice (by leaving
Romania); and in respect of Mr. Patriciu, excessive media broadcasting of the case allegedly
designed to influence the witnesses and other parties; in addition it cites against Mr. Patriciu
what it refers to as an attempt to influence the criminal proceedings by proceedings under a
bilateral investment treaty — plainly a reference to the present arbitration — “when in fact the
object of the criminal investigation ... [far from being against the Dutch legal entity investor]

. refers to the defendant’s activity within the Rompetrol group as a natural person.” The
Claimant stigmatizes this as yet another item of oppressive conduct, notably what it describes
as the wholly unacceptable attempt to penalize Mr. Patriciu for the commencement of the
ICSID arbitration, which was once again rejected out of hand by the Romanian courts“°* The
Respondent answers that the Claimant in every case exaggerates what the courts found, that in
none of these instances was the prosecutors’ applications found to be without an arguable
basis, and that in any event the applications were without effect as they were not granted by the

court.

These events were covered in the expert evidence of Profs. Boroi and Kiihne. Professor Boroi,
in his written opinion, concentrates largely on the procedural defects identified in the
judgments of the Bucharest court and the Court of Appeal. Professor Kiihne, for his part, says
that, even granted these procedural defects, neither the 24-hour actual detention nor the
applications for preventive detention in fact caused any appreciable prejudice to Mr. Patriciu or
his co-accused, since the first was of short duration, the second never took effect, and ample
remedies were to hand both before the courts and the CSM; the Romanian legislation was in

any event, in his opinion, more protective than the standards required by and under the ECHR.

In the light of this evidence, the Tribunal’s view of the matter is close to that of Professor
Kiihne. The 24-hour detention of Mr. Patriciu seems clearly to have been de minimis in the
wider scheme of things. The applicable local legislation expressly empowers a prosecutor to

apply to the court to authorize pre-trial detention for up to 30 days, and in the light of

47 Exhibit C-111, pp. 38-39.

48 ‘At first instance on 23 March 2006 (Exhibit C-122) and again on appeal by the Public Ministry on 10 April
2006 in respect of Mr. Patriciu (Exhibit C-129) and on 13 June 2006 in respect of Mr. Stephenson and the third
defendant (Exhibit C-143).

135

252.

unchallenged expert evidence that the legislation in question falls well within the European
and international norm, the Tribunal cannot find anything wrongful in a prosecutor resorting to
that procedure. However, the entire chapter reflects no credit on the DIICOT prosecutors —
and Ms. Cristescu in particular — when one puts together cumulatively the procedural defects
in their first application, the patently thin grounds advanced by them to justify the need for pre-
trial detention, their persistence with a second application nine months later with no apparently
stronger basis, and finally what appears plainly to be Ms. Cristescu’s defiance of the CSM
investigation into the matter for which (see above) the Respondent has offered no

explanation.“

(i) The PNA and GPO press releases

On this issue the argument is somewhat different. At the factual level, there is once again no
dispute that the DNA and GPO issued press releases relating to the progress of the
investigation at various stages of its development.*"° But at the legal level the Claimant does
not frame its argument primarily in terms of lawfulness or unlawfulness, alleging rather that
what the prosecutorial authorities did amounted to a ‘press campaign’ which, it says, was both
gratuitous and knowingly harmful to the individuals under investigation and to RRC. The
Claimant singles out in particular a press release by the PNA in March 2004 announcing that it
had begun informal and preliminary enquiries into the matters that had been the subject of the
Talpes report, and a subsequent press announcement in May of the same year that formal
investigations had begun ‘in rem’.'! The Claimant’s allegation is that these press
announcements overstepped the acceptable boundaries set by the presumption of innocence by
stating in what it (the Claimant) describes as ‘conclusory terms’ factual findings that had never

yet been put to judicial proof, and that, by some mysterious process, these press releases

4° As to the specific complaint raised by the Claimant in respect of the veiled reference in the DIICOT request
to the present ICSID proceedings, the Tribunal does not read this passage (subject to the endemic uncertainties
that have emerged in the course of the proceedings about the reliability of translations from Romanian into
English) in the same way as the Claimant. In the Tribunal’s view, the passage seems to allege instead an
attempt to use the position of TRG as an investor to shield individuals against criminal liability — which
(whether right or wrong) is a different matter, and one to which the Tribunal has itself already drawn attention
earlier in this Award.

#1 Tt should however be noted that the Claimant also alleges (as part of this ‘press campaign’) a deliberate leak
of the Talpes report, which the Respondent does not admit.

4"! Claimant’s First Post-Hearing Brief, {| 22-24. A more specific analysis of the press releases in general is
contained in the Claimant's expert opinion on damages, which will be dealt with in paragraphs 281-288 below.

136

   

 

  

253.

254.

always seemed to coincide with important events in TRG’s operational plans.*!? The
Respondent’s answer is that the press releases either corresponded to key events in the
investigations or were in answer to items that were being carried in the press about the
investigations.*"? It refers in particular to what it describes as ‘intense media coverage’ of the
circumstances surrounding the Petromidia privatization in March 2004 before the PNA

investigation was initiated.*'*

The nature and content of the press releases was covered in the expert evidence of Professors
Boroi and Kiihne, both of whom balance the freedom of information duties of public

authorities‘!

against the principles of the ECHR, notably the presumption of innocence.
Professor Boroi’s analysis, on behalf of the Claimant, is in the abstract, without commenting
on the specific press releases complained about. On behalf of the Respondent, Professor
Kiihne draws attention to the difficulty experienced in many jurisdictions in reconciling the
tension between these two competing principles. He analyzes the ‘Guidelines for the
Cooperation between Courts, Prosecutor's Offices attached thereto and Mass Media’ currently
applicable in Romania and concludes that none of the press releases in issue breaches the
restrictions laid down, given on the one hand Mr. Patriciu’s status as a public figure and the
importance of his economic interests, and on the other hand what he finds to be the consistent
pattern in the drafting of the press releases of maintaining the distinction between charges or
suspicions and criminal convictions, and between provisional findings and formally
established facts. He points out that, both in principle and under Romanian law, a prosecutor
is bound of necessity to reach his own ‘conclusions’ on allegations brought forward, as the

basis for his decision whether or not to prefer formal criminal charges.

The Tribunal is inclined, once again, to take much the same view as Professor Kiihne. It does,
however, find itself in some difficulty in forming any sort of definitive opinion on the matter in
the absence of any comparative information or evidence (from either Party) as to the normal
practice in Romania in comparable situations. Much would appear to turn — here as in other

contexts in the arbitration — on the flavour of the language used, and in this respect the

42 Claimant’s Second Post-Hearing Brief, { 58. See also the Claimant’s Reply, { 135 (the press statements
were “defamatory”) and | 126 (the press releases were “timed to keep the charges concerning TRG’s
investment constantly in the news’).

43 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, [ 308.

414 Thid., J 309.

4!5 Professor Boroi’s First Legal Opinion, Section 2, Professor Kiihne’s First Legal Opinion, {| 103 - 115, and
Professor Kiihne’s First Legal Opinion, § 21 - 32.

137

 

255.

Tribunal is far from confident that the translations into English from which it (and Counsel)
were working were able to capture the subtleties of usage or reflect them with enough accuracy
to allow judgements to be formed on the basis of the documents alone. The Claimant’s
argument was, however, based in its entirety (so far as the content of the press releases is
concerned) on the interpretation it gives to the language of these translations alone, notably by
reading as if they were assertions of ecumenical fact phrases that seemed to the Tribunal to be
equally consistent with the alternative reading that they represented, linguistically, no more
than what Professor Kiihne described as the Prosecution’s provisional findings. As to the
question of the timings of the various press releases, on the other hand, the Claimant’s
argument appeared to the Tribunal to be a purely empirical one, derived simply by putting one
time line alongside another to see how far they coincided, and then asking the Tribunal to draw
specific inferences from the mere existence of any coincidence in time that emerged, without
offering any more concrete evidence, however fragmentary, to support turning the adventitious
into the purposive. The Tribunal accordingly finds that the Claimant has not established that

the press releases raise any issue in respect of the Claimant’s protection under the BIT.

(j) The interception of Mr. Patriciu’s and/or RRC’s telephone conversations

Here, once again, there is little if any dispute between the Parties over the facts, namely that
Mr. Patriciu’s telephones — including, so it would seem, the telephone line in his business
premises — had been subject to interception since 2003, initially on the strength of applications
from the Romanian intelligence services under the Law on National Security, though
subsequently for the purposes of the criminal investigations themselves. The Claimant
stigmatizes this telephone tapping as illegal both on account of procedural defects in the
process for securing authorization and, more broadly, because the Romanian Law itself had
been found by the European Court of Human Rights to provide insufficient guarantees to meet
the requirements of the ECHR. It complains further of the failure by the prosecution
authorities to provide Mr. Patriciu with information, which it says prejudiced his rights as a
defendant, and adds to this a further complaint about the Respondent’s failure fully to comply
with the Tribunal’s order for disclosure in respect of the warrants authorizing the various
interceptions. It also says that the telephone tapping as such damaged the interests and
operations of TRG, Rompetrol and RRC by creating an atmosphere of anxiety and concern

amongst the companies’ employees, and supports this by the brief evidence given by two of

138

256.

them in Court proceedings in Romania, though neither of the two was tendered as a witness in

this Arbitration.

The Tribunal finds it unnecessary to go into these questions in greater detail, as it is now in
possession of an authoritative determination by the Romanian High Court of Cassation and
Justice in its decision of 18 February 2011. It will be evident from the chronology that the
High Court’s decision intervened after the closure of the oral proceedings in the arbitration.
As, however, the decision was on an appeal against a judgment of the Bucharest Court of

1

Appeal that was already on record in the arbitration,“'® and had been in certain respects the

subject of extended discussion between the Parties in the course of the oral hearing,*"” and in

Post-Hearing submissions,*!®

the Tribunal did not feel that it would be right to exclude the
decision from consideration. It ruled accordingly on 6 September 2011, having taken into
account the competing submissions of the Claimant and Respondent on the matter; as the
Parties were unable to meet the Tribunal’s request to agree on which parts of the final appellate
decision were relevant to the arbitration, the Tribunal ultimately admitted the entire
decision.“”? The decision is too long and complex to be summarized in its entirety in this

Award. It will be sufficient to note:

e that the parties to the litigation were Mr. Patriciu and Rompetrol, as claimants, and

the Romanian Intelligence Service, as defendant;

e that the court of first instance had awarded Mr. Patriciu moral damages of RON
50,000 plus costs for the invasion of his privacy, but had rejected his other claims

and those of Rompetrol;

e that the matter had come to the High Court on applications for cassation filed by all
three parties against the Judgment of the Bucharest Court of Appeals in which the
latter had turned down their respective appeals against the decision of the lower
court, on various grounds, both of law (the superior force of the ECHR) and of fact
(the absence of proof of any prejudice to Rompetrol or access to its IT or telephone

systems in relation to its business activities); and

416 As Exhibit R-51.

47 Transcript, Day 1, pp. 44-45, Day 2, pp. 4ff.

4'8 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, {{[ 383ff., Claimant’s Second Post-Hearing Brief, {{| 60ff.
4 Tn an agreed English translation produced by the Parties. See above paragraph 29.

139

257.

258.

259.

e that the High Court dismissed the applications of all three parties, holding inter alia
that there had been nothing arbitrary in the assessment of the quantum of Mr.
Patriciu’s moral damage and that it was not open to it, in cassation proceedings,
either to revisit the findings of fact by the lower courts or to consider new claims

that had not been brought in the proceedings before the lower courts.

It follows from this summary account that the net result of this extended litigation was that the
judgment of the lower court stood, and in particular its finding that Mr. Patriciu was entitled to
a certain limited compensation for moral damage but not to any further relief, nor was
Rompetrol entitled to any remedy; the ground for Mr. Patriciu’s individual entitlement was the
breach of the guarantee of respect for his private life through the extended interception of his

telephone calls without a proper legal basis.

The direct relevance of this to the Claimant’s claims in this arbitration is therefore limited to
the characterization of the evidence as found in the High Court’s ruling. Given that decision of
the High Court had not yet been rendered at the time of the Post-Hearing submissions, the
Claimant rested on a statement by the Court of Appeals in rejecting the appeal against the
lower court’s findings, which reads as follows (in translation,’”° with emphasis added by the

Tribunal to identify the particular phrases at issue):

Under the pretext [sub pretextful] of the existence of threats to the national safety were
registered the telephone conversations of the plaintiff Patriciu Dan Costache for an extremely
long period (1 year and 3 months) and subsequently the data were used against him in
criminal suits the subject matter of which was exclusively the committing of common law
offences and no court of law may cense [sa poata censura] the legality of administering such
means of evidence.

 

The Claimant had asked the Tribunal to read this passage as constituting a formal and
authoritative finding by a senior Romanian jurisdiction that the threat to national security
advanced in the Intelligence Service’s request for authorization was no more than a convenient
fiction without any substantive justification, and hence asks the Tribunal to treat the finding as

another element in the campaign of harassment against TRG and Mr. Patriciu.

#9 To be more precise, the translation tendered by the Respondent, in Exhibit R-51.

140

260.

261.

262.

The High Court’s decision supports Claimant’s contentions. While agreeing that it was not the
Intelligence Service’s responsibility to ensure conformity between Romanian law and
Romania’s obligations under that Convention, the High Court went on to uphold the
Intelligence Service’s liability on the ground that the Service had no valid indication of a threat
to national security as required by law. In this context, the High Court, like the Court of
Appeals, referred to the national security justification as a ‘pretext’ [pretextul], indicating that
by this it meant a ‘false reason’. Accordingly, although the Respondent submitted that the
term ‘pretextul’ in itself was capable of a wider range of nuances in the Romanian language
than its literal equivalent in English, the Tribunal is satisfied that a Romanian court at the
highest level has established that national security was not the real motive for the interception

but only a convenient device.

That said, the High Court’s Judgment leaves it beyond any doubt that the litigation was
directed towards the guarantee of respect for Mr. Patriciu’s private life, as embodied in the
ECHR, and finds expressly that Mr. Patriciu’s business activities were not affected. In the
circumstances, and in the absence of any positive evidence to show collusion between the
intelligence services and either the DNA or DIICOT prosecutors — in respect of surveillance
that originally began well before the initiation of the criminal investigations — the Tribunal is
unable to conclude that the episode comes within the area of protection under the BIT. The
Romanian courts at all three levels found that Rompetrol had not substantiated its claim of
interference with its own business operations. Moreover, even so far as Mr. Patriciu’s
individual interests are concerned, the Tribunal can see no sign whatever of Mr. Patriciu,
having allegedly fallen foul of important enemies, receiving on that account a biased or unfair
treatment at the hands of the Romanian courts when he set out to vindicate his rights At the
very most, therefore, the telephone interception saga might go, once again, to suggest that there
were elements in the State apparatus determined to pin something on Mr. Patriciu, if they
could; as such, the Tribunal places this alongside the other fragments of evidence mentioned in

paragraphs 248, 251, and 257 above relating to the conduct of the prosecutors.

(k) The requests for information from banks

The Claimant points out that the Respondent had conceded, in the context of the Tribunal’s

Orders on document production, 7! that the GPO had in the course of the DIICOT criminal

#1 See paragraph 186 above.
141

263.

264.

investigation directed requests for information to some 60 banking institutions, and relating to
some 400 companies, as to the financial transactions of Rompetrol. The Claimant complains
that “[nJothing in the record provides any legitimate justification for such a massive campaign
of requests directed to TRG’s business partners. These requests were made simply to harass
TRG and to harm its relationships with businesses and financial institutions.” The
Respondent’s answer is, in essence, that the requests were in accordance with Romanian law
(citing specifically the legislation against money laundering) and that the powers conferred
under the legislation in question, wide as they were, conformed to the European Union
Directives on Money Laundering and the EU Framework Decision on Money Laundering.*”*
In addition, the Respondent denies (by reference to the voluminous attachments to the criminal

424

Indictment)” the Claimant’s assertion that none of the information sought was in fact ever

used for the criminal process.*?°

The question was considered to an extent in the expert evidence of Professors Boroi and
Kiihne. For Professor Boroi, it was only once the criminal investigations had become in
personam that it became legally justified to override bank secrecy. Professor Kiihne, on the
other hand, took the view that it was not necessary that the persons concerned had already
become formally identified as suspects or had been charged; he sets out in detail why he
considers that Romanian law complies with the broad European standard in respect of the fight

against money laundering.

The Claimant links with its arguments, however, its complaint about the inadequate response
by the Respondent to the Tribunal’s disclosure Orders. The Tribunal has already considered
this matter (at paragraphs 184-186 above) and decided that, in the circumstances, the situation
as to document production does not call, in general or in particular, for the drawing of any
adverse inferences on matters of fact. The Tribunal is prepared to regard as a matter of
common knowledge that, once a money-laundering investigation is properly launched, it is
likely to lead to the investigators’ net being cast wide to gather in a picture of financial
transactions that may be both complex and opaque. That leaves at large the Claimant’s
allegation that this particular money-laundering investigation was not genuine but was

designed to be either oppressive or damaging or both.

#2 Claimant’ s First Post-Hearing Brief, J 46.

#5 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, {{]] 428-429.
#4 See paragraph 237 above.

#5 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 433.

142

265.

266.

267.

Given that the requests for information from the banks were directed at a wide range of targets
that had in common their business affiliation with TRG, this aspect of the investigation and
prosecution constituted conduct that fell within the zone of protection under the BIT. The
Claimant has been unable however to offer any positive proof of its allegation that the requests
were wrongfully motivated, but instead asks the Tribunal to fill in the gap by drawing
inferences from the observable facts. A reasonably sceptical approach is justified towards
determining whether the scope of these requests was in accord with standard criteria when this
question is considered in conjunction with other aspects of the investigation and prosecution
already discussed. The Claimant has nevertheless failed to demonstrate to a sufficient degree
of reliability that the requests were themselves irregular or abusive. Accordingly, the Tribunal
does not regard this matter as evidence of a pattern of serious irregularities on the part of the

prosecutors such as might bring Article 3(1) of the BIT into play.

(1) The tax controls

This issue need not trouble the Tribunal at length. It is once again of a slightly different kind
from some of the preceding issues dealt with above: there is no dispute, on a factual level, that
the tax controls complained about took place, nor does the Claimant contend that they were
unlawful; it complains instead that the combination of their number and frequency and the
manner in which they were conducted shows that they represented yet another element in a

campaign of harassment against Rompetrol.

Witnesses of fact were presented from each side. The Claimant proffered the evidence of Mr.
Adrian Volintiru (formerly the Chief Finance Officer of RRC, now in the employment of the
Romanian subsidiary of another Dutch company ultimately owned by Mr. Patriciu)*”* in
support of the propositions that the level of tax controls was significantly ramped up in 2003
after TRG’s acquisition of Petromidia, that the attitude of the tax inspectors was ‘rude and
aggressive,’ that the tax inspectors had clearly been instructed to find irregularities and not to
make a proper assessment of RRC’s financial situation, and that the investigations were unduly

prolonged and deliberately burdensome. For its part, the Respondent produced as a witness

Ms. Valeria Nistor (a senior official of the General Legal Directorate of the National Agency

“© Though it would be more accurate to say that Mr. Volintiru’s witness statement, which was produced only
with Claimant’s Reply, was in fact in response to the first witness statement of Ms. Nistor annexed to the
Statement of Defence.

143

268.

for Fiscal Administration, ANAF).””” In her two witness statements, Ms. Nistor deals inter
alia with the allegations by the Claimant of the unjustified increase in the tax controls on
Petromidia or RRC, with the length and manner of the investigations, and with the allegation
that the form of the investigations was changed in mid-stream in order to evade the possibility
of challenge in the courts.”* She includes in her first witness statement a table breaking down
by year and by type the tax controls that had been carried out in the period from 1999 onward.
According to this table, for the period up to and including 2003, 15% of the controls were to
verify the company’s entitlement to benefits it had itself claimed, roughly 50% (75% in the
year 2003) were cross-checks of transactions reported by other companies, and 10% were
specific verifications required by law for production and trade in excisable products; so that
only 25% represented what Ms. Nistor classified as ‘tax controls on RRC’s activity’.
According to Ms. Nistor’s table, far from accelerating after RRC’s acquisition of Petromidia,
the gross number of controls peaked in 2001/02, and then fell off sharply in all categories with
the sole exception of cross-checks on the declarations of RRC’s trading partners. There was
then a further sharp drop in 2004 and 2005 which (Ms. Nistor points out) coincided with
radical changes in the Fiscal Code, particularly in respect of the petroleum industry. She sets
out in addition, through another table, the steady rise, despite the company’s increasing
turnover, in RRC’s accumulated tax debt (from US$195.3 million in 2000 to US$693.7 million
in late 2003). Finally, Ms. Nistor draws attention to the fact that Mr. Volintiru’s opinions had
not been backed up by documentary corroboration but that she had extracted from the ANAF

files the relevant papers which did not bear out his assertions.

The Respondent did not call Mr. Volintiru for cross-examination. Ms. Nistor, on the other
hand, was called by the Claimant and was cross-examined at length.*”° She impressed the
Tribunal as a responsible and knowledgeable witness, and the Tribunal has no hesitation in

giving credence to her evidence.“ She supplemented her evidence in chief by testifying that

#7 By the time she came to give her oral evidence, however, Ms. Nistor had become the General Counsel to a
major Romanian Investment Fund designed to compensate people whose property had been confiscated during
the communist era.

#8 And with certain other questions that the Tribunal does not find of significant importance for its Award.

#° She gave her evidence in English, and not through the medium of interpretation with the difficulties that
entailed in other contexts.

49 Tt should however be noted that it emerged under questioning from the Tribunal that Ms. Nistor had
prepared her witness statements in English, which had then been translated by Respondent’s counsel into
Romanian and put before her to sign in a version that did not correspond at all accurately to the English
originals deposited with the Tribunal as ‘translations’. This was an unfortunate lapse, which the Respondent
ought never to have allowed to happen, but it does not alter the Tribunal’s view of the value of Ms. Nistor’s
evidence as such.

144

the number of tax controls undertaken in the same period in respect of RAFO Onesti
comfortably exceeded that in respect of RRC. When it was put to her that Mr. Patriciu had
complained that Rompetrol was the most controlled oil company in Romania, she replied to
the effect ‘they all say that,’ which to the Tribunal rang particularly true. The Claimant seeks
in its Post-Hearing submissions to undermine the value of her evidence on the basis that she
was not present at the tax investigations carried out on RRC whereas Mr. Volintiru was there

. 3
in person.**!

The Tribunal does not regard this as a particularly convincing argument. At
most, it could bear only on the Claimant’s allegation as to the aggressive demeanour of the tax
inspectors when on the premises of RRC — an allegation which the Tribunal evaluates against
what must be the general assumption that no business enterprise regards the descent of the tax
inspectors as a happening inspiring unmitigated joy. But it does not touch the main part of

Ms. Nistor’s evidence which the Tribunal has already assessed above.

269. The Tribunal accordingly finds that the Claimant has not met the burden falling on it to
establish that the conduct of the tax authorities towards RRC was oppressive, either absolutely
or by comparison with the treatment of its competitors. Hence, though directed at the
company itself, the tax controls do not implicate the protections afforded by Article 3(1) of the

BIT.

Summary

270. The Claimant’s case, therefore, reduces to a submission that the Tribunal should find, on a
balance of probabilities, by drawing the necessary inferences from the objectively established
(or admitted) facts, that certain of the prosecutors in positions of authority and responsibility in
the PNA and the DIICOT were driven by hostility and bias towards Mr. Patriciu (and therefore
his interests and his associates) and a determination to find something to pin on him (or them),
that they allowed this hostility and bias to influence, in a substantial way, their prosecutorial
functions (or at least their tactics), specifically an unnecessarily large and sweeping effort to
pull in potentially incriminating material from banking sources, to freeze financial assets, to
take Mr. Patriciu and Mr. Stephenson into custody and to enter into the public polemic over
Mr. Patriciu’s affairs, and that the result was to cause damage both material and moral to RRC,
and through it to TRG. This submission was reflected in an argument the Claimant developed

over the course of the arbitral proceedings, and particularly in the Post-Hearing submissions,

+! Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 56.

145

271.

namely that, over and above the individual items of conduct complained of, the conduct of the
Romanian State, judged overall, was such as to engage its liability to TRG under the BIT. The
Tribunal identifies in paragraph 124 above those portions of its First Post-Hearing Brief in
which the Claimant identifies four ‘scenarios’ giving rise to liability, the first of which is ‘a
pattern of abusive acts by Romania,’ and the final ‘scenario’ asks the Tribunal to look at the

global effect of all of the three prior ‘scenarios’ taken together.

In the face of that approach, this Tribunal can join other recent tribunals in accepting that the
cumulative effect of a succession of impugned actions by the State of the investment can
together amount to a failure to accord fair and equitable treatment even where the individual
actions, taken on their own, would not surmount the threshold for a Treaty breach.*” But this
would only be so where the actions in question disclosed some link of underlying pattern or
purpose between them; a mere scattered collection of disjointed harms would not be enough.

As the matter was put by the Rosinvest Tribunal:

In conclusion therefore, the Tribunal considers that the totality of Respondent's measures
were structured in such a way to remove Yukos’ assets from the control of the company and
the individuals associated with Yukos. They must be seen as elements in the cumulative
treatment of Yukos for what seems to have been the intended purpose. The Tribunal, in
reviewing the various alleged breaches of the IPPA, even if the justification of a certain
individual measure might be arguable as an admissible application of the relevant law,
considers that this cumulative effect of those various measures taken by Respondent in respect
of Yukos is relevant to its decision under the IPPA. An illustration is, as Claimant has pointed
out, that despite having used nearly identical tax structures, no other Russian oil company was
subjected to the same relentless and inflexible attacks as Yukos. In the view of the Tribunal,
they can only be understood as steps under a common denominator in a pattern to destroy
Yukos and gain control over its assets.

272. The Claimant’s Statement of Claims referred to “the extraordinary State orchestrated

harassment to which it has been subjected ... 4 The Respondent refers to this — with some

435

justification — as a conspiracy theory,” its answer to which is as follows. The Respondent

says first that proof of any conspiracy is wanting: the allegations advanced by the Claimant

42 As, for example, in RosinvestCo UK Ltd. v. The Russian Federation, SCC Case No. V079/2005, Final
Award, 12 September 2010, { 599: “the Tribunal considers that an assessment of whether Respondent
breached the IPPA can only be effectively conducted if the conduct as a whole is reviewed, rather than isolated
measures or aspects.”

433 RosinvestCo UK Ltd. v. The Russian Federation, SCC Case No. V079/2005, Final Award, 12 September
2010, 621.

44 Statement of Claims, 3.

455 4 term that was also used by the Respondent in Rosinvest.

146

273.

274.

rest entirely on the self-interested evidence of Mr. Patriciu and Mr. Stephenson and the
discredited evidence of Mr. Stanescu; everything else is pure speculation and anecdote. But
the Respondent rests also on what it submits are the improbabilities inherent in a conspiracy
theory, since it would depend on a chameleon-like shift in the cast of conspirators; the original
conspiracy would have has its orchestrator Mr. Talpes, in pursuit of his undercover
commercial links to RAFO, and would then have to switch to a different orchestrator,
President Basescu on his election, in pursuit of a wholly different set of purposes, of a purely
political kind, deriving from the hostility between the President and Prime Minister, with Mr.
Talpes acting somehow as the hinge joining the two in influencing Mr. Basescu’s attitudes

despite the lack of political affinity between the two men.**°

There is much force in the Respondent’s argument. The Tribunal starts from the proposition
that, whether the conduct in question is stigmatized as ‘conspiracy’ or as ‘organized
harassment,’ some proof is required, even if all of the actors have the status of State agencies,
that different actions pursued on different paths by different actors are linked together by a
common and coordinated purpose. This was clearly the view taken by the Rosinvest tribunal, a
view which the present Tribunal shares. What degree of proof would be required cannot be
stated in the abstract; it would depend on the nature of the allegations and the circumstances of
the case. The Tribunal recalls its finding in paragraph 182-183 above as to the sufficient
weight of positive evidence that would be required to sustain serious allegations of sustained
and coordinated misconduct, as opposed to pure probability or circumstantial inference. The
Tribunal is quite prepared to assume as a working hypothesis that, given conditions in
Romania at the time, there may have been tensions and rivalries, both commercial and
personal, between Mr. Patriciu’s enterprises and those connected with RAFO, and that Mr.
Talpes may have had personal links to the latter. It is equally prepared to assume that there
may have been, or there may have built up, a political hostility between Mr. Patriciu and Mr.
Basescu after the latter succeeded Mr. Ion Iliescu as President. But, even if so, this could only
go to establish motive, and in investment arbitration the gap between motivation and action is

not one that can be leapt over by conjecture rather than evidence.

The Tribunal turns therefore to the evidence the Claimant offered, starting with that of Mr.

Patriciu. The Respondent is justified in warning of the element of self interest in Mr. Patriciu’s

436 See Respondent’s First Post-Hearing Brief, {{] 102ff. The Respondent points also to an unexplained gap in
the theory covering the earlier period from 2001 to 2004.

147

275.

evidence. As to its content, in his witness statement Mr. Patriciu says: that it was the then
Minister of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Dan Ioan Popescu, also a witness in this arbitration)
who brought about the meeting at which Mr. Tender made the threats recorded at paragraph
211 above; and that there were links between Mr. Talpes and RAFO; to which he adds (but
only in his second witness statement) the belief that, for political reasons, Mr. Basescu had not
only endorsed the campaign of harassment but directed that it be expanded and intensified and
involved himself directly in the DIICOT investigations. He offers no corroboration of this
other than Mr. Stanescu’s account of certain events, the files dealing with Rompetrol in Mr.
Basescu’s office (which the Tribunal has dealt with in footnote 373 above), and Mr. Basescu’s
television interviews (which the Tribunal will discuss below). The Tribunal notes that Mr.
Popescu, in his evidence, failed to corroborate Mr. Patriciu’s claim that he arranged the
meeting with Mr. Tender of RAFO. As to Mr. Stephenson’s evidence, so far as the present
issue is concerned he is not able to more than repeat certain elements of Mr. Patriciu’s
evidence without any first-hand knowledge of his own — other than in respect of a shareholder
court action launched against TRG by a minority shareholder in RRC (Faber Invest & Trade)
which he says was backed by a leaked copy of the ‘Cristescu themes’.“*”_ Mr. Stanescu’s
evidence has already been dealt with at length in paragraphs 213-224 above. The Tribunal

turns finally therefore to President Basescu’s television interviews.

The reference is to two interviews given by Mr. Basescu to Realitatea TV at the time of his
election to the Presidency. There was some initial confusion among the Parties between the
two interviews, with the result that the Tribunal did not see the full texts of both until a late
stage in the proceedings, but no serious difficulty ensued as a result. The issues arising from
the contents of the interviews were extensively canvassed in the Parties’ written and oral
submissions, and in the evidence of Mr. Patriciu. The Tribunal sees no need to recite the
arguments in detail. The key submissions are in the Post-Hearing Briefs: for the Claimant, at
paragraphs 30-33 of its First Brief; and for the Respondent, at paragraphs 133-138 of its First
Brief and 66-69 of its Second — and these submissions on both sides take into account the
cross-examination of Mr. Patriciu, in which he interpreted the two interviews by the President
(and particularly the first of them) as a public declaration that Petromidia was guilty of

criminal practices and stood in this respect on the same footing as RAFO. This is the version

437 See paragraph 236-237 above. Mr. Stephenson confirmed under cross-examination that he was
unable to read the Romanian original of any of the documents in question, but was going on
apparently oral translations given to him by RRC’s local staff.

148

276.

277.

278.

of events espoused by the Claimant, but the Respondent rejects it on the basis that the actual
texts of the interviews do not bear this meaning out. The Respondent asserts instead that, in
response to loaded questions from his interviewer at a time of political excitement, the newly-
elected President was saying no more than that corruption and cronyism would not be tolerated
under his Presidency and that RAFO and RRC would receive exactly the same treatment in
this respect. Due allowance made for the translation of live interviews into English which (as
in so many places in the evidence before the Tribunal) leaves a question as to whether the
nuances were or were not properly captured, the Tribunal has no doubt that the Respondent’s
reading — set out in full in the paragraphs of its Post-Hearing Briefs noted above — is clearly the

better one.

The Tribunal accordingly finds that the evidence mustered by the Claimant falls well short of
what would be required to establish its claim that the woes that befell Mr. Patriciu and RRC
must be linked together and seen as part of a co-ordinated campaign of harassment by the

Romanian State.***

Having found unproved the Claimant’s contention of a broad campaign of orchestrated
harassment, the Tribunal must still consider whether the evidence analysed above sustains the
hypothesis of a pattern of disregard by the GPO and DIICOT prosecutors for the procedural
tights of TRG’s executives, and in particular for the likely and foreseeable effects on the
interests of TRG itself as a protected foreign investor. The Tribunal’s conclusion is that the
evidentiary record goes sufficiently far in that direction to raise a question as to the breach of
Article 3(1) of the BIT, notably the guarantee of fair and equitable treatment. The question

must therefore be examined further.

As the Rosinvest Tribunal recognized, the ‘cumulative effect’ of a series of wrongful acts may
amount to a treaty breach even if the individual components of that series do not. Likewise, in
this Tribunal’s view, a State may incur international responsibility for breaching its obligation

under an investment treaty to accord fair and equitable treatment to a protected investor by a

438 ‘The Tribunal reaches this conclusion independently of the arguments advanced by the Respondent that the
theory of determined and implacable hostility to RRC and/or Mr. Patriciu is not reconcilable with the State’s
rescue of the company by agreeing to convert the accumulated tax liability into bonded debt (see paragraphs
104.b and 205 above), nor is it easy to reconcile with the incontrovertible fact that at no stage was there any
interference in the ownership either of Mr. Patriciu’s personal interests, nor in the ownership of RRC’s assets
(notably the Petromidia refinery), nor in TRG’s ownership interests in Rompetrol or RRC. These arguments
are plainly not without merit, but they go only to reinforce a conclusion which the Tribunal had already
reached on other grounds.

 

149

279.

pattern of wrongful conduct during the course of a criminal investigation or prosecution, even
where the investigation and prosecution are not themselves wrongful. The provisos are
however that the pattern must be sufficiently serious and persistent, that the interests of the
investor must be affected, and that there is a failure in these circumstances to pay adequate
regard to how those interests ought to be duly protected. In the Tribunal’s considered view, it
is part of the legitimate expectations of a protected investor — without in any way trenching
upon the sovereign right of the host State to prescribe and enforce its criminal law — that, if its
interests find themselves caught up in the criminal process either directly or indirectly, means
will be sought by the authorities of the host State to avoid any unnecessarily adverse effect on

those interests or at least to minimise or mitigate the adverse effects.

The Tribunal notes that from a certain point at least in the lengthy saga of the criminal
investigations, the GPO and the DIICOT knew that the interests of TRG as such stood directly
or indirectly in the line of fire. It is not easy to put a finger on a particular point in time, but
knowledge of this kind must be assumed to be there at the very latest by the time of the second
request for detention (of Mr. Patriciu and Mr. Stephenson), for the simple reason that the
request refers directly to the present Arbitration and to its having been brought at the instance
of ‘the Dutch investor’ (ie. TRG).“* From that point onwards, the Respondent could not be
heard to deny that the GPO, as a responsible organ of the Romanian State whose actions or
omissions would engage Romania’s international responsibility, was aware that its actions in
pursuit of the criminal investigation stood to harm the interests of a protected foreign investor.
In fact, the Tribunal finds sufficient by way of reference to ‘the Rompetrol Group’ in the GPO
press releases and in the various DI[COT formal documents that it feels justified in projecting
back in time the element of knowledge so that it would in practice cover the attachment of the
RRC shares and the requests for banking information as well as later events in 2006 and
onwards. There is however no evidence that steps were taken either to assess or to avoid,
minimise, or mitigate that possibility of harm, nor has the Respondent so pleaded in its written
arguments. On the basis of the procedural irregularities during the criminal investigation of
Mr. Patriciu and others, including the conduct of the prosecutors discussed in paragraph 245,
the attachment of RRC’s shares discussed in paragraphs 247-248, and the arrest and attempted
imprisonment of Messrs. Patriciu and Stephenson discussed in paragraphs 249-251, the

Tribunal accordingly holds that to that limited extent the Respondent is in breach of the

4° See paragraph 249 above.
150

280.

L

281.

282.

guarantees accorded to the Claimant by Article 3(1) of the BIT, notably the guarantee of ‘fair
and equitable treatment’. In so finding, the Tribunal wishes to make it plain that it would not
regard any breach, or indeed any series of breaches, of procedural safeguards provided by
national or international law in the context of a criminal investigation or prosecution as giving
rise to the breach of an obligation of fair and equitable treatment. All will depend on the
nature and strength of the evidence in the particular case, on the impact of the events
complained about on the protected investor or investment, and on the severity and persistence
of any breaches that can be duly proved, as well as on whatever justification the respondent
State may offer for the course of events. The Tribunal’s finding is based entirely on the facts

of the present case.

All of the Claimant’s remaining claims are dismissed.

LOSS AND DAMAGE

Given the Tribunal’s limited findings as to potential liability under the BIT set out above, it
will be clear that many of the assumptions against which the Claimant put forward its expert
evidence on loss and damage, and the Respondent replied to that, including through its own
expert evidence, are no longer intact. The analysis of loss and damage remains, all the same, a
necessary element in the completion of the Tribunal’s reasoning in this Award. The Tribunal
would like to note at this stage the high quality of the expert evidence put forward on both
sides on this aspect of the case. Not only were the experts on each side - for the Claimant,
Messrs. Dunbar and Okongwu of NERA (assisted at the hearing by Mr. McKenna), and for the
Respondent, Messrs. Dow and Lapuerta of the Brattle Group - deeply knowledgeable in their
field, but they were each ready to engage with the arguments of the opposing experts in an
exemplary fashion. The Tribunal found its joint session with both sets of experts on the
penultimate day of the hearing to be genuinely informative, as well as helpful to it in forming a

view of the case, and would like to record its particular appreciation for that.

The Tribunal finds it unnecessary, at this stage in its Award, to rehearse in any detail the
successive submissions of the Parties on the question of loss and damage; these can be found
in Sections C, D and E above. For present purposes it suffices to summarize the final
submissions by each Party as follows, based on their closing statements at the end of the oral
hearing and their Post-Hearing Briefs. In the eyes of the Claimant, the damage it suffered
consisted, on the one hand, of injury to its reputation which affected its current and future

151

283.

business, and on the other hand of the actual loss of property or property rights flowing from
specific acts on the part of the Respondent. That damage then manifested itself (so says the
Claimant) in various ways, including legal costs incurred in dealing with the wrongful acts of
the Romanian investigators and prosecutors, increased financing costs for its continued
business activities, and the loss of business opportunities. These sources of damage were, the

Claimant maintains, precisely what its expert study set out to measure.“

The Respondent’s
answer is that the only damages that are recoverable in law are those that are non-speculative,
have actually materialized, and are not too remote, but that the figures put forward by the
Claimant are derived through the use of a method that makes them wholly speculative and

unreliable.“

The Claimant, while accepting that damage may not be purely speculative and
must have a sufficiently proximate link to treaty breaches established, retorts that both criteria
are satisfied by its damage claims as formulated. The Respondent, in rejecting these
assertions, replies that the Claimant has not, in fact, produced evidence of any loss at all. In
short, the entire question whether the Claimant, TRG, has proved any loss or damage at all is

in issue between the Parties.

It is against that background that the Tribunal must assess the expert evidence. The Claimant’s
experts base their assessment of the damage suffered by the Claimant on what is known as the
‘event study’ method.” This method is defined in the following terms in the Claimant’s first

expert report on damages, produced by Dr. Dunbar in December 2008:

An event study is an empirical technique used to measure the stock price impact of a specific
event, such as a company's earnings announcement. The technique examines stock price
returns - the percentage change in stock prices from one day to the next - to determine how
much of the price movement on a particular day is due to the event being examined, and how
much is due to changes in conditions affecting the market in general.“

Dr. Dunbar’s report goes on to explain that the event study method is a form of purely
statistical regression analysis by which, on the hypothesis of a sufficiently efficient market

for trading in the shares in question, he has set out first to construct an expectation of share

#9 Claimant’ s First Post-Hearing Brief, | 198.

#1 Respondent's First Post-Hearing Brief, {| 508ff.

+ By a direction dated 2 September 2010, the Tribunal ruled inadmissible further evidence put forward by the
Claimant with its First Post-Hearing Brief as the basis for an alternative method for the assessment of its
damage. See footnote 213.

+8 Dunbar report, | 68. The rebuttal report by Dow and Lapuerta (see below) defines it as “a statistical
technique that consists, in essence, of specifying a priori certain days on which a particular event became
known to the stock market, and on which there appear to be no confounding events that might also move the
stock price, and then seeing how much the stock price moved on those days” (3).

152

movements overall in the relevant market, and then to assess whether it can be said, with a
sufficient degree of statistical reliability, that, under the effect of selected ‘events,’ the
observed movement in the traded price of the shares under examination undershoots - or
alternatively overshoots - the movement that would have been expected. It is self-evident
that, in applying this analytical method, the selection of ‘events’ is of particular
significance, and in the specific circumstances of this case the search was for possible
correlations with the actions by or on behalf of the Romanian State about which the
Claimant complains in this arbitration; or, more precisely, not directly with the actions
themselves but with when news of them reached the market. Dr. Dunbar explains in some
detail how he put together the string of 32 ‘event days’ affecting RRC, on the basis of an
extensive examination of the published information that would have been available to
market participants at the relevant times, principally from the published media. These
choices are further justified and explained in the report of November/December 2009 by
Dr. Dunbar’s colleague, Dr. Okongwu (who also appeared as an expert witness at the
hearing). The final stage of the analysis then consisted in several further steps: (i) isolating
which ‘event days’ from among the chosen 32 were to be treated as significant, (ii)

calculating the excess downward or upward‘

movement in the RRC share price on each
of these significant ‘event days,’ (iii) converting that into a cash figure by a multiplier
derived from TRG’s shareholding in RRC, (iv) adding those figures together to arrive at a
cumulative total, which is then put forward as the figure representing the Claimant’s

overall damages.“

. The criticism of the above in the expert report of March 2010 by Professor Dow and
Dr. Lapuerta, on behalf of the Respondent, focuses to a large extent on the technical defects
which in their view render the Dunbar report unreliable as an application of the event study
methodology.“ In summary, they say that it analyses the wrong shares, tests the wrong days,
and embodies other technical errors, and finally that it fails to cross-check its statistical
findings against other indicators (‘reality checks’) which would have shown that the true
picture of what happened to TRG is quite different from that put forward. These are strong
criticisms. In part they derive from the fact that the Dunbar report chooses as the

representative quantity to measure the relatively small minority of RRC shares actually traded

+4 Fg. under the impact of the withdrawal or reversal of an earlier negative event.

“5 U$$139 million.

© Although Dow and Lapuerta also express, and explain, their doubts as to whether the event study method, as
applied by Dr. Dunbar, was appropriate to the case at all.

153

285.

on the Bucharest Stock Exchange, which Dow and Lapuerta regard as an unreliable, and at
best indirect, guide to the effect on TRG as such, as the holder of the very large controlling
stake in RRC. In part these criticisms derive also from what they regard as technical defects in
the handling of the statistical ‘confidence interval’ which they say deprive the Dunbar
calculations of any serious value as a demonstration of cause-and-effect. Dow and Lapuerta
also criticize the way in which the Dunbar report arrives at its final selection of the 12
‘significant event days,’ these being the days in respect of which the corresponding effect on
shareholder value, as calculated in the report, go to making up the cumulative figure put
forward as the Claimant’s damages flowing from the Respondent’s alleged breaches of treaty.
Specifically, Dow and Lapuerta say that the technique adopted by Dr. Dunbar falls into
fundamental technical error by abstracting the 12 particular ‘event days’ from the set of 32
such days originally selected for examination ex post facto and on the basis of the outcome of
the observations on those days, the result of which (say Dow and Lapuerta) is mathematically
bound to skew the outcome of the calculation. Dow and Lapuerta also challenge, amongst
other things, the choice made by Dr. Dunbar for the beginning and the end of the period
studied. And in that connection they challenge in particular the exclusion of certain

7,"7 which led to a

‘favourable’ dates, most notably the buy-out by KazMunaiGaz in 200
massive rebound in the share price. But they also assert that the technique applied in the
Dunbar report is incapable of taking proper account of the ‘no news is good news’
phenomenon, in which the markets gradually discount over time a risk or risks they had
previously factored into the share price because the anticipated risk (in the present case, for
example, the loss of the Petromidia refinery) had failed to materialize, but without this
happening in any dramatic fashion hinging on any specific event. Overall, Dow and Lapuerta
claim that the statistical confidence that can as a result be placed in the Dunbar calculations is
so low that the latter do not amount to proof of any loss at all, let alone one of the magnitude

put forward.

These sharply conflicting expert views were vigorously argued out at the oral hearing, both in
the examination and cross-examination of each set of experts, and in a separate session
arranged for the specific purpose of allowing the two sets of experts to be questioned jointly
thereafter in conference by the members of the Tribunal. A full account of both is given in

paragraphs 107-112 above, and need not be repeated here. So far as the purely technical

#7 See paragraph 37 above.

154

286.

aspects of the calculation of damage are concerned, the Tribunal need go no further than to
observe that the criticisms mounted by Dow and Lapuerta were both trenchant and far-
reaching and, although responded to with determination and conviction by Dr. Okongwu, they
raise a serious doubt as to whether in these circumstances the Claimant can be said to have met
the burden resting on it of proving its damages.“ The Tribunal wishes at this stage merely to
highlight one question relating to the overall approach of the Dunbar report to the problem put

before its author, what one may call its fundamental underlying hypothesis.

The issue in question is that Dr. Dunbar (and Dr. Okongwu in his turn) took as the axiom
underpinning their reports that all the Romanian criminal investigations connected with
Rompetrol should be regarded in principle and in their entirety as unlawful in terms of the BIT.
This emerged with unmistakable clarity from paragraph 3.2.1 of Dr. Okongwu’s Consolidated
Rebuttal Report of November 2009 and in particular from its paragraph 31. Whether
Messrs. Dunbar and Okongwu were specifically instructed to that effect by their client is not
revealed. Be that as it may, this all-or-nothing approach ends up leaving the analysis
somewhat stranded. As will have appeared in Section H of this Award (paragraphs 247-248
above) the Tribunal’s findings do not sustain this basic axiom of the Dunbar and Okongwu
reports. On the contrary, the Tribunal has not only declined to find that the criminal
investigations were per se illegal, but it has also declined to find similarly in respect of the
majority of the individual aspects of those investigations put specifically in issue by the
Claimant. The underlying problem became in due course the subject of discussion between the
two sets of experts during the hearing. There seemed to be a large measure of agreement
between them that the technically proper approach, for the event of only a partial finding of
illegality, would be to reconfigure the experiment and run it again. This was not of course
done — if only for the simple reason that it would have required foreknowledge of what the
Tribunal was going to decide. The Tribunal was convinced by the argument of Dow and
Lapuerta that the Dunbar/Okongwu application of the event study method can offer no means
of differentiating between the market effects of a company’s coming under investigation by the
authorities for any legitimate purpose and the asserted incremental effects of illegalities that

happened in the course of such an investigation. The Tribunal has held that the investigations

#8 The Tribunal observes en passant that Dr. Dunbar is clearly wrong when he states in {[ 62 of his report that
“[t]he main purposes of damages in arbitral proceedings are to restore a claimant’s economic losses caused
by a respondent's conduct and to deter such future conduct,” the aim of reparation in international law is
compensation, not punishment. The Tribunal does not however regard this misstatement as having any
material bearing on the conclusions that follow below.

155

287.

were not per se illegal. This therefore wholly compromises the event study method as a means

of proving damage in this case.

The Tribunal does not regard this question of appropriateness as being a matter of law, but
rather as one to be assessed on the basis of the economic and statistical rationale behind the
event study method — specifically in its relationship with the factual matrix of the case in hand.
The test is: what does the method set out to measure, and does it do so with sufficient accuracy
and reliability? The Tribunal accepts that the event study method has, on the evidence, been
properly employed in judicial proceedings where the issue arising for determination is the
effect of a specified event or closely related events on the share price itself, for example in a
shareholder lawsuit or one arising out of a corporate merger or acquisition. Something
equivalent might, for example, conceivably apply in respect of the expropriation of an
investment or the effect of a specific regulatory measure imposed by the host State. In such
circumstances the value of the investment, or the deterioration in its value, might well be
reflected in the instantaneous response of the market. That is however qualitatively different
from the situation with which this Tribunal is confronted, in which the Claimant’s case is
characterized by an extended series of disparate events spreading over a period of years which
are said to have had a negative effect on an enterprise’s running costs and the development of
its business opportunities. An investment tribunal would be faced with a near to impossible
task if it was required, on an allegation of breach, say, of the applicable standard of fair and
equitable treatment in respect of a going concern, to investigate separately every individual
item of conduct (or omission) by the host State’s authorities, to assess and calculate the
damages applicable to each, and finally to merge those individualized calculations into an
overall assessment of the damages due. The Tribunal notes Dow’s and Lapuerta’s
fundamental caution that an event study grows less reliable the less well defined the events to
be studied and the longer in time over which they extend. The Dunbar report, per contra,
appears to assume (but without saying so expressly) that ‘damage’ is a day-to-day affair and
that the total damage suffered is a cumulation of selected day-to-day individual damages. In
the opinion of this Tribunal, that is fundamentally misconceived. The true position is that
damages, in the legal sense, must be understood as what is required to make good in monetary
terms some enduring alteration for the worse in the economic, financial or commercial position
of the foreign investor which can be traced, in a sufficiently direct and proximate way, to the
host State’s unlawful course of action, taken as a whole. If so, then it means that the

application of the event study method to the present case must be regarded as inherently

156

288.

289.

questionable. And especially so if it brings in its train an arbitrary starting point (after the
allegedly unlawful conduct had already begun) and also an arbitrary end point which excludes
at least one highly significant development for the economic and financial situation of the
foreign investor which had, by common agreement, a dramatically positive effect on the very

quantity the method sets out to measure (the RRC share price).””

The Tribunal therefore could only accept as a valid technique for the quantification of
economic damages one which, proceeding from the prior need to establish by the appropriate
standard of proof a sufficient causal nexus between the claimed illegality and the asserted loss,
allows a suitably objective comparison then to be made between the status quo ante and the
Claimant’s situation at the time that suit is brought. The event study method as advanced in
these proceedings fails that test, and no alternative method has been advanced that would put
the Tribunal in a position to determine whether any quantifiable economic loss to the present
Claimant flowed specifically from the potentially actionable events identified at paragraph 270

above.

DIRECT DAMAGE AND MORAL (REPUTATIONAL) DAMAGE

Against this background, the Tribunal now turns to the alternative claim put forward by the
Claimant of the discretionary assessment of a notional amount to serve as compensation for
moral damage. The Claimant asserts in its Post-Hearing submissions that “moral damages
cover non-pecuniary injury for which monetary value cannot be mathematically assessed and

. must be determined by the tribunal with a certain amount of discretion.” This would
conform to the approach taken by the only two ICSID tribunals that have hitherto awarded
moral damages.**! A leading commentary draws as its conclusion from the cases that tribunals
seem to enjoy “an almost absolute discretion in the matter of determining the amount of moral
damages." The very fact, however, that this alternative claim for damages is both notional
and widely discretionary prompts a considerable degree of caution on the part of the present
Tribunal in facing the proposition that compensable ‘moral’ damage can be suffered by a

corporate investor. The case law in the investment field, as indicated, is very thin: two

“° Te, the sale to KazMunaiGaz.

459 Claimant’ s First Post-Hearing Brief, { 278.

451 §A.R.L. Benvenuti & Bonfant v. People’s Republic of Congo, 1CSID Case No. ARB/77/2, Award, 8 August
1980, and Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/17, Award, 6 February
2008.

452 Ripinsky & Williams, Damages in International Investment Law, Exhibit CLA-110.

157

290.

tribunals have accepted claims for moral damage*** and two have declined to award it. In
general international law, while the award of moral damages is certainly accepted,**° both
practice and the published literature show that this represents either damage to the honour and
dignity of a State — in which case the remedies are non-economic — or else indirect
compensation under the rubric of diplomatic protection for injuries of a personal kind suffered
by the citizens of the claimant State. In the opinion of the Tribunal, neither of these categories
fits the present case. The Tribunal has already indicated that reputational damage to a
protected foreign investor is a perfectly conceivable consequence of unlawful conduct by the
State of the investment, and if so is likely to show itself, for example, in increased financing
costs, and possibly other transactional costs as well. But the Tribunal regards that as just
another example of actual economic loss or damage, which is subject to the usual rules of
proof. To resort instead to a purely discretionary award of moral solace would be to subvert

the burden of proof and the rules of evidence, and that the Tribunal is not prepared to do.

The Claimant does make an assertion of actual reputational damage of this kind, which it says
affected RRC’s creditworthiness, as shown on the one hand by its increasing difficulties in
obtaining finance for its operations and investments, and on the other hand by the higher
interest rates it found itself having to pay for the loans it was able to raise. The specific
evidence offered by the Claimant to that effect is however quite limited. It is confined to the
testimony of Messrs. Patriciu and Stephenson, supplemented by that of Mr. Benabderrazik,
who had been from 2004 until the KazMunaiGaz buyout in 2007 the Managing Director of
Vector AG, TRG’s international trading arm focusing inter alia on the supply of crude to
RRC; he was also closely involved in the leveraged acquisition of Dyneff SA, TRG’s first
venture into Western Europe. To start with Mr. Patriciu, he says that TRG’s relationships with
many of its key bankers and investors were negatively affected by the investigations, citing as
examples the reduction of its credit ranking by international rating bodies, the loss of
investment opportunities, and greater difficulty in obtaining finance and then only on worse
terms. Mr. Stephenson is more specific, and cites the failure of a Eurobond offering in 2004,

which he attributes to the fixation of potential investors on the PNA investigation then in train,

45 See footnote 451 above.
44 Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2,
Award, 29 May 2003, and Yury Bogdanov v. Republic of Moldova, SCC Arbitration No. V (114/2009), Award,
30 March 2010, to which must now be added the very recent Award in Mr. Franck Charles Arif v. Republic of
Moldova, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/23, Award, 8 April 2013.

455 Article 31 (and Commentary) of the International Law Commission’s Draft Articles on State
Responsibility.

158

291.

292.

the refusal of a loan guarantee by the US Ex-Im Bank in 2005, and the refusal of credit
facilities in 2006 by a Belgian bank, by the Black Sea Trade & Development Bank, and by the
European Investment Bank, as well as the credit downrating by Standard & Poors in May 2005
and by Fitch in March 2006 which only returned to a stable state in late 2006. Mr.
Benabderrazik’s witness statement is short; he says, unspecifically, that the banks (mentioning
only Société Générale) took a more restrictive view of TRG in 2006, because Mr. Patriciu was
central to their view of TRG’s prospects, that medium and long-term financing disappeared
leaving reliance on more expensive and more precarious short-term loans, and that other
targets for leveraged acquisition as in the case of Dyneff foundered on the impossibility of
obtaining finance. None of the statements by these three witnesses was backed up by
documentary evidence. Nor was much added by their oral evidence under direct and cross-
examination at the hearing, except to the extent that Mr. Benabderrazik explained that the RRC
shares attached by the GPO were part of the security pledged to the banks for the leveraged
acquisition of Dyneff, and to the extent that it emerged that his evaluation of the ‘lost
opportunity’ represented by the failure to acquire the Spanish company Petromirrales was
based on the possibility it would have offered to enhance its book value simply by virtue of its

ownership by TRG, through applying to it an EBITDA multiple of 12-14 in place of 7.

The Tribunal is therefore faced with the difficulty that the evidence of TRG’s increased
problems with its bankers and potential investors during the relevant period is thin, lacks
concreteness, and derives from sources within the TRG complex who were themselves in
personam targets of the GPO investigation. This stricture applies, no doubt, less to
Mr. Benabderrazik than to Messrs. Patriciu and Stephenson, but Mr. Benabderrazik did no
favours to the weight of his testimony by evading, under cross-examination, the perfectly
reasonable question by Respondent’s counsel whether the precision of his figures for losses
incurred had been derived from access to the financial records or were based simply on
memory. Still less was the Tribunal impressed by the plausibility of Mr. Benabderrazik’s
blithe assertion that, on acquisition via leveraged purchase by TRG, Petromirrales could
miraculously have acquired a very substantially increased book value by the application to it of

what the Tribunal can only describe as a highly optimistic EBITDA multiple.

Against the above evidence for the Claimant, the Tribunal must also range the quite substantial
body of evidence culled in the Dow-Lapuerta report from the published financial statements,
which in the aggregate casts doubt on how far TRG did in fact find itself in real difficulties
over the obtaining of finance and whether its investment activity was in fact noticeably

159

293.

294.

inhibited over the period in question. Conceding without difficulty that a reputational cloud
was likely in principle to show up in extra financing costs, Dow and Lapuerta essay an
extrapolation of their own from the two concrete and specific pieces of evidence offered by the
Claimant’s witnesses, and come up with a worst-case estimate of US$3.7 million, an estimate
based however on the hypothesis that all of the Claimant’s assertions of illegality in the
Romanian investigations are treated as valid. The Tribunal takes due note of their expert
opinion that extra borrowing costs are likely in principle to result from reputational damage
and of their estimate of the absolute maximum such extra costs could amount to in the present

case if all of the Claimant’s assertions of liability were to be upheld.**°

The Tribunal is firmly of the view that ‘moral damages’ cannot be admitted as a proxy for the
inability to prove actual economic damage. Given, therefore, the failure by the Claimant to
produce any reliably concrete evidence of actual losses incurred under this head by TRG, as
analysed in the preceding paragraphs, the Tribunal declines to make any award of damages

under this head.

OTHER RELIEF

The Tribunal notes that the Claimant framed its requests for relief from the outset (starting
from the Request for Arbitration itself) in terms of a request for a determination of breach
followed by an award of damages; by the time of the Post-Hearing submissions this had
become refined into a statement that TRG ‘seeks damages in compensation for’ Romania’s
measures, of which the declaration of breach was the first ‘specific’ step. This modification
might give the impression that the determination of breach was conceived of as the necessary
stepping-stone to the award of damages, not as a substantive claim in its own right.
Nevertheless, in the Tribunal’s view, the correct assessment of the submissions of the Parties is
that the claim to declaratory relief retained an independent existence of its own irrespective of
the question of consequential loss or damage. The Tribunal does not however, given the
rejection in Section I above of the great majority of the Claimant’s allegations of breach,
regard the circumstances of the present case as justifying declaratory relief in anything like the

all-embracing terms requested.

45° The Claimant's figure of US$46 million (Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, {| 278) appears to be nothing
more than a purely arithmetical fraction of its main damages claim.

160

295.

296.

297.

COSTS

The Tribunal moves finally to consider its duty under Article 61 of the ICSID Convention and
Rule 47(1)(j) of the Arbitration Rules, to decide on the distribution of the costs of the
arbitration proceedings. The Tribunal recalls in this regard that its Decision of 18 April 2008
on the Respondent’s Preliminary Objections expressly reserved the costs of that phase of the

proceedings.

Each Party has claimed costs in its formal submissions: the Claimant in its Response Memorial
on Preliminary Objections and its Reply asked the Tribunal to order the Respondent to pay the
costs of the Arbitration, including “all expenses that TRG has incurred or shall incur herein in
respect of the fees and expenses of ... Claimant’s legal counsel, experts and consultants, as

well as its own internal costs and management time’*"

the Respondent in its Memorial on
Preliminary Objections and its Rejoinder asked that the Claimant be ordered to bear the costs
of the arbitration, including the costs Respondent has incurred in its defence “including the
fees and disbursements for its attorneys and its experts as well as costs of its witnesses and

. oe A . . 9458
administration incurred in relation to this case.

Both requests were reiterated in the Post-
Hearing submissions. The Tribunal is in receipt of corresponding cost claims from both
Parties submitted in October 2010, as well as each Party’s comments on the cost claim of the
other, pursuant to the Tribunal’s directions of 21 May 2010 given after the close of the oral
hearing. The Claimant’s costs claim is for €4,524,781 + US$3,064,481 + GB£2,321, the
Respondent’s for €8,212,538.64. Reducing those claims to a common base in US dollars as at
the date of this Award gives figures of approximately US$9 million for the Claimant and
approximately US$10.75 million for the Respondent.*” The Claimant criticizes the size of the
Respondent’s claim as being excessive, making a particular point that its own legal fees

amount to only 54% of those claimed by the opposing Party.

As is evident from the preceding Sections of this Award, the Claimant has succeeded in
making out only a very limited number of the claims of fact and law on which its request for

relief in this Arbitration was based. It now appears that the inability of the Claimant to make

457 Claimant’s Reply, J 271(c), and Claimant's First Post-Hearing Brief, | 303(c).

458 Statement of Defence, { 314(b), Respondent's Rejoinder, | 437(b), and Respondent's Post-Hearing
submission, J 648(b).

°° Additional marginal costs will of course have been incurred by each Party in respect of the Post-Hearing
applications mentioned in paragraphs 121-141 above, but in view of what follows the Tribunal did not
consider it necessary to put the Parties to the further trouble of submitting supplementary cost claims in that
regard.

161

298.

299.

out its allegations is in large part connected with what the Tribunal has referred to in Section F
of Part I above as the very special and unusual nature of the Claimant’s case, namely that it
revolved around criminal investigations, that these were against individuals not the investor,
and that they were still in train in parallel with the arbitral proceedings themselves. It also
appears on closer examination that these special features had been brought into focus by the
Respondent from the very earliest stages. In the circumstances, the Respondent is entitled to
some degree of reimbursement for the costs expended in defending itself against those
allegations and the claims based on them. Against that must be set the fact that the Respondent
was itself responsible for launching the unsuccessful preliminary objections phase, which
delayed the arbitral process by somewhat over a year; likewise the Respondent was responsible
for putting forward a largely unmeritorious challenge to the Claimant’s new lead counsel,

which the Tribunal dismissed in January 2010, but at the cost of some further delay.

The Claimant’s costs submission cites, with apparent approval, commentaries and previous
awards expressing themselves in favour of a principle that costs in ICSID proceedings should
generally follow the event. Both Parties agree however that an ICSID Tribunal is endowed
with a broad measure of discretion in this respect, a view which the Tribunal itself shares. The
Tribunal can see no good reason not to apply a ‘costs follow the event’ principle in the
particular circumstances of this case. It does so, however, subject to the modification that the
proceedings in this arbitration have consisted, not of one single ‘event’, but rather of the series
of events listed in paragraph 297 above, in two of which the Claimant was successful, and in
one of which the balance of success lay heavily (though not entirely) with the Respondent.
That being so, the Tribunal finds that the most appropriate solution, as regards the costs of the
Arbitration, is for them to be borne equally by the Parties, and that in the circumstances as
described above no further order is called for, with the result that each Party will bear its own

costs.

CONCLUSIONS

For the reasons set out above, and on the basis of the final submissions of the Parties, the

Tribunal decides as follows:

a. The Claimant’s claims are admissible.

162

. On the evidence presented to the Tribunal, the Claimant has not made out its claim
that the treatment by the Romanian State of the Claimant and its investments in
Romania was in breach of Articles 3(1) and 3(5) of the Agreement on
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of

The Netherlands and Romania which came into force on | February 1995.

Notwithstanding paragraph (b) above, on the evidence presented to the Tribunal,
the Claimant has established a breach by Romania of Articles 3(1) and 3(5) of that

Agreement to the extent, but only to the extent, specified in paragraph 279 above.

. On the evidence presented to the Tribunal, the Claimant has not however met the

onus on it of proving that it suffered economic loss or damage resulting from the

breach specified in paragraph (c) above.

The Claimant’s claim for moral damage is rejected for the reasons given in

paragraphs 289-293 above.

The costs of the Arbitration are to be shared equally between the Parties.

. The Tribunal makes no further order as to costs.

163

The Arbitral Tribunal

[Signed] [Signed]
The Honourable Marc Lalonde Mr. Donald Francis Donovan
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: [25 April 2013] Date: [27 April 2013]
[Signed]

Sir Franklin Berman
President
Date: [29 April 2013]

164

