INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the arbitration proceeding between
BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA

Applicant

and

TIDEWATER INVESTMENT SRL AND TIDEWATER CARIBE, C.A.

Respondents

ICSID Case No. ARB/10/5

 

DECISION ON THE APPLICANT’S REQUEST FOR A CONTINUED
STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, President
Tan Sri Dato’ Cecil W.M. Abraham
Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper

Secretary of the Committee
Marco Tulio Montafiés-Rumayor

Date of dispatch to the Parties: February 29, 2016

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela:

Dr. Reinaldo Enrique Mufioz Pedroza
Viceprocurador General de la Reptiblica
Procuraduria General de la Reptiblica

Av. Los Ilustres, cruce con calle Francisco
Lazo Marti

Edif. Procuraduria General de la Reptblica,
piso 8

Urb. Santa Ménica

Caracas 1040

Venezuela

Mr. George Kahale, IIT

Mr. Benard V. Preziosi, Jr.

Ms. Miriam K. Harwood

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
101 Park Avenue

New York, New York 10178

United States of America

Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila

Mr. Eloy Barbara de Parres

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, S.C.
Rubén Dario 281, Pisos 8 & 9

Col. Bosque de Chapultepec

11580 Ciudad de México

México

Representing Tidewater Investment SRL
Tidewater Caribe, C.A.:

Mr. Miguel Lopez Forastier
Mr. Thomas L. Cubbage IIT
Mr. Alexander A. Berengaut
Mr. Daniel E. Matro
Covington & Burling LLP
One City Center

850 Tenth Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20001-4956
United States of America

Mr. Bruce Lundstrom
Tidewater Inc.

6002 Rogerdale Road
Suite #600

Houston, Texas 77072
United States of America

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. |THE PROCEDURAL HISTORY
II. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
a. The Applicant’s Position

   

we

b. The Respondents’ Position

 

5
Ill. RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE ICSID CONVENTION AND THE
ARBITRATION RULES 7
IV. THE ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE ............ccccccscsccssssestsseeteseeeseeeseeeseenes 9

V. DECISION

 

THE PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On July 9, 2015, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (the “Applicant” or
“Venezuela”) filed with the Secretary-General of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) an application for annulment (the
“Application for Annulment”) of the award rendered on July 7, 2015 in ICSID
Case No. ARB/10/5 (the “Award’”), brought by Tidewater Investment SRL and
Tidewater Caribe, C.A. (the “Respondents” or ““Tidewater”).

The Application was filed in accordance with Article 52 of the Convention on
the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States (“ICSID Convention”) and Rule 50 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for

Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”).

In its Application, Venezuela requested the Secretary-General to provisionally
stay enforcement of the Award (“Stay Request”) concerning the amount of
US$46.4 million plus interest in favor of Tidewater.! Venezuela also requested
that the stay be maintained until the ad hoc Committee issued its Decision on

the Application for Annulment.”

On July 16, 2015, the Secretary-General registered the Application for
Annulment and notified the Parties of the provisional stay of enforcement of the

Award pursuant to Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

On September 9, 2015, the Secretary-General notified the Parties that the ad
hoc Committee (the “Committee”) had been constituted in accordance with
Rule 52(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. The Committee was composed of
Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf (Somali) as President; Tan Sri Dato’ Cecil W.
M. Abraham (Malaysian) and Professor Rolf Knieper (German), as Members.

' Application for Annulment, para. 18.

2 Ibid.

The annulment proceeding was thus deemed to have begun on the above date.
The Parties were also informed that Mr. Marco Montafiés-Rumayor, Legal

Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Committee.

On September 17, 2015, the Committee decided to extend the provisional stay
of enforcement of the Award until it ruled on such request after its first session.
The Committee also fixed a schedule to receive written submissions regarding

Venezuela’s Stay Request.

On October 7, 2015, in accordance with the schedule fixed by the Committee,
Venezuela filed a submission in support of the continuation of the provisional
stay of enforcement of the Award (“Venezuela’s Stay Submission”). The Stay
Submission was accompanied by Exhibits R-88, R-131 to R-145, and by Legal
Authorities RL-180 to RL-187.

On October 28, 2015, Tidewater filed a reply to Venezuela’s submission of
October 7, 2015 (“Tidewater’s Reply”). The Reply was accompanied by
Exhibits C-1 to C-5, and Legal Authorities CL-1 to CL-39.

On November 23, 2015, the Committee held its first session with the Parties in
Paris, France. Immediately after the first session, the Committee also heard oral

argument (“Stay Hearing”) on the issue of the Stay Request.

3 Venezuela’s Stay Subr
+ Venezuela’s Stay Submis

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
a. The Applicant’s Position

Venezuela first argues that Tidewater has the burden of proof and that it has not
shown “prejudice”? or “good cause why a lifting of the stay is necessary.”* In
its view, Tidewater would not be harmed if the Stay Request is granted because
interest is provided for in the Award. Therefore, if Tidewater prevails in the
annulment proceeding, interest would accrue at an annual compound rate of
4.5% on all amounts awarded during the period of time that this proceeding is

pending.°

The Applicant further contends that, unlike Tidewater, the lifting of the stay
would harm Venezuela when Tidewater tries to enforce the Award while the
amount of damages to be paid is uncertain.° At the Stay Hearing, the
Applicant’s counsel argued that such enforcement is “prejudicial for Venezuela
because we don't receive a settlement for that. We don't receive a release of

liability for the payment as made.””

Second, Venezuela claims in its Stay Submission that the continuation of the
provisional stay of enforcement has become “standard practice”® and is “almost
automatic”? in ICSID annulment proceedings. In support of its proposition,
Venezuela asserts that “out of 42 committees (other than this Committee), only
three have refused to grant the continuation of the stay.” !° Venezuela concludes
that there are no “unusual” or “exceptional” circumstances in this case that

would justify a departure from this practice.!!

  

$ Venezuela's Stay Submission, para. 5; Hearing Transcript, p. 27, lines 1-7.

© Hearing Transcript, p. 27, lines 1-7.

7 Hearing Transcript, p. 80, lines 4-6.

® Venezuela’s Stay Submission, para. 5.

° Venezuela’s Stay Submis

 

ion, para. 5, citing Victor Pey Casado and Foundation “Presidente Allende”

v. Republic of Chile, CSID Case No. ARB/98/2 (Annulment Proceeding), Decision on the Republic of
Chile’s Application for a Stay of Enforcement of the Award, May 5, 2010, para. 25.

10 Ibid.

4! Venezuela’s Stay Submi

 

n, para. 6.

Third, Venezuela submits that its Stay Request should not be viewed as a way
to delay payment.'? To the contrary, Venezuela is “just exercising a right under
the Convention”! as there can be “no doubt that there are serious grounds for
the annulment of the Award.” * In any event, Venezuela submits that the Parties
agreed to an accelerated schedule for the filing of the written pleadings on

annulment.!5

The Applicant also points out to Venezuela’s “track record of providing

compensation for nationalizations,” '®

including the settlements reached with
companies affected by the 2009 nationalization at issue in this case. In addition,
Venezuela has not defaulted on its sovereign debt and has complied (and will

continue to comply) with its international obligations. '7

Finally, Venezuela argues that there is no legal or factual basis to partially lift
the suspension of the enforcement of the Award.'* In its view, a partial lifting
of the Stay of Enforcement “necessarily implies a pre-judgment of the merits”!
because the Application is directed to annul the amount of damages awarded by

the Tribunal in the original proceeding.

Venezuela submits that the section of the Award that relates to the calculation
of damages must be annulled because the Tribunal failed to state reasons and
committed a manifest excess of powers and a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure. If that section of the Award is annulled, it would

be up to a new tribunal to calculate the damages to be awarded.”

 

2 Venezuela’s Stay Submi

n, para. 9.

3 Hearing Transcript, p. 27, lines 9-11.
4 Venezuela’s Stay Submission, para. 9.
'S Hearing Transcript, p.16, lines 6-11.

 

6 Venezuela’s Stay Submission, para. 6.
"7 Venezuela’s Stay Submission, para. 8.
'8 Hearing Transcript, p. 28, line 22; p. 29, lines 1-6.
'° Hearing Transcript, p. 28, line 22; p. 29, lines 1-6.
2 Hearing Transcript, p. 29, lines 17-22.

20.

21.

22.

Therefore, in light of the above reasons, Venezuela concludes that its Stay

Request should be granted.

b. The Respondents’ Position

The Respondents first oppose the Stay Request by arguing that Venezuela, as
the requesting party, has the burden of proving that a stay is required. In their

view, Venezuela has failed to meet that burden.?!

To support this proposition, Tidewater points to the language of the ICSID
Convention and the Arbitration Rules. According to the Respondents, an
annulment committee has discretion to grant a stay of enforcement, under
Convention Article 52(5), only if the party seeking a stay establishes that a stay
is required under the circumstances.?* Moreover, Rule 54(4) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules requires the requesting party to “specify the circumstances
that require the stay.”*

Second, Tidewater asserts that contrary to the Applicant’s claim, the Stay
Request Venezuela seeks is not ICSID “standard practice.” In its view,
Venezuela’s argument that only three out of 42 annulment committees have
refused to grant the continuation of the stay is misleading because it fails to
mention that in many of those 42 cases, the request was granted only on the

condition that the award debtor post a security.”4

Third, Tidewater contends that Venezuela’s Stay Request is dilatory in nature.?>
In support of its position, Tidewater cites to MTD v. Chile which held that “a

stay is not appropriate where the annulment application is merely ‘dilatory’ .”?°

2! Tidewater’s Reply, para. 22.

% Tidewater’s Reply, para. 22.

23 Tidewater’ s Reply, para. 22.

» Tidewater’s Reply, para. 22.

°5 Tidewater’s Reply, para. 27.

2 Tidewater’s Reply, para. 27, citing to MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. The Republic of
Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7 (Annulment Proceeding), Decision on the Respondent’s Request for
a Continued Stay of Execution, June 1, 2005, para. 28 (Ex. RL-185).

5

23.

24.

25.

26.

The Respondents argue that even assuming that Venezuela can show “serious
grounds for annulment” of the disputed amount of US$10.938 million of the
Award, there are no grounds at all for annulment of the undisputed US$35.462
million portion of the Award.?” Therefore, the Stay Request regarding that
unchallenged debt serves “no purpose other than to delay its inevitable

enforcement.”?8

Tidewater claims that Venezuela has not established that a stay of enforcement
of the “whole” Award is required.*? Venezuela’s Application concerns “a
fraction of the total compensation’ because it challenges only the portion of
the Award that granted compensation exceeding “the highest conceivable
amount that could have been calculated using even [Claimants’] own expert’s
DCF model and applying the elements that the Tribunal determined should be

employed.”*!

Tidewater further contends that the portion of the compensation awarded by the
Tribunal that does not exceed the above amount, is “completely unchallenged
and indisputably final.”*? Accordingly, Venezuela must pay that portion of the

Award regardless of the outcome of this annulment proceeding.

In light of the above reasons, Respondents request that the Committee deny
Venezuela’s Stay Request. They further ask that “at a minimum, the Committee
should lift the stay with respect to the portion of the Award that Venezuela’s

Application does not dispute —specifically, US$35.462 million, plus interest.”**

2” Tidewater’s Reply, para. 27.

28 Tidewater’s Reply, para. 27.

2° Tidewater’s Reply, para. 27.

3 Tidewater’s Reply, para. 3.

3! Tidewater’s Reply, para. 3.

* Tidewater’s Reply, para. 3.

3 Tidewater’s Reply, para. 32.

Il.

27.

28.

29.

RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE ICSID CONVENTION AND THE
ARBITRATION RULES

Article 52 of the ICSID Convention provides:

(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an
application in writing addressed to the Secretary General...

(5) The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so
require, stay enforcement of the award pending its decision.
If the applicant requests a stay of enforcement of the award
in his application, enforcement shall be stayed provisionally
until the Committee rules on such request.

Article 53 of the ICSID Convention provides:

(1) The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be
subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except those
provided for in this Convention. Each party shall abide by
and comply with the terms of the award except to the extent
that enforcement shall have been stayed pursuant to the
relevant provisions of this Convention.

(2

For the purposes of this Section, “award” shall include any
decision interpreting, revising or annulling such award
pursuant to Articles 50, 51 or 52.

Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules reads as follows:

Stay of Enforcement of the Award

(1) The party applying for the interpretation, revision or
annulment of an award may in its application, and either
party may at any time before the final disposition of the
application, request a stay in the enforcement of part or all of
the award to which the application relates. The Tribunal or
Committee shall give priority to the consideration of such a
request.

(2)

(3)

(4

(5)

If an application for the revision or annulment of an award
contains a request for a stay of its enforcement, the Secretary-
General shall, together with the notice of registration, inform
both parties of the provisional stay of the award. As soon as
the Tribunal or Committee is constituted it shall, if either
party requests, rule within 30 days on whether such stay
should be continued; unless it decides to continue the stay, it
shall automatically be terminated.

If a stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to
paragraph (1) or continued pursuant to paragraph (2), the
Tribunal or Committee may at any time modify or terminate
the stay at the request of either party. All stays shall
automatically terminate on the date on which a final decision
is rendered on the application, except that a Committee
granting the partial annulment of an award may order the
temporary stay of enforcement of the unannulled portion in
order to give either party an opportunity to request any new
Tribunal constituted pursuant to Article 52(6) of the
Convention to grant a stay pursuant to Rule 55(3).

A request pursuant to paragraph (1), (2) (second sentence) or
(3) shall specify the circumstances that require the stay or its
modification or termination. A request shall only be granted
after the Tribunal or Committee has given each party an
opportunity of presenting its observations.

The Secretary-General shall promptly notify both parties of
the stay of enforcement of any award and of the modification
or termination of such a stay, which shall become effective on
the date on which he dispatches such notification.

IV.

30.

31.

32.

THE ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE

The first task of the Committee is to analyse the provisions of the ICSID
Convention and the Arbitration Rules relevant to the present case. According to
Article 52(1) of the Convention “either party” may initiate the annulment
proceedings, and thus seek a remedy against the award, if it feels aggrieved by
the findings of the award or the procedure leading towards it. Although the
Convention does not explicitly refer to a request for annulment of part of an
award, it specifically gives the ad hoc Committee, under Article 52(3), the
authority to annul the award or any part thereof. In its Application for
Annulment dated July 9, 2015, Venezuela requests, inter alia, that: “b. the stay
of execution of the Award be maintained until the Decision of the ad hoc
Committee on this Application for Annulment.” It also requests that: “c. the
Award be partially annulled under Article 52(1), subparagraphs (b), (d) and

(e).4

While the Committee is mindful of the fact that it is not called upon at this stage
of the proceedings to take a decision on the partial annulment of the Award
requested by Venezuela, it is of the view that this distinguishing feature of the
present Application for Annulment is relevant to its decision on the Stay
Request. It will therefore have to address this issue, which was discussed by the
Parties in their written submissions, and argued even more extensively during
the Stay Hearing. Thus, the Committee will consider this issue in the broader
context of its analysis of whether the circumstances of the present case require

a continued stay of enforcement.

Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54 of the Arbitration Rules
contain the fundamental provisions related to the stay of enforcement of an
award. Paragraph | of Rule 54 of the Arbitration Rules provides that the party

applying for an annulment, and either party, may request a stay of the

4 Application for Annulment, pp. 9-10.

33.

34.

enforcement of part or all of the award to which the application relates. Two
points merit to be highlighted here. First, a request for stay of enforcement is
not necessarily limited to the party seeking annulment, since paragraph 1
explicitly refers to “either party”. Secondly, the request may concern either
“part or all of the award to which the application relates”, which implies that
the committee has the discretion to stay the enforcement of part or all of the
award depending on the requests of the parties, and on the circumstances of the

specific case.

Paragraph 2 of Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules deals with the granting
of provisional stay of enforcement by the Secretary-General of ICSID and the
obligation of the committee, once it is constituted, to rule on whether such stay
should be continued, failing which the stay will be automatically terminated. A
stay of enforcement may also be modified or terminated by a committee at any
time at the request of either party, in accordance with paragraph 3, after it had
been granted under paragraph | or continued under paragraph 2 of Rule 54 of
the Arbitration Rules. It is the opinion of the Committee that the stay of
enforcement referred to in paragraph 1 of Rule 54 of the Arbitration Rules is
the one requested in the Application for Annulment and automatically granted
by the Secretary-General when the Application is filed in the form of

provisional stay.

Paragraph 4 of Rule 54 of the Arbitration Rules prescribes that a request for stay
of enforcement must specify the circumstances that require the stay or its
modification or termination. This is based on Article 52(5) of the ICSID
Convention which provides that the committee may stay enforcement of the
award “if it considers that the circumstances so require.” Thus, while it is for
the parties, when making a request, to provide a clear indication of the
circumstances that require such stay, it is for the committee to assess them and
decide whether those circumstances effectively require a stay of enforcement.
This follows from Article 53 of the ICSID Convention which provides that an

ICSID award is “binding on the parties”, and that “each party shall abide by

35.

36.

37.

38.

and comply with the terms of the award except to the extent that enforcement

shall have been stayed.”

Neither the ICSID Convention nor the ICSID Arbitration Rules spell out the
nature of the circumstances to be specified. Various ad hoc committees have,
however, indicated the circumstances to which they attached particular
importance in examining a request for stay of enforcement in a specific case.
For example, the ad hoc committee in the case concerning Sempra Energy
International v. Argentine Republic regarding the latter’s request for a
continued stay of enforcement of the award, stated that “previous ad hoc
Committees have attached importance to the following circumstances: 1)
prospects of compliance with the award; 2) causation of economic hardship; 3)

prospects of recoupment; 4) a dilatory motive.”*

In its Stay Submission, Venezuela puts forward three circumstances it deems
relevant to its request. First, that Venezuela would suffer prejudice if the stay
was lifted by the Committee because “the Tidewater parties ....will undoubtedly

take measures to enforce the award.”*®

Secondly, that “Venezuela has an impressive track record of providing
com ion for nationalization”, providing examples of settlements reached
with companies affected by the 2009 oil nationalization and “the earlier similar

process conducted in 2005 with respect to 35 operating service agreements.”*"

Thirdly, that “there can be no doubt as to the existence of serious grounds for
annulment of the Award under the ICSID Convention’’, and that it is not the case
here that the application is “without any basis under the Convention” or is

purely “dilatory” in nature.*®

35 See, Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16 (Annulment
Proceeding), Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement, p. 4.

3 Venezuela’s Stay Submission, p. 2.
51 Ibid, pp. 4-5.
38 Ibid, p. 5.

39.

40.

Al.

During the Stay Hearing, Venezuela also emphasized that it is not possible “to
lift the stay of enforcement of a portion of the damages awarded as argued by
the Tidewater Parties.” According to Venezuela, “there is no legal basis, no
factual basis to partially lift the stay of enforcement of the Award.” Moreover,
for Venezuela “a partial lift of the stay of enforcement necessarily implies... a
prejudgment of the merits of the Annulment Application since the Application

is directed to annul the amount of damages awarded by the Tribunal.”*°

For Tidewater, the sole circumstance specified by Venezuela in support of its
request is that the Respondents “will undoubtedly take measures to enforce the
Award and Venezuela will suffer prejudice”; but that “does not justify a stay of
any part of the Award.”*° More importantly, in the view of Tidewater, “even if
the Republic’s concern about Respondent’s enforcement of the Award were a
basis for staying the challenged portion of the Award, it could not possibly
justify a stay of enforcement of the unchallenged portion.”*! Thus, Tidewater
contends that Venezuela must pay the unchallenged portion of the award
“regardless of the outcome of this annulment proceeding, and ... cannot claim
that it is prejudiced by Respondents’ efforts to enforce it.”*” They finally request
that “the Committee deny Venezuela’s request for an unconditional stay of the
whole Award” and that “at a minimum, the Committee should lift the stay with
respect to the portion of the Award that Venezuela’s Application does not

dispute — specifically US$35.462 million, plus interest.”

The Committee will now consider the above-summarized arguments of the
Parties in light of the provisions of the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration
Rules related to the stay of enforcement of an award as analysed in the preceding

paragraphs.

* Hearing Transcript, p. 28, lines 19-22, and p. 29, lines 1-6.
40 Tidewater Reply, p. 15.

4! Ibid.
® Ibid.

8 Tbid, p. 18.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

First, the Committee does not find the assertion concerning the alleged
impressive record of Venezuela for providing compensation for nationalizations
to be of direct relevance to the circumstances that may require a stay. Although
it may be true that Venezuela provided compensation for nationalizations, the
fact that this case was submitted to ICSID shows that an unsettled dispute exists
between the Parties with respect to compensation. According to the Award: “...
the Parties were unable to agree on the basis or the process by which such

compensation would be calculated and paid.”

Secondly, the Committee considers that it is premature at this stage of the
annulment proceedings to assess the Application for Annulment on its merits.
Venezuela is exercising its right under the ICSID Convention to request an
annulment, and the Committee does not find at this point in time that its request
is dilatory in nature. This is, in any case, a matter that will have to be addressed

at a subsequent phase of the proceedings.

Thirdly, with regard to the possibility that Venezuela may suffer prejudice if the
stay of enforcement was not granted by the Committee because Tidewater will
take measures to enforce the Award, the Committee notes that Venezuela has
not specified the nature of the prejudice that it would suffer from such
enforcement measures. Moreover, the Committee recalls Article 53(1) of the

ICSID Convention, which provides that:

“The Award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be
subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except those provided
for in this Convention. Each party shall abide by and comply with
the terms of the award except to the extent that enforcement shall
have been stayed pursuant to the relevant provisions of this
Convention”

This preliminary assessment of the circumstances specified by the Parties with
regard to Venezuela’s Stay Request needs to be completed by an analysis of the

arguments presented by them to the Committee on the possibility of a partial

+4 Award, para. 145, p 49.

46.

47.

stay of enforcement. Indeed, during the Stay Hearing, both Parties have
exhaustively addressed this issue and advanced different views on whether the
discretion of the Committee under the provisions of the ICSID Convention and
the Arbitration Rules extends to stay the enforcement of part of the award, and
whether in the specific circumstances of this case a partial lifting of the stay of

enforcement is warranted.

The Committee considers that it is important to recall briefly the context in
which this debate took place. In the Application for Annulment of Venezuela it
is stated that: “Venezuela notes at the outset that this Application does not relate
to any of the legal holdings of the Tribunal, but only to one issue emerging from
paragraphs 197, 201, and 202 of the Award.”*° Paragraph 197 of the Award
contains the conclusions of the Tribunal on its Discounted Cash Flow (“DCF”)
calculation “applying the elements that it ... found to be appropriate” and
describing those elements. Paragraph 201 of the Award reproduces the spread
of figures presented by the two experts of the Parties which the Tribunal

considered to be as follows:

“a) Claimants: US$31.959 million (11 vessels only) (an earnings
multiple of 3.79) +US$16.484 million non-recurring accounts
receivable=US$48.443 million; b) Respondent: US$27.407
million (15 vessels with 100% recoverability of accounts
receivable).”

Paragraph 202 is worth quoting in full and reads as follows:

“The Tribunal has already observed that the determination of an
appropriate level of compensation based upon a discounted cash
flow analysis of this kind is not and cannot be an exact science,
but is rather a matter of informed estimation. The Tribunal
considers that a willing buyer would have valued the business at
approximately US$30 million, but that it would also have been
prepared to pay an additional amount of US$16.4 million for the
non-recurring accounts receivable, which it would have been
entitled to recover in full from PDVSA upon acquisition of the
business. The Tribunal therefore arrives at a valuation (excluding
pre-award interest) for the purposes of compensation of US$46.4
million.”

45 Application for Annulment, para. 3.

48.

49.

50.

51.

On March 20, 2015, Venezuela submitted an Application for Revision to the
Secretary-General of ICSID pursuant to Article 51(1) of the ICSID Convention

and Rule 50 of the Arbitration Rules in which it requested, inter alia, that:

“the amount of compensation provided for in the Award be
revised to take into account the fact that the figure presented by
the Tidewater Parties’ expert in his presentation on the last day of
the Hearing in response to the Tribunal’s questions, and using the
guidelines set forth by the Tribunal in paragraph 197 of the
Award, was US$30.401 million, not US$48.443 million.” *

By decision dated July 7, 2015, the Tribunal denied the Application for Revision
on the basis of inadmissibility. 4” Following the Tribunal’s Decision on
Revision, Venezuela lodged an Application for Annulment on July 9, 2015 in
which it states that: “The Tribunal’s Decision on Revision does not in any sense
cure the infirmities in the Award itself, and, in fact, underscores the point that
the Award should be partially annulled on the grounds of failure to state
reasons, manifest excess of powers and serious departure from a fundamental
rule of procedure.”*®

In its Application for Annulment, Venezuela notes that: “Therefore, the total
amount stated in paragraph 201 of the Award as the figure according to the
Tidewater Parties expert should have been US$30.401 million (i.e. US$13.917
million + US$16.484 million= US$30.401 million), not US$48.443 million.”””

Venezuela also makes the following statement in footnote 12 of its Application
for Annulment: “Had the correct figure from slide 8 (US$ 13.917 million) been
inserted in paragraph 201 of the Award, the difference between the parties’
experts would have been only US$ 3 million, i.e. US$30.401 million (for 11

46 Venezuela’s Application for Revision, p. 5, para.13(c).

“7 Tidewater Investment SRL and Tidewater Caribe, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/10/5 (Revision Proceeding), Decision on Application for Revision, July 7, 2015, p. 14.
(“Decision on Revision”).

+8 Application for Annulment, p. 9, para. 17.
* Ibid, p. 5, para. 12.

52.

vessels) for Claimants versus US$27.407 million (for 15 vessels) for
Respondent.” According to Venezuela: “ If the US$13.917 million figure, which
was for an 11 vessel business, had been scaled up to a 15 vessel business, then
the figure for Claimants in paragraph 201 of the Award would have been
US$35.462 million (i.e.US$18.978 million...plus US$16.484 million for non-
recurring activities receivable), and the spread between the parties would have
been US$35.462 million (for 15 vessels) for Claimants versus US$27.407

million (for 15 vessels) for Respondent.”©°

Before the ad hoc Committee, Venezuela insisted on a continued stay of
enforcement of the whole Award, despite its Application for partial annulment,
and its Application for Revision based on a miscalculation of the US$46.4
million in compensation awarded to the Claimants, as well as the calculations
presented in both applications which clearly show that there is an unchallenged
portion of the compensation provided in the Award. According to Venezuela

“there is no legal basis, no factual basis to partially lift the enforcement of the

 

Award,” and “[A] partial lift of the stay of enforcement necessarily implies....a
pre-judgment of the merits of the Annulment Application since the Application
is directed to annul the amount of damages awarded by the Tribunal.”>!
However, when a member of the Committee asked Counsel for Venezuela
during the hearing whether it was Venezuela’s case that “they do not owe even
one cent to the Claimants”; Counsel for Venezuela conceded that “that is not
the case.”*2 Moreover, when the same member asked Counsel for Venezuela if
it was Venezuela’s case that “they do not owe at least the 27.407 million, which
appears to be an admitted sum, based on your expert’s calculation?” Counsel

for Venezuela replied: “we do not dispute that amount.”**

5° Tbid, p.7.

5! Transcript, p.28, line 22, and p. 29, lines 1-6.
52 Transcript, p.80, lines 16-20.

53 [bid, p. 80, lines 21-22, and p. 81, lines 1-4.

53. Tidewater contends that “Venezuela cannot justify a stay of enforcement of the
whole Award because it only challenges a small fraction of that Award.”**

According to Tidewater:

“Venezuela suggests proportionally scaling up Mr. Kaczmarek’s
[i.e. expert for Tidewater] 11 vessel valuation to a 15 —vessel
calculation. We agree that when you do that, you get a total value
of US$35.4 million. By Venezuela’s logic, the Tribunal could have
awarded any level of compensation up to that amount. This means
that at least US$35.4 million of the US$46.4 million in
compensation awarded by the Tribunal is unchallenged by the
Application, and that is, Members of the Committee, more than 75
per cent of the Award. And we respectfully submit that there is no
basis at all to continue the stay of enforcement of that uncontested
debt.”

54. With regard to the discretion of the Committee to lift partially the stay of
enforcement, Tidewater argues that such power is expressly provided for in

Rule 54(3) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.*°

55. In considering the requests submitted by the Parties on the continued stay of
enforcement of the whole Award (Venezuela), and on the partial lifting of the
stay of enforcement (Tidewater), the Committee notes that Venezuela contests
the figure of US$46.4 million determined by the Tribunal on the ground that it
“was substantially higher than the highest conceivable amount that could have
been calculated using even the Tidewater Parties own experts’ DCF model and
applying the elements that the Tribunal determined should be applied.” It also
argues that “such a compensation amount would not have flowed from the
Tribunal’s reasoning, and, in fact, the US$46.4 million would have been
unconnected to any reasoning or calculations.”*’ However, Venezuela does not
dispute the figure presented by its own experts to the Tribunal in paragraph 201
of the Award, i.e. US$27.407 million. Indeed, Counsel for Venezuela confirmed

during the Stay Hearing that “we do not dispute that amount.”

Ibid, p. 58, lines 6-9.

55 Ibid, p. 62, lines 5-17.

5 Tid, p. 63, lines 19-22, and p. 64, lines 1-2.
°7 Application for Annulment, para. 13.

56.

57.

Consequently, the Committee considers that there is an unchallenged portion of
the damages awarded by the Tribunal, which amounts to US$27.407 million. In
the opinion of the Committee, the Application for Annulment as well as the Stay
Request can logically apply only to the difference between this undisputed
amount (US$27.407 million) and the amount determined by the Tribunal for
compensation (US$46.4 million), which Venezuela does not agree with. Indeed,
in its Additional Observations on its Application for Revision, Venezuela, after
stating that there was a mistake in the figure reported in paragraph 201 of the

Award regarding the Tidewater experts’ presentation, observes that:

“if the Tribunal had been aware of this fact, the Award
presumably would have been somewhere between approximately
US$27.407 million (the valuation of the Applicant’s experts) and
US$35.462 million (the valuation of the Tidewater Parties’ expert,
scaled up for a 15-vessel valuation, plus the non-recurring
receivables).” Venezuela adds: “Only the Tribunal could answer

the question of exactly where it would have fallen within that

range.”*®

As noted above, the Application for Revision was rejected by the Tribunal.

Having established that there is a portion of the damages awarded by the
Tribunal that is not disputed by Venezuela, the Committee will now turn to the
legal issue of whether it has the discretion under the relevant provisions of the
ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules to stay or lift part of the
enforcement of the Award. The Parties disagree on this point. However, as
pointed out in paragraph 32 above, it is the view of this Committee that it has
the discretion to stay part or all of the Award depending on the requests of the
Parties, and on the circumstances of the specific case under paragraph 1 of Rule
54 of the Arbitration Rules. According to Schreuer’s Commentary of the ICSID

Convention: “The ad hoc Committee’s discretion extends to whether it stays

58 Applicant’s Additional Observations on its Application for Revision, p. 5.

18

58.

59.

enforcement of part or all of the award and to the modification or termination

of the stay.”

Paragraph 1 of Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules is quite clear in this
sense: “...either party may...request a stay in the enforcement of part or all of
the award to which the application relates. The Tribunal or Committee shall
give priority to the consideration of such a request.” In the present case,
Venezuela argued in favour of staying the enforcement of the whole Award;
while Tidewater requested the Committee to “lift the stay with respect to the
portion of the Award that Venezuela’s Application does not dispute- specifically
US$35.462 million, plus interest.” The Committee does not, however, agree
with Tidewater that the unchallenged portion of the Award amounts to
US$35.462 million. It considers that the amount undisputed by Venezuela is
US$27.407 million, which is the valuation presented by its own expert to the

Tribunal.

It is also the view of the Committee that the ICSID Arbitration Rules confer
upon it the discretion, under paragraph 3 of Rule 54, to modify or terminate at
any time the provisional stay of enforcement referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2
of Rule 54 requested in the Application for Annulment and automatically
granted by the Secretary-General of ICSID. Moreover, the Committee may
modify or terminate the continued stay of enforcement granted by it under those
provisions at any time before the disposition of the Application for Annulment.
In the present case, a provisional stay of enforcement of the whole Award was
requested by Venezuela in its Application for Annulment, and the Secretary-
General of ICSID granted automatically such provisional stay of enforcement
pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54(2) of the

Arbitration Rules.

8 See, C. Schreuer with L. Malintoppi, A. Reinisch, and A. Sinclair, The ICSID Convention, A
Commentary, 2 ed. 2009, p. 1067.

19

60.

61.

Following the constitution of the Committee, one of the first decisions it
adopted on September 17, 2015, which the Parties were immediately apprised
of, was to extend the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award until it ruled
on such request after its first session. It is this extension of the provisional stay
of the whole Award which it granted in its decision of September 17, 2015 that
the Committee has now concluded should be modified, after hearing the Parties,

by changing it to a continued stay of enforcement on a part of the Award.

Thus, the Committee, taking into account the specific circumstances of this case
as well as the relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration
Rules analysed above, finds that it is appropriate to lift the stay of enforcement
on the undisputed portion of the damages awarded by the Tribunal, which, as
recognized by Venezuela during the Stay Hearing, amount to US$27.407

million.

20

Vv. DECISION

62. Pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54, paragraphs 1,

2 and 3 of the Arbitration Rules, the Committee decides that:

a. the stay of enforcement is lifted with regard to the undisputed
amount of US$27.407 million plus interest from May 8, 2009 to the

date of payment at the rate of 4.5% per annum, compounded

quarterly; and
b. the stay of enforcement of the amount of US$18.993 million in

Claimants’ compensation awarded by the Tribunal and of US$2.5

million in partial reimbursement of Claimants’ costs is maintained.

21

[Signed] [Signed]

Tan Sri Dato’ Cecil W.M.
Abraham
Member

Professor Rolf Knieper
Member

[Signed]

Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf
President of the ad hoc Committee

22

