International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

Tokios Tokelés (Claimant)

Ukraine (Respondent)

Case No. ARB/02/18

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal
Lord Mustill, President
Professor Piero Bernardini
Mr. Daniel M. Price

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Martina Polasek

Representing the Claimant

Mr. Ivan Lozowy, General Counsel,
Tokios Tokelés

Mr. Serhiy Danylov, Chairman of the
Board of Directors, Tokios Tokelés

Ms. Ludmilla Zhyltsova, Tokios Tokelés
Mr. Oleksandr Danylov, Tokios Tokelés

Representing the Respondent

Prime Minister of Ukraine

Cabinet of Ministers

Deputy Minister of Justice

Department on Representation of State in
Courts of Ukraine and Foreign Judicial
Institutions, Ministry of Justice of Ukraine

Mr. Dmitri Grischenko, Counsel
Mr. Sergei Voitovich, Counsel
Mr. Oleg Schevchuk, Counsel
Mr. Andriy Alekseyev, Counsel

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 26 July 2007

a>

Ne

: ga
Ne AQwAYNS

w

PAAMAP

©

10. Political Asylum Granted by Lithuania
11. Other Evidence that the State’s Actions Were Politically Motivated

mo
WPWNP

Pywnyr

cA

. The Political Situation in Brief
. The Economic Situation in Brief

. Investigations and Court Proceeding:

. Introduction

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page Number

INTRODUCTION
THE SITUATION IN UKRAINE

 

 

 

 

THE CLAIMANT’S CASE
SUMMARY OF PROCEDURAL HISTORY ..
The Request for Arbitration
Withdrawal and Resubmission
Notice of Registration
Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal
Hearing on Jurisdiction: Reconstitution of the Tribunal... ceseeeeeseseeseseeteseeneseeeeeeeeneees 14
The Substantive Oral Hearing
THE CLAIMANT’S NARRATIVE
Taki Spravy Produces Campaign Materials for BYT .
The State’s Press S
2.1 The Press Statement of 25 March 2002 ..........ccscsessessessessesssesseseeseeseeseeseesessssssssnseseeeeeseesee
2.2 Other STA Press S

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.1 Taki Spravy and Produkt BVO
3.2 Taki Spravy and Rembudproekt
3.3 Investigation of Taki Spravy Clients ......0.. ee
3.4 Other Allegedly Unfounded Investigations, Searches and Seizures.
Tax Notice Decisions and Related Proceedings ......
Tax Investigations and Arrest of Taki Spravy Assets.
The Criminal Case Against Mr. O. Danylov: Case No. 79/00032.
Other Denials of Claimant’s Requests for Relief...
The Tax Authorities’ Requests for Taki Spravy to Provide Te:
Evidence of Discrimination Against Other Publishers

 

 

  
 
  
      
  
 
  

 

mony Against BYT.

THE CLAIMANT’S MAJOR ALLEGATIONS
The Press Statement of 25 March 2002
The Raids of 17 — 20 June 2002

The Administrative Arrest of Taki Spravy’s Assets .........ccscsssessesecseseeseseeeseeeseeeseesenenseneees
The Electoral Cc ission
Proceedings in the Courts of Ukraine
THE CLAIMANT’S FORMULATION OF BREACHES 1.00.0... ccccceceeseseeeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeenenees
THE CASE FOR THE STATE OF UKRAINE... c.cecececceeceeseseseeeseseeeeeseeeeeeseneeneeeeaeenenenes
JURISDICTION:
Investment: Local Requirements
Pre-existing Assets
The Order of Events
The Transfer of Assets
THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS
EXPROPRIATION
PROOF OF A BREACH

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.1 Proof.

 

N

Rw

oZzz

. Individual Items

. The Complaints as a Whole
. Conclusions

1.2 “Admitted or Proved”

 

1.3 Documents

 

 

2.1 The Press Statement

 

2.2 Entry to Premises

 

2.3 Failure to Set Out Grounds for Actions...
2.4 The Electoral Cc ission
2.5 The Events of 2005

 

 

 

APPLICABILITY OF UKRAINIAN LAW,
COSTS

 

ORDERS OF THE TRIBUNAL

 

54
55
55
55
56
57
58
58
59
60
61
62
63

INTRODUCTION

This Award is made in an arbitration between the above-captioned parties in accordance
with the dispute-resolution mechanism of the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (hereafter “ICSID”). The arbitration is brought to enforce various
provisions of a bilateral investment treaty, dated 8 February 1994 and entitled Agreement
Between the Government of Ukraine and the Government of the Republic of Lithuania for
the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments (hereafter “the Treaty”), between

the Republic of Lithuania and Ukraine.

The Claimant in the arbitration is Tokios Tokelés, a corporation registered in 1989 as a co-
operative enterprise under the laws of Lithuania, and subsequently reorganised as a joint-
stock company. Although Tokios Tokelés is the Claimant, the companies most immediately
involved in the events giving rise to this arbitration were its two wholly-owned Ukrainian
subsidiaries: Subsidiary Enterprise ‘Taki spravy’ and II Subsidiary Enterprise ‘Taki spravy’
(hereafter respectively “Taki spravy” and “TSII”). By the beginning of the year 2002, Taki
spravy had for some years carried on a prospering business in Ukraine in the advertising,
printing, publishing and allied trades, under the control and management of two brothers,
Mr. Oleksandr V. Danylov and Mr. Serhiy V. Danylov. Both are citizens of Ukraine and
resident in that country, apart from a period of some years commencing in May 2002, when

Mr. O. Danylov left Ukraine for Lithuania, where he sought and obtained refugee status.

This has proved to be a difficult case, so much so that after prolonged and intensive
discussions the Tribunal with regret finds itself unable unanimously to agree on the central
issue in the dispute. In addition, depending on the outcome of that issue, several major
questions of principle have arisen, some of them fundamental to the developing
jurisprudence on investor/state arbitrations of the present kind. The parties’ legal
representatives have explored these issues with the greatest diligence, in written submissions
extending over hundreds of pages, reinforced by oral argument. No line of enquiry has been
neglected, no assertion by one has escaped contradiction by the other. This diligence is
commendable, but it has tended to submerge in a mass of detail the central feature of the
case, which is whether an inference favourable to the Claimant’s complaint can be drawn

from a course of events which is largely undisputed. Unlike many ICSID arbitrations this

does not require the Tribunal to master and rule on complex technical matters, or to evaluate
conflicting oral testimony on primary facts. The task is simple — simple to state, that is, not
simple to decide — to see whether the facts speak for themselves, when placed in context,
both as evidence of wrongdoing by the State and as to the outcome of that wrongdoing, so
that they are sufficient to prove, with the requisite degree of conviction, the proposition of

fact on which the Claimant bases its claim.

4. This proposition is that Taki spravy was the target of a long-running campaign of oppression
by State agencies, instigated for political reasons by a person or persons in high authority,
and taking the shape of numerous episodes of unjustified interference with Taki spravy’s
activities and management, largely by the Kiev tax administration but with the connivance
of prosecution and judicial organs, under the guise of investigations into breaches of
Ukrainian economic laws. It is alleged that the effect on Taki spravy’s business, customer
relations and staff welfare was so great as to constitute a wrongful “expropriation” of the
investment made by the Claimant in Ukraine via Taki spravy, and was also a breach of
Ukraine’s obligations under the Treaty to accord fair and equitable treatment to that
investment. The same conduct is asserted to be a breach of the internal laws of Ukraine
which the Claimant invokes to support its Treaty claims. The Claimant seeks in this
arbitration monetary compensation amounting to nearly USD 65,000,000, exclusive of

interest and costs.

5. On 29 April 2004 the Panel of Arbitrators, as then constituted,! issued a formal document
(“the Decision on Jurisdiction”) which contained rulings on various procedural issues,
including a challenge by Ukraine to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, which was dismissed.
Subsequently, after the re-constitution of the Tribunal,” the challenge was revived, partly on
grounds substantially the same as those already rejected in the Decision on Jurisdiction, and
partly in reliance on facts which, wrongfully, had not been disclosed by the Claimant to the
former Tribunal. Justice required that the issue of jurisdiction should be reassessed in the
light of this new information, and it was decided that the submissions and conclusions upon
it would be incorporated, together with the issues of liability and quantum, in the present

Award.

' Professor Prosper Weil (President), Professor Piero Bernardini and Mr Daniel M. Price.
? See infra at paragraph 26.

  

THE SITUATION IN UKRAINE

It would be impossible to achieve, and hazardous to attempt, a full account of contemporary
Ukrainian history, even in the respects most closely relevant to the present dispute.
Something must however be said about two aspects of it, in order to place in context the

dispute, and the rival interpretations of events.

1. The Political Situation in Brief

The long history of suffering and oppression endured by Ukraine and its peoples forms an
inescapable background to the dispute between Tokios Tokelés, its subsidiaries and the
State. The declaration of independence in 1991 marked the formal emancipation of the
country, and the adoption of a new constitution five years later, establishing a pluralistic
parliamentary system and protection for human rights and liberties, promised a real break
with the past, and hope for the future. In practice, the changes did not happen overnight.
Many familiar faces were still to be seen in public positions, and the presence of powerful
neighbours continued to be felt. The building of national unity was hampered by deep
geographical, ethnic and cultural divides; and these factors also underpinned lasting
controversy about the positioning of Ukraine in its political and economic relations with

external powers.

In consequence, the events of 2001-2003 which form the substance of the present dispute
were played out against a backdrop of volatility and fragmentation in Ukrainian political
life. In November 2001, when so far as the evidence goes the Ukraine State authorities and
the various corporate and natural persons who feature in this dispute began to intersect, a
general Parliamentary Election was only a few months away. This was distinct, in principle,
from the next election of a President, which was not due until 2004, when (as later events
were to show) it would be the occasion of a convulsion in Ukrainian political life.
Meanwhile, the position of the long-serving President, Mr. Leonid Kuchma, was not
directly under threat. In reality, however, his personality, record, methods and policies were
widely identified with the interests of the political alliance holding power in Parliament at
that time. It was inevitable that efforts to unseat the existing majority would involve a
challenge to Mr. Kuchma himself, and this is what duly happened. One of the most

conspicuous elements campaigning for a change of government was a “Bloc”, a loose

grouping identified by the name of Ms. Yulia Tymoshenko,’ a charismatic and outspoken
politician, strongly opposed to Mr. Kuchma and his policies. As the Parliamentary elections
drew close, this Bloc (referred to in some of the documentary evidence as “the BYT”) set
about the production and distribution of written electioneering materials in considerable
quantities. Samples of these were deposited, as required by law, with the Electoral
Commission. Also in widespread distribution was a volume entitled (in translation)
“Unfulfilled Order”, which was as hostile to Mr. Kuchma as it was laudatory of Ms.
Tymoshenko. Whilst it has been asserted that this was printed by Taki spravy on the
instructions of BYT, some press reports suggested that the BYT and Ms. Tymoshenko had
each repudiated the volume, attributing it to a private venture. The Tribunal cannot resolve
this problem, but will assume for present purposes that “Unfulfilled Order” had come to the

attention of those in power in some way which associated it with Taki spravy.

9. In the event, the results of the poll held on 31 March 2002 were announced as showing that
the ruling party, backed by President Kuchma, had obtained a majority of the votes cast, but
insufficient to constitute an absolute majority. The adherents of the old regime thereafter
continued in power, albeit in circumstances of increasing stress, throughout almost the entire
duration of the events relied upon by the Claimant as instances of the hostile campaign
commenced against Taki spravy in February 2002. It was not until the closing months of
2004, when Mr. Kuchma’s tenure as President was due to expire, that popular upheavals and
are-run Presidential election forced the existing regime from power. We do not describe
these, or their aftermath, since they are not relevant to the present dispute, beyond noting for
future reference that for several months during the year 2005 Ms. Tymoshenko was Prime

Minister of Ukraine.
2. The Economic Situation in Brief

10. It is plain that by the start of the current millennium the Government of Ukraine had become
seriously concerned by two unlawful practices which were believed to be exacerbating the
already serious economic situation then prevailing. First, “money-laundering”, and
secondly “tax-evasion”. These practices, common enough world-wide, need no definition
here, but there is one feature common to both which plays an important part in the present

dispute, namely the use of “fictitious enterprises”. We have not seen any official definition

* The transliteration of Ukrainian names is not consistent.

of this term’, in its Ukrainian usage, or indeed any precise account of its meaning. But the
general idea is clear enough. The “enterprise” — i.e. firm, or company or business — is not
fictitious in the sense of having no existence at all, but is a sham, a falsehood, a “front”, a
dummy, or whatever word one may choose to describe something which is not what it
purports to be, and whose real functions are not what they purport to be. Such entities can
perform a variety of functions in wrongful economic dealings. In this particular context,
they can be used to record spurious indebtedness to be netted-off against earnings for tax
purposes, or they can be introduced into circular transactions in which money changes its
exchange value; and so on. If the existence of such an entity is detected as an apparent
participant in a transaction, it can be assumed that it is there for a reason; and that the reason
may be nefarious. Thus, the authorities are instructed to be on the lookout for signs of
fictitiousness; and “signs” are established as the criterion: not, at this first stage, concrete
evidence. Then, if signs of fictitiousness are detected the authorities are entitled to
investigate further, and in particular to pursue third-party investigations. So, if scrutiny of a
transaction between A and B reveals signs that B may be fictitious, then the authorities may
look beyond that transaction into the wider dealings of B, and perhaps move on to scrutinise

its relations with C, who will then itself become a subject of investigation.

11. No doubt several agencies of the State were alert for signs of fictitiousness, but the one with
which this dispute is most closely concerned was the State Tax Inspectorate, of which at the
outset of the events Mr. V.P. Furlet, was then (before his promotion to a more senior post
in the State Tax Administration (““STA”)) the Senior Investigator of the Inspectorate in the
Solomanskaya district of Kiev. Mr Furlet’s assistant in these matters was Mr. M.V.
Vasyuk. These two officials were in charge of the actions taken by the tax authorities

which form the heart of the Claimant’s case against the State under the Treaty.
Cc. THE CLAIMANT’S CASE
12. The theme of the Claimant’s complaint is unmistakable, even if the language used is not

always exactly the same. The following extracts from its written submissions will make this

clear:

 

* As distinct from “Fictitious entrepreneurship”, which was defined by Art. 148-4 of the Criminal Code, as the “creation
or acquisition of subjects of entrepreneurial activity (juridical persons) without intention to carry out charter activity, if
it has inflicted material damage upon the State, a bank, a credit institution, other juridical persons or citizens”.

“The requesting parties TT and TS allege that, in the year 2002, state bodies of
Ukraine committed a series of unfounded, illegitimate and unlawful acts directed

against the investments made by TT into TS”.°

“Tokios Tokelés’ claims in the given case concern actions committed by state
agencies of Ukraine which are connected by a unity of wrongful intent and purpose
on the part of government officials of interfering with the business of Tokios
Tokelés’ wholly-owned subsidiary in Ukraine, Taki spravy. This goal of
intentionally damaging Taki spravy was realised through various measures
implemented by state agencies of Ukraine in order to ultimately achieve an
illegitimate political goal, namely to punish Taki spravy for supporting an opposition

politician, Yulia Tymoshenko.

Similar practices of a concerted campaign against a particular company or individual
have an established history in Ukraine. Such practices have received their own

nomenclature — ‘nayizd’””.°

“The ‘nayizd’ practice is relevant to the given case in that it ties together the many
actions, which may otherwise seem disparate, committed by the Respondent with
regard to Taki spravy. The practice of ‘nayizd’ helps to characterise and assists in
understanding the relevant facts concerning Taki spravy which form the factual basis

of the given dispute”.”

“The entire series of acts by state agencies of Ukraine with regard to Tokios Tokelés’
investments in Ukraine, specifically in its investment vehicle Taki spravy, is rife with
violations of the BIT, Ukraine’s laws and international law. These acts and their
attendant violations comprise a single whole, which consists of the intentional,
premeditated, destruction of Taki spravy’s business operations and its reputation.
That this wave of repressive actions against Taki spravy began immediately after
Taki spravy printed a large amount of campaign material for Yulia Tymoshenko

provides convincing circumstantial evidence that the authorities vented their wrath

* Request for Arbitration at paragraph 12.
° Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraphs 16 and 17.
” Ibid, paragraph 19.

on Taki spravy precisely for its support of an opposition politician. This conclusion
is supported by the focus of the state agencies’ activities: companies which executed

work on behalf of or supported the Block of Yulia Tymoshenko”.*

In order to ensure that it had correctly understood the nature of the Claimant’s case the
Tribunal addressed the following questions to Mr. O. Danylov in the course of his oral

evidence:”

“PRESIDENT: And what you are asking, or your company is asking us to infer is
that all the way through to the end, or nearly the end of 2004 there was a continuous
nayizd persecution of the company because of its association with Madame

Tymoshenko. Is that what your company is alleging?
ANSWER: Yes.

PRESIDENT: And that is all part of — of course, up to that point at least, all part of

one continuous nayizd?

ANSWER: In the extent you described at the beginning of your question in 2002 it
was more often, and it was more powerful, so to say. Later, especially in view of the

order by ICSID Tribunal’? it was not that often”.

13. The message is quite clear. The Claimant was the victim of a conspiracy, inspired by
political rancour, put into effect through the State authorities, and carried through for years
as a single course of conduct from shortly after the Claimant’s activities gave offence to the
regime. Whether this is proved is what the dispute is about. Equally clear is what the
dispute is not about. For example, the Claimant does not contend that this is a case where a
single instance of blameworthy conduct reached the level of being in itself an international
wrong. This is not surprising, since although (as we shall record) there were such instances,
none could on its own have caused damage to Taki spravy on a scale remotely
approximating to the amount claimed. Nor is it said that this is a case where numerous

individual episodes, separately arising, can be agglomerated to make an international delict.

* Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraph 684.
° Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume III, pages 68 et seq.
'° Viz. Order No. 1, granting interim protective measures.

Nor still is it suggested that law enforcement authorities failed to take reasonable measures
to protect the Claimant from unlawful or harmful actions by third parties. Instead the
Claimant has chosen (and there may well have been no other available choice) to express its
complaint in the way we have summarised. It is on this that the Tribunal must focus its

attention.

Before leaving this topic one important point must be emphasised. The Claimant has, very
reasonably, made much of the personal antagonisms rife in Ukrainian politics, with a view
to explaining the alleged nayizd in terms of President Kuchma’s adverse reaction to the Bloc
election materials. To bring the persecution home to Mr. Kuchma himself is not however an
essential element in the cause of action. What does matter, for the purposes of the Treaty, is
whether there was a malicious campaign, and if so whether it can be attributed to the
respondent State. For this purpose the Tribunal must in practice form an idea, necessarily
based on secondary and circumstantial evidence since direct evidence is out of reach, not so
much about the identity of the prime mover but about whether it was a person or group of

persons whose actions were, for the purposes of the Treaty, those of the State.

SUMMARY OF PROCEDURAL HISTORY

Since the procedural history of the dispute has some bearing on the issues which remain for

decision it is convenient to set it out at this stage in a compressed form, as follows.

1. The Request for Arbitration

On 16 August 2002 Tokios Tokelés and Taki spravy filed at the Centre a Request for
Arbitration dated 14 August 2002 against the Government of Ukraine. The requesting
parties maintained that Tokios Tokelés was properly to be regarded as an investor for the
purposes of both the ICSID Convention and the Treaty. It was claimed that, since 1994,
Tokios Tokelés had invested more than USD 6.5 million in the territory of Ukraine, and that
these investments were duly registered with the Ukrainian authorities. In the Request, it was
further asserted that Taki spravy should be treated as a national of another Contracting State
on the basis that, “it is a wholly owned subsidiary of Tokios Tokelés, it was created
expressly for the purpose of realizing investments by Tokios Tokelés in the territory of

Ukraine and because of the close and extensive measure of control exercised by Tokios

Tokelés over its subsidiary...”'' The Claimants further noted that, “[i]n any event, TS lies
at the heart of the dispute between the parties and should be included in the arbitration

proceedings on that basis”.

17. | Amongst other items, the Request for Arbitration identified the complaints against the State
in terms quoted above at paragraph 12. The Request was accompanied by a Letter of
Consent dated 7 August 2002, signed by Mr. Serhiy Danylov as Chairman of the Board of
Tokios Tokelés expressing the consent of that company to the jurisdiction of ICSID over the

dispute therein identified.
2. Withdrawal and Resubmission

18. On 15 October 2002, however, ICSID notified the requesting parties that a condition for
submitting a dispute to ICSID had not been fulfilled, namely the requirement under Article 8
of the Treaty, under which the investor is only entitled to submit a case to ICSID if a dispute
between the parties cannot be settled through negotiations within a period of six months.
Accordingly, on 17 October 2002, the requesting parties informed ICSID that they withdrew
their Request for Arbitration until such time as it “may be renewed and resubmitted for
consideration to the Centre”. The Request for Arbitration was resubmitted by Tokios

Tokelés and Taki spravy on 22 November 2002.

19. | On 6 December 2002, the Centre alerted the requesting parties to the fact that, “the parties
have not agreed that [ Taki spravy ] should be treated as a national of another Contracting
State under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, and Article 1(2) of the bilateral
investment treaty between the Government of Ukraine and the Government of the Republic
of Lithuania”. In response, on 9 December 2002, Tokios Tokelés informed the Centre that,
in view of the absence of such an agreement, Taki spravy would be removed as a requesting
party. However, Tokios Tokelés reserved “the right to introduce Taki spravy as well as
other potential claimants, including legal as well as physical persons, to the cause at some
future date”. In the event, no subsequent attempt has been made to re-introduce Taki spravy

as a party to the arbitration, or to add TSII.

" Request for Arbitration at paragraph 6.

20.

21.

22.

23.

3. Notice of Registration

After re-submission of the Request for Arbitration, the State initiated exchanges with ICSID
and the Claimant on an endeavour to cause the Secretary-General of ICSID to exercise his
power under Rule 6(b) of the “Institution Rules” to refuse to register the Request. The
Secretary-General nevertheless proceeded to notify the parties that the Request had been

registered.

4. Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal

On 20 February 2003, sixty days having passed since the registration of the Request for
Arbitration, the Claimant notified the Centre that it had chosen the formula established in
Article 37(2)(b) of the Convention. Accordingly the Tribunal was to be composed of three
arbitrators, one appointed by each party and the third, who would be the President of the

Tribunal, to be appointed by agreement of the parties.

On 5 March 2003, the Claimant notified the Centre of its appointment of Mr. Daniel M.
Price, a national of the United States of America, as arbitrator. On 24 March 2003, the
Respondent notified the Centre of its appointment of Professor Piero Bernardini, a national
of Italy, as arbitrator. The parties being unable to agree on the appointment of the President
of the Tribunal, the Claimant by letter dated 25 March 2003 requested, pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 4(1), that the appointment be made by the Chairman of the ICSID
Administrative Council. Thereupon the Chairman of the Administrative Council, in
consultation with the parties, appointed Professor Prosper Weil, a national of France, as an

arbitrator and designated him as the President of the Tribunal.

The Tribunal held its first session in Paris on 3 June 2003, the outcomes of which were
Orders No.1 and No.2 made on 1 July 2003 whereby the Tribunal granted interim protective
measures and decreed that the proceedings would be bifurcated to permit certain issues of

jurisdiction to be heard and determined before the remainder.

24.

25.

26.

27.

5. Hearing on Jurisdiction: Reconstitution of the Tribunal

Accordingly, after the filing of written submissions, the Tribunal held an oral hearing in
Paris on 10 December 2003 to receive the objections to its jurisdiction. Thereafter the
Tribunal issued its Decision on Jurisdiction. The members were divided in their opinions.
Contrary to the submissions of the State, Professor Bernardini and Mr. Price concluded that
the Claimant is an “investor” of Lithuania within the meaning of Article 1(2)(b) of the
Treaty and a “national of another Contracting State” for the purposes of Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention. These arbitrators went on to hold that the Claimant had made an
“investment” in Ukraine as defined by the Treaty, and that the dispute arose from that

investment. Accordingly, they held that the objections to jurisdiction should be rejected.

Professor Weil recorded his dissent from this conclusion in an opinion attached to the
Decision on Jurisdiction. Conceiving that it would be inappropriate in the circumstances for
him to play a further part in the arbitration, Professor Weil notified the Centre of his

resignation as arbitrator and President of the Tribunal.

By letter dated 23 August 2004, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID informed the parties
of the appointment of the Rt. Hon. Lord Mustill as President of the Tribunal, in substitution
for Professor Weil. The proceedings, which had been suspended pending the new

appointment, then resumed.

There would be little point in listing the successive written submissions filed by the parties,
nor with one exception attempting to reduce to a reasonable compass the numerous and
extended contentions which they advanced. The substance of these can be sufficiently
gathered from the account given in this Award. The exception relates to information
disclosed for the first time by the Claimant in its Second Request for Provisional Measures
of 14 September 2004. This was to the effect that on 6 April 2002, four months before the
Claimant’s first Request for Arbitration, Taki spravy had transferred to its fellow subsidiary
TSII a “unitary property complex” leaving behind with Taki spravy only 10 or 11 items of
assets. This disclosure formed one of the grounds on which the State submitted, on 30 June
2005 Additional Objections to Jurisdiction. The Tribunal declined to rule immediately on
this objection, and postponed argument and a decision upon it until the full oral hearing and

the resulting Award.

28.

29.

6. The Substantive Oral Hearing

The Tribunal conducted a hearing in Paris from 16 to 19 January 2006. The parties were
represented by counsel who presented their respective cases to the Tribunal and also
examined witnesses from their side and put questions to witnesses from the opposing side.
Transcripts were made of the hearing and distributed to the parties. Present at the hearing

were:

Members of the Tribunal:

Lord Mustill, President. Professor Piero Bernardini and Mr. Daniel Price

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Ms. Martina Polasek

Assistant to the President of the Tribunal:

Ms. Jessica Wells

Attending on behalf of the Claimant:
Mr. Ivan Lozowy, Mr. Oleksandr Danylov, Mr. Serhiy Danylov, Ms. Ludmilla Zhyltsova

Attending on behalf of the Respondent:

Mr. Kostyantyn Krasovsky, Mr. Dmitri Grischenko, Dr. Sergei Voitovich, Mr. Oleg
Shevchuk, Mr. Andriy Alexeyev, Mr. Oleg Vysochynskyy, Ms. Yulia Konyuskenko, Ms.
Larisa Lischynks and Mr. Vsevolod Chentsov

The following witnesses were called by the Claimant:
Mr. Oleksandr Danylov, Mr. Serhiy Danylov

The following witnesses were called by Ukraine:
Mr. Volodymyr Furlet, Mr. Mykola Vasyuk and Ms. Olena Volska.

In the course of the hearing, the Tribunal addressed a series of questions to the parties with a
view to elucidating their respective submissions. These were subsequently reduced to

writing, and were the subject of answers from each side in the closing written exchanges.

30.

31.

32.

33.

At all stages of the proceedings, the Members of the Tribunal deliberated extensively by
various means of communication, taking into account all pleadings, documents and
testimony adduced, whether or not specifically referred to in this Award. The proceeding

was declared closed on 27 June 2007.

THE CLAIMANT’S NARRATIVE

This is essentially a case on the facts, and although a number of important and difficult
issues of principle were thoroughly explored by the parties and discussed within the
Tribunal, it can be seen that, with the sole exception of the separate issue of “expropriation”,
the outcome of the dispute is dictated by the view taken on a single question whether the
Claimant has established according to the relevant standard of proof that the events
complained of were the product of a nayizd. This is a question of inference, requiring a
choice between two fundamentally different narratives. One, presented by the Claimant,
describes the interaction between Taki spravy, its officers and the STA. The other views the
history in the context of investigations carried on by State agencies at and around the time in
question, and whilst not directly challenging the Claimant’s bare recital of events, treats it as

incomplete and potentially misleading.

Apart from the question of quantum, which raises quite separate issues, the heart of the
Claimant’s case consists of the account which follows of the dealings between the STA and
Taki spravy. There is, in addition, a quantity of written and oral evidence from the Messrs.
Danylov giving personal accounts of interviews with officials, both in the year 2002 and
again in 2005, in which they describe pressures allegedly applied to extort admissions, false
evidence against Mr. Romanov, and the dropping of the present ICSID arbitration. For
economy of space the Tribunal abstains from setting this out, since it reinforces but does not
enlarge the case built upon the largely undisputed course of events. It has however been

fully taken into account when at a later stage the implications of fact are discussed.

The way in which the Claimant has formulated its case requires the Tribunal to reach
conclusions on (a) What happened as between the STA and Taki spravy, and (b) Why did it
happen? The answer to the first question calls for little evidence, since the fact that the

events relied upon by the Claimant both to found the inference of a political persecution and

34,

35.

to display the persecution in progress actually happened is scarcely in dispute. Thus, for
example, where the Claimant’s Memorials assert that tax officials visited its offices on a
particular date, or that a demand for documents was made on another date, or that identified
criminal proceedings were set in motion against Taki spravy, there is very often no contest
that this is what happened, although in a number of instances the description of the incident
is not accepted. The real controversy is about why these events took place. On this, the
Claimant’s case is ultimately very simple. One only has to look at the events, their volume,
their timing, their absence of legal justification, and the political context to conclude that
there could be no other reason for them but political spite thinly disguised as a tax

inspection. Res ipsa loquitur.

There are problems with this approach, quite apart from the existence of materials which
point the other way. One is simply a question of perspective. The Claimant presents its data
in a dense mass of more than two hundred instances, undifferentiated in terms of type and
significance, and simply unmanageable as it stands. To draw any reliable inference from it a
perspective must be achieved, and for this purpose the episodes must be reduced to some
kind of order, without descending to an over-analysis which would smother the central issue
in detail. The Tribunal has approached this from two angles. First, it has prepared for the
purposes of its deliberations, and now appends as Annex A, an extensive summary of the
allegations, which have been divided broadly according to subject matter. Secondly, to
enable a more simplified view it has compressed the complaints into a graphic in the form of
a chart showing the variation with time of the numbers of events about which complaints are
made (Annex B). The Tribunal draws particular attention to these Annexes, which are
integral parts of this Award, and which display in perhaps a more accessible format the data
on which to a large extent the Claimant’s case is based, but for the moment it will simply set
out a narrative account of the allegations, largely as formulated in the claims and supported
by contemporaneous documents submitted by Claimant with its memorials and by testimony

at the hearing on the merits.

I. Taki Spravy Produces Campaign Materials for BYT

According to Claimant, Taki spravy entered into a series of agreements in late 2001 to print

campaign-related materials for the BYT in connection with the parliamentary elections

36.

37.

38.

scheduled for 31 March 2002.'? The following month and in the first quarter of 2002, Taki
spravy produced approximately 2.5 million of these campaign documents, including
440,400 copies of the volume described above, “Unfulfilled Order,” which were delivered
on 31 January 2002. 8

The tax authorities initiated their investigation of Taki spravy on 14 February 2002, which
will be discussed further below. In response to the investigation, BYT issued a press
statement on 6 March 2002, which stated in part: “[iJmmediately after the Electoral Bloc of
Yulia Tymoshenko. ..had delivered to the Central Election Commission the samples of
agitation materials of the Bloc printed at the publishing house ‘Taki spravy’, this publishing
house experienced outrageous pressure, threats, and blackmail on the part of the State Tax
Administration. ..It stands to reason that the only ‘guilt’ of publishing house ‘Taki spravy’ is
its consent to print the official agitation campaign materials of the Bloc of Yulia
Tymoshenko”.'*

On 16 March 2002, the Chairman of the Election Commission, Mr. M. M. Ryabets, received
from a parliamentary candidate a letter of complaint, drawing attention to the large print
runs of “Unfulfilled Order” and “The Team of the Bloc of Yu. Tymoshenko” — “printed, by
the way, at the same printing house ‘Taki Spravy’”. The writer asked the Chairman to
“charge the competent bodies with the check-up of the financial violations by Yu.
Tymoshenko...and give me the answer: 1. Who, and how much money, paid for printing of
500,000 copies of the book ‘Unfulfilled Order’? 2. By whom, and what amount, was the fee
to the author paid? 3. How much money was spent on the distribution of the book, and from

what sources?”

On the same day the Chairman sent what was presumably an internal memorandum to a Mr.
V.V. Alsufyev, as follows: “I request that you send the complaint for an urgent examination
to the State Tax Administration of Ukraine and to the Ministry of Internal Affairs of
Ukraine”. Mr. Alsufyev promptly forwarded the complaint to Mr. M.Ya. Azarov, the Head
of the State Tax Administration, asking for information on what was stated in it, as soon as

practicable but not later than 19 March 2002.

® Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraph 20, Annex 1.

8 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraphs 21-22.
'4 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits at Attachment 77.

39.

40.

2. The State’s Press Statements

21 The Press Statement of 25 March 2002

On 25 March 2002 the STA issued a Press Statement in which it alleged that Taki spravy
was under investigation for suspected money laundering.'* The Statement also asserted that
STA was investigating alleged election law violations at the request of the Central Election
Commission. During the hearing on the merits, however, witnesses for the State
acknowledged that Taki spravy was not under investigation for money laundering at the
time the statement was issued. In addition, witnesses for the State also acknowledged that
STA has no enforcement authority with respect to election law. According to the STA Press
Statement “a check of the activities of DP ‘Taki spravy’ was made...because of its active
participation in the activities of a diversified network for the legalization of ‘dirty’ money”.
STA asks, “then why does DP ‘Taki spravy’ go for unjustified expenses, working for its
own losses? Surely because the difference is covered at the expense of ‘shadowy’ sources
of finances and the flows of ‘dirty’ money”. The statement concludes, “the violations
discovered during the course of the investigation of DP ‘Taki spravy’ have signs of crimes
as foreseen by...Article 209 (the legalization (laundering) of money funds and other

property, received by criminal means) of the Criminal Code of Ukraine”.'°

During the hearing on the merits, Mr. Furlet was asked “[b]y the end of February 2002, did
the authorities of Ukraine, especially your department, reach a conclusion that there was not
enough evidence to go forward against Taki spravy or its management for crimes of money

laundering?”!”

Mr. Furlet responded: “[w]ith respect to myself at the end of February 2002,
as far as I can recollect, the decision, criminal procedural decision about responsibility of
Taki spravy management with regards to money laundering was not taken, so the decision
was not taken that they were responsible for money laundering”.'* Mr. Vasyuk was asked,
“[t]o your knowledge, after February 2002...was either Taki spravy or Mr. Danylov under
investigation for money laundering?” Mr. Vasyuk responded, “[fJor money laundering there
was none”. Mr. Vasyuk was asked, “[nJone after February?” Mr. Vasyuk replied, “That’s

right”.!°

'S Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 25.
6 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 25.
'’ Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume III at 240, lines 15-20.

'S Hearing on the Meri

s, Transcript Volume III at 240, lines 24-25; 241, lines 1-5.

 

'° Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume IV at 102, lines 14-17, 21-23.

41.

42.

20 Hearing on the Meri
2! Hearing on the Meri

Mr. Vasyuk was then asked why the money laundering allegations were included in the 25
March 2002 STA Press Statement when both Mr. Vasyuk and Mr. Furlet testified that Taki
spravy was not suspected of or under investigation for money laundering after February
2002. Vasyuk testified that “[p]robably, [ the Press Statement ] is not written correctly
enough because Taki spravy transferred non-cash funds into cash money using the scheme
which has been well known to tax police for quite a long period of time, as it is mentioned
here through fictitious or dummy firms, and when, in the press, the process of transferring
non-cash funds into cash money sometimes is wrongly called ‘money laundering’. So I

think from a legal standpoint, this material is written not correctly””°

[sic]. However, Mr.
Vasyuk’s explanation that Taki spravy was under investigation for receiving income from
unknown sources was not consistent with his other testimony. Mr. Vasyuk was asked, “[s]o,
in your opinion, the Press Statement should have talked about tax evasion, not money
laundering”.”'! Mr. Vasyuk agreed, saying, “[a]bout tax evasion through- by means of
moving funds through fictitious firms”.” The Act of Investigation from the Kyiv State Tax
Administration, however, does not allege that Taki spravy received moneys from unknown
sources rather, it alleges that Taki spravy claimed improper expenses and VAT credits
associated with those expenses.”* The nature of the allegations of tax evasion was
confirmed by Mr. Vasyuk, who was asked, “[s]o in both cases they are claiming deductions
or expenses to which they are not entitled”. Mr. Vasyuk responded, “[y]es, correct”.”*

The STA Press Statement also appears to allege that Taki spravy acted illegally or
improperly by undercharging for the production of the material for the BYT. It states,
“[w]ithout a doubt, the citizenry of Ukraine should turn its attention to the privileged or
sponsored price of printing services. At least, their value for real should be 20 times
greater”.”> However, when Mr. Vasyuk was asked whether this allegation is “at all related
to the tax evasion case,” Mr. Vasyuk responded, “[n]o...I didn’t investigate this particular
issue in the course of the case”.*° With respect to suspected election law violations, the
STA Press Statement states, “[b]esides that, the Central Election Commission of Ukraine, as
directed by current legislation, authorized the tax service to check information about

. Transcript Volume IV at 105, lines 9-18.
's, Transcript Volume IV at 105, lines 19 to 21.

 

2 Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume IV at 105, lines 22 to 23.
2} Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 56, p. 7.

?4 Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume IV at 108, lines 3 to 6

?5 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 25, p. 4.

?6 Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume IV at 111, lines 10-14.

20

43.

44.

violations of election legislation during the manufacture of printed production by the...
‘Election Block of Yulia Tymoshenko”.”” When Mr. Furlet was asked, “[a]re the Tax

Police responsible for enforcing elections laws,” Mr. Furlet responded “[n]o. The Tax

Police does not have the task of exercising control over the observance of election

v9 2
laws...”.78

On the same date as the Press Statement of 25 March 2002, STA sent a letter to local tax

2 .
> which was

authorities urging them to seek broad media coverage of the statement,
eventually reported in over 100 newspapers.*” On 27 March 2002, Taki spravy issued a

declaration and press statement denying the allegations.*!

The evidence is unclear as to whether the 25 March 2002 STA letter to local authorities was
consistent with STA’s normal operations or an exceptional occurrence. Mr. Furlet,
however, sidestepped the question from the Tribunal as to whether “any of those other
companies” that Mr. Furlet had testified “were subjected to the same treatment” as Taki
spravy “were the subject of a press release by the state authorities and whether the state
authorities issued a directive to local authorities to publish that press release”.** He said
“there is a kind of not very official guideline from the management of the tax administration
to the heads of departments to speak through the mass media from time to time,” noting that
in the two months prior to the hearing, he had “participated in mass media activities
highlighting certain activities against economic crime”.*? In addition, Mr. Vasyuk was
asked: “have you ever received a letter during your service in these terms directing the
authorities to provide urgent coverage, and to report on steps taken?” He replied, “[s]uch a
letter I never received because my competences covered the criminal investigation, and I am
not engaged in public relations”.** Finally, when the Tribunal asked O. Danylov for his
opinion as to the purpose of the STA letter to local tax administrations, Danylov responded,
“the objectives of the State Tax Administration of Ukraine sending this letter were purely

political”.*°

27 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 25, p. 2.

?8 Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume III at 245, lines 4-9.

® Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 26.

*° Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 25 (cont.) in Volume II.

*! Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 27-28.

*? Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume III at 243, lines 6-12.

*} Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume III at 243, lines 14-17, 21-23.
* Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume IV at 112, lines 12-18.

*5 Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume III at 59, lines 20-22.

21

45.

46.

47.

2.2 Other STA Press Statements

On 27 November 2002, STA issued a press statement accusing Taki spravy (along with
Rembudproekt and Produkt BVO) of conspiracy, tax evasion, dishonesty and illegal turn-
over.*° On 16 January 2003, STA issued another press statement accusing Taki spravy of
conspiracy and tax evasion.*” On 28 December 2002, an announcement appeared in “RIO”
newspaper listing Taki spravy as an ‘indebted enterprise’ in amounts that far exceeded Taki
spravy’s actual debts. Claimant later asserted that STA was responsible for having this

allegedly erroneous information published.**
3. Investigations and Court Proceedings
3.1 Taki Spravy and Produkt BVO

On 14 February and 18 February, and 2 July 2002, the Solomiansky tax service (hereafter
“STS”) sent to Taki spravy a written request for documentation of its relationship with
Produkt BVO.” The Claimant argues that it complied with the requests even though they
were overly broad and without legal foundation.*” On 21 and 26 February 2002,
Solomiansky Tax Police (hereafter “STP”) rendered decisions to seize documents from Taki
spravy relating to its relationship with Produkt BVO."' On 22 and 26 February, and 5
March 2002, STS searched and seized documents from Taki spravy.”” Regarding the 5
March episode, Taki spravy’s chief accountant stated, “when more than 10 men intruded my
office...I unwillingly recalled the terrible times of Stalin’s repressions. They ransacked and
searched all over: turned everything upside down. I think I will remember the day when

militia ‘ransacked’ our accounts department — 5 March 2002 — forever”.**

In Case No: 21/125 of 1 April 2002, STA submitted a complaint against Produkt BVO and

Taki spravy in the Economic Court, alleging that the companies were evading taxes and that

*° Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 207.

*7 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Supplemental Annex 5.
** Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 218.

*° Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraph 366.

*° Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraphs 366 to 369.
“! Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 10 and 13.

© Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 11, 14 to 16.
* Claimant’s Reply on the Merits at Annex 20.

22

48.

49.

one of the companies was pursuing objectives “in conflict with the interests of state”. “* On
8 April 2002, the Court invited STA to provide “explanations and requisite proofs” which
STA declined to do, instead requesting that the proceedings be suspended pending the
outcome of the criminal case on the same matter. The Court rejected STA’s request and on

20 May 2002, dismissed the complaint for lack of evidence.**

3.2 Taki Spravy and Rembudproekt

On 13 March 2002, STP authorised the inspection of Taki spravy’s dealings with
Rembudproekt.*° On the same date (and again on 15 March 2002), STP authorised warrants
and seized documents from Taki spravy relating to its dealings with Rembudproekt.*” On
19 April 2002, STA requested Taki spravy to provide information regarding its dealings
with Rembudproekt.** The Claimant argues that it complied with these requests even
though they were unsubstantiated and contrary to Ukrainian law. On 7 May 2002, STA
issued an “Act of Investigation” pursuant to its investigation that Taki spravy failed to make
proper tax payments based on its transactions with Rembudproekt.”” On 13 May 2002, Taki

spravy submitted objections, which STA rejected on 14 May 2002.

On 7 May 2002, the General Procuratura (hereafter “GP”) submitted a claim against
Rembudproekt and Taki spravy in the Economic Court (Case No 10/399-02-2-25/5178),
requesting the Court to invalidate the contract and order the companies to pay the taxes
owed. On 30 May 2002, the Court returned the complaint “without review”. On 17 June
2002, GP appealed the Court’s decision. On 15 July 2002, the Economic Court of Appeals
upheld the 30 May 2002 decision. On 16 July 2002, GP appealed to the Higher Economic
Court; on 20 August 2002 the Higher Economic Court annulled the lower court’s decision.
On 4 September 2002, Taki spravy appealed to the Supreme Court; on 3 January 2003, and
again on 6 February 2003, Ukraine’s Supreme Court rejected the appeal.

“+ Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 32.
* Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 67.
“6 Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annex19.
“’ Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 21 and 23.
“8 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 47.
* Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 56.

23

3.3 Investigation of Taki Spravy Clients

50. On 8 April 2002, STA sent letters to three clients of Taki spravy, requesting documentation
of their relationship with Taki spravy.*” On 10 April 2002, STA sent letters to two
additional clients of Taki spravy, informing them that their relationship with Taki spravy
was being investigated.°! The Claimant argues that the five letters do not comply with
relevant legal requirements because they do not indicate the legal basis for the request and
the investigation. In response to questions from the Tribunal, Mr. S. Danylov testified
that, of the five clients who received letters from STA, one was “one of our biggest
customers”, another was a “very big customer” and another was a significant supplier.”
The Claimant submitted an unsigned witness statement of one of the clients, O.Yarosh of
Palitra Druku, indicating that he was the subject of harassment and pressure from STS

because of his business relationship with Taki spravy.~4
3.4 Other Allegedly Unfounded Investigations, Searches and Seizures

51. Onl4 February 2002, the STS issued two certificates for tax investigations of Taki
spravy.”> On 5 April 2002, STS authorised and executed seizure of documents from Taki
spravy relating to LLC Agenstvo Alfo, a company that made payment on behalf of Produkt
BVO for campaign materials produced by Taki spravy.*° On 16 April 2002, STS requested
Taki spravy to provide personal information regarding its employees, which Taki spravy
refused on grounds that such disclosure would violate confidentiality protected by law.*”
On 22 and 23 July 2002, STS seized documents and a computer from Taki spravy.** On 5,
7, 9 and 12 August, 18 September, 4, 16, 22 October and 7 November 2002, STS authorised
and conducted additional document seizures.®’ Each of these seizures was apparently
related to the criminal case against Mr. O. Danylov. Between 30 May 2002 and 25 October
2002, the State issued eleven summonses regarding investigation of Taki spravy. The

Claimant alleges that these summonses were legally defective for various reasons (for

*° Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 36-38.
*! Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 40-41.
® Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraphs 402 and 403.
s =, Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume III at 60, lines 14-25; 61, lines 1-25; 62, lines 1-22.
“4 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 252.
55 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 5-6.
“6 © Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 33-34.
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 45, 50.
** Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 123-125.
* Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 133, 138, 144, 146, 167, 178, 183, 186, 199.

 

 

 

24

52.

53.

example, for failure to state subject matter).

On 7 November, two agents of the State
entered the home of a Taki spravy officer, I. Butuzov, without permission, threatened arrest
and refused repeated requests to leave. Mr. Butuzov left Taki spravy on 3 June 2003, citing

intimidation and fear for his safety.°!

4. Tax Notice Decisions and Related Proceedings

On 13 May 2002, STS issued two Tax Notice Decisions, demanding payment of taxes
allegedly owed.” On 21 May 2002, Taki spravy submitted a complaint to the Economic
Court (Case No: 11/134), requesting that the Court invalidate the Tax Notice Decisions for
lack of evidence. On 31 May 2002, Taki spravy submitted a complaint to the Economic
Court seeking “preventative measures” which the Court granted. On 11 June 2002, STA
requested the Court to suspend proceedings, which the Court granted. On 18 June 2002,
Taki spravy appealed the decision to suspend the proceedings. On 23 July 2002, the
Economic Court of Appeals rejected Taki spravy’s appeal in the light of the pending
criminal case against Messrs O. Danylov and Romanov.” The Claimant argues that the
decision to suspend the case and to uphold that decision were rendered without adequate

explanation and were subject to improper influence.“

On 23 July 2002, STS issued a “First Tax Demand” to Taki spravy and on 7 August 2002,
STS issued a “Second Tax Demand” to Taki spravy (collectively hereafter “the Tax
Demands”).® On 19 August 2002, Taki spravy submitted a complaint to the Economic
Court (Case No 29/266) requesting the Court to invalidate the Tax Demands for reasons
including lack of foundation and violation of time limits.°° On 23 August 2002, TS
addressed a “Declaration” to Solomiansky District Court and the Solomiansky Procuratura
with a request that a criminal case be opened against STS officials based on actions that
resulted in the Tax Demands. The Court forwarded the complaint to STS. On 3 September
2002, STS informed Taki spravy that the Tax Demands were sent to Taki spravy by
mistake.®” On 11 September 2002, STS by letter informed Taki spravy that the Tax

© Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraphs 533-542.

°! Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraphs 543-544.

2

Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 58-59.

® Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 127.

 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraphs 619-626, Annex 78.
°° Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 128, 137.

°° Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 150.

®’ Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annex 158.

25

Demands were invalid. Also on 11 September 2002, the Economic Court halted
proceedings in Case No 29/266 at the request of STS.” On 11 November 2002, Taki spravy
submitted a complaint to Solomiansky District Court requesting that the Court order STS to
issue a public correction of the erroneously issued Tax Demands, which were published in
the media.” The Court rejected the complaint on 5 December 2002.7" On 11 March 2003,
Taki spravy submitted a similar complaint and request to the same court, which once again

rejected it.”

54.  On3 April 2003, STS issued two additional Tax Notice Demands.” On 11 April 2003,
Taki spravy requested the Economic Court (in Case No. 25/353) to invalidate the additional
Tax Notice Demands based on deficiencies in the investigation.’ On 10 June 2003, the
Court granted Taki spravy petition to suspend the proceeding in light of the pending ICSID

case.”°
5. Tax Investigations and Arrest of Taki Spravy Assets

55. On 6 June 2002, STA issued a notice of a complex documentary investigation of Taki
spravy. On 17 June 2002, STS sent three of its officials to Taki spravy to conduct an “open-
ended” investigation. Taki spravy expressed concern to STS officials, who left and returned
the following day with several armed STP employees. On 20 June 2002, STA adopted a

decision to place under administrative arrest all assets of Taki spravy.”°

56.  Inresponse to the asset seizure, Taki spravy filed a complaint with the Economic Court on
21 June 2002 (Case no 11/148), seeking to overturn the decision. On 15 August 2002, the
Economic Court issued a decision denying relief to Taki spravy, which Taki spravy
appealed on 30 August 2002. On 20 December 2002, the Economic Court of Appeals
denied the appeal. Taki spravy appealed this decision on 20 January 2003. On 11 March
2003, the Higher Economic Court accepted the appeal and on 30 May 2003, adopted a

°$ Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 164.
® Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annex 163.
” Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 201.
” Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annex 210.
” Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annex 231.
* Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annex 236.
™ Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annex 237.
* Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annex 244.
*6 Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 90-93.

26

decision to remand the case for de novo review. On 8 July 2003, the Economic Court

dismissed the case.

57. On 25 June 2002, STA requested the Economic Court (Case No 21/246) to extend the arrest
for an additional 90 days. On 27 June 2002, the Economic Court extended the arrest for 30
days, rejecting the Claimant’s request to join this case with Case No 11/148. On 5 July
2002, Taki spravy appealed against this decision. On 23 July 2002 the Economic Court
decided to suspend proceedings pending a decision in Case No 11/148. On 26 July 2002,
STA lifted the arrest of assets.

6. The Criminal Case Against Mr. O. Danylov: Case No. 79/00032

58. On 13 March 2002, STS initiated a criminal tax evasion case (Case No 79-00111) against
Rembudproekt; on 28 March 2002 this was expanded to include Mr. V. Romanov
(Rembudproekt’s Director). It appears that this case was later combined with Case No
79/00032, which had been initiated against Mr. O. Danylov on 14 May 2002, for tax
evasions based on transactions said to have been entered into with Rembudproekt. During
May 2002, Mr. O. Danylov left Ukraine for Lithuania. On 3 July 2002, STP issued an
indictment against Mr. Romanov and Mr. O. Danylov. Whilst in custody, Mr. Romanov
gave statements supporting STS’s charges but later retracted those statements, alleging that
he had been coerced. On 19 September 2002, Romanov filed a complaint alleging that he
had been subject to physical abuse and denied access to legal counsel.’’? On 6 November
2002, Mr. O. Danylov sought refugee status in Lithuania. On the following day,
Solomiansky District Court rendered guilty verdicts against him (in absentia) and Mr.
Romanoy, who was sentenced to six and a half years imprisonment. On 22 November 2002,
Mr. Romanov brought an appeal to the Appellate Court, which was rejected on 21 January
2003. On 13 May 2003, the Supreme Court denied relief.

59. On the same day, 13 May 2003, Lithuania granted Mr. O. Danylov refugee status. On 3
March 2005, Mr. O. Danylov returned to Ukraine. On 25 April 2005, STA notified Mr. O.
Danylov that it had decided to close the case against him for lack of evidence.”* However,

on 8 August 2005, GP notified him of its decision to reopen the case, though it declined Mr.

” Claimant's Memorial on the Merits at Annex 168.
*§ Claimant’s Reply on the Merits at Annex 1.

27

O. Danylov’s request for a copy of the decision.” On 16 November 2005, the STA decided

again to close the case for lack of evidence.*°

60. The case was reopened on 29 December 2005.*' During the hearing on the merits, Mr. O.
Danylov testified that, during a meeting with Mr. V. Schvets, a high level official in the
Prosecutor General’s office, Mr. Schvets told him that the criminal case against Mr. O.
Danylov would be reinstated unless the Claimant withdrew its ICSID claim. Mr. O.
Danylov further testified that he had meetings with the Head of the State Police, Mr.
Katerinchuk, and the Prosecutor General of Ukraine, Mr. S. Piskun, both of whom linked
the criminal case to the ICSID claim.*? Mr. O. Danylov testified that he met with the First
Deputy Prosecutor, S. Vynokurov on 29 December 2005, who showed him a copy of a letter
from the Minister of Justice, Mr. M. Holovaty, to the Prosecutor General, which described
the present ICSID proceedings. Mr. Vynokurov used the letter to indicate that the Claimant
was demanding too much money from Ukraine and urged Mr. O. Danylov to withdraw the

ICSID claim.™*
7. Other Denials of Claimant’s Requests for Relief

61. | The Claimant made numerous written appeals to high level tax authorities, the Presidential
administration, and central and local Procuraturas, requesting them to intercede to stop the
alleged mistreatment of Taki spravy. According to the Claimant, each appeal was
summarily dismissed, in some case in contravention of the statutory or constitutional

obligations of those offices to pursue bona fide investigations of such complaints.**

62. On 27 June 2002, Taki spravy filed a complaint with the Solomiansky District Court (Case
No 2-2335) alleging various illegal acts by STA officials.** On 2 July 2002, the Court

dismissed the complaint for lack of jurisdiction.’’ On 18 November 2002, Mr. S. Danylov

” Claimant’s Reply on the Merits at paragraph 18.

*° | etter to Martina Polasek, Secretary to the Tribunal, 3 January 2006.

Transcript Volume I at 96, lines 1-3.

, Transcript Volume II at 15, lines 1-17; 32, lines 21-25.

, Transcript Volume II at 17, lines 1-25; 18, lines 1-5; 33, lines 15-25.
“ Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume II at 42, lines 16-25; 43, lines 1-25; 44, lines 1-3.
*5 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraphs 545-572.

* Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 98.

*’ Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 139.

 
 
 
 

 

28

63.

64.

65.

filed a complaint in Solomiansky District Court claiming that the State Tax Inspectorate

engaged in improper seizures, which the Court dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.**
8. The Tax Authorities’ Requests for Taki Spravy to Provide Testimony Against BYT

On 26 February 2002, Mr. O. Danylov met with Mr. Furlet intending to negotiate a
settlement of the dispute. According to Mr. O. Danylov, Mr. Furlet questioned him
“regarding companies which had placed orders with Taki spravy for the Block of Yulia
Tymoshenko”.*’ When Mr. Furlet was asked by counsel whether he “put questions
regarding the political background of the ‘Unfulfilled Order”, such as “[w]hat party stands
behind the customer,” Mr. Furlet replied “[a]s far as I recollect I didn’t ask such

questions”.°°

On 11 March 2002, Mr. O. Danylov met with Mr. Furlet, who, according to the Claimant,
“suggested that Oleksandr Danylov attest in writing that Taki spravy had received cash
payments for orders placed with Taki spravy on behalf of the Block of Yulia
Tymoshenko”.*! When Mr. Furlet was asked by the State’s counsel about this allegation, he

responded “[n]o, I didn’t make such a proposal”.

According to his written statement, Mr. S. Danylov met with Mr. Furlet on 20 May 2002,
during which meeting “Furlet said that his superiors and he himself desire for me to testify
that Yulia Tymoshenko gave me a ‘valise’ with money in it for the printing of the book”.”?
In response to a question from the State’s counsel, Mr. Furlet denied making this proposal.”
On 29 July and 15 August 2002, Mr. S. Danylov again met with Mr. Furlet, who, according
to Mr. S. Danylov, encouraged him to provide testimony against BYT.”> According to Mr.
S. Danylov, “Furlet in various forms repeated one and the same thing: that I and my co-
workers give testimony against Kochetkov (an official representative of BYT)”.”°
According to Mr. S. Danylov, Mr. Furlet said that if Mr. S. Danylov and Mr. O. Danylov

“both give testimony against Kochetkov, then they will close the criminal case [ against Mr.

*$ Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annexes 203, 209 and 211.

*° Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraph 30, Annex 159.

°° Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume III at 101, lines 23-25; 102, lines 1-4.
°! Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraph 35, Annex 159.

°? Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume III at 103, Line 1.

°} Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 156, p. 5.

°4 Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume III at 103, lines 7-11.

°> Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraphs 130, 145.

°° Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 156, p. 7.

29

66.

67.

O. Danylov ] and lift the siege of our enterprise”.”” In response to questions from the
State’s counsel, Mr. Furlet testified that it was Mr. O. Danylov and Mr. S. Danylov who
proposed to offer testimony against BYT officials in exchange for the Tax Service dropping
the criminal case: “they said we could, in exchange of closing down the case, make a public
action to discredit this political leader. We may name the persons who acted on her behalf,
and so on. I didn’t agree with that proposal because that went beyond my competence and

was not -- didn’t meet the requirements of criminal and procedural legislation”.”*

9. Evidence of Discrimination Against Other Publishers

The Tribunal asked Mr. O. Danylov “whether other printers or publishing houses performed
services [ in early 2002 ] for parties being part of the opposition, in addition to Taki

spravy?” Mr. O. Danylov responded:

“At that point in time in Ukraine, there was a very hard situation for the opposition
[groups] in the perspective of the printing and publishing products because the
government had blocked all the possibilities for producing printing products for those
blocs and parties. Many directors of printing houses called me and told me that they
had been instructed not to accept the orders from those parties and blocs. The State
printing companies had been directly instructed not to accept such orders. The
private printing houses had been warned verbally by the tax authorities not to accept
such orders, otherwise they would run into big problems. I had also received such
signals. I often relayed to Directors of printing houses, publishing houses, printing

shops, and they often shared with me that such signals were there”.!°

The Claimant submitted with its Reply a letter from Mr. O. Turchynov, an official of BYT,
to Mr. S. Danylov, which said that “the printers in Kyiv categorically refused to place [
orders from BYT ]. Moreover, their management believes that the very fact of such
negotiations, if they are to become known, will definitely lead to problems in relations with
the current government”.'*! The letter continues, “during the period of the pre-election

campaign of 2002 all the large printers of Ukraine were unofficially warned by local

°7 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 156, p. 8.

°§ Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume III at 104, lines 6-13.

°° Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume II at 123, lines 14-17.

‘© Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume II at 123, lines 23-25; 124, lines 1-14.
‘©! Claimant’s Reply on the Merits, at Annex 7.

30

representatives of the tax administration and other force structures, that any cooperation
with the Block of Yulia Tymoshenko and the political structures which enter into it, will

inevitably lead to the closure of the enterprise”. !

68. In its post-hearing brief the Claimant responded to the Tribunal’s question: “[dJuring the
same period, have other publishing or printing enterprises performed services for the
opposition? If so, were they made subject to interventions by the local authorities similar to
those experienced by Taki spravy?” The Claimant cited numerous sources to demonstrate
that newspapers, publishers, and printing companies that provided services for, or positive
media coverage of, opposition politicians were subject to intervention by governmental
authorities. According to these sources, the governmental actions included: (1) the
detention of delivery trucks and seizures of print runs, (2) refusals to publish, (3) criminal

investigations, (4) searches of offices, and (5) withholding of utility services. !°

69. In the State’s post-hearing brief it alleges that “‘at least five additional enterprises printed or
arranged for the production of official campaign materials for the BYT in 2002,” none of
which was “subject to interventions by the local authorities similar to those experienced by

TSI [ Taki spravy ]”.'

10. Political Asylum Granted by Lithuania

70. According to documents submitted by the Claimant, Lithuania granted Mr. O. Danylov
refugee status on 13 May 2003.'°° The decision to grant asylum was based on a 18 May
2003 document issued by the Lithuanian Migration Department, which states in part that the
“[p]ossibility of persecution of Olexksandr Danylov was confirmed by the information of
situation in Ukraine, and the materials presented by the applicant proved the fact of such
persecution”.'°° Mr. O. Danylov was asked “[w]as there a process by which you applied for

asylum in Lithuania?”!©’ Mr. O. Danylov responded:

'© Claimant’s Reply on the Merits at Annex 7.

‘3 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief at 24-31. The sources cited by the Claimant include, (1) The Press and the
Government: a Chronicle of Confrontation (published by Ukrainian partner of Reporters Without Borders), (2) annual
speech to Parliament of Ukraine’s Commissioner for Human Rights, and (3) 2002 Annual Report on Ukraine by
Reporters Without Borders.

‘4 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief at paragraph 21.

'°S Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 239.

‘°° Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 238.

‘7 Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume II at 132, lines 13-14.

31

71.

72.

“[dJuring those interviews [ with Lithuanian Immigration officials ] I had to inform
maximum possible extent about all the circumstances of persecution and provide

them with the maximum possible number of documents and materials which would
testify to this persecution. ..[T]he Immigrations Department took a decision to grant

me status of a political refugee in Lithuania”. '*

In response to the same question, Mr. O. Danylov testified that, during his stay in Lithuania,
“Lithuania refused, rejected my extradition to Ukraine, and my arrest, refused to arrest me,
because the Interpol, through which Ukraine demanded my extradition and arrest according
to the Interpol statute, Interpol had no rights to take any actions against...people who were
granted political immigrant status”.'°” Mr. O. Danylov testified that “when I took a decision
to come back into Ukraine after the political situation in the country had changed I
submitted the relevant application to the Immigrations Department in which I indicated that
because of change to political situation in Ukraine, and because the authorities in Ukraine

changed, I took a decision to return back to Ukraine”.!!

11. Other Evidence that the State’s Actions Were Politically Motivated

The Claimant submitted with its Memorial a letter from Peter Byrne, a staff writer for the
Kyiv Post, in which Mr. Byrne recalled a 25 June 2003 meeting with Anatoly Yakovinets,
deputy head of the tax police investigative unit. According to Mr. Byrne, Yakovinets said
that the case against Taki spravy “was motivated on political grounds, referring to an order
‘from above’ to put the printing house out of business”.''! As counsel for the Claimant
noted at the hearing, the State declined to call Mr. Byrne for cross-examination. According
to the Claimant, Mr. O. Danylov met with the Director of the Investigative Directorate of the
Tax Police, Mr. B.Y. Valentynovych on 11 April 2002, who informed Mr. O. Danylov that

“the tax service is after [ Taki spravy ] very strongly”.!!?

‘8 Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume II at 133, lines 1-5, 8-9.

' Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume II at 133, lines 12-18.

"0 Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume II at 135, lines 13-20.

"| Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Supplementary Annexes, Annex 3.

'?? Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraph 55 (quoting Annex 159, at 5).

32

73.

74.

75.

THE CLAIMANT’S MAJOR ALLEGATIONS

The Claimant identifies within the main body of events a number of specific instances to
which it attaches particular weight. The occurrence of these is not disputed, but there is
radical controversy about their significance. For the moment, we do not do more than

identify them.
1. The Press Statement of 25 March 2002
First, there was an episode which we describe at a little length, because of the importance

attached to it by the Claimant. This was evidently set in motion by a press statement of the

BYT on 6 March 2002. The following extracts serve to set the tone:

“Immediately after the Electoral Bloc of Yulia Tymoshenko hand [sic] delivered to
the Central Election Commission the samples of agitation materials of the Bloc at the
publishing house ‘Taki spravy’, this publishing house experienced outrageous
pressure, threats and blackmail on the part of the State Tax Administration.
Numerous other unplanned examinations on the part of the tax police, which are
accompanied by gross violations of the laws and elementary norms of human
respect, resulted in a complete blocking of the publishing house’s operation. It
stands to reason that the only ‘guilt’ of publishing house ‘Taki spravy’ is its consent

to print the official agitation campaign materials of the Bloc of Yulia Tymoshenko”.

It was plainly as a response to this public attack that the STA issued its own Press Statement
of 25 March 2002. In particular, importance is attached to the following extracts from the

Press Statement:

“As a result of the discovery of connections, the movement of financial flows and
structures related to the legalisation of ‘shadow’ funds there was discovered an
active participant in the illegal activity, namely the Lithuanian subsidiary private
enterprise ‘Taki spravy’ that is why a check of the activities of DP ‘Taki spravy’ was
made not accidentally and in no way based on political considerations. Rather
because of its active participation in the activities of a diversified network through

legalisation of ‘dirty’ money for the legalisation of ‘fictitious’ firms, substitute

33

76.

77.

persons, falsified documents, ‘fictitious’ contracts. It is established that the
legalisation of ‘shadow funds by DP ‘Taki spravy,’ an active participant in the
network, the ‘fictitious’ enterprises PP ‘Produkt BVO’, PP ‘Rembudproekt’, ZAT
‘Teslo’, TOV ‘RIF’, PP ‘Lira’ were used.

Naturally, with the legalisation of dirty money demanded from DP ‘Taki spravy’ a
documented legalisation and masking by the realisation of business operations. It
was these operations which drew the attention of the tax service. Besides that, the
Central Electoral Commission, as directed by current legislation, authorised the tax
service to check information about violations of election legislation during the
manufacture of printed production by the election block of political parties ‘The
Election Block of Yulia Tymoshenko’. It is established that on 28.11.2001 there was
concluded Contract No. 645 between the ‘fictitious’ Enterprise PP ‘Product BVO”
and DP ‘Taki spravy’ for the manufacture of printed production. On the part of the
‘fictitious’ enterprise PP ‘Produkt BVO’ the contract was signed by the supposed

director Chemera S.S and on the part of ‘Taki spravy’ by the director Danylov O.V.”

After deploying figures to suggest that the apparent loss on printing was in reality financed
by the BYT the Press Statement turned to a brochure entitled “The team of the Block of
Yulia Tymoshenko”, asserting that according to the documentary orders it appeared to have

been ordered twice, and commenting:

“Tt should be noted that the contract was falsified already during the course of the
investigation of ‘Taki spravy’. Without a doubt, such a speed is connected only with
the effort to hide the fact of the preparation of the agitation materials of the election
block of political parties at the expense of money from the ‘fictitious’ enterprise PP

Produkt BVO and the financing from dubious sources of origin”.

Finally, the following must be quoted:

“The violations discovered during the course of the investigation of DP ‘Taki
spravy’ have signs of crime as foreseen by Article 358 section | (falsification of
documents, seals, stamps and letterhead, their sale, the use of falsified documents)

and Article 209 (the legalisation (laundering) of money funds and other property,

34

78.

79.

80.

81.

received by criminal means) of the Criminal Code of Ukraine. Right now these

materials are being reviewed”.

The weight to be attached to this document as part of the Claimant’s allegation of a “nayizd”
is discussed at a later stage. One thing is however clear, that its plain implication that Taki
spravy was part of a ring of money-launderers (as distinct from tax-evaders) was not on the
date of its publication established by the evidence available to the tax authorities, whatever
“signs” of it they may have believed to be present. So much was conceded by the witnesses
for the State during the oral hearing; the serious charge of money-laundering soon
disappeared from the case; and the State has never sought to persuade the Tribunal that it

was in fact well-founded.

In conclusion, it should be recorded that this document was circulated to numerous agencies
who did in due course refer to it in the press with a request to publish it with urgency; that it
has been said on behalf of the Claimant that only a few days later this Request was
“withdrawn”, although the State denies this; and that its unfounded allegation of money-
laundering has never been put right by the tax authorities. The Press Statement, and the
incorrect allegations which it contained, has never itself been “withdrawn” and indeed

remains on the STA website until this day.

Finally, in its Response to the State’s Observations, of 3 April 2006, the Claimant noted that
the State had not attempted to put forward its own version of events. It noted that the State’s
main response to the allegations was not so much that the event alleged never occurred, but
was centred on the lack of authority of the relevant officials to negotiate regarding the
ICSID arbitration. In response the Claimant asserts that, if the General Procuratura wished
to exert pressure on Tokios Tokelés, it could have done so, since it held the power to reopen
criminal cases. The Claimant repeated its submission that the repeated opening and closing

of the criminal cases constitutes a violation of due process.

2. The Raids of 17 — 20 June 2002

Next, particular importance was attached by the Claimant to events occurring on 17 and 18

June 2002. Three certificates were issued by the Solomiansky Tax Service for an open-

35

82.

83.

84.

ended investigation of Taki spravy for the years 1 January 1999 to 1 April 2002, and officers
arrived at Taki spravy’s premises to perform it. The visit ended in an impasse, and officers
returned the next day accompanied by a tax militia carrying side arms. There was
considerable noise and confusion, in the course of which Taki spravy summoned the local
police. The incident died down without violence and the documents were seized and taken
away. Taki spravy was permitted to make and retain a video record of the incident which

the Tribunal has viewed.

3. The Administrative Arrest of Taki Spravy’s Assets

Particular complaint is made about a full administrative arrest of the assets of Taki spravy,
which appears was extended by one month as the result of a court order, and which is said to
have created great difficulties for the running of its business. Taki spravy instituted court
proceedings to invalidate the arresting order (Case No 11/148) but this was unsuccessful at

first instance and on appeal.

4. The Electoral Commission

It will have been noted that in the Press Statement of 25 March 2002, the STA justified its
investigations into Taki spravy on the additional ground that “...the Central Election
Commission of Ukraine, as directed by current legislation, authorized the tax service to
check information about violations of election legislation during the manufacture of printed
production by the... ‘Election Block of Yulia Tymoshenko”” In fact, no current or other
election legislation empowered the Commission to confer such an authority, and the
Claimant cites this as another example of State agencies riding roughshod over the rights of

individuals to further a political aim.

5. Proceedings in the Courts of Ukraine

The Claimant occupies much of its lengthy rehearsal of the numerous individual complaints
with accounts of acts done or omitted by the Courts of Ukraine and by the Procuratura. The

chronological relationship of these to the more direct dealings of the State authorities can

readily be understood from Annex B, and we shall not explore it in detail here. For the

36

85.

moment it is sufficient to say that the Claimant’s allegations in relation to the various court

cases falls into two categories:

Legal actions brought by the State agencies of Ukraine which allegedly were devoid
of grounds and based on insufficient evidence and which were consequently

dismissed by the courts; and

Cases in which the executive agencies were allegedly able to exert pressure on

judges to adopt decisions which were contrary to the facts and the law.

THE CLAIMANT’S FORMULATION OF BREACHES

The Claimant contends that the events thus summarised were infringements of the following

provisions of the Treaty:

“ARTICLE 2. PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS

2.

Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall at all times enjoy full

protection and security in the territory of the other Contracting Party”.

“ARTICLE 3. MOST-FAVOURED-NATION-TREATMENT

I.

[J]

Each Contracting Party shall in its territory accord to investments and returns of
investors of the other contracting Party treatment which is fair and equitable and not
less favourable than that which it accords to investments and returns of investors in

any third State.

Each Contracting Party shall in its territory accord to investors of the other
Contracting Party, as regards management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or
disposal of their investment which is fair and equitable and not less favourable than

that which it accords to investors of any third State”.

“ARTICLE 5. EXPROPRIATION

I.

Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall not be nationalised,
expropriated or subjected to measures having effect equivalent to nationalisation or

expropriation (hereafter referred to as ‘expropriation’) in the territory of the other

37

Contracting Party except for a public purpose. The expropriation shall be carried
out under due process of law, on a non-discriminatory basis and shall be
accompanied by provisions for the payment of prompt, adequate and effective
compensation. Such compensation for the benefit of an investor shall be equivalent
to the market value of the investment expropriated immediately before expropriation
or the impending expropriation became public knowledge. The compensation shall
include interest calculated on the LIBOR basis from the date of expropriation, shall
be made without delay, shall be effectively realizable and shall be freely transferable

in freely convertible currency.
2. The provision of paragraph 1 of this Article shall also apply where a Contracting
Party expropriates the assets of a company which is incorporated or constituted

under the law in force in any part of its own territory, and in which investors of the

other Contracting Party own shares”.

86. The Claimant contends that during the period 2002-2003 Ukraine committed the following

violations of the applicable legal norms, in that it:

Failed to encourage and provide favourable conditions for the Claimant’s

investments in Ukraine;

Expropriated the Claimant’s propriety rights in Taki spravy and adopted measures

having an equivalent effect;

Failed to provide fair and equitable treatment as well as full protection and security;

Denied justice to Taki spravy;

Acted in bad faith by deliberately pursuing a campaign of superficially legal-seeming

actions motivated by political considerations that aimed to inflict damage to Taki

spravy with the eventual goal of destroying this enterprise’s business activities; and

38

87.

88.

89.

Violated Ukrainian law by failing to protect the Claimant’s business investments,
refrain from interfering in Taki spravy’s business activities and failing to compensate

for resulting damages.

THE CASE FOR THE STATE OF UKRAINE

The factual case for the State is that although much of the Claimant’s narrative is correct, so
far as it goes, it does not go far enough, being so incomplete that it leads in entirely the
wrong direction. What it omits, so the State maintains, is any account of what was being
done by the tax authorities at and around the time in question, otherwise than in the shape of
the Claimant’s catalogue of events. According to the State, this information is supplied
through written and oral evidence of Mr. Furlet and Mr. Vasyuk, backed by some significant

contemporary documents.

What the State’s evidence amounts to is this. It is wholly untrue that the tax officials’
activities vis-a-vis Taki spravy were inspired by instructions from higher authority to make
the Claimant’s life uncomfortable in revenge for printing election materials (especially the
brochure, “Unfulfilled Order”). The tax authorities had no interest in such materials, and
indeed Mr. Furlet and his subordinates knew nothing about the brochure until one of them
learned about it while on escort duties on the occasion of the visit of 14 February 2002. The
State contends that it was not until 26 February 2002 that the brochure appeared in the
investigation, and only then because it was furnished as an example of the kind of work

done by Taki spravy.

The true background of the events in question, according to Mr. Furlet, was that from the
latter part of the year 2001 the authorities were performing their allotted task of uncovering
and rooting-out fiscal crimes effected through the medium of fictitious enterprises, with
particular regard to a business named “Sound”, and the related Case No 75-00029. This led
to the discovery that the persons concerned had acquired Produkt BVO, of which Mr. V O
Brodetsky (initials “BVO”) was named in the registration documents as founder and
manager. In the course of an interview with him on 14 February 2002 (the date of the first
visit by the tax authorities to Taki spravy) Mr. Brodetsky claimed that he had formed the
company at the request of an acquaintance, and soon after transferred the enterprise to the

latter, and had never had anything to do with its activities. It transpired that during

39

90.

91.

92.

93.

November 2001 a bank account had been opened in the name of Produkt BVO with the
Bank “Kyivska Rus”. In order to follow up the information given by Mr. Brodetsky the
investigators had seized materials and data from this Bank. These purported to show that
the management of the enterprise and the right to use the account had been conferred on one
S.S. Chemer, a person identified by the number of his passport — although Mr. Brodetsky
had not (he said) appointed him.

Another item of information obtained from the Bank was that during the short lifetime of
Produkt BVO’s bank account, funds were credited to it from only two sources,
Rembudproekt and another company (“Teslo”), and that funds had been transferred out to

Taki spravy.

The State contends that, on this basis, the officials decided on 14 February 2002 that there
were sufficient signs of fictitiousness to justify the extension of the enquiry to
Rembudproekt, Teslo and Taki spravy, and accordingly signed notices to all three
companies to produce documents relating to their dealings with Produkt BVO. Because of
the late hour these were not sent until the following day, too late apparently to reach Taki
spravy before two less senior officials arrived there to call for, and ultimately obtain, a few

documents corresponding with the demand.

Further investigations in the course of the next few days revealed that Rembudproekt had
received substantial funds from Taki spravy, ostensibly for printing services, and that funds
had also flowed from Rembudproekt (as Mr. Furlet’s statement expressed it) “returned
through Produkt BVO to Taki spravy with the same purpose for printing services”.
Meanwhile, Mr. Chemer had been seeking to replace his passport, which he claimed to have
lost, or had stolen from him, some time previously when he was working as a shop assistant.
The tax officials now called him in for an interview and showed him the passport (or
perhaps a copy of it) which had been used to open the bank account. According to a signed
record of the interview he recognised the passport as the one which he had lost, except that
his original photograph had been covered-up with that of someone else, whom he did not

know.

The State argues that it was in these circumstances, and for these reasons, that the tax

authorities decided that there were signs of involvement with fictitious enterprises in the

40

94.

95.

96.

shape of Rembudproekt and Produkt BVO which justified the extension of the enquiry to
Taki spravy, and the prosecution of Mr. Romanov, whom the tax authorities believed for
good reason was the original owner and operator. The State argues that this decision was
one of the outcomes of a long-running investigation which had begun before the election
materials were published and was to continue until well after they had ceased to be of any
practical interest. The impetus for the activities of the authorities was an honest perception
based on reasonable grounds that there were matters which called for tenacious

investigation, and this was their own perception not a cynical cover for spite.

As previously noted, the police and prosecuting authorities sought to eradicate and punish
the kind of economic crimes which were doing so much damage to Ukraine at the time in
question. The activities of the State authorities went no further than was justified, but in any
event the remedy for the Claimants was to invoke the internal constitutional safeguards and
remedies furnished by Ukrainian law. Complaints of the kind advanced in this arbitration
are not concemed with investment protection and were never intended to be judged by the

international norms, and rectified by the international remedies, of the ICSID/BIT system.

Not surprisingly, the Respondent did not rest content with this outright denial but sought to
fall back on an alternative case, which addressed individual complaints or groups of them,
by reference to the language of the Treaty. This in turn led to rebuttals by the Claimant, and
ultimately to extensive written and oral evidence, examined meticulously in hundreds of
pages of submissions. The outcome was complex and demanding set of issues. In its
lengthy deliberations, the Tribunal has given all of these the closest attention, but takes this
early opportunity to emphasise the importance of not allowing the central issue, of whether
the Claimant has proved a breach of the Treaty by reason of the existence of a long-running,
concerted and malicious campaign to punish Taki spravy for its association with the political
opposition, to be swamped by a flood of detail. It has considered all of the multifarious
arguments addressed, but will concentrate attention on those which it believes to be the most

germane.

JURISDICTION

It will be recalled that among the rulings made by the previous tribunal in the Decision on

Jurisdiction was that “...the present dispute is within the jurisdiction of the Centre and the

4l

97.

98.

99.

competence of the Tribunal”. It could have been thought that this would leave only the
merits of the dispute to be considered at the present stage, but events have proved otherwise.
The State has returned to the Tribunal with several objections to its jurisdiction. One of
these was raised at the earlier stage, and rejected by the previous Tribunal. Two could have

been raised on that occasion, but were not. The remainder are entirely new.

1 Investment: Local Requirements

The State relies on the requirement under Article 25 of the Convention that the dispute shall
arise “directly out of an investment”, and contends that the tangible assets of the two Taki
spravy companies did not comply because the foreign investment notices corresponding to
them were incomplete or insufficiently detailed.''> The present Tribunal takes the same
view of this argument as its predecessor. Certainly, if the assets had been touched in some
way by illegality, or if their utilisation had been actively prohibited, the position might well
have been different: vide the words—“...in accordance with the laws and regulations of the
latter...” in Article 1 (1) of the Investment Treaty. But there was nothing of the sort here,
and if the assets were in reality investments within the meaning of the Investment Treaty a
failure to observe the bureaucratic formalities of the domestic law could not have caused

their character to change.

The Tribunal notes that it could have dealt with the contention simply recording that by
virtue of the treatment of the same point in the Decision on Jurisdiction the principles of res
judicata and issue estoppel excluded any right to raise it again, but in the circumstances it

has been thought right to reconsider the question, with the same result as before.

2 Pre-existing Assets

The Tribunal has had difficulty in understanding the next objection, advanced in
Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief at paragraphs 11-19, but it seems to amount to this: There
is a crucial difference between an asset which the national of the investing state already
owns within the territory of the host state and the act of moving the asset into that territory.
If this is what Ukraine is really saying it seems to pay no regard to the policy of the
Investment Treaty read as a whole or to its structure which clearly distinguishes between the
two different meanings of the word in the English language (which is the language version

to which the present proceedings have been directed), namely to denote (a) a particular

"3 Respondent’s Additional Objections to Jurisdiction at paragraphs 17-18.

42

100.

101.

102.

103.

species of asset and (b) the act of moving it into the territory of a particular state; and then,

having made the distinction, goes on clearly to apply its relevant provisions to both.

We should add that there may be another possible aspect of this argument. Perhaps Ukraine
is contending that after-acquired property cannot be an investment: i.e. that even if an asset
is already an investment, money spent to modify, maintain or improve it is not. If this is
indeed the argument, the Tribunal has no hesitation in rejecting it, for it has no foundation in
logic, and runs entirely counter to the general policy of the Investment Treaty. Very clear
words would be required to impose this limitation on the effect of the Treaty, and there are

none.

3 The Order of Events

Next, there are two objections dependent on the fact that the first Request for Arbitration
was made whilst the series of events in respect of which the claim is made had not yet come

to an end: and indeed would not do so for three years and more.

The first objection turns on the six-month period prescribed by Article 8 of the Treaty for
negotiations before a dispute could be referred to arbitration. This entails that when
independent claims arising from independent events are referred to arbitration only those
events which happened more than six months before the reference can be taken into account.
For there cannot be negotiations without an existing dispute, and there cannot be a disputed
claim without an existing claim; and there cannot be an existing claim without a current
ground for claiming. Thus, so it is said, since arbitration was not invoked until 14 August
2002 only those events happening before 14 February 2002 could be relevant, and there are

none.

There is a problem with this contention which might, if things had been different, have
required the Tribunal to solve. Namely, whether the logic of the argument applies when the
complaints relate to a single continuing course of conduct which began during the six
months’ moratorium, but were still in progress on and after the arbitration was invoked. In
the event, however, no solution is required here, for 14 August 2002 is the wrong date from
which to count back six months. The Request for Arbitration was then withdrawn, and was
not put right until the second Request was filed on 22 November 2002, by which time the

objection was academic.

43

104.

105.

106.

107.

The second argument on the order of events is more substantial, and raises an issue of
consent. The theory of ICSID investor/state dispute resolution as a consensual process
without privity is well-established, and need not be expounded at length here. Essentially,
the concept is of three, progressively-narrowing fields of consent: the general consent, as
between states, embodied in the Convention; the more specific consent between two or
more states, created by individual investment treaties, limited to particular kinds of disputes
arising from particular kinds of investor/state obligations; and the consent to refer individual
disputes to arbitration, created by the choice of the investor to avail itself of the state’s
consent as manifested in the Convention and the investment treaty. The reference to
arbitration expresses the investor’s choice, and binds the investor and the state irrevocably to
the resolution of the specified disputes by the ICSID dispute-resolution processes. But only
those and not others, even if a wider reference would have been permitted by the investment

treaty.

Invoking this well-established principle, Ukraine relies both on the Letter of Consent and on
the Request for Arbitration. The former referred to acts by state bodies “committed in
2002”, and the latter (which incorporated by reference the Letter of Consent) alleged that a
series of investigations had begun in February 2002 (paragraph 3), and that in the year 2002
Ukraine had committed a series of wrongful acts (paragraph 12). Nothing could be clearer,
so the State maintains. If the Claimant had intended to place before the Tribunal the whole
of the episodes which might later ensue, nothing would have been simpler to say so, by

using well-known expressions such as “...and continuing”.

The Tribunal pauses to note that interesting as this argument (familiar in the context of
party/party arbitration) may be from a theoretical point of view it is of little practical
importance here. A glance at Annex B will show that even the proportion of events
occurring after 31 December 2002 was small, and surely too small to have any significant
impact on the outcome of the dispute. Nevertheless, the point is there and must be

addressed, albeit briefly.

Two situations must be distinguished. First, if the claim had asserted a number of
individual, discrete breaches of duty, each of them generating a separate cause of action,
then it would seem that in principle an objection on the grounds suggested would be well-
founded, for arbitration could not be invoked in respect of a claim until it had occurred and
had become the subject of a dispute. On the other hand a continuing wrong generating a

continuing cause of action would have been in existence, though not yet fully developed, at

44

108.

109.

any stage of the continuum of episodes (see, by way of analogy, Article 15 of the ILC
Report on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts). Often, it is hard to
know whether a cause of action is continuous or not, but in the present case the parties have
provided a solution by the way they have shaped their propositions. As already shown, the
Claimant’s idea that the episodes were all part of a series lies at the heart of their case. So
also for the State, whose response does not depend for its validity in principle on the
establishment of a series but whose explanation of what happened necessarily rests in fact
on the proposition that there was throughout an ongoing, though expanding, single
investigation of linked financial misdeeds. Thus, in their different ways, the parties are at
one in treating the consecutive events as a unity which can be treated as the subject of a
dispute, and hence as a ground for invoking arbitration, even though it has not yet been fully

consummated.

This conclusion accords with common sense and with the wording of the claim. Whilst the
subjective intention of the party claiming arbitration cannot be relevant to the scope of the
reference, for the circle of consent under the ICSID/BIT system is both closed and defined
for both parties by the terms in which the claimant chooses to invoke the jurisdiction, a
correct understanding of those terms must have regard to what the common sense of a
particular intention would or would seem to have been. Here it is unlikely, whatever the
words might seem to say, that the Claimant can have intended, and or could have been
thought by those in charge on the side of the State to intend, that the enquiry should be
terminated as at 31 December 2002, leaving the Claimant to begin, and the State to defend, a
separate arbitration in respect of later events. On the contrary, since the cause of the dispute
began in the year 2002, and was still in progress in that year when the Consent was given
and the Request was made, the Tribunal considers it reasonable to understand the reference
to the year 2002 as a means of identifying the continuing dispute, and not as a means of

cutting short the dispute at the end of the year.
4 The Transfer of Assets

The Tribunal now turns to the last, and altogether most formidable, objection. This was not
discussed in the Decision on Jurisdiction, and could not have been, since the relevant facts
had not yet come into the open. It is now known that on 6 April 2002 Taki spravy
transferred to TSII a substantial part of its assets, and indeed (the oral evidence would
suggest) would have transferred them all but for inhibitions created by certain covenants as

to retention of ownership. The Claimant has not given any explanation of this which the

45

110.

Tribunal has been able to understand, or why it took place when it did. The fact that TSII
had been incorporated some months previously, but had not so far performed any functions,
suggests an element of pre-planning, but pre-planning for what is a matter of speculation.
Still less has the Claimant given any explanation of why this potentially crucial fact was not
disclosed when, two years later, the question of jurisdiction was before the previous
Tribunal in the context of a claim for damages in which the status of the assets in the hands
of TSII would obviously play a part. There was an early opportunity to do so, when the
Letter of Consent and the first Request for Arbitration were submitted to the Centre.
Instead, the Letter of Consent referred to ICSID jurisdiction over “the legal dispute which
concerns a series of unfounded, illegitimate and unlawful acts by State bodies of Ukraine
committed in 2002 against the Lithuanian subsidiary private enterprise ‘Taki spravy’, which
is the repository of investments made in Ukraine by the CJSC ‘Tokios Tokelés’”: thus
actively misleading the Centre and ultimately the Tribunal as first constituted. This is
unacceptable conduct. For the moment, since the facts are now known, attention must be

concentrated on how the transfer affects our jurisdiction over the claim.

For this purpose, we must distinguish between two elements of the claim as originally
presented. The first was a claim by Tokios Tokelés as a claimant investor, through the
medium of its local investment vehicle Taki spravy. The second was by Taki spravy in its
own right as owner of the tangible and intangible assets of its business. As already stated,
the latter was withdrawn as a party to the arbitration, so this second feature has disappeared,
taking with it a number of issues arising from the fact that for much of the relevant period
only some of the original assets belonged to Taki spravy. Although, in deference to the
arguments addressed, the Tribunal has studied these questions, there would be no point in
exploring them here, since a solution is not necessary to the resolution of the dispute. There
are two linked reasons for this. The first is that once Taki spravy had transferred most of its
assets to TSII their ownership was no longer of central importance. Thereafter, attention
was focussed on the Claimant and the effect on its assets of any wrongs done to its
subsidiary. Secondly, when we come to see what the injured or expropriated investment is
said to have been, these questions may be recognised as immaterial. Reading once again the
voluminous documents in which the Claimant sets out its case it can be seen that the heart of
its complaint is that the State attacked the business of Taki spravy as a going concern, and
thereby caused damage to the investor Tokios Tokelés, which had put money into that
business; and that the attack took the shape of interfering with its operations, depreciating its

goodwill, and putting unacceptable pressures on the company.

46

111.

There is no word of complaint, and on the facts presented to us there could not have been, of
any direct interference with the physical assets of the business. No destruction of
machinery; no seizure of materials; no exclusion of staff from offices; no arrest of ships; and
so on. The pressures on the printing enterprises are presented as personal, psychological and
economic, not physical. This being so, the transfer of tangible assets from one subsidiary of
Tokios Tokelés to another does not affect the findings in the Decision on Jurisdiction. At
paragraphs 87 et seq. the Tribunal (as then constituted) dealt as follows with one of the

State’s objections to jurisdiction:

“Third objection: The Dispute does Not Arise from the Investment.

87. In order for this Tribunal to have jurisdiction over a dispute, there must be an
adequate nexus between the dispute and the Claimant’s investment in the territory of
the Contracting Party.

88. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention extends jurisdiction to any dispute
‘arising directly out of an investment.’ In order for the directness requirement to be
satisfied, the dispute and investment must be ‘reasonably closely connected.’ As
Professor Schreuer notes, ‘disputes arising from ancillary or peripheral aspects of the
investment operation are likely to give rise to the objection that they do not arise
directly from the investment...’

89. Article 8 of the Ukraine-Lithuania BIT, in turn, provides that an investor in one
Contracting Party may submit to arbitration a dispute ‘in connection with’ an
investment in the territory of the other contracting Party. It may be held that the
scope of the arbitrable disputes under the Treaty is broader than that contemplated by
Article 25(1) of the Convention which refers to any ‘dispute arising directly out of an
investment.’ Even if based only on the language of the Convention, however, the
Respondent’s contention is in any case bound to fail.

90. The Respondent argues that the present dispute does not ‘arise directly out of an
investment’ because the allegedly wrongful acts by Ukrainian governmental
authorities (including unwarranted and unreasonable investigations of the Claimant’s
business, unfounded judicial actions to invalidate the Claimant’s contracts, and false,

public accusations of illegal conduct by the Claimant) were not directed against the

 

physical assets of the Claimant, i.e., its facilities and equipment.

91. In this regard, the Respondent misapprehends the jurisdictional requirements of
Article 25. For a dispute to arise directly out of an investment, the allegedly

wrongful conduct of the government need not be directed against the physical

47

112.

113.

property of the investor. The requirement of directness is met if the dispute arises
from the investment itself or the operations of its investment, as in the present case.
The scope of this requirement was addressed by the first ICSID tribunal, Holiday
Inns S.A. v. Morocco, which found jurisdiction over loan contracts that were separate
but related to the investment agreement, emphasizing ’the general unity of an
investment operation.’

92. Thus, the Respondent’s obligations with respect to ‘investment’ relate not only to
the physical property of Lithuanian investors but also to the business operations
associated with that physical property. State’s obligations with respect to ‘property’
and ‘the use of property’ are well established in international law. For example, the
Draft Convention on the International Responsibility of States for Injuries to Aliens,
defines a ‘taking of property’ to include ‘not only an outright taking of property but
also any such unreasonable interference with the use, enjoyment or disposal of
property as to justify an inference that the owner thereof will not be able to use,
enjoy or dispose of the property within a reasonable period of time after the
inception of such interference.’ Further, the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal found that
‘[a] deprivation or taking of property may occur under international law through
interference by a state in the use of that property or with the enjoyment of its

benefits”.

In the opinion of the Tribunal this pronouncement makes it a matter of issue estoppel, quite
apart from its own independent conclusion, that damage to a physical asset does not form an
essential ingredient of a claim under this Investment. This being so, it is hard to see why,
when all the assets taken together comprise the totality of the Claimant’s interests in the
home State, it should make any difference precisely where the ownership of them is located:
for it is the business of the Claimant which suffered the adverse consequences of whatever
wrongs the State may have committed. For this reason we reject this objection, in common

with the others, and will now proceed to consider the merits of the dispute.

THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS

Having set forth the arguments of the parties, we return to the central question of this
dispute: why did the tax authorities take these actions against Taki spravy? Did the

authorities initiate and carry out these actions to punish Taki spravy for producing campaign

48

114.

115.

116.

117.

materials for political opponents of the government, as Claimant alleges? Or did the
authorities’ investigation of fictitious enterprises with which Taki spravy had business
relations naturally and justifiably lead them to investigate Taki spravy, as Respondent

maintains?

There is evidence in the record that supports the argument of each Party. For Claimant, the
timing of the State’s actions against Taki spravy, which began just days after the company
delivered campaign materials to BYT, is consistent with political motive. In addition, the
tax authorities’ public allegations that Taki spravy was suspected of crimes that those
authorities had already decided not to pursue, or were not empowered to pursue, cast doubt
on the legitimacy of the investigation. Further, the magnitude, character, and duration of the
State’s investigation, as well as, in certain respects, its manifest lack of factual or legal
foundation, are also consistent with Claimant’s argument. Finally, even allowing for
differences among national criminal justice systems, it is difficult to reconcile the criminal
proceeding against O. Danylov, which the State has opened and closed a total of five times,

with general principles of due process.

On the other hand, there is evidence in the record that supports the State’s position. That
evidence indicates that the actions against Taki spravy were the result of an investigation of
companies with which Taki spravy did business that began before Taki spravy produced
materials for BYT. That evidence further indicates that these companies showed signs of
being sham enterprises and that their dealings with Taki spravy was what led the tax

authorities to investigate Taki spravy.

With this evidence in mind, we turn now to assess Claimant’s allegations that the actions of
the State constituted an expropriation of Claimant’s investment and denied Claimant fair and

equitable treatment and full protection and security.

EXPROPRIATION

Among the causes of action relied upon by the Claimant on the basis of the Treaty is the

prohibition against expropriation and the concurrent obligation to compensate for

expropriation under Article 5 of theTreaty. In its ordinary usage this term often denotes the

taking of property by the state for the use of the state, and overlaps to a considerable degree

49

118.

119.

the concept of “nationalisation”, but in the context of investor/state dispute resolution it has
been given a considerably wider meaning, by a solid line of jurisprudence: although whether
it would have been wide enough to cover a claim such as the present may perhaps be
debatable. This possibility need not, however, be explored for the Claimant also relies on
the words “measures having effect equivalent to ...expropriation”, which are interpreted in
the jurisprudence (as are the words “tantamount to expropriation”) more widely still. In
particular, the concept has emerged of “creeping expropriation” (an issue dealt with in
particular by the Iran-United states Claims Tribunal) or “measures having effect equivalent
to expropriation” or “indirect expropriation” (UNCTAD Paper on the “Taking of Property”,
2000, p.4; OECD Working Paper on “Indirect Expropriation and the Right to Regulate in

International Investment Law”, September 2004).

Since the cases are familiar there is no need to rehearse them at length but a resumé may be
useful as an illustration of the problems which face the Tribunal. The jurisprudence,
including under the ICSID Convention, confirms that, differently from expropriation,
“measures having effect equivalent to expropriation” are all those measures the effect of
which is to deprive the investor of the control, benefit and economic use of its investment.
An ICSID award to which also the Claimant has made reference, Middle East Cement
Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ARB/19/6), has clearly stated

that:

“When measures are taken by a State the effect of which is to deprive the investor
of the use and benefit of his investment even though he may retain nominal
ownership of the respective rights being the investment, the measures are often
referred to as a ‘creeping’ or ‘indirect’ expropriation or, as in the BIT, as measures

‘the effect of which is tantamount to expropriation’”.!'*

In that case, the measure consisted in the de facto revocation of an import licence by the
Egyptian authorities, the effect of which was to deprive the foreign investor of the right and
ability to import into the country and sell there cement of a certain type. The license
qualifying as an “investment” under the relevant BIT, it was held that the investor had been

deprived by such measures of part of the value of its investment. Similarly, in the

"4 Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ARB/19/6), Award of 12 April
2002, at paragraph 108.

50

120.

121.

UNCITRAL case CME (Netherlands) v. Czech Republic based on a BIT, the Partial Award
of 13 September 2001 found that an expropriation had occurred because the actions and
omissions of the national Media Council had “caused the destruction of the [joint venture]
operations, leaving the [joint venture] as a company with assets but without business”
(paragraph 591). Other cases in the context of NAFTA have followed the same line of
thinking. Thus, in the Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States the Tribunal has

stated:

“expropriation under NAFTA includes not only open, deliberate and acknowledged
takings of property, such as outright seizure of formal or obligatory transfer of title in
favour of the host State, but also covert or incidental interference with the use of
property which has the effect of depriving the owner, in whole or in significant part,
of the use of reasonably-to-be-expected economic benefit of property even if not

necessarily to the obvious benefit of the host State”.'!®

A critical factor in the analysis of an expropriation claim is the extent of harm caused by the
government’s actions. For any expropriation — direct or indirect — to occur, the state must
deprive the investor of a “substantial” part of the value of the investment.''® Although
neither the relevant treaty text nor existing jurisprudence have clarified the precise degree of
deprivation that will qualify as “substantial”, one can reasonably infer that a diminution of
5% of the investment’s value will not be enough for a finding of expropriation, while a
diminution of 95% would likely be sufficient. The determination in any particular case of
where along that continuum an expropriation has occurred will turn on the particular facts

before the tribunal.

Moreover, the burden of demonstrating the impact of the state action indisputably rests on
the Claimant. The principle of onus probandi actori incumbit — that a claimant bears the
burden of proving its claims — is widely recognized in practice before international tribunals.
The significance of this burden was stated effectively by the tribunal in Asian Agricultural

Products, Ltd. v. Sri Lanka (ARB/87/3), which noted that:

"5 Metalclad v. United Mexican States, ICSID (Additional Facility) Case No. ARB/AF/97/1, Award of August 30,
2000, at paragraph 103.

"6 See Pope & Talbot, Inc. v. Government of Canada, Interim Award, June 26, 2000, at paragraphs 96, 102; CMS Gas
Transmission Co. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/01/08, Award, 12 May 2005, at paragraph 262; Waste

Management, Inc.

. United Mexican States, \CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/3, Award, 30 April 2004, at paragraph 155.

 

Sl

122.

123.

[a] Party having the burden of proof must not only bring evidence in

support of his allegations, but must also convince the Tribunal of their

truth, lest they be disregarded for want, or insufficiency, of proof.'!”
In this case, the Claimant has simply failed to satisfy this burden. For example, the
Claimant has not shown that the government agencies’ various press announcements
damaged its reputation or customer relationships to the point that it was unable to obtain any
new orders. Similarly, the Claimant has not shown that the various police raids and
investigations launched against it by Ukrainian authorities have significantly impaired its
ability to operate. Further, the Claimant specifically acknowledged that TSII, to which Taki
spravy transferred the bulk of its assets, was not harmed by the government’s actions. It is
conceivable that such continuous hostile treatment as that alleged by the Claimant could in
some cases deprive an investor of a substantial portion of the value of his or her business.
But the record before us supports no such finding. Without more extensive proof of harm

from the Claimant, we must reject the claim of expropriation under Article 5 of the Treaty.

PROOF OF A BREACH
1. Introduction
1.1 Proof

A breach of Article 5 of the Treaty being thus rejected there remain claims under Articles 2
and 3 for denial of fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security. A sharp
doctrinal controversy on the standards of protection demanded by these and similar
expressions in investment treaties has created two divergent streams of authority, too well-
known to require citation here. We do not enter into it now, since in our opinion it does not
affect the outcome of the present dispute. For if it is decided that the Claimant has
succeeded in proving a deliberate campaign to punish Taki spravy for its impertinence in

printing materials opposed to the regime, or to expose Taki spravy as an example to others

"7 See Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. v. Republic of Sri Lanka, \CSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Award, 27 June 1990, 6
ICSID Rev.-FILJ 526, 549 (1991) at paragraph 56 (quoting Bin Cheng, GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW AS APPLIED BY
INTERNATIONAL COURTS AND TRIBUNALS 329-31 (1953)). See also Tradex Hellas S.A. v. Republic of Albania, \CSID
Case No. ARB/94/2, Award, 24 December 1996, 14 ICSID Review 197, 219 (1999) (paragraph 74) (“[It] can be
considered as a general principle of international procedure — and probably also of virtually all national civil procedural
laws -...that it is the claimant who has the burden of proof for the conditions required in the applicable substantive rules
of law to establish the claim”.).

52

124.

who might be tempted to do the same, this must surely be the clearest infringement one
could find of the provisions and aims of the Treaty, whatever precise standards those
provisions might set. Conversely, if proof is absent, so that there remain only a number of
disconnected incidents that were not politically motivated, the case for the Claimant,
formulated as it has been throughout exclusively in terms of a nayizd, must fall away. This
being so, we shall abstain from offering a view on the meaning of “fair and equitable
treatment”, “full protection and security” and the associated expressions, and will
concentrate on the question whether Claimant has established, according to the appropriate

standard of proof, that a nayizd can properly be inferred from facts, admitted or proved.

Equally, we shall not propose a solution for the current uncertainty about the standard of
proof to be applied in a case such as the present. We emphasise the standard of proof, not
the burden of proof, for there can be no doubt that the latter rests on the Claimant. As
regards the standard, three possibilities have attracted support. First, the usual standard,
which requires the party making an assertion to persuade the decision-maker that it is more
likely than not to be true. Second, that where the dispute concerns an allegation against a
person or body in high authority the burden may be lower, simply because direct proof is
likely to be hard to find. Third, that in such a situation, the standard is higher than the
balance of probabilities. As to these, the logic of the second appears questionable, for its
consequence is that the person who makes the allegation may be entitled to succeed even if
it is less likely than not that the allegation is true. Certainly, any sensible tribunal
considering an allegation of this kind will recognise that the need to rely on circumstantial
or secondary evidence does not necessarily tell against it, but this does not dispense with the
need for evidence of one kind or another sufficient to take the proof over the barrier. As for
the third possibility, which at the other extreme requires proof of more than the balance of
probabilities where an allegation of gross misconduct is made against a highly placed
person, here also there are serious logical problems. It surely cannot be the case that
evidentiary requirements can be heightened purely on the grounds of deference or comity or
otherwise. And if it is said that this is an example of the common-sense principle that an
inherently unlikely allegation requires stronger than usual supporting evidence before it is
accepted, contemporary experience shows how unrealistic it can be to assume that important
persons will not behave badly. We make no assumptions of this kind, one way or the other,
in the present case, and shall approach the issues on the basis that in order to prove its case
on the existence and causal relevance of a nayizd the Claimant must show that its assertion

is more likely than not to be true.

53

125.

126.

12 “Admitted or Proved”

We have referred to facts “admitted or proved” and now move on to an important aspect of
this expression which can easily escape notice; namely, that although it has repeatedly been
emphasised that there is little controversy about whether the events relied upon to found the
inference of a nayizd did in fact happen this is only half of the picture, for there is no
agreement at all about the character of the events. The Claimant’s submissions are pervaded

by descriptions such as “wrongful”, “frivolous

”’, “unfounded”, “without adequate grounds”,
“patently unjust”, “false” and so on. The cumulative effect of the events will obviously be
infinitely stronger if these descriptions are accurate than if they are not. For a continuous
course of justified pressure would say little if anything about the existence of a nayizd, or
whether the events constituted a breach of the Treaty. Yet there has been no attempt, except
in a few of the more important instances, to assess the extent to which the repeated demands
made on the Claimant were soundly based; and indeed there hardly could have been, given
the very large numbers of events so described. This being so, the most that the Tribunal can
do is to take care not to take a broad view of the events as a whole, without taking for

granted the Claimant’s characterisations of them.

This problem is well illustrated by the complaints made against the courts and the
Procuratura, which form a substantial proportion of the Claimant’s allegations, particularly
in respect of the latter part of the period in question. The common theme of these
complaints is that in addition to officials in the various departments of the tax administration
and the Electoral Commission the prime movers in the conspiracy had recruited judges and
prosecutors to spend time and effort in breach of their professional ethics to join in
persecuting Taki spravy for its impertinence in printing opposition publicity. This is not
inherently incredible, for contemporary experience shows that betrayals of trust within a
judicial system can and do happen; and we do not draw any inference adverse to the
Claimant simply from the absence of direct evidence in support of the allegation, for this is
just what one would suspect if it were true. But there still must be evidence of some kind in
favour of the assertions that the legal proceedings were “frivolous”, “patently unjust” etc...,
before it is possible to rely on them when contemplating an inference that they were part of
a widespread and long-running campaign motivated by spite and conducted in bad faith.
The prosecution, conviction and sentence of Mr. Romanov, left undisturbed after two
appeals, provides a conspicuous example. We are not sure whether it is part of the

Claimant’s case that Mr. Romanov was innocent, but it is more than once asserted that a

54

127.

128.

statement by him implicating Mr. Danylov was made under duress. This may be true, or it
may not. But the Tribunal has no evidence beyond a statement by Mr. Romanov himself

which the Tribunal has no means of testing, and his culpability remains unknown.
1.3 Documents

Ina case which turns on appraisal of events which happened five years ago, and where in
the nature of things many of them cannot be illuminated by direct oral evidence, a decision-
maker is bound to lean heavily on contemporary documents. There is no shortage of these
here, and the Claimant has made use of some of those created within the tax administration
to show that its actions did not conform with the law: see paragraph 131, below. But there
are serious problems with others, notably those which purport to record the commercial
activities of persons and corporations (whether “fictitious” or not) at the time in question:
for example, those summarised in paragraphs 89-91 above, in which Mr. Chemer’s name
features in one capacity or another. Yet in a record of his interview with the tax
investigators he is reported as denying any knowledge at all of Produkt BVO, or
participating in commercial activities of any kind. It is a striking feature that the
contemporary documents seem to show Taki spravy dealing with Produkt BVO through a
non-existent representative, and it is no surprise that the authorities pressed hard for further
documentation. The Claimant has never furnished evidence about how these apparently
anomalous documents came into existence, but exist they certainly did. So wherever the
truth may lie, they form an important part of the picture when deciding on the justification

for the authorities’ conduct as part of the general picture.
2. Individual Items
2.1 The Press Statement

Although we have more than once emphasised the importance of avoiding too much
immersion in detail something must be said about the individual episodes to which the
Claimant has given particular weight. The most conspicuous is the Press Statement.
Different countries have different traditions about the relationship between the media and
public authorities, but if a government body is to use the media to circulate accusations of
criminal conduct when public legal proceedings have not even started it should make some
effort to get the facts right. This the tax authorities manifestly failed to do when they

publicly described the activities of Taki spravy as money-laundering, an alleged offence that

55

129.

130.

the authorities had already decided did not warrant further investigation. It is disturbing that
in their oral evidence the witnesses for the State made no attempt to explain how this mis-
statement came to be made, how it came to be recognised as false, and why it was not
corrected. The episode casts a shadow over the entire behaviour and standards of the tax
authorities. At the same time, we must keep in mind that the present Tribunal is not
appointed to perform a disciplinary function, or to conduct a review under the local
administrative law. The question is whether the serious flaw in the Press Statement is
evidence of conspiracy being put into effect. If the position had been that the publication of
the Press Statement was entirely unprompted there might have been grounds for an
affirmative answer. In reality, however, this was not the case. The document was a
response to criticisms published on the website of the Bloc some days previously. It should
have been more accurate, but we find it hard to perceive as part of a pre-planned course of
conduct, initiated five weeks earlier, to wear down the Claimant by unsubstantiated

allegations.

Moreover, if the authorities did have such a plan in view they adopted a strange way of
putting it into effect. Whilst money-laundering and tax evasion are not the same, they are
both economic crimes and are often found in association. If the author of the document had
really set out to damage Taki spravy by alleging fictional crimes it is hard to see why he or
she did not go the full distance and accuse the target of the conspiracy of both offences,
rather than pick the one which the authorities never afterwards tried to sustain. Beyond this,
we can go no further. We give full weight to the wrongful nature of the accusation, but

cannot regard it as anything approaching decisive evidence of a conspiracy.
2.2 Entry to Premises

The next major complaint relates to the repeated entries of tax personnel into the premises of
Taki spravy, of which the episodes of 18 and 20 June 2002 have demanded and received
special attention. We recognise that excessive disturbances of privacy are always
distressing, and the progressive removal of documents, escalating as it did from a mere
handful at the outset to the virtual stripping of the company’s records as time went on, is
bound to have had a serious effect on the orderly conduct of its business. Uncomfortable
echoes of former times must have added to the disquieting effects. But too much should not
be made of this. Taking the incursions of June 2002 as the worst instance, it is striking that
the State personnel not only permitted the office staff to make video recordings of what

went on, but even to retain them for future use. This was hardly a feature to be expected in a

56

131.

brutal and cynical affront on the rights of citizens. The Tribunal has in the event been able
to view the recording, which though amateurish does give an impression of the general level
of confrontation. It shows a scene of confusion, with much shouting and mill-around, but
no personal violence. The manager was even allowed to telephone the local police force,
who arrived and left again without appearing to achieve anything substantial. The militia
officers wore protective upper garments and carried side arms, nothing in itself unusual in
many countries of the world, but so as far as can be seen no weapons were produced, still
less used. Nobody was hurt, and no damage done to the premises. The female members of
staff who can be seen waiting for the episode to die down showed few signs of
apprehension. All in all, this must have been an unpleasant experience, and not the only
one, but in our view its significance should not be overstated — and of course, its
significance for present purposes relates not to a claim against the tax authorities for an
inordinate use of their investigatory powers, but to an allegation that they were using them
as a disguise for an intimidation which had nothing to do with a genuine suspicion of

economic misconduct.
2.3. Failure to Set Out Grounds for Actions

Reference to the tax officials’ demands for the production of documents leads to a broader
topic: namely, their repeated failure, clearly demonstrated by their own internal
communications, to set out the information required by law to be set out in requisitions for
authority to seize and search and in the formal written authorities themselves. Having little
choice, Mr. Furlet accepted that this should not have happened, and attributed the failure to
the fact that his department had inherited the forms from a previous administration, and had
not had the opportunity to put them right. This is unimpressive, but even if it is evidence of
laxity of administration, it is hard to see how it can have caused additional damage to Taki
spravy. The question is whether these deficiencies are evidence of a pre-planned campaign.
Surely not. Some of the documents in question were internal to the tax services, and cannot
in themselves have put Taki spravy under pressure. As to the others, if the tax authorities
were willing to lend themselves to a secret, dishonest and oppressive misuse of their power
they would surely have taken the trouble to cover their tracks by making their paperwork
look right. In our opinion, whilst the deficiencies do not show the authorities in a good
light, we must remind ourselves that we are not conducting an administrative audit but are

concerned to see whether the course of events justifies the inference of a nayizd. For this

57

132.

133.

purpose, although we take it into account with all the rest of the history, the complaint does

not in our opinion carry the Claimant’s case any great distance further.
2.4 The Electoral Commission

The Claimant criticises the statement in the Press Statement that the Central Election
Commission “...governed by current legislation authorised the tax service to check
information about violation of election legislation during the manufacture of printed
production by the Election Block of political parties ‘the Election block of Yulia

Tymoshenko”’. This was another mis-statement, but it is no evidence of wrongdoing, still
less of deliberate wrongdoing. The true state of affairs emerges from a handful of
contemporary documents produced in evidence. These show that a candidate for an outlying
constituency was voicing suspicions about who was financing the BYT’s election materials.
The Chairman of the Commission obviously thought it quicker to enquire from the tax
services who were already looking into payments associated with these materials, rather
than have his own staff spend valuable time on them. The Chairman did not “authorise” the
tax authorities to do anything that they were not already doing. Perhaps the communication
was not technically in order, and certainly the unknown author of the Press Statement should
have taken trouble to state the facts accurately, but we cannot accept that this episode caused
the least harm, or that it points in any way to the existence of a conspiracy to damage Taki

spravy.
2.5 The Events of 2005

The twice-repeated discontinuance and revival of the criminal charges, which, as of
December 2005, remain pending, create a poor impression and must have imposed a quite
unnecessary strain on Mr. Danylov. More than three years after the event, the tax and
prosecuting authorities ought to have made up their minds whether or not to pursue the
criminal charges. Whether in truth this was the outcome of a difference of opinion between
officials about the sufficiency of the evidence against Mr. Danylov, or whether it was part of
an attempt to put pressure on Tokios Tokelés to settle an expensive ICSID arbitration, we
are unable to say. The way in which the complaint was introduced into the arbitration

1''* as to the

coupled with the refusal of the State to respond to questions from the Tribunal
legal justification of the criminal proceeding much less give access to its files has made it

impracticable to explore the matter in any depth. We accept that a manifest and gross

"'8 Hearing on the Merits, Transcript, Volume I, at 265:24 to 266:12, 171:20 to 172:1.

58

134.

135.

failure to comply with the elementary principles of justice in the conduct of criminal
proceedings, when directed towards an investor in the operation of his investment, may be a
breach, or an element in a breach, of an investment treaty, but we are unable to find that the
events of 2005 were part of the alleged conspiracy, or evidence that one ever existed. The
most we can say is that they are part of the general picture which must be looked at in its

entirety when we come to decide what if any inferences can properly be made.
3. The Complaints as a Whole

Although we have warned against becoming lost in detail we have had no alternative but to
treat these complaints individually, because of the special weight attached to them by the
Claimant. We recognise however that this does less than justice to the Claimant’s case, for
it is the combined effect of all the complaints which is said to make the inference of a nayizd
irresistible, and to elevate what might otherwise disparate items of maladministration into a
single continuous breach of international law. Surely, the Claimant urges, this massive
deployment of the machinery of State must have been aimed at more than the investigation
of whether a single company was engaged in a middle-rank tax fraud. We learn from
figures produced by the State itself how very many enterprises were being investigated and
brought to justice for just such abuse of fictitious vehicles, and there seems no reason why
such a striking amount of time and resources should have been devoted to only one of them.
It cannot, so it is urged, have been a simple coincidence that the bureaucratic bombardment
of Taki spravy began so soon after the lodging of documents hostile to the current regime.
And at the end of the story, it must be something more than obstinacy on the part of officials
which explains why a criminal prosecution, which bears all the marks of going nowhere,
should still so long after the event be repeatedly brought to life. The whole picture is one of
abnormal behaviour which cannot be explained except by the type of plan described in the

passages quoted at the beginning of this Award (paragraphs 12-13).

We are fully alive to the strength of this case, but even when viewed in isolation it leaves
important matters unexplained. Perhaps most strikingly, it is clear, once the hundreds of
allegations are viewed, not as an undifferentiated bulk but in their chronological
development, that their profile is not at all what would be expected if the Claimant’s theory
is valid. The latter could be expected to produce an immediate and intense burst of hostile
activity, dying down quite rapidly once the election had terminated in favour of the existing
regime, making pique and deterrence things of the past. But this is the opposite of what

happened, as a glance at the Annexes to this Award will show. In fact the intensity of the

59

136.

137.

attack seems to have grown with time, rather than diminishing as past resentments were
overtaken by current preoccupations. The likelihoods are also against the nayizd theory.
Would the guilty persons in high places have taken the risk of promoting a campaign of
injustice against the supporters of their political opponents, when within a very few weeks
the outcome of the election might have installed those opponents in the high places
themselves? And when Ms Tymoshenko came later to occupy an important position would
it not have been natural for her to put a stop to the persecution of those who had performed
services on behalf of her electoral campaign? Yet, according to the Claimant, it continued
unabated. And why was only Taki spravy made the target, leaving both TSII and the other

publishers of the Bloc’s materials unmolested? These are among the unanswered questions.
4. Conclusions

Notwithstanding these grounds for scepticism, we might have regarded the issues as very
finely balanced, if the existence of a nayizd had been the only feasible explanation of what
took place. But this is not so. We have already summarized the account given by the State
of the investigations which had begun at the end of the year 2001, and which by mid-
February 2002 had already uncovered some highly suspicious circumstances. (supra,
paragraphs 89 to 91). This account is corroborated by the contemporary documents, which
are not alleged to have been fabricated, whatever the truth of their contents. On the basis of
them there was every reason for the authorities to begin, and continue to press, an enquiry
into the connection of Taki spravy with these dubious events. There is thus an entirely
plausible alternative to the hypothesis of a nayizd. It is not for the State to prove that Taki
spravy was guilty of economic offences, and the relevance of this material is simply to show
that the Claimant is in error in asserting that the events have no credible alternative
explanation other than a concerted, malicious and politically inspired campaign. Once this
alternative is on the table it is in our opinion impossible to treat the existence of a nayizd as

the most plausible explanation of the events which found the Claimant’s case.

Ultimately, this long and costly dispute turns on a short question of inference. Having
reflected with great care, giving full weight to the contrary opinion of our colleague, each of
us has come to the firm conclusion that the case for the Claimant on this decisive issue is not
made out, and we therefore join in dismissing all the causes of action asserted under the

Treaty.

60

138.

139.

140.

141.

APPLICABILITY OF UKRAINIAN LAW

In addition to the Treaty and international law, the Claimant relies on the provisions of

Ukrainian legislation.

The issue of the law applicable to the present dispute has been dealt with by the parties in
their written and oral submissions. The Claimant has contended that according to Article
42(1) of the ICSID Convention, the law of the state party to the dispute and the rules of
international law are to be applied failing a choice by the parties. The Claimant further cites
Article 8 of the Treaty, which provides that an investor may submit “any dispute” to ICSID
arbitration, whether it is based on an alleged breach of the Treaty, the domestic law of the
host state, or other applicable legal norm. The Respondent has replied that only the Treaty
and international law are applicable to settle a dispute arising under the Treaty, the
provisions of Ukrainian law serving only the purpose of elucidating the factual background

of the case and the Claimant’s claims.

The Tribunal shares the view expressed by the Annulment Committee in Wena Hotels Ltd.
v. Arab Republic of Egypt that under Article 42(1), second sentence, “both legal orders...
have a role. The law of the host State can indeed be applied in conjunction with
international law if this is justified. So too international law can be applied by itself if the

appropriate rule is found in this other ambit”. !"°

The Claimant relies on various provisions of Ukrainian law, specifically:

(1) __ those protecting foreign investments and investment activity (including provisions to
be found in the Constitution), ensuring stable conditions for foreign investments and

compensation to investors in case of expropriation or expropriation—like measures;

(2) those prescribing the observance by State’s authorities of procedures, formalities and
conditions for the validity of their acts (as in case of searches, seizures of documents

or summons of witnesses); and

(3) those providing for items of damage additional to compensation which is due for
expropriatory measures (such as moral damages, under Article 23 of the New Civil

Code).

"° Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, Decision of February 5, 2002, 41 ILM 933 (2002), at 941.

61

142.

143.

144.

145.

146.

Regarding Ukrainian provisions concerning protection of foreign investments, the Claimant
itself recognizes the primacy of international agreements over domestic legislation in this

field.'*°

Accordingly, the system of protection, guarantees and remedies provided by Ukrainian law
with regard to foreign investments is in effect replaced ratione materiae by the substantive
provisions of the Treaty and international law, to the extent the latter govern the same

subject-matter.

The Claimant invoked the provisions referred to in paragraph 141(2) above in order to
establish that the State’s actions have had expropriatory effects or have resulted in the
failure to provide fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security to the
Claimant’s investment in Ukraine.'?! According to the Claimant, those were the effects of
the actions by the Ukraine’s government and it is on this basis that it has claimed
compensation in these proceedings. We thus have taken into consideration the provisions in

paragraph 141(2) when examining whether the State’s actions breached the Treaty.

Finally, a majority of the Tribunal having found that no treaty breach was committed by the
State, Ukrainian law provisions regarding damages referred to in paragraph 141(3) above

are of no avail.

COSTS

The Tribunal reviewed the entire conduct of the parties in this matter in order to consider
whether it should make any special order as to the allocation between them of a) the legal
costs and expenses of each party and b) the “Cost of Proceedings” referred to in Chapter VI
of the Convention, and has determined that it should not. Accordingly, each side must bear
its own legal costs and expenses. The costs of the proceedings shall be borne as to one-half

by each party.

2° Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraph 322.
"21 See, e.g., Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraph 324.

62

147.

148.

ORDERS OF THE TRIBUNAL

The Tribunal orders as follows:-

qd)

2)

@)

(4)

The objections by the Respondent to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal are dismissed.
The claim of the Claimant for breach of Article 5 of the Treaty is dismissed.

(By a majority). The claims of the Claimant for breach of Articles 2 and 3 of the

Treaty are dismissed.
(a) Each party shall bear its own legal costs and expenses; and

(b) Each party shall contribute one half of the Costs of Proceedings.

In conclusion all members of the Tribunal wish to express their earnest thanks to the Staff of

the Secretariat for their sustained endeavours throughout these lengthy proceedings.

63

/signed/
Lord Mustill
President of the Tribunal
Date: 29 June 2007

/signed/ /signed/
Professor Piero Bernardini Mr. Daniel M. Price
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: June 29, 2007 Date: 29 June 2007
Dissenting

64

TOKIOS TOKELES v. UKRAINE
ANNEX A

ANALYSIS OF CLAIMANT’S FACTUAL ALLEGATIONS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Actions by Solomiansky Tax Police

Date All i

14/02/02. | Director of Solomiansky Tax Police (Wolodomyr Furlet) requested that Taki spravy (“TSI”) provide “verified
copies of documents which reflect the financial-economic interrelations with the enterprise ‘Produkt BVO’ for
the entire period of activity.”

18/02/02 | Furlet sent letter to Oleksandr Danylov (“OD”) stating that Produkt BVO has “signs of fictitiousness” and
requesting that TSI speed up the production of documents previously requested. TS1 responded to this request
on 19/02/02.

21102102 | Deputy Chief of Investigative Department (Yu. O. Zayets) signed “Warrant of Seizure” from TSI of

reflecting the fi ial ip with Produkt BVO as well as other d

26/02/02 | Negotiations between OD and Furlet. Furlet authorised an additional investigation of TS1 as to reports,

ing ledgers and other d relating to Produkt BVO.

11/03/02. | Negotiations between OD and Furlet. Furlet suggested that OD attest in writing that TSI had received cash
payments for orders placed with TS1 on behalf of Bloc of Yulia T:

12/03/02 | Furlet forwarded letter to OD explaining that investigations of TS1 were being conducted in connection with
criminal case initiated against the of Produkt BVO.

13/03/02 | Furlet authorised i ion of TS1 regarding its “mutual ” with kt

28/03/02 | Zayets initiated criminal case against Valentyn Romanov, Director of Rembudproekt, for evasion of taxes and

i: ion and use of d Joined to Criminal Case No. 79-00011.

30/05/02 | Negotiations between Serhiy Danylov (“SD”) and Furlet. Furlet indicated “the desire by his superiors and
himself to show that Yulia Tymoshenko exceeded the amount of expenses established for the elections and to
annul the results of the elections.”

18/06/02. | At least four members of tax police, armed and in bullet proof vests, accompanied STS in its attempted

igation of the premises of TSI.

29/07/02 | Further negotiations between SD and Furlet. Furlet proposed that SD provide false testimony against an
official ive of the Bloc of Yulia T:

15/08/02 | Third set of negotiations between SD and Furlet. Furlet again proposed that SD should provide false
testimony.

2. Actions by Solomiansky Tax Service

Date All i

14/02/02. | Dispatched two workers to offices of TSI as part of “non-planned investigation of money documents,

books...and other d d with the and payment of taxes...

14/02/02 | Director of Department of Document Investigations of Revenue Tax from Salaries signed a “list of questions

which are to be investigated” at TS1.

22/02/02 ives of STS ducted search of premises of TS] and seized a number of d

26/02/02 | Representatives of STS authorized and carried out a warrant of seizure of documents from TS1. Also

conducted search of premises of TS1.

05/03/02 ives of STS ducted a search of premises of TS] and seized a number of d

13/03/02 | STS initiated Criminal Case No. 79-0001 1, alleging large scale evasion of taxes in by managers of

Rembudproekt. Issued warrant of seizure of documents reflecting the financial-economic relations with
‘kt. Conducted seizure of d

15/03/02 _| STS authorised further seizure of d relating to kt. Seizure d.

05/04/02 | STS adopted Decision authorizing seizure from TS of documents relating to “Agenstvo Alfa” which had

rendered payment for an order placed with TS1 by Produkt BVO.

16/04/02 | STS requested that TSI provide information regarding its employees, including home addresses and home

telephone numbers. Also inquired of TS1 whether a certain number and type of printing operations could
have been performed on equi operated by TSI during the period 01/01/01 to 01/04/02.

13/05/02 | STS issued two “Tax Notices-Decisions”, on the basis of the 7 May 2002 Act of Investigation, demanding

payment from TS1 and ing the sale of TS1’s assets in the event of

 

 

 

 

 

to tax an
period from 1999 to April 2002. These officials visited TS1 to conduct the tax investigation. After attempts
by TS1’s management to ascertain the grounds for the investigation, the investigation was postponed until the

assets tax payer

payment

company’s

at , average

Rozora, to appear as

to return s request

1a copy of an “Act on ‘a Documentary

1 four Tax payment

 

 

Actions by the State Tax Administration of Ukraine (STA)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Date All i

25/03/02 | Press Service issued “Declaration” which accused TS1 of money laundering, fraud and other illegal activity.
Accused of receiving money from “fictitious enterprise” Produkt BVO. STA ordered local tax services to
provide urgent coverage of this statement in regional mass media.

19/07/02 | STA responded to complaint by TSI, claiming that investigations of TSI were in conformity with the

22/07/02 | STA responded to the open letter by employees of TS! of 21 June 2002, supporting the legality of the
administrative arrest of the assets of TSI. Also responded to complaint by TS1 by asserting that tax officials
had not itted any violations in their i igation of an unspecified criminal case.

24/07/02 | In response to TS1’s complaint, STA asserted that the tax service had committed no violations in its actions
against TS1.

27/11/02 | Press Service of STA published press release entitled “Taki spravy — Criminal Affairs” which accused TS] of

iracy, tax evasion, dish and illegal turn-over.
16/01/03 _| Press Service of STA issued a press release accusing TS! of conspiracy and tax evasion in large amounts.
4. Actions by Kiev State Tax Administration (KSTA)

 

separate

1 payments

“Act on an on
legislation as to the interrelations with Rembudproekt...” Concluded that TS1 had unfoundedly included a

tax

to tax and currency legislation for the period from 1999 t0 01/04/02. KSTA issued 3 certifications to tax
service officials for the conducting of an open-ended investigation of TS! for the period from 1999 to April
court No. to on cases
on arrest assets of a tax
request to arrest of assets

wrote to TSI

to

's arrest

account arrest

Actions by State Tax Administration in the Dnipropetrovsk Oblast (DOSTA)

 

Date

All 5

 

 

 

10/04/02

 

DOSTA wrote to two companies, “Media Brief” and “Color Hand”, informing them that an investigation of
their business relations with TS1 would be conducted. Issued authorization for an investigation of “Color
Hand”.

 

 

 

6.

 

Actions by Kiev Economic Court

support
04/04/02.
ourt . f [had not
ourt
‘ourt
evidence.

to TSI’s request measures No. I

as invalid the Tax Notices-Decisions issued by the STS on 13 2002.
No. 1
No. arrest of assets

No
No.
‘ourt s
exclusive

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7. Actions by Kiev Appellate Economic Court
Date All i
23/07/02 | Adopted decision in Case No. 11/134 rejecting an appeal of the lower court’s decision to halt the proceedings
due to the proceedings in Criminal Cases No. 79-00032 and 79-00011.
20/12/02_| Court denied an appeal filed by TS1 in Case No. 11/148.
8. Actions by Higher Economic Court of Ukraine

court

‘ourt Procuratura.
No. 1

‘ourt to

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9. Actions by Kiev Appellate Court
Date All i
21/01/03 | Adopted decision amending lower court’s decision which sentenced Romanov and found OD guilty by
excluding references to a prior conspiracy between Romanov and OD.
10. Actions by Solomiansky District Court
Date All i
02/07/02 _| Court rejected laint by SD as to the illegal actions of state officials due to lack of jurisdiction
29/08/02 | Court forwarded the complaint by TS1 of 23 August 2002 to Solomiansky Tax Police for review on the
merits.
25/10/02 | Court rejected request that material evidence be accepted for review in the criminal court case against
Romanov.
07/11/02 | Court issued guilty verdict against Romanov in Criminal Case No. 79-0011, sentencing him to 6 years and 6
months in prison.
02/12/02 _| Court returned the int filed by SD as lacking in jurisdiction.
09/12/02 | Court returned int filed by SD as lacking in jurisdiction.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11. Actions by Supreme Court of Ukraine

Date All i

03/01/03 Court rejected TS1’s cassation appeal in Case No. 02-20-25/5178.

02/06/03 _ | Court rejected in its entirety the appeal filed in the Romanov case.

12. Actions by General Procuratura of Ukraine

Date All i

07/05/02 | General P passed on TSI’s laint to P of City of Kiev.

07/05/02 | Submitted a claim to Kiev Economic Court against Rembudproekt and TSI asking the court to recognise as
invalid the contracts concluded between them, and to “draw down to the revenue of the State” all the monies
received under these contracts.

17/06/02 | General Procuratura appealed decision from Kiev Economic Court of 30 May 2002, which returned, without
review, the above i

09/07/02 _| General P passed on a laint by TT for review by the Kiev City F

16/07/02 | General Procuratura issued a cassation appeal to the Higher Economic Court of Ukraine regarding the Kiev
Appellate ic Court’s Decision of 15/07/02.

17/07/03 _| General P passed on laint by TSI to Kiev City P

21/08/02 | General Procuratura responded to complaints by TSI, stating that no infringements of the law of criminal
procedure have been discovered in the actions of the Tax Police officials.

04/11/02 _| General P itted a cassation appeal in Case No. 10/399.

13. Actions by Procuratura of City of Kiev

Date A i

14/05/02__| P of City of Kiev passed on TS1’s aint to the Procurator in the i district of Kiev.

06/06/02 | Responded to TS1’s complaint by denying any violations by the tax service in the repeated investigations of
TSI and in the publications regarding TS1.

02/08/02 | Responded to complaint addressed by TS1 to members of Parliament, stating that “Violations...were not

d by the F of the city”.

15/08/02 | Kiev City Procuratura responded to complaint made by TT to General Procuratura, denying any wrongdoing
by state officials during i igati searches and seizures at TS1.

07/10/02 _| Kiev City Procuratura responded to TS1’s complaints referred through members of Parliament, stating that it
had uncovered no violations by tax officials.

14. Actions by Solomiansky District Procuratura

Date All i

24/05/02 | Solomiansky Procurator passed on TS1’s complaint to the Investigative Section of the District Department of
Tax Police.

20/08/02 | Responded to complaint by TSI by stating that the grounds for the Procuratura’s reaction were not
established.

15. Actions by Administration of President of Ukraine

 

. Actions by Ukraine’s Ministry of Justice

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Date All i
30/07/02 Forwarded letter to the Lithuanian Embassy i in Ukraine, setting out its assessment of Ukraine’ 's investment
regime, provisions and i dispute P
17. Miscellaneous

Date All i

11/04/02 | OD told by a “highly placed tax official”, Yosyp Buchynsky, that “the tax service is after [TSI] very
strongly.”

19/09/02 | Romanov signed “Complaint” in which he claimed that he had been physically abused while held in
detention and coerced into making ions against OD.

23/09/02 _| TSI received phone call from Solomiansky Administration inquiring about salary arrears at the company.

06/11/02 _ | OD submitted a request for the granting of the status of refugee in the Lithuanian Republic.

22/11/02 _| Romanov’s lawyers itted an appeal of the verdict and sentence passed on Romanov.

25/11/02 _| The car being driven by SD was hit by a car bel to the State Treasury.

10/01/03 TS1 informed that STS responsible for information published regarding TS1 on 28 December 2002 in the
“RIO” newspaper.

25/01/03 Newspaper article describing Romanov’s conviction and making reference to OD.

13/05/03 | Migration Dept. of Ministry of Internal Affairs of Lithuania issued a Decision on Granting Refugee Status to
OD.

04/10/04 _| The Director of Palita Druku explained that his company had been investigated by the tax service in October
2002, because of its business relations with TS1. The tax service had alleged a tax debt by Palitra Druku and
the Director was threatened by local tax officials, summoned and detained by the local Procurator. A fine of
1,700 UAH was imposed on Palitra Druku.

18. Actions by TS1

Date All i

22/04/02 | TS1 submitted complaint to General Procuratura of Ukraine, the Administration of the President of Ukraine
and the Parliament, alleging violations of Ukrainian law during the multiple investigations, searches and
seizures and the publi by the tax authorities.

26/04/02 | TSI responded to request for information about employees by pointing out that this would violate the
conf iality of its

29/04/02 _| TS1 issued response to KSTA’s lain before the Kiev Economic Court.

13/05/02__| TSI i its Objections to the Act of 7 May 2002, denying the allegations against TS1.

20/05/02 | TS1 appealed to President Leonid Kuchma to intercede in the disputes between TS] and the state agencies of
Ukraine.

21/05/02 | TSI submitted complaint (Case No. 11/134) to Kiev Economic Court requesting that the two Tax Notices
Decisions of 13/05/02 be d as invalid on the basis of lack of evidence.

10/06/02 | TSI requested clarifications from the tax service regarding the investigation initiated by the certificates
issued by KSTA on 06/06/02.

12/06/02 | Ludmilla Zhyltsova, a shareholder of TT, addressed request to the STA and the General Procuratura for an
explanation of the “concrete and specific evidence (if such exist) of violations of law on the part of our
subsidiary”.

18/06/02 _| TS1 appealed the decision to suspend Case No. 11/134.

18/06/02 _| TS1 add d letters to clients asking for their und ding in the ci

19/06/02 | TSI notified city government that employees and their families would picket the building of the Kiev city tax
service on 28 June 2002. The demonstration was held as planned.

21/06/02 | TS submitted complaint to Kiev Economic Court requesting that the tax service’s decision to place its assets
under administrative arrest be recognized as invalid. Also filed complaint with Kiev Economic Court seeking
to overturn the tax service’s decision. TS asserted that the decision was taken without proper grounds.

21/06/02

Employees of TS and their families adopted an open letter addressed to the President of Ukraine, the mayor
of Kiev, the heads of the Economic Court of Kiev and the State Tax Admini

 

 

 

 

to request arrest of assets

Tax

Procuratura’s May
suit brought against TS1. TS1 also submitted its response to request for documentation from KSTA of

1 a to Procurator S
particular as regards the decision by STS to seize all documentation from TS1 in its entirety, for the period

Procuratura

to Romanov’s

Igor Butuzov, Deputy Procuratura

to a court
December 2002, denying review of his complaint as to the actions of tax officials towards TS, be annulled

 

Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine
Annex B

Note: The activities of the various State agencies are depicted quarter by quarter; and the position of the entries within a quarter does
not reflect the actual dates of the activities.

 

 

 

14
31/03/02 - Yuschenko
achieves bare majority in 16/08/02 - TT
12 Parliamentary elections &TS1 file
RFA at ICSID
10
23/11/02 - RFA
resubmitted
8
6
4
2
0
1st Qtr 02 2nd Qtr 02 3rd Qtr 02 4th Qtr 02 1st Qtr 03 2nd Qtr 03 3rd Qtr 03 4th Qtr 03 2004 and
onwards
EISOLOMIANSKY TAX POLICE EISOLOMIANSKY TAX SERVICE CISTATE TAX ADMINISTRATION OF UKRAINE
DKIEV STATE TAX ADMINISTRATION IIDNIPROPETROVSK OBLAST STATE TAX ADMINISTRATION EIGENERAL PROCURATURA OF UKRAINE
EIPROCURATURA OF CITY OF KIEV CISOLOMIANSKY DISTRICT PROCURATURA WIKIEV ECONOMIC COURT
DIKIEV APPELLATE ECONOMIC COURT DHIGHER ECONOMIC COURT OF KIEV UKIEV APPELLATE COURT

SOLOMIANSKY DISTRICT COURT SUPREME COURT OF UKRAINE

 

DISSENTING OPINION OF DANIEL M. PRICE

1. I join my colleagues in sections A through K and M through O of this Award. I dissent
from section L and the decision of my colleagues that Respondent did not breach its

obligation to accord Claimant fair and equitable treatment.

2. My colleagues find that “a deliberate campaign to punish Taki spravy for its impertinence in
printing materials opposed to the regime, or to expose Taki spravy as an example to others
who might be tempted to do the same,” if proved, “must surely be the clearest infringement
one could find of the provision and aims of the Treaty.”! I agree. There could be no serious
debate that the fair and equitable treatment obligation set forth in Article 3 of the Treaty is
breached where a State exercises its sovereign powers — investigatorial, prosecutorial,
regulatory or otherwise — to harass, intimidate, or retaliate against an investor for political

purposes.

3. The majority and I are thus in apparent agreement on the content of the applicable legal
standard. Where we disagree is in our assessment of the evidentiary record and on the
central question of whether Claimant has established that the Respondent engaged in the
type of activity that we all agree is proscribed by the Treaty. My colleagues find that
Claimant has failed to meet that burden. I disagree and therefore respectfully dissent from
the finding of the majority that the Respondent did not breach the obligations to accord

Claimant fair and equitable treatment.

4. As the majority noted, there is relatively little disagreement between the parties over the
basic facts at issue in this dispute.” The parties do dispute whether the actions of the State
against Taki spravy were motivated by legitimate governmental interests or by a desire to
harass or punish the company for publishing campaign materials for BYT. As the majority
also noted, the evidence to support this type of claim will in most cases be circumstantial,
because government actions against an investor will rarely be taken for overtly political

purposes.’

5. In my view, the evidence does establish that the State engaged in a deliberate and targeted
course of conduct against Taki spravy that was triggered by the company’s production of
' See Award at paragraph 123.

? See Award at paragraph 125.
5 See Award at paragraph 126.

campaign materials for the BYT. That the State’s actions were politically motivated can be
ascertained most readily by: (i) the time period in which those actions occurred, beginning
shortly after Taki spravy delivered campaign materials to the BYT and six weeks before a
strongly contested parliamentary election; and (ii) the lack of a convincing or, in some cases,
any legal justification for the State’s actions that would rebut the rather clear inference that
those actions were politically motivated. I further believe that the severity and duration of
the State’s actions against Taki spravy, described in paragraphs 35 to 72 of the Award, lends
support to Claimant’s argument that the State was engaged in an effort to harass and

intimidate Taki spravy.
I. Timing of the State’s Actions

6. This dispute between Taki spravy and the State’s tax authorities arose during the political
campaign leading up to Ukraine’s parliamentary elections on 31 March 2002. In November
2001, Taki spravy entered into an agreement with Produkt BVO to supply printing and
publishing services.* Pursuant to that agreement, in the last quarter of 2001 and the first
quarter of 2002, Taki spravy printed more than two million campaign-related documents.*
The most controversial of these documents was “Unfulfilled Order,” a brochure harshly
critical of then-President Kuchma and laudatory of opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko,
delivered on 31 January 2002.° Although the State has questioned whether Produkt BVO
actually ordered and paid for these materials and whether Taki spravy undercharged for its
services, it has not disputed that Taki spravy produced the documents and delivered them in

January 2002.7

7. On 14 February 2002, two weeks after Taki spravy produced and delivered “Unfulfilled
Order,” the State’s tax authorities arrived at the offices of Taki spravy to begin their
investigation. Over the next six weeks leading up to the election, and for several months

thereafter, the tax authorities engaged in on-site inspections of Taki spravy, made public

* Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraph 20.

* Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraph 22.

° Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paragraph 21.

7 Declaration from the Press Service of the State Tax Administration of Ukraine at 2 (“DP ‘Taki spravy’ realized the
manufacture of such printed prod the brochure “U Order”...leaflets-calendars ‘I know injustice—I want
to save you from injustice’... [and] brochures ‘the Team of the Block of Yulia Tymoshenko”) (submitted as Annex 25
to Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits); see also id. at 3 (“[a]ccording to the act of transfer-acceptance by the printers
DP ‘Taki spravy’ on 31.01.2002 there were printed and unloaded 440,000 copies of the brochure ‘Unfulfilled Order”);
id. at 4 (on 14 February 2002 Taki spravy “concludes a contract for the already printed agitation materials... “The Team
of the Block of Yulia Tymoshenko”); Hearing on the Merits, Transcript, Volume III, at 43:25 to 44:3 (Counsel for
Respondent stated that “there is no evidence that Produkt BVO ordered either, “Unfulfilled Order”, or the official
campaign materials of bloc of Yulia Tymoschenko. That is the point”.).

allegations of criminal conduct, seized documents and computer hardware from the
company, investigated its clients and suppliers, pursued criminal investigations of the
company’s management, froze the company’s assets, issued demands for tax payments, and
pursued court actions to nullify the company’s contracts. I will address several of these
events below but, for present purposes, will focus on the unrebutted inferences to be drawn

from when they occurred.

My colleagues find that the timing of the State’s actions is inconsistent with a political
motive, which, in their estimation, “could be expected to produce an immediate and intense
burst of hostile activity, dying down quite rapidly once the election had terminated in favour
of the existing regime.”* In the present case, they conclude that “the intensity of the attack

> At the same time, however, they

seems to have grown with time, rather than diminishing.
suggest that if the State officials had been politically motivated, they would have waited
until after the election to act to avoid “the risk of promoting a campaign of injustice against
the supporters of their political opponents, when within a very few weeks the outcome of the

election might have installed those opponents in the high places themselves.”'°

First, I agree with my colleagues that the presence of a political motive would be expected
to produce an immediate and intense burst of hostile activity. But in my view, such a period
of activity clearly did occur. In fact, after the initial inspection of Taki spravy on 14
February 2002, the State’s tax authorities entered the company’s premises no less than six
times over a three-week period from 22 February to 15 March to search for and seize
documents.'' The nature of these inspections was described in the written testimony of Taki
spravy’s chief accountant in which he described one episode “when more than 10 men
intruded my office...I unwillingly recalled the terrible times of Stalin’s repressions. They

ransacked and searched all over: turned everything upside down.”

The initial “burst” of activity also included STA’s 25 March Press Statement containing the
allegations of money laundering and election law violations that the State acknowledged at
the hearing were not being investigated at the time the release was distributed. Further, Taki

spravy was subject to at least three written demands for the production of documents during

§ See Award at paragraph 135.
° Id.

"Td.

"! The documentation of the searches and seizures of documents from Taki spravy can be found at Annexes 11, 14, 15,
16, 21, and 23 (submitted with Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits).

' Witness Statement by Taki spravy’s Chief Accountant Halyna Rozora, Annex 20 (submitted with Claimant’s Reply
on the Merits).

this early period of the disputes.'? Thus, in my view, the record shows that there was an
immediate and intense burst of hostile action toward Taki spravy that supports Claimant’s

argument that actions were politically motivated.

Second, I agree with my colleagues that the State’s actions did not die down rapidly after the

election but disagree that this weakens Claimant’s argument. Once the investigation was

 

launched, it is not at all surprising that it would continue rather than suddenly cease after the
election, if only because of bureaucratic zeal and the desire to avoid the appearance of
political motivation. But more importantly, the State’s political incentive to continue its
actions against Taki spravy hardly diminished after the 31 March 2002 election. That is
because, as we noted above, BYT’s parliamentary campaign was understood to be a
challenge to President Kuchma himself and a prelude to the presidential election that would
occur two years later.'* Thus, even after the pro-government coalition retained power in

March 2002, the State had a continuing reason to punish the supporters and commercial

suppliers of its political opponents in anticipation of the next election.

also disagree that if the State’s officials were politically motivated they would have waited
until after the election to act against Taki spravy in order to avoid the risk of retaliation in
the event that the BYT gained power. I believe that the opposite is true. A political motive
would prompt State officials to act when they did—before the election—in order to
influence the outcome in their favour, maintain power, and prevent their opponents from

obtaining positions of authority.
2. Absence of Justification for the State’s Actions

The State’s failure to provide justification for many of its actions against Taki spravy, either
at the time the actions were taken or during these arbitral proceedings, also supports
Claimant’s contention that those actions were politically motivated. The STA Press
Statement of 25 March 2002 is the most glaring example. It states that “there was

discovered an active participant of illegal activity, namely...‘Taki spravy’” and accuses the

company of “active participation in the activities of a diversified network for the legalization

'S Letter from Solomiansky Tax Service to Taki spravy from 14 February 2002, Annex 4 (submitted with Claimant’s

Memorial on the Merits); List of Questions Attached to Certificate of Investigation from 14 February 2002, Annex 7
(submitted with Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits); Letter from Solomiansky Tax Service to Taki Spravy from 18
February 2002, Annex 8 (submitted with Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits).

'4 See Award at paragraph 8.

of ‘dirty’ money.” It adds that Central Election Commission of Ukraine had “authorized

the tax service to check information about violations of election legislation.” '° On the same
day that STA issued the release, it directed local tax authorities to obtain widespread media
coverage of the release,” which was ultimately published in at least 124 newspapers across

Ukraine. '*

14. During the hearing on the merits, the State’s tax officials acknowledged that STA had

decided not to investigate Taki spravy for money laundering three weeks before it issued the

 

Press Statement accusing the company of that crime.'° The officials also conceded that
STA could not have investigated election law violations as it had no authority to do so.2” A

State tax offi

 

‘ial also conceded in his testimony that the allegations in the Press Statement
were inaccurate.”! Despite this acknowledgement, the STA never issued a press release to
correct these errors and in fact never withdrew the press release, which remains on the STA
website as of the date of this Award.” In my view, the STA Press Statement demonstrates
both an absence of a legitimate justification for the State’s actions and an intent to harm the

business reputation of Claimant’s enterprise.

15. Thus, I agree with the observation of my colleagues that it is “disturbing” that the State
made no attempt to explain why the STA made these inaccurate statements or why they
were not corrected. I agree with them that “[t]he episode casts a shadow over the entire
behaviour and standards of the tax authorities.”** My colleagues further state that if the
Press Statement had been “entirely unprompted” then “there might have been grounds” to
find that it is “evidence of a conspiracy being put into effect.”** They reject such finding,
however, because the Press Statement “was a response to criticisms published on the
website of the Bloc some days previously.””* I fail to see how the BYT release mitigates

responsibility for the unfounded allegations in the Press Statement or disproves the

'S Declaration from the Press Service of the State Tax Administration of Ukraine, Annex 25, at 1 (submitted with
Claimants Memorial on the Merits) (emphasis added).

6 Declaration from the Press Service of the State Tax Administration of Ukraine, Annex 25, at 2 (submitted with
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits) (emphasis added).

” Letter from the State Tax Administration of Ukraine to Local Tax Administrations of 25 March 2002, Annex 26
(submitted with Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits).

'S Claimant submitted a compilation of these newspaper articles as Annex Volume II of its Memorial on the Merits.

Hearing on the Merits, Transcript, Volume III, at 240:15 to 241:5; Hearing on the Merits, Transcript Volume IV at

102:14-23.
20 Hearing on the Merits, Transcript, Volume III, at 245:4-11.
2! Hearing on the Merits, Transcript, Volume IV, at 105:9-18.
» See State Tax Administration of Ukraine, Declaration of the Press Service, at
http://www. sta.gov.ua/news.php3?1439.
3 See Award at paragraph 128.
Td.

Id.

 

existence of a political motive. If my colleagues are suggesting that the errors were the
product of a hastily written document, I cannot agree because the BYT release was issued on
March 6, two-and-half weeks before the STA release. Moreover, whether or not the STA
release was a response to the BYT’s criticisms, why did the Release not state any accurate

legal grounds for an investigation?

16. The record contains additional evidence that the State’s actions lacked legal justification.
For example, on 1 April 2002, STA brought a complaint against Produkt BVO and Taki
spravy in Economic Court, alleging that the companies were evading taxes and that one of
the companies was pursuing objectives “in conflict with the interests of the state.””° The
Court invited STA to provide “explanations and requisite proofs,” which STA declined to
do and the Court thus dismissed the complaint for lack of evidence.”’ This case
demonstrates the State’s inclination to bring even unsubstantiated actions against Taki
spravy thus lending support to Claimant’s contention that the intent was to harass and

impede the business of the company.

17. In addition, the “tax demands” that the authorities “mistakenly” issued in July and August of
2002, like the Press Statement, demonstrate the lack of justification for the State’s actions
and its refusal to correct erroneous allegations that it publicly broadcast against Taki
spravy.”*> Two weeks after the company challenged these demands in court,”’ the tax
authorities informed Taki spravy that the demands had been “formed in an automatic
regime...and were mistakenly sent to your address.”*” In response, Taki spravy brought an
action in court requesting that the tax authorities be ordered to issue a public correction of
the erroneously issued demands.*! That is because the demands had been published in the

media, including their dire warnings that all of the assets of Taki spravy were under tax

*6 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 32.

?7 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at Annex 67.

°8 First Tax Demand from the Solomiansky Tax Service to Taki spravy from 22 July 2002, Annex 128 (submitted with
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits); Second Tax Demand from the Solomiansky Tax Service to Taki spravy from 7
August 2002, Annex 137 (submitted with Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits).

?° Claim from Taki spravy to the Economic Court of Ukraine from 19 August 2002, Annex 150 (submitted with
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits).

* Letter from the Solomiansky Tax Service to Taki spravy from 3 September 2002, Annex 158 (submitted with
Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits).

*! Claimant Statement from Taki spravy to the Solomiansky District Court in Kyiv from 11 November 2001, Annex 201
(submitted with Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits).

20.

mortgage and would be sold at auction in the event of non-payment. Notwithstanding the

tax authorities’ acknowledgment of its error, the Court dismissed Taki spravy’s complaint.*?

My colleagues note that the warrants for the searches of Taki spravy’s premises and seizures
of the company’s documents failed clearly to identify the legal grounds on which they were
issued, as acknowledged by the State’s witness.*? They find, however, that “it is hard to
see” how the absence of legal justification “can have caused additional damage to Taki
spravy.”*' I respectfully submit that this is not the point. Claimant does not argue that the
lack of legal justification adds to its damages but rather that it provides evidence that the
State lacked a valid motive and its actions could not be characterized as bona fide exercises
of investigatory authority. My colleagues, however, conclude that the lack of justification
actually argues against political motive because “if the tax authorities were willing to lend
themselves to a secret, dishonest and oppressive misuse of their power they would surely
have taken the trouble to cover their tracks by making their paperwork look right.”*> A
more plausible explanation, in my view, is that the searches and seizures in fact lacked legal

justification.

Finally, with respect to the criminal proceedings against Mr. Danylov, Claimant presented
evidence that the proceeding was first initiated to punish Taki spravy for assisting BYT and
later reopened to coerce Claimant into withdrawing its treaty claim.*° In my view, this
evidence shifted the burden to Respondent to demonstrate the existence of a legal
justification consistent with applicable treaty norms. It refused to do so. Indeed, when the
Tribunal posed the question to counsel for Respondent,*” counsel referred the Tribunal to its
earlier statement that “Respondent sees no justifying reason to conduct, in an international
investment arbitration proceeding a detailed discussion regarding closure of a criminal case

and cancellation of such closure, whatever the motives and/or reasons for them....”>*

My colleagues “accept that a manifest and gross failure to comply with the elementary
principles of justice in the conduct of criminal proceedings, when directed towards an

investor in the operation of his investment, may be a breach, or an element in a breach, of an

* Decision from the Solomiansky District Court in Kyiv to Danylov S.V. from 5 December 2002, Annex 210
(submitted with Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits).

* See Award at paragraph 131.

“Id

Td.

*° See Direct Examination of O. Danylov, Hearing on the Merits, Transcript, Volume II, at 15:1-17; 17:1 to 18:6; 29:24
to 30:23; 32:21 to 33:25.

*7 Hearing on the Meri
** Hearing on the Merits, Transcript, Volume I, at 171:20 to 172:1.

. Transcript, Volume I, at 265:24 to 266:12.

 

 

21.

investment treaty.”*° They are unable to conclude, however, that the State’s repeated
openings and closings of the case against Mr. Danylov transgress that standard. Even
assuming that a departure from elementary principles of justice must be manifest and gross
in order to give rise to a breach of Article 3 — a standard I believe to set the bar too high” —
that standard is surely met where the State refuses to provide any justification for acts
which, on the evidence, appear arbitrary or to raise serious questions about their motivation.
If an ICSID tribunal may consider whether the conduct of criminal proceedings has
breached the provisions of a treaty — a competence which all members of this Tribunal
maintain exists in this case — then a respondent state must offer an explanation or
justification for the acts called into question. If it fails to do so, a tribunal must decide the

issue based on the credible evidence submitted by the claimant.

For the foregoing reasons, I find that Respondent has breached Article 3 of the Treaty and
must therefore, respectfully, dissent from the majority’s decision that Claimant has failed to

establish such a breach.

/signed/

Mr. Daniel M. Price
Arbitrator
Date: 29 June 2007

* See Award at paragraph 133.
“© If there is in fact a “failure to comply with elementary principles of justice,” it is unclear why such failure must be
manifest and gross.

