SCC No V 2014/169

FINAL AWARD

ED \)
Claimants
vs.
THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS
Respondent
Before the Arbitral Tribunal composed of
Yves Derains, Chairman

Prof. Andrea Giardina, Co-Arbitrator

Sophie Nappert, Co-Arbitrator

INDEX

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I, PROCEDURE 3
ll. FACTS 32
Ill. POSITION OF THE PARTIES. 33
A. Claimants’ position 33
a) Claimants’ position on jurisdiction 33

b) Claimants’ position on the MeCits 0.0.0... cesses eeseereeeeeeeeeeeetseeeseeestetetsteseeeeneeeeee OT

B. Respondent's position 40
a) Respondent's position on jurisdiction ............ccceccesecsecessessesseesssrenesensesreeeneeenceneeee 40

b) Respondent's position on the MEeTitS..........cccececeeses tee eseeeeseeseeeeneeeesesestseaeseeneeesnensaee 43

IV. DISCUSSION 50
A. Was there an expropriation of Claimants’ investment? .. 53
a) Claimants’ in t 53

i. Claimants’ initial position regarding the investment at stake... cee 54

ii. Claimants’ latest position regarding the investment at stake... 59

 

b) Claimants’ expropriation of their investment

Vv. COSTS 65

PROCEDURE

On 5 December 2014, Mcssrs. QD oi IND filed 2

Request for Arbitration against the Republic of Cyprus before the Arbitration Institute
of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (“the SCC”). Claimants appointed Mr. Jakob
Ragnwaldh, Mannheimer Swartling Advokatbyra Ab, Box 1711, SE-111 87 Stockholm,
Sweden, as arbitrator. This Request for Arbitration was accompanied by powers of

attorney dated 26 November 2014.

On 8 December 2014, the SCC acknowledged receipt of Claimants’ Request for
Arbitration and indicated that the persons in charge of the case at the SCC would be Ms.

Lotta Knapp and Ms. Linda Herrlund.

On the same date, the SCC informed the Republic of Cyprus that Messrs. GD

GERD 2): GRD 11.201 filed a Request for Arbitration against it and

that it had until 5 January 2015 to submit its Answer to the Request for Arbitration (the

“Answer’).

On 30 December 2014, Mrs. Elena Zachariadou. attorney of the Republic of Cyprus.

requested that Respondent be granted a 30-day extension to file its Answer.

On the same date. the SCC invited Claimants to submit their comments to Respondent's

request for an extension by 2 January 2015.

On 1 January 2015, Claimants objected to the length of the requested extension and

indicated that they were willing to agree to a 15-day extension.

On 2 January 2015, the SCC granted Respondent until 20 January 2015 to submit its

Answer.

On 20 January 2015, Respondent provided its Answer in which it appointed Professor
Avv. Andrea Giardina, Chiomenti Studio Legale, Via XXIV Maggio, 43, 00187 Rome,

Italy, as arbitrator. Powers of attorney were also submitted.

On 5 February 2015, the SCC informed the parties that the arbitrators appointed by the
parties had 21 days to appoint the Chairperson and that if no agreement was reached by

26 February 2015. the SCC Board would make the appointment.

On 5 February 2015, Claimants informed the SCC that the partics had agreed to give the
party-appointed arbitrators a period of 21 days to agree. in consultation with them, on a
Chairperson and that failing an agreement, the SCC Board would have to make the

appointment.

On 26 February 2015, Claimants informed the SCC that the parties had agreed to extend

for 14 days the period to agree on a Chairperson.

On 27 February 2015, Respondent contirmed the parties’ agreement regarding the

extension.

On the same date, the SCC granted the parties until 12 March 2015 to agree on the

appointment of a Chairperson.

On 13 March 2015, the SCC requested the parties to inform it whether the arbitrators

appointed by the parties had reached an agreement on a Chairperson.

On 15 March 2015, Respondent indicated that the parties were unable to reach an

agreement on a Chairperson.

On 16 March 2015, Claimants confirmed the failure of the parties to agree on a

Chairperson.

On 24 March 2015, the SCC informed the parties that the Board appointed as Chairman
of the Arbitral Tribunal Mr. Yves Derains. Derains & Gharavi. 25 rue Balzac, 75008

Paris.

On 25 March 2015, the SCC submitted the file of the case to the Arbitral Tribunal and

informed it that the award had to be rendered by 25 September 2015.

On the same date, the Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal informed the parties that, in

accordance with Article 23 of the Arbitration Rules of the Stockholm Chamber of

nN
an

Commerce (“the Rules”), the Arbitral Tribunal would contact them promptly in order to

establish a provisional time table for the conduct of the arbitration.

On 2 April 2015, the Arbitral Tribunal informed the parties of its will to organize a
conference call with them to discuss a provisional timetable in accordance with Article
23 of the Arbitration Rules and accordingly proposed some dates. It also provided a
Draft Procedural Order no. | for the parties’ comments by 15 April 2015. Lastly, it
proposed to appoint as Secretary to the Arbitral Tribunal, Ms. Catherine Schroeder,
associate at Derains & Gharavi, 25 rue Balzac, 75008 Paris. specifying that she would
not receive any remuneration from the parties and that only her reasonable costs would

be refunded. Her resume was attached.

On 6 April 2015, Respondent provided dates for a conference call and indicated that it
consented to the appointment of Ms. Catherine Schroeder as Secretary to the Arbitral

Tribunal.

On 8 April 2015, Respondent wrote a letter to Mr. Ragnwaldh in which it requested that
the later provide clarifications. by 10 April 2015, regarding his role as counsel in the
Toan Micula case against Romania and the European Commission and concluded that he

should resign as arbitrator. Mr. Ragnwaldh subsequently resigned.

On 12 April 2015, Mr. Derains indicated to the parties that he was chairing an Arbitral
Tribunal where the relationship between EU law and intra-EU investment treaties was
among the issues involved but specified that, as he was not acting as counsel, he did not

see it as a circumstance impacting his independence or impartiality.

On 13 April 2015, Claimants thanked the Chairman for its disclosure and requested. for
the sake of good order that Professor Giardina disclose whether he was currently
involved in any proceedings where the relationship between EU law and intra-EU

investment treaties was among the issues to be resolved.

On the same date, and in the light of Mr. Ragnwaldh’s resignation, Claimants also
requested that the preparatory conference cal] be postponed until Mr. Ragnwaldh is
replaced. They also requested a postponement of the deadline to provide comments to
Procedural Order no. | and indicated that they consented to the appointment of Ms.

Catherine Schroeder as Secretary to the Arbitral Tribunal.

5

26.

32.

33.

36.

On 14 April 2015, the Arbitral Tribunal indicated that it agreed to the postponement of.
the conference call as well as to the postponement of the deadline fixed to comment on

the Draft Procedural Order no. 1.

On the same date, Professor Giardina confirmed to the parties not being involved in any
proceedings where the issue of the relationship of EU law with intra-EU bilateral

treaties was among the issues to be resolved.

On the same date. the SCC forwarded Claimants’ letter of 13 April 2015 where they
requested an extension of 7 days to the deadline by which they had to appoint a new
arbitrator, ie. until 24 April 2015. The SCC invited Respondent to provide any
comments by 16 April 2015.

On the same date, Respondent indicated that it had no objection to Claimants” request

for an extension until 24 April 2015 to appoint a new arbitrator.
On 5 May 2015, Claimants appointed Dr. Richard Happ as arbitrator.

On 8 May 2015, the SCC provided to the parties the confirmation of Dr. Richard Happ

as well as his resume.
On the same date, the SCC submitted the file of the case to Dr. Richard Happ.

On 12 May 2015, Respondent sent a letter to Dr. Richard Happ requesting that he

provide further information on certain cases where he was acting as counsel.

On 15 May 2015. Dr. Richard Happ provided explanations as to his activities as

counsel.

On 18 May 2015, the Arbitral Tribunal indicated that it was time to schedule a
conference call to organize further steps of the proceedings and proposed some dates to
the parties. It also submitted a revised version of the draft Procedural Order no. 1 for the

parties’ comments by 26 May 2015.

On 25 May 2015, Respondent informed the SCC of its challenge to the appointment of

Dr. Richard Happ as co-arbitrator.

39.

40.

4}.

43.

44,

46.

On 26 May 2015, Claimants made two comments to the revised version of the Draft

Procedural Order no. 1 and provided their availabilities for a conference call.

On the same date, the SCC invited Claimants and the members of the Arbitral Tribunal

to comment on the challenge made by Respondent by 2 June 2015.

On 27 May 2015, the Arbitral Tribunal acknowledged receipt of Claimants’ comments
to the Draft Procedural Order no. | and indicated that they were duly taken into account.
In the light of Respondent's challenge to the nomination of Dr. Richard Happ. the
Arbitral Tribunal indicated that the conference call had to be postponed until the
Arbitral Tribunal has been definitely constituted but specified that Respondent's

comments on Draft Procedural Order no. 1 were still expected.
On the same date, Respondent provided its comments to draft Procedural Order no. 1.

On the same date, Claimants requested an extension until 9 June 2015 for filing their

comments on Respondent's challenge of Dr. Richard Happ.

On the same date, the SCC granted Claimants an extension until 7 June 2015 to submit
its comments to the challenge and indicated that the SCC Board would make a decision

in this regard on 10 June 2015.

On 2 June 2015, Dr. Richard Happ wrote to the SCC regarding Respondent's letter
dated 25 May 2015 as well as his challenge.

On 7 June 2015, Claimants provided their comments on Respondent's challenge of

Dr. Richard Happ.

On 16 July 2015, the SCC indicated that Respondent’s challenge of Dr. Richard Happ
was sustained and that Claimants were requested to appoint an arbitrator by 23 July

2015.

On 23 July 2015, Claimants informed the SCC that they had appointed Ms. Sophie
Nappert. 3 Verulam Buildings, Gray’s Inn, London WCIR NT, United Kingdom, as

arbitrator.

47.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

On 28 July 2015, the SCC transferred the case to Ms. Nappert and indicated that the

award had to be rendered by 25 September 2015.

On the same date, the Chairman indicated that the Arbitral Tribunal being constituted
that day, the award could not be rendered by 25 September 2015. It was added that the
Arbitral Tribunal would establish a time schedule and asked the SCC to fix on this basis

a date for rendering the Final Award.

On 10 August 2015, the SCC requested that the Arbitral Tribunal submit a timetable.

On 3 September 2015. the Arbitral Tribunal sent a Draft Procedural Order no. | to the
parties (including the previous comments) for discussion during a conference call. Such
conference call was held between the parties and the Arbitral Tribunal on 7 September

2015.

On the same date, the Arbitral Tribunal submitted to the parties Procedural Order no. 1

which reads:

“Whereas a conference cull hetween the Parties and the Arbitral Tribunal was held on 7

September 2015:

Whereas the Parties agreed that Me Catherine Schroeder be appointed as Secretary of

the Tribunal;
Whereas it was specified that Me. Catherine Schroeder will not receive any remuneration
from the parties and that only her reasonable costs would be reimbursed as costs of the

arbitration;

Whereas the Secretary to the Arbitral Tribunal will onlv provide administrative and

logistical tasks:

The Arbitral Tribunal hereby issues the following decisions and directions applicable

as from the date of this Procedural Order:

J. SEQUENCE OF THE PROCEEDINGS / PROVISIONAL TIMETABLE

 

1.1, The sequence and timing of the proceedings shall be the following:

 

 

DATE

PARTY

DESCRIPTION

 

30 October 2015

Claimants

© Statement of Claim with

Witness Statements if
applicable (experts and

witnesses of fact)

 

16 November 2015

Respondent

Objections to the jurisdiction of
the Arbitral Tribunal and request

Sor bifurcation

 

7 December 2015

Claimants

Comments on Respondent's
objections to the jurisdiction of
the Arbitral Tribunal and on

request for bifurcation

 

21 December 2015

Tribunal Arbitral

proceedings

Decision on bifurcation of the

 

11 January 2016

 

Tribunal

Arbitral/Parties

 

Conference call to organise

continuation of the proceedings

 

 

1.2. Extensions of time shall be granted by the Arbitral Tribunal in its discretion,

in exceptional cases only and provided that a request is submitted before or,

if not possible, immediately after the event preventing a Party from

complying with the deadline. The Parties may also grant between themselves

short extensions of time, on the basis of mutual courtesy, as long as they do

not materially affect the timetable and that the Arbitral Tribunal is informed.

Written pleadings and other formal submissions together with testimonial

evidence shall be sent to each member of the Arbitral Tribunal and the

opposing party simultaneously by email, followed by courier dispatched not

later than the second business day following the electronic submission. The

 

written submissions and factual exhibits will be supplied in paper (Ad

 

format). Electronic versions (on a USB drive) of all written submissions,

testimonial evidence, factual and legal exhibits will also be sent by courier.

The written submi: statements and expert reports shall be

 

submitted in their electronic form as searchable pdf documents. All other
correspondence shall be sent to the Arbitral Tribunal and/or to the opposing

party by e-mail only.

All written communications shall he deemed to have been validly made only

when they have been delivered in accordance with the above timetable.

Written submissions and Documentary Evidence

w
uy

I.

 

ions Shall be munbered consecutively

 

The paragraphs of all written submi

and the submissions shall include a table of contents.

For each of their submissions, the Parties will clearly indicate the evidence
they invoke in support thereto: documents (with indication of the page and

statements, etc.

 

paragraphs), expert reports, witnes:

All documentary evidence submitted to the Arbitral Tribunal shall be
deemed true and complete. including evidence submitted in the form of

copies, unless a Party disputes its authenticity or completeness.

The written submissions shall be accompanied by the documentary evidence
and the testimonial evidence relied upon by the relevant Party, including the
legal authorities relied upon by it/them. No new document, including legal
evidence, may be presented at the hearing unless agreed by the Parties or

authorized by the Tribunal, in exceptional circumstances.

The documents shall be submitted in the following form:

a. exhibits shall be contained in separate binders, each exhibit having a
divider bearing on the tab the exhibit's identification number;
b. the exhibits shall be numbered consecutively throughout these

proceedings;

c the number of each exhibit containing a document submitted for the
main claim by Claimants shall be preceded by the letter “C” for
factual exhibits and “CL” for legal exhibits; the number of each
exhibit containing a document submitted by Respondent shall be
preceded by the letter “R” for factual exhibits and “RL” for legal
exhibits,

d. each binder containing exhibits shall contain a list of these exhibits,
setting forth for each one:

(i) the exhibit number;
(ii) its date; and
(iii) a brief description of the exhibit.
@ the lists of exhibits shall be updated with each new submission of

documents in these proceedings.

Document Production

 

3.1.

32

The Parties may request documents from each other at any time during the
proceedings. Correspondence or documents exchanged in the course of this

should not be sent to the Arbitral Tribunal.

 

proces:

To the extent that the totality of the requests referred to in section 3.1 is not

satisfied, the Parties will refer the matter to the Arbitral Tribunal.

Evidence of fact witnesses

41.

4.2.

If a Party wishes to adduce testimonial evidence in respect of its allegations,
it shall so indicate in its submissions and submit written witness statements

together with these submissions, as provided in Section 1.1.

Any person may present evidence as a witness, including a Party, a Party's

officer, employee or other representative.

Each witness statement shall:
a. contain the name and address of the witness, his or her relationship to
any of the Parties (past and present, if any) and a description of his or

her qualifications;

44.

46.

47.

4.8.

b, contain a full and detailed description of the facts, and the source of
the witness” information as to those facts, sufficient to serve as that
witness’ evidence in the matter in dispute;

c. contain an affirmation of the truth of the statement;

d. be signed by the witness and give the date and place of signature; and

e identify with specificity any document or other material relied on, As a
general rule, no documents or other material should be attached to

the Witness Statement.

If a Party wishes to cross-examine a witness whose statement has been filed

 

by the other Party, it should request the presence of this witness at the
hearing referred to in section 1.1. for cross-examination, as provided in

sible

  

section 4.5 ; otherwise. the witness statement will be considered admi:
evidence, subject to the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal, as provided in

section 4.9.

On or before the date mentioned in paragraph 1.1. supra, each Party shall
notify the other Party, with a copy to the Arbitral Tribunal, of the names of
the witnesses of the other Party whom that Party wishes to cross-examine at

the witness hearing.

Being duly informed of the date of the hearings, the Parties will immediately

as quickly as possible. inform their

 

after the receipt of this Order, or at lea:
potential witnesses of these dates to secure their presence at the hearings

and avoid any disruption of the procedural calendar.

The witnesses shall, in principle. be summoned by the Party which relies on
their evidence. Where the witness should ultimately not be able to attend for
a valid reason, the Arbitral Tribunal shall hear the Parties on this issue and
decide after tuking into account all relevant circumstances, including the
Parties’ legitimate interests, what weight should be given to the testimony of

suid witnes:

 

ifany

The Arbitral Tribunal. at the request of one Party, may invite the other Party
to ensure, or to use its best efforts to ensure, the appearance for testimony at
an Evidentiary Hearing of uny person, including one whose testimony has

not yet been offered.

12

49. The admissibility, relevance, weight and materiality of the evidence offered

by a witness or a Party shall be determined by the Arbitral Tribunal.

4.10. The costs of a witness's appearance shall be borne by the Party summoning
him, without prejudice to the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal as to which

Party shall ultimately bear those costs and to which extent.

Evidence of expert witnesses

5.1. The provisions of Section 4 of this Order are applicable, mutatis mutandis,
to expert witnesses if any, with the exception of the last sentence of Article
4.3 e). The expert shall identify his or her area of expertise. The expert's
report will contain the expert’s opinion including a description of the

method, evidence and information used in arriving at the conclusions,

5.2. The Arbitral Tribunal may also appoint one or more experts pursuant to

Article 29 of the SCC Rules.

Witness hearing
6.1. Each Party will first make an opening statement.

6.2. The procedure for examining witnesses at the witness hearing shall be the

following:

a. Claimants’ witnesses will be examined first, followed by Respondent's
witmesses.

6. Each witness shall first be invited to confirm or deny his or her
written Statement.

ce The Party presenting the witness will have the right to make a short
direct examination of that witness on new facts or developments, if
any, which would have taken place since the date of filing of his/her
last witness statement. Such examination should not exceed five
minutes.

d. The opposing Party shall then proceed to cross-examine the witness,
followed by a re-examination by the first Party. The scope of the

cross-examination will be strictly limited to the content of the witness

13

6.3.

64.

statement, any issue regarding the credibility of the witness and any
other topic specified hy the party proceeding to the cross-examination
at the time such party asked that the witness be heard. The scope of
the re-examination shall be limited to matters that have arisen in the
cross-examination. The Arbitral Tribunal mav authorize re-cross
examination under certain circumstances.

e. The Arbitral Tribunal shall have the right to examine the witnesses
and exceptionally to interject questions during the examination by

counsel. It shall ensure that each Party has the opportunity to re-

 

examine a witness with respect to questions raised by the Arbitral

Tribunal.

ft The Arbitral Tribunal shall at all times have complete control over the

procedure in relation to a witness giving oral evidence, including the
right to limit or exclude any question when it considers that the
particular question is irrelevant or unnecessarily hurdensome or

duplicative.

Witnesses will not be heard under oath but the Chairman shall draw their
attention to the fact that the Arbitral Tribunal requests them to tell the truth,

the entire truth and nothing but the truth and shall ask them to confirm that

  

they will comply with this reques

Witnesses of fact may not be present in the hearing room during the

 

examination of other witnesses of fact, unless the Parties agree otherwis
However, this rule does not apply to Parties’ representatives (no more than
two on each side, unless the Parties agree otherwise) or to witnesses of fact
who have already given their testimony, who have the right to remain in the
hearing room at all times. If Parties’ representatives are also witnesses, they

should be cross-examined first. Experts, any, may be present in the

 

hearing room at any time.

At the end of the hearing, the Parties may make closing statements or, on a
date following the hearing, file post-hearing briefs on their conclusions of
A

decision as to whether there will be closing statements and/or post-hearing

 

evidence gathered during the hearing and on their legal argument.

briefs is reserved.

14

6.6. The hearing shall be transcribed by court reporters, the costs of which are to
be advanced by each Party in equal shares, without prejudice to the decision
of the Arbitral Tribunal as to which Party shall ultimately bear these costs
and to which extent. The hiring of the court reporters will be done by the

Parties themselves.

6.7. The use of demonstrative exhibits (such as charts, presentations, etc.) is
allowed at the witness hearing, provided that no new evidence is contained
therein. A hard copy of anv such exhibit shall simultaneously be provided by
the Party submitting such exhibit to the other Parties and to each member of
the Arbitral Tribunal. The Parties shall exchange copies of proposed
demonstrative exhibits no later than three days before the first day of the

hearing.

7. Translations and interpretation

71. Documents and authorities in another language than English will be

 

filed with an English translation. For documents and authorities, only the
relevant parts have to be translated. Each translation shall be deemed to be

correct unless a Party disputes its correctness.

7.2. Oral testimonies in another language than English will have to be
interpreted in English. The cost of interpretation will be advanced by the
Party presenting the witness but will be included in the costs of the

arbitration.

8 Amendments

8.1. This Procedural Order No. | may be amended or supplemented, and the
procedures for the conduct of this arbitration modified, pursuant to such
further directions or Procedural Orders as the Arbitral Tribunal may issue

in the future”.

52. On the same date. the Arbitral Tribunal indicated to the SCC that a provisional
timetable had been agreed upon and requested that the time limit for issuing the award

be extended.

53.

54,

55.

56.

57.

On 17 September 2015, after having given the parties the opportunity to express their
views, the SCC indicated that the Final Award was to be rendered by | February 2017.

On 30 October 2015, Claimants submitted their Statement of Claim.

On 16 November 2015, Respondent submitted its Objections to the jurisdiction of the

Arbitral Tribunal and Request for Bifurcation.

On 7 December 2015, Claimants provided their comments on Respondent’s Objections

to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal and Request for Bifurcation.
On 10 December 2015, the Arbitral Tribunal issued Procedural Order no. 2 which reads:

“Whereas in accordance with Procedural Order no. 1, Respondent provided on 16
November 2015 its Objections to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal and its request

for bifurcation;

Whereas, in accordance with Procedural Order no. 1, Claimants provided on 7
December 2015 their comments to Respondents’ objection to the jurisdiction and request

for bifurcation;

Whereas Respondent indicated that it had four jurisdictional objections but that it
requested bifurcation only with regard to the first jurisdictional objection which is based

on the limited scope of the Treaty’s dispute resolution clause;

Whereas Respondent explained that Article 9 of the Agreement between the Republic of
Cyprus and the Republic of Poland dated 4 June 1992 (the “Treaty” or the “BIT”)
provides only for arbitration of disputes “concerning expropriation of an investment”,

showing the Contracting Parties’ consent to arbitration of expropriation claims only;

Whereas it added that such clause limiting the consent to arbitrate is commonly used and

that Cyprus and Poland have utilized it in their BIT’s with other countries;

Whereas Respondent stated that as ‘(...) Article 9 allow[s] for one ordinary meaning and
do not leave the meaning “ambiguous or obscure” or lead to a result which is

“manifestly absurd or unreasonable” when interpreted in accordance with Article 31 of

16

the VCLT, the Tribunal is required to give effect to that ordinary meaning and cannot

resort to supplementary means of interpretation to justify an alternative reading”:

Whereas it was also argued that arbitral tribunals have consistently enforced similar
dispute resolution clauses and rejected claimant's attempt to expand the scope of the

dispute resolution clause hy invoking the Treaty MFN clause;

Whereas case law was brought in support of the latter argument;

Whereas Respondent also asserted that Claimants’ attempt to circumvent the limitations
of Article 9 by relying on a purported MEN clause in Article 7 of the BIT has no basis as
Article 7 does not constitute a MFN provision but a “preservation of rights” or “without

prejudice” clause which provides for investors from the home State under the BIT to

 

receive the more favourable treatment that is actually provided to them by the provis
of the host State's law but do not convert obligations of the host State to third-party

nationals into obligations owed to the home State's nationals;

Whereas additionally, Respondent indicated that in fact the parties had contemplated for
an MEN Clause in Article 3 (2) of the BIT which is very limited and which prevents the

parties from relying on it to expand the scope of Article 9:

Whereas, in any case even, if Article 7 of the Treaty was to provide MFN treatment to
Claimants, Claimants could only enforce that right by bringing a claim for breach of

Article 7;

Whereas finally Respondent concluded that its request for bifurcation should be granted
by the Arbitral Tribunal as its preliminary objection is correct, would result in efficiency

gains if granted and is not intertwined with the merits;

Whereas the Arbitral Tribunal finds that this issue is not intertwined with the merits and
that it will not have a considerable impaet on the proceedings as the parties have already
substantiated their arguments and the Arbitral Tribunal does not anticipate a hearing
which length would exceed one day;

Whereas, in addition, Claimant indicated that it is leaving to the Arbitral Tribunal the
discretion to decide whether to bifurcate, specifying that if “the members of the Tribunal
consider that bifurcation of the proceedings is in the interest of this arbitration, Claimant

do not object to bifurcation”:

17

58.

59,

60.

Whereas in view of the above, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that the bifurcation of the

proceedings is appropriate;

Whereas consequently, for the time being, the arguments on the merits developed by

Claimant in response to Respondent's first objection do not need to be developed;

Whereas by Procedural Order no. 1, it was decided that a Conference call would be held
on 11 January 2016 among the parties and the Arbitral Tribunal in order to discuss

Further steps of the proceedings;

The Arbitral Tribunal hereby issues the following decisions and directions applicable

as from the date of this Procedural Order:

1, The proceedings are bifurcated in order to deal first with Respondent's objection
based on the limited scope of the Treaty’s dispute resolution clause (article 9 of the

BIT);

nN

Further steps of the proceedings will be discussed at the conference call of 11

January 2016".

The Arbitral Tribunal also indicated that, in order to speed up the procedure, it would be
willing to hold the conference call on 21 December 2015 if the parties were available
and invited the parties to indicate whether it was the case. It added that it wished the
parties to liaise with regard to further steps of the proceedings and revert to the Arbitral

Tribunal in that regard before the conference call.

On 15 December 2015, Respondent indicated that it would be available on 21 December

2015 and added that if Claimants were available they would liaise before with them.

On 17 December 2015, the Arbitral Tribunal recalled to Claimants that they had to

indicate whether they would be available for a conference call on 21 December 2015.

On the same date, Claimants indicated that they had not been able to reschedule
previous meetings and thus that they preferred to preserve the originally agreed time for

the call.

18

61.

63.

65.

67.

On 18 December 2015, the Arbitral Tribunal confirmed the conference call scheduled

on 11 January 2016 at 2.00 pm (Paris time).

On 6 January 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal reminded the parties that it expected them to
liaise with regard to further steps of the proceedings before the conference call to be

held on 11 January 2016 and invited them to do so by 8 January 2016.

On 7 January 2016, the parties indicated that they had liaised and that they would share

their thinking with the Arbitral Tribunal at the conference call of 11 January 2016.

On the same date, the Arbitral Tribunal thanked the parties and confirmed its agreement

to the proposal of the parties to indicate their thoughts at the conference call.

On 11 January 2016, a conference call was held between the parties and the Arbitral

Tribunal.
On the same date, the Arbitral Tribunal confirmed that:

- Respondent had to submit by 25 January 2016 its comments to Claimants’
comments dated 7 December 2015 relating to the jurisdictional issue object of the

decision of bifurcation;

- Claimants had to submit by 8 February 2016 their comments to Respondent's

submission of 25 January 2016.

- As the parties had declared that they did not request a hearing on the jurisdictional
issue object of the bifurcation, the Arbitral Tribunal would render its award on
jurisdiction thereafter but reserved the right to ask specific questions to the parties

possibly in a teleconference.

- It was also recalled that the week of 17 October 2016 had been provisionally

booked for a hearing on the merits.

On 15 January 2016, the Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal indicated having discovered

that he had a previous commitment for the week starting 17 October 2016 and proposed

19

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

Tes

74.

Ta.

alternative dates, specifying that in case it would be impossible to change, he would try

to reschedule his previous commitment.

On 22 January 2016, the Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal indicated having noted that
Claimants and Professor Giardina would be available for a hearing from 10 to 14
October 2016 and asked whether it would also be the case for Respondent and Ms.

Sophie Nappert.
On the same date, Ms. Sophie Nappert confirmed her availability for such period.

On 25 January 2016, Respondent provided its Rejoinder on Preliminary Objection to

jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal.

On 26 January 2016, Respondent confirmed its availability for a hearing from 10 to 14
October 2016.

On the same date, the Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal thanked his colleagues and the
parties for accepting that change and confirmed that a hearing would take place from 10

to 14 October 2016.

On 8 February 2016, Claimants indicated that all assertions regarding the first objection
to jurisdiction were uttered in their Reply to Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction
and Request for Bifurcation dated 7 December 2016 and that they were accordingly

leaving the issues exposed to the consideration of the Arbitral Tribunal.

On 10 February 2016, the parties proposed a timetable. Respondent however specified
that the schedule was conditional upon the acceptance of its objection and that it could

request an alternative schedule if the objection was denied.

On 16 February 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal confirmed its agreement to the proposed

schedule which reads:

 

DATE PARTY DESCRIPTION

 

and witnesses of fact)

 

 

 

30 October 2015 Claimants Statement of Claim with Witmess
Statements if applicable (experts

 

 

20

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Replies to Comments)

DATE PARTY DESCRIPTION

25 January 2016 Respondent Rejoinder on the Preliminary
Objection

8 February 2016 Claimants Further Comments on Preliminary
Objecti

~ 4 March 2016 Tribunal Decision on the Preliminary
Objection

29 April 2016 Respondent Statement of Defence with Witness
Statements if applicable (experts
and witnesses of fact)

6 May 2016 (1 week after | Claimants / Either or both Parties may request

Statement of Defence) Respondent an order for production of
documents from the Tribunal if any
(see paras 3.4 to 3.6 below)

13 May 2016 (1 week after | Claimants/ Comments on the Request for

Request for production of | Respondent production of documents

documents)

20 May 2016 (1 week after | Claimants/ Replies to the comments on the

Comments on the | Respondent Request for production of

Requests) documents

27 May 2016 (1 week after | Tribunal Decision on the Parties’ requests

for production of documents

 

10 June 2016 (2 weeks

Claimants /

Production by Claimants /

 

 

after Tribunal’s decision) | Respondent Respondents of documents whose
production has been ordered by the
Arbitral Tribunal

29 June 2016 (2,5 weeks | Claimants Reply to the Statement of Defence

after Production of and Rebuttal Witness Statements if

documents) applicable (experts and witnesses
of fact)

9 September 2016 (2 — 2.5 | Respondent Rejoinder to the Reply and Rebuttal

Witness Statements if applicable

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

months after Reply)
(experts and witnesses of fact)

19 September 2016 Claimants / Notification of names of the
Respondent witnesses to be cross-examined

23 September 2016 Claimants/ Cut-off Date for Submitting New
Respondent Evidence (that could not have been

bi d earlier)

10-14 October 2016 Parties/ Witness Hearing and Oral

Arbitral Tribunal arguments

 

76. As the Parties waived their right to a hearing on the issue of jurisdiction, it was within

the framework of that schedule agreed by the parties that the Arbitral Tribunal rendered

its Partial Award on jurisdiction.

 

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

83.

84.

On 4 March 2016, with the parties’ agreement. the Arbitral Tribunal provided them

with an unsigned electronic copy of the Partial Award on jurisdiction.

On 8 March 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal provided the parties with the signed version of

the Partial Award on jurisdiction.

On 29 April 2016, Respondent submitted its Statement of Defense and its Memorial on

jurisdiction.

On 3 May 2016. the Arbitral Tribunal acknowledged receipt of Respondent's

submissions.

On 6 May 2016, Claimants indicated that they had received Respondent's Exhibits per
mail on 4-6 May 2016 but requested an extension of the deadline for requesting

production of documents as they did not have the opportunity to revicw the material.

On the same date. Respondent indicated that the parties agreed to propose that the
requested extension be granted. that the other dates relating to the document requests
and production be pushed by one week with the 29 June 2016 date for Claimants’ Reply

and that the other dates retained as currently scheduled.

On the same date, the Arbitral Tribunal indicated that if it was agreed by the parties, it

had no objection.

On 9 May 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal sent to the parties Procedural Order no. 3 which

reads as follows:

“Whereas by email dated 16 February 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal confirmed to the
parties that it was in agreement with the schedule proposed by the parties on 10 February

2016;

Whereas pursuant to the said schedule, the parties were to submit any request for

documents production by 6 May 2016;

22

Whereas by email dated 6 may 2016, Claimants explained that they had received
Respondent's Statement of Defence electronically on 29 April 2016 but the exhibits per

mail only on 4-6 May 2016 due to public holidays affecting the postage of the exhibits;

Whereas accordingly Claimants requested an extension for requesting documents

production until 13 May 2016;

Whereas on the same date, Respondent indicated that, having discussed with Claimants,
it was agreed by the parties that the requested extension be granted and that the other
dates relating to documents requests and production be also pushed back for one week
with the 29" June for Claimant's Reply and all the following dates retained as currently

scheduled:

Whereas in light of the parties’ agreement, the Arbitral Tribunal confirms that the parties
should submit their Request for documents production by 13 May 2016, their comments
on the Request for documents production by 20 May 2016, their Replies to the comments
on the Request for documents production by 27 May 2016. The decision of the Tribunal
will accordingly be provided by 3 June 2016 and the Parties will produce the docnments

by 17 June 2016;

Whereas the following dates of the schedule remain unchanged:

Whereas consequently Claimants will provide their Reply to the Statement of Defence by
29 June 2016 and Respondent its Statement of Rejoinder to the Reply by 9 September
2016;

Whereas all the subsequent dates remain unchanged as well;

The Arbitral Tribunal hereby issues the following decisions and directions applicable

as from the date of this Procedural Order:

Ll. The parties will submit their Request for Documents Production hy 13 May 2016;

N

The parties will submit their Comments to the Request for Documents Production

hy 20 May 2016:

23

85.

86.

87.

88.

3. The parties will submit their replies to the Comments on the Request for

Documents Production by 27 May 2016:

4. The Arbitral Tribunal will render its decision on the Request for Documents

Production by 3 June 2016;
5 The parties will provide the ordered Documents by 17 June 2016;

6. All other dates of the time schedule remain unchanged”.

On 27 May 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal pointed out that the parties were supposed to
submit their Request for documents production by 13 May 2016, which it did not

receive, and inquired on the status of this question.
On the same date, Respondent provided its completed Redfern Schedule.

On the same date, Claimants indicated that TTD Gi
iD were no longer representing Claimants and that all correspondence
should be addressed to the lead counsel, Mr. Cs]

On 3 June 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal sent to the parties Procedural Order no. 4 which

reads:

“Whereas pursuant to the timetable agreed by the parties and accepted by the Arbitral
Tribunal on 16 February 2016, the parties had to provide by 6 May 2016 their respective

order for production of documents;

Whereas on 6 May 2016, Claimants indicated that having received Respondent's
Statement of Defence electronically on 29 April 2016 and the attached exhibits per mail
only on 4-6 May 2016, they had not the chance to review all the material submitted by
Respondent and accordingly requested an extension of the deadline for requesting

production of documents, if any, until 13 May 2016;

24

Whereas on the same date, Respondent indicated that having discussed with Claimants”
counsel, it was decided to propose to the Arbitral Tribunal that the requested extension
be granted and that the other due dates relating to the document requests and production
be pushed by one week maintaining at the same time the 29 June 2016 for Claimants'

Reply;

Whereas on the same date, the Arbitral Tribunal indicated that if the requested extension

was agreed by both parties, it had no objections;

Whereas on 9 May 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal sent to the Parties Procedural Order no. 3

which reads as follows:

Whereas by email dated 16 February 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal confirmed to the
Parties that it was in agreement with the schedule proposed by the parties on 10

February 2016:

Whereas pursuant to the said schedule, the parties were to submit any request for

documents production by 6 May 2016;

Whereas hy email dated 6 may 2016. Claimants explained that they had received
Respondent's Statement of Defence electronically on 29 April 2016 but the exhibits
per mail only on 4-6 May 2016 due to public holidays affecting the postage of the

exhibits;

Whereas accordingly Claimants requested an extension for requesting documents

production until 13 May 2016,

Whereas on the same date, Respondent indicated that, having discussed with
Claimants, it was agreed by the parties that the requested extension be granted and
that the other dates relating to documents requests and production be also pushed
hack for one week with the 2%" June for Claimant's Reply and all the following

dates retained as currently scheduled:

Whereas in light of the parties’ agreement, the Arbitral Tribunal confirms that the
parties should submit their Request for documents production by 13 May 2016,
their comments on the Request for documents production by 20 May 2016, their

Replies to the comments on the Request for documents production by 27 May 2016.

25

The decision of the Tribunal will accordingly be provided by 3 June 2016 and the

Parties will produce the documents by 17 June 2016;

Whereas the following dates of the schedule remain unchanged,

Whereas consequently Claimants will provide their Reply to the Statement of
Defence by 29 June 2016 and Respondent its Statement of Rejoinder to the Reply
by 9 September 2016;

Whereas all the subsequent dates remain unchanged as well;

The Arbitral Tribunal hereby issues the following decisions and directions

applicable as from the date of this Procedural Order:

1. The parties will submit their Request for Documents Production by 13 May
2016;

2. The parties will submit their Comments to the Request for Documents

Production by 20 May 2016;

3. The parties will submit their replies to the Comments on the Request for

Documents Production by 27 May 2016:

4. The Arbitral Tribunal will render its decision on the Request for Documents

Production by 3 June 2016;
3. The parties will provide the ordered Documents by 17 June 2016;

6. All other dates of the time schedule remain unchanged.

Whereas on 27 May 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal, having received no request for

documents production from the parties, inquired on the status of such request;

Whereas on the same date, Respondent sent to the Arbitral Tribunal a complete Redfern

Schedule;

Whereas no request for documents production was received from Claimants;

26

89.

90.

91,

The Arbitral Tribunal hereby issues the following decisions and directions applicable

as from the date of this Procedural Order:

1. The decisions of the Arbitral Tribunal regarding Respondent's request for
documents production are incorporated in the Redfern Schedule submitted by

Respondent and annexed hereto as Annex”.

On 6 June 2016, Claimants submitted their Request for Documents Production,

indicating that due to external factors they had not been able to provide it timely.

On the same date, the Arbitral Tribunal acknowledged receipt of Claimants’ email and

invited Respondent to comment by 8 June 2016.

On the same date, Respondent indicated that it had no comment other than that
Claimants’ requests were extremely broad and that production would impose a
significant burden on Respondent that could not be complied with by 17 June 2016, as

contemplated in the timetable.

On 9 June 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal sent to the parties Procedural Order no. 5 which

reads:

“Whereas pursuant to Procedural Order no. 3, the parties had to provide their Request

for Documents Production by 13 May;

Whereas on 27 May 2016, date where the parties were to submit their comments to the
Request for Documents Production, the Arbitral Tribunal inquired on the status of the

Requests for Documents Production having received nothing so far;

Whereas on the same date, Respondent sent to the Arbitral Tribunal a complete Redfern

Schedule but Claimants did not send anything, as recalled in Procedural Order 4;

Whereas on 6 June 2016, Claimants submitted to the Arbitral Tribunal their Request for
Documents Production, indicating that due to external factors they had not been able to

provide it timely;

27

94.

95.

96.

Whereas on the same date, the Arhitral Tribunal invited Respondent to comment on

Claimants’ untimely Request for Documents Production by 8 Jime 2016;

Whereas on 8 June 2016, Respondent indicated that it had no comment but reiterated that

Claimants’ requests were extremely broad and that production of the said documents

  

would impose a significant burden on Respondent which could thus not complied with the

17 June 2016 deadline:

Whereas the Arbitral Tribunal notes that Respondent does not object to the admissibility

of the Request but seeks its dismissal;

Whereas accordingly the Arbitral Tribunal will declare Claimants’ Request for

Documents Production admissible;

The Arbitral Tribunal hereby issues the following decisions and directions applicable

as from the date of this Procedural Order:

L The Request for documents production submitted by Claimants on 6 June 2016 is

admissible;

2. The decisions of the Arbitral Tribunal regarding Claimants’ Request for documents
production are incorporated in the Redfern Schedule submitted by Claimants and
annexed hereto as Annex 1”.

On 30 June 2016, Claimants submitted their Reply to the Statement of Defense.

On 9 September 2016, Respondent submitted its Rejoinder.

On the same date, Claimants indicated that Mr. ED tom GD
GRD ud also act as Counsel for Claimants.

On 10 September 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal acknowledged receipt of Respondent's

Rejoinder.

28

97.

98.

99,

100.

101.

102.

104.

105.

106.

On 12 September 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal informed the parties of its will to schedule
a conference call with them in order to organise the hearing to take place on the week of

10 October 2016 and proposed dates in that regard.

On 14 September 2016, Claimants informed the Arbitral Tribunal of mutual

arrangements made by the parties regarding the hearing.

On the same date, the Arbitral Tribunal thanked the parties and indicated that it would

revert shortly to them as to the proposed agenda.

On 15 September 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal proposed some modifications to the

proposed agenda.

On the same date, Claimants indicated that the parties agreed to the agenda proposed by

the Arbitral Tribunal but proposed a slight modification.

On 20 September 2016, the Arbitral Tribuna] requested to have information on the

venue of the hearing, which was provided on the same day by Claimants.

. On 22 September 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal confirmed that a conference call would

take place on 28 September 2016.

On 23 September 2016, Claimants provided a submission on evidence. On the same
date, Respondent also provided new documents, among which the Court of Justice of

the European Union’s decision dated 20 September 2016.

On 28 September 2016, a conference call took place between the parties and the

Arbitral Tribunal.

On 29 September 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal confirmed to the parties that, in
accordance with the discussion at the conference call, they were expected to provide

their respective positions on the impact of the decision of the Court of Justice of the EU

29

107.

108.

109.

dated 20 September 2016 by 7 October 2016. It further provided a modified agenda and
recalled that the parties were to provide to the Arbitral Tribunal and to its Secretary
copies of the documents on which they would rely during their openings as wel! as

during the cross-examination of the witnesses.

On 7 October 2016, the parties provided their respective positions on the decision of the

Court of Justice of the EU dated 20 September 2016.

On 12 and 13 October 2016, a hearing took place in Stockholm.

On 14 October 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal sent to the Parties Procedural Order no. 6

which reads as follows:

“Whereas a hearing was held in Stockholm on 12 and 13 October 2016;

Whereas the Parties had the opportunity to express their respective positions on

jurisdiction as well as on the merits;
Whereas Claimants changed their position on some specific points,

Whereas in that light, the Arbitral Tribunal indicated that the submission by the Parties

of Post-Hearing Briefs would be useful:
Whereas in light of those circumstances the Arbitral Tribunal indicated that it would be
more efficient if Claimants would submit their Post-Hearing Brief first, followed by

Respondent;

Whereas the Parties did not have any objection to submitting Post-Hearing Briefs nor to

submitting them one after the other:

Whereas the parties agreed to the proposed dates for submitting their Post-Hearing
Briefs;

Whereas the Parties must also submit their Statement on Costs;

30

110.

Wil.

112.

113.

114,

115.

Whereas the Arbitral Tribunal specified that it only needed the Parties to indicate how

the costs were allocated but did not need them to provide any supporting documents;

The Arbitral Tribunal hereby issues the following decisions and directions applicable

as from the date of this Procedural Order:

i. Claimants shall submit their Post-Hearing Brief by 10 November 2016.

Nv

Respondent shall submit its Post-Hearing Brief by | December 2016.

3. The Parties shall simultaneously submit their Statement on Costs by 15 December
2016.
4. The Parties may comment, if necessary, the Statement on Costs provided by the

other party, by 22 December 2016”.

On the same date, the Arbitral Tribunal wrote to the SCC Secretariat and requested an

extension until | March 2017 for rendering its Final Award.

On 17 October 2016, the SCC Secretariat granted the requested extension and thus

confirmed that the Final Award was due by 1 March 2017.

On 20 October 2016, Claimants submitted the documents presented at the hearing with

Exhibits numbers.

On 10 November 2016, Claimants submitted their Post-Hearing Brief (“Claimants’
PHB”).

On 2 December 2016, Respondent submitted its Post-Hearing Brief (“Respondent’s
PHB”).

On 15 December 2016, the parties submitted their respective Statements on Costs.

31

116.

117.

118.

119,

120.

121.

On 19 December 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal acknowlcdged reccipt of the parties’

respective Statements on Costs.

On 22 December 2016, Respondent submitted its reply to Claimants” Statement on

Costs.

On 31 January 2017, the Arbitral Tribunal declared the proceedings closed, in

accordance with Article 34 of the Rules.

FACTS

Messrs GED and GERD Polish citizens, are the only
shareholders of QD 2 Cypriot Limited Company based in
Nicosia and registered in February 2011. This company is particularly active in the

fields of pharmaceuticals and biotechnology.

Claimants explain that in late March 2013, the Republic of Cyprus enacted a series of
legislative measures aimed at restructuring two Cypriot banks, Laiki Bank and Bank of
Cyprus. They add that around the same time, Claimants instructed the Bank of Cyprus
to make two payments for the purchase of shares in the Polish company
The Bank of Cyprus executed only the first payment but the remaining funds to be
transferred were blocked as a result of various legislative measures. They argue that the
legislative acts of the State and the restrictive measures undertaken by the organs of the
Cypriot State and its dependents limiting and partially blocking the transfer of the
Company's capital deposited in the Bank of Cyprus (“bail-in measures”) resulted in

expropriation of the business of the Claimants’ Company.

Alleging that the Republic of Cyprus has deprived them of their investments, the
Claimants introduced a Request for Arbitration on 5 December 2014 before the SCC on
the basis of Article 9 of the agreement concluded on 4 June 1992 between the Republic
of Cyprus and the Republic of Poland for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments (“The Treaty” or the “BIT”). Claimants seek a declaration that measures

taken by the Republic of Cyprus to prevent the collapse of the Bank of Cyprus

32

Ii.

124.

125.

constituted breaches of Respondent’s obligations under Article 4(1) (expropriation) of
the Treaty. They also seek compensation by Respondent of the alleged losses resulting

from the alleged breaches.

. Respondent states that the legislative measures, which aimed at recapitalizing the Bank

of Cyprus and avoiding its collapse, were not expropriatory, unreasonable or

discriminatory.

. There is thus a dispute among the parties regarding the existence of an expropriation of

Claimants’ investment under Article 4 of the Treaty.

POSITION OF THE PARTIES

A. Claimants’ position

a) Claimants’ position on jurisdiction

The Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the case and decide on the claims for
compensation for expropriation of an investment on the basis of the arbitration clause
contained in Article 9 of the BIT and must decide on its jurisdiction pursuant to the
competence-competence doctrine, as provided in Article 16 of the UNCITRAL Model

Law. The following arguments justify the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

Article 9 of the BIT is the basis for the Arbitral Tribunal’s decision since the parties are
free to determine freely the applicable law. In case they do not settle this issue, Article
8.5 of the BIT would be applicable by analogy’. In fact, the scope of the applicable law
should be determined by the parties by interpreting the BIT and, in case of disagreement
among them, by the Arbitral Tribunal. In the present dispute, the parties acted in a
manner that expresses their mutual agreement to consider the provisions of the BIT as
the primary source of the applicable law. Tribunals have in that light decided that the
bilateral treaty on investment protection is the basis for both the jurisdiction of the
Arbitral Tribunal and the applicable law. Here, the applicable law is the BIT itself as

well as other relevant agreements existing between the two contracting states, the

Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, para 7, pages 4 and 5.
33

126.

127.

Arbitral Tribunal having the power to modify the scope of the applicable law without

limiting ie.

The Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction despite the accession of Poland and Cyprus to the
European Union. Even though. Claimants may, because of their Polish citizenship,
enjoy the protection of the Court of Justice (“ECJ”), they may also be party to the
procecdings before the Arbitral Tribunal constituted on the basis of the BIT. The two
paths exist and do not overlap*. The essence of this proceeding is to determine whether
the activity of the State was harinful to the investment made by Claimants. The core of
the claims is the legal situation of the investor and their investment while proceedings

before the ECJ aim at securing individual basic rights",

The BIT remains in force as neither the Republic of Cyprus nor the Republic of Poland
have filed a notice of termination on the basis of Article 13 of the BIT’. Further, it was
not either terminated tacitly in accordance with Article 59 of the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties (“VCLT”), the condition being that the two treatics relate to the
same subject matter. Further, Article 207 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union (*TFEU™) does not include intra-EU investment. The exclusive
competence of the EU over Foreign Direct Investment deals only with extra-EU BITs.
A decision of the Frankfurt Court of Appeals has decided in that light that Article 344 of
the TFEU applies only to Member States and thus does not prohibit investment
arbitration between a private investor and an EU Member State. Further. the European
Commission’s proposal of Common European Investment Policy expressly also
excludes intra-EU BITs. Finally, there is no case law in which an arbitral tribunal denies

its jurisdiction based on the EU Membership of the parties to the BIT®.

. In any case, the intra-EU BITs do no result in discriminatory treatment of Nationals of

different EU Members. The Frankfurt Court of Appeals in its decision Eureko v.

Slovakia did not see any violation of Article 18 TFEU which prohibits discrimination of

Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, para 11, page 6.
Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, para 12, page 6.
Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, para 13, page 6
Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, para 16, page 7.
Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, paras 17-22, pages 7-8.

34

12

13

131.

so

Ss

EU citizens by Member States. But a potential breach of Article 18 would not render the
arbitration clauses in investment treaties invalid as it would frustrate the investors*

legitimate expectations’.

Further, the arbitration clause of Intra-EU BITs is compatible with the institutional and
judicial framework of the European Union, the Court system of the European Union
being exclusive only to matters of the European Union. The BIT and obligations
deriving from it belong to a different legal regime, which cannot be included in the
European Union’s jurisdiction. Additionally, standards of investment in the BIT and in
the TFEU differ as the latter is not specifically aimed at protecting investment and does

not, for instance, provide for arbitration proceedings’.

In fact, the compatibility of the BITs with the acquis communautaire has been debated
for a long time and the European Commission initiated, in 2004, proceedings against
Denmark, Austria, Sweden and Finland requesting that they remove alleged
inconsistencies between the TFEU and a number of BITs with non-EU countries
concluded prior to the accession to the European Union. Such proceedings were not
introduced before Poland which concluded the BIT in 1992 and signed the accession
treaty in 2003. This is because no inconsistencies exist. Further, pursuant to Article 351
of the TFEU, treaties concluded before the date of accession of the Member State
remain binding and shall not be affected by the provisions of the TFEU. There is thus

no conflict between the BIT and capital transfer provisions of the TFEU’.

As to the source of the claim, it is the value of Claimants’ investment in the company in
Cyprus — QB which received a certain amount of money that was supposed to be
transformed in another form of investment, a number of shares in a public company
GERRED This would have benefited Claimants. These actions taken by Claimants prior
to 15 March 2013 can thus be described as investment operations. > was in fact a
transparent financial vehicle which allowed enlarging its value by investing in other

sectors. Eventually, the value of the investments made by i) would be crystallized in

Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, paras 23-24, pages 9.
Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, paras 26-27, pages 9-10.
Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, paras 28-31 pages 10-11.

35

13.

133.

ul

N

the value of QM to the benefit of Claimants as shareholders and would benefit the

Cypriot economy".

The BIT defines “investment” in a broad manner as it encompasses “every kind of
asset”. It does not provide any exclusions and restrictions from the definition of
investment. It would thus be contrary to the BIT wording to conclude that the rights to
funds gathered in the company’s bank account are outside the scope of the BIT. Further,
the BIT states that “title to money, goodwill and other assets and to any performance
having an economic value” constitute an investment. Yet, it is undoubtful that the right
of only the shareholders to dispose the money of their company is the title to money.
The money gathered on the account of came from another company of Claimants,
GREED which shows who was really managing the funds. In that respect, the case
brought by Respondent - Enkev v. Republic of Poland - is not applicable as it was
decided that claimant could not claim in the name of a subsidiary, the latter being a
different person. In the present case, Claimants are actually the company and there is no
doubt as to the validity of the ownership over GERD However, the ruling in
Eureko B.V. y. Poland should apply here!’.

By 15 March 2013, Claimants had complied with the requirements put forth by the
Bank of Cyprus. The money was ready to be forwarded and constituted an investment.
It is the imposition of the bail-in measures which rendered this investment impossible to
be executed. This form of expected gain and business opportunity also constitute a
protected investment under the Treaty. Further, there is no objection that the other
transfer amounting to 7,000,000 PLN, which was executed, constituted an investment.
The request for payment of the remaining 3,000,000 PLN should also be considered as a
valid and protected investment. The request for payment made on 15 March 2013 thus

fits the broad definition of investment”.

 

Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, paras 32-35, page 12.
Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, paras 36-41, pages 12-13.
Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, paras 42-44, pages 14-15.

36

134.

135,

b) Claimants’ position on the merits

In March 2013, the government of Cyprus agreed on conditions of financial aid aimed
at recapitalizing the Cypriot banking system amounting to EUR 10 billion bail-out. The
plan also included bail-in measures for recapitalizing of two Cypriot banks, among
which the Bank of Cyprus. The bail-in consisted of the conversion of part of the
deposits held by the banks into shares of those banks and a partial freeze of capital. This
applied to deposits exceeding EUR 100,000. In March 2013, Claimants planned an
acquisition by QP of shares in the capital of QP a Polish company, of which
GRD was already a shareholder. Claimants subscribed a certain amount of stock-shares
and, in order to complete the investment, transferred PLN 10,000,000 to th
account managed by the Bank of Cyprus. Two transfers were then supposed to be made:
one amounting to PLN 7,000,000 for the acquisition of GED shares offered in retail
tranche and the other one amounting to @B3.000,000 for the acquisition of 200,000
GERD shares publicly offered in investors’ tranche. The purpose of this purchase was
that (9 would continue to be the main shareholder of @MP The Bank of Cyrpus
executed the first transfer for PLN 7,000,000 but the second one for PLN 3,000,000 was
never made. As a result, 9 was not able to pay for and acquire the GD shares.
Additional documents for the second transfer were requested by the Bank of Cyprus,
which were provided the same day. The Bank also requested a translation into English
of such documentation, which was provided by QD on 18 March 2013. It
remains that the second transfer was never made, the Bank of Cyprus having explained
that the payment for 3,000,000 PLN was not executed on 15 March 2013 because the
bank instructions were received to the Bank after the cut-off time. In fact, the payment

+ «es. B
was not made because of Respondent's restrictive measures'”.

The acts of Respondent, especially issuance of the Decree 103/2013 (“the Decree”),
were not undertaken in any public interest but aimed at remedying the poor financial
conditions of two private banks. It was also not conducted with due process as the
investors were not informed about the incoming legal changes. There was no possibility
for Claimants to appeal the effects of the Decree. Further, the acts of the State were

discriminatory as, even if it was not the intent of the State, the result was that only two

Claimants’ Statement of Claim, 30 October 2015, paras 13, 18, 19, 26-33, 41-43.
37

13

13

138.

6.

7.

oo

out of 40 banks were affected by the legal changes and only the clients of those banks
were concemed. Further, only those clients holding deposits of more than EUR 100,000

were directly affected by the Decree",

No single moment can be pointed out as to the moment when the expropriation took
place; it is rather a long process starting with the imposition of extraordinary bank
holidays and ending and combined with the Decrees being issued by the Central Bank
of Cyprus (“CBC”). If there had been no Bank holidays, the request for payment of
PLN 3,000,000 made on 15 March 2013 would have been executed on 19 March 2013.
The brokerage house should have received the payment of PLN 3,000,000 on 20 March
and could have proceeded with the purchase of 200,000 QED shares. Mr. B®
testimony confirms that the expropriation started as early as 16-17 March 2013 when
the Government was discussing steps to be taken with the Troika. Further, he confirmed
at the hearing that unlawful expropriation took place. He also confirmed that it was the
first time that bank holidays were declared in Cyprus in this manner. Respondent thus
bears responsibility for each action that affected directly or indirectly Claimants’
investment understood as funds gathered in the Bank of Cyprus’ account or the request

for payment that was made on 15 March 2013"°.

The measures that were taken by Respondent were retroactive as they embraced the
money that would not have been on the Bank of Cyprus’ account if the bank holidays
had not been introduced. The bail-in measures could have affected only the funds that
were in the Bank of Cyprus as of the entry into force of the Decree 103/2013 but it was
not the case. As a result, Claimants lost their business opportunity as the shares in
GERD would have produced the value to the shareholding interest of Claimants that
they had in @B The resolution law affected the transaction that was pending until 25
March 2013, encompassing the money that was destined to be transferred on 15 March

20131.

Claimants are entitled to receive compensation for lost profits deriving from the loss of

business opportunity. This results from Respondent's blocking of Claimants’ payment

Claimants’ Statement of Claim, 30 October 2015, paras 136, 159, 165, pages 52, 59 and 60.
Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, paras 46-53, pages] 5-17.
Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, paras 55-58, page 17.

38

139,

140.

that could be executed on 19 or 20 March 2013 but that did not occur because of the
instructions of the CBC which ordered the Bank of Cyprus not to process any
international payments. And then, the Bank of Cyprus was closed because of the bank
holidays. The amount of compensation requested with regard to a loss of business

opportunity is set at PLN 16,720,000.00 as updated on 10 October 201677.

This was a unique situation. The PLN 3,000,000 was to purchase 200,000 shares of the
company set up by Claimants as a start-up in order to ensure their major shareholding
position, which was crucial as it would have protected their investment from external
hostile takeovers. The request for payment should have been made on 15 March or 19
March 2013 but was not due to the retroactivity of the measures undertaken by Cyprus.
This was probably not foreseen by the Government as the situation is unique but it has
caused a major prejudice to Claimants in any case. Ruling in favour of Claimants will
not create any precedent because of the uniqueness of the situation with respect to the

consequences of bail-in measures'®,

In summary, Claimants respectfully request the Tribunal to:

(i) declare that Respondent is liable for expropriation of Claimant's investment
under Article 4 of the BIT;

(ii) declare that Respondent is liable to compensate Claimants for Respondent's
breaches of the BIT and international law resulting in the loss of funds in the
amount of PLN 1,319,794:

(iii) declare that Respondent is liable to comy Clai for Rest 's

breaches of the BIT and international law resulting in the loss of profit in the

amount of PLN 16,720,000;

(iv) declare that Claimants are entitled to compound interest on the sum of PLN
1,319,794 from 25 March 2013 until the date of rendering of the Award by
the Tribunal and thereafter until the day of payment at the rate of EUR 3M
LIBOR + 3% compounded on a quarterly basis,

Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, paras 60-63, pages 18-19.
Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, paras 64-69, pages 19-20.

39

141.

(v) declare that Claimants are entitled to compound interest on the sum of PLN
16,720,000 from 10 October 2016 until the date of rendering of the Award by
the Tribunal and thereafter until the date of payment at the rate of EUR 3M
LIBOR + 3% compounded on a quarterly basis;

(vi) order Respondent to pay compensation in the amount of PLN 18,039,974;

(vii) order Respondent to pay the amount of compound interest resulting from

points [iv-v]; and

(viii) order Respondent to compensate Claimants for their costs of arbitration in
an amount to be specified later together with interest thereon, and, as
between the parties, alone to bear the compensation to the Arbitral Tribunal

and to the SCC Institute.”

B. Respondent’s position
a) Respondent's position on jurisdiction

Following the Partial Award on Jurisdiction dated 7 March 2016, Respondent focused
its jurisdictional objection on the alleged incompatibility of the BIT and European Law.
For the European Commission, the bilateral investment treaties between EU Members
States (“intra-EU BITs”) are incompatible with EU law as the treaties establishing the
EU (Lisbon Treaty, Treaty of the European Union (“TEU”) and Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union (“TFEU”)) have created a new framework for the
treatment of cross-border investment with the EU. Claimants are challenging the
policies made by Respondent. However, the right of EU Member States to impose
restrictions on the transfer of capital in connection with the supervision of financial
institutions is established by Article 65.1 of the TFEU. Insofar as Claimants’
expropriation claims are based on the Republic Jaws and decrees restricting the transfer
of funds, the provisions of the BIT are incompatible with the EU Treaties. The bail-in is
a critical component of the EU Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (“the BRRD”).

However, Claimants have invoked the BIT’s dispute resolution clause to ask the

Claimants’ PHB 10 November 2016, para 72, page 21
40

142.

143.

Arbitral Tribunal to find that the expropriation clause of the BIT precludes the bail-in
tool because it constitutes an uncompensated taking of property. Moreover, the
European Council approved the terms of the economic adjustment program and
mandated the Republic to implement it, in accordance with Article 136 (1) of the TFEU.
Claimants cannot render the provisions of the TFEU and BRRD ineffective in invoking
a BIT entered into between Cyprus and Poland before those States became EU Member

States. That would defeat the principles of primacy, unity and effectiveness of EU law”?

On the basis of Article 59 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of the Treaties (“the
Vienna Convention”), the BIT should be deemed terminated or superseded pursuant to
Article 30. Cyprus and Poland acceded to the EU on 1 May 2014 and became
subsequently parties to the Lisbon Treaty which superseded the TEU and the TFEU. By
doing so, the two States have agreed to transfer certain competencies to the EU, namely
the direct effect of EU law and the primacy of EU law. The BITs concluded between
Member States before their accession, such as in the instant case, covering areas
governed by EU law, are subject to the principle of primacy of EU law. Pursuant to
Article 351 of the TFEU, only the treaties concluded between a Member State and a
third country prior to the accession of the Member State to EU are valid. EU Treaties
include substantive protections for intra-EU Investments, replacing the standards of
treatment set forth in intra-EU BITs. For instance, Article 4 of the BIT which protects
investment against uncompensated expropriations has been superseded by Article 17 of
the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights (“EU Charter”) and Article 1 of the Protocol of
the European Convention of Human Rights (“ECHR”Y'.

In any case, if the intra-EU BIT provisions were deemed not to have been superseded by
EU Treaties, they would still be unenforceable as they are irreconcilable with the
Member States’ obligations deriving from the EU Treaties. The BIT is indeed
incompatible with EU law as it offers Polish and Cypriots citizens benefits that are not
conferred upon investors from other EU Members. This is for instance the case of the
right to arbitrate. This discrimination violates Articles 49 to 55, 63 to 66 but also Article
18 of the TFEU. Indeed, the EU Treaties prohibit the EU Member States from granting
more favorable treatment to only some EU nationals. Yet, the arbitration clause of intra-
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2016, paras 1-7, pages | to 4.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2016, paras 19-23. pages 8-10, para 34. pages 14-15.

41

144,

EU BITs is incompatible with the institutional and judicial framework of the EU.
Article 344 of the TFEU excludes any method of settlement not provided by the TFEU

itself”.

In the instant case, there is no doubt that the BIT conflicts with the TFEU’s capital
transfer provisions (Articles 63 and 65). The TFEU constitutes a successive treaty to the
BIT that relates to the same subject matter. Further, there is a clear incompatibility
between the two treaties because the BIT excludes transfer restrictions and provides for
disputes over this question to be resolved by arbitration, which is not the case with the
TFEU. This question has not been addressed yet by the CJEU but it has already decided
that Member States BITs with non-Member States are incompatible with EU Treaties. It
is not doubtful that it will decide that intra-EU BITs are incompatible with EU Treaties.
Article 59 of the Vienna Convention should thus apply and if not. Article 30 should”®.
Further, Claimants’ claim conflicts with the EU BRRD as they allege that the Republic
breached the BIT because of the bail-in, which constituted an expropriation for which
they were not compensated. However, the bail-in was a policy measure established by
the BRRD. By relying on the BIT to challenge the validity of the bail-in tool, Claimants
have demonstrated the incompatibility of the BIT with the EU Treaties”. In any case. if
EU nationals with access to an intra-EU BIT were allowed to submit disputes over
resolution measures. including the application of the bail-in. to arbitral tribunals, that
would undermine the EU's ability to regulate the financial sector in a coordinated
manner”. Finally, Claimants’ claim challenges the economic adjustment programme
developed pursuant to the TFEU and approved by the European Council pursuant to
Article 136 (1) of the TFEU. The Republic of Cyprus indeed implemented the
programme in accordance with a decision of the European Council of 25 April 2013
directing it to do so”. Yet, if Claimants’ claims were declared admissible, the award
would violate the “ordre public” of Sweden. the State of the lex arbitri, together with
the EU publie policy, which would lead to an award annullable in Sweden under the

Swedish Arbitration Act’”.

  

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2016, paras 39-40, pages 16-17, paras 48-49, page 20.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2016, paras 54-63, pages 22-25
Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2016, paras 64-65, 70-71,
48-49, page 20.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2016. para 70, page 30.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2016. para 72, page 31, para 77. pages 32-33.
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2016, para 80, page 35.

    

 

pages 25-26, 30-31, paras

42

145,

As to Respondent’s objection on jurisdiction regarding the “intra-EU” character of the
Treaty, Claimants did not address the issue in its Reply and only did so at the hearing,
ignoring however key aspects of Respondent’s argumentation. Similarly, they expanded
on that question in their Post-Hearing Brief, making however irrelevant points regarding
the differences between ECJ proceedings and investment treaty arbitrations and the fact
that the BIT had not been formally terminated. In fact, they referred to a decision of the
Frankfurt Court of Appeals as being decisive without mentioning that the Federal
Supreme Court of Germany did not follow that decision and made a request for a
preliminary ruling before the ECJ**. Further, Claimants did not properly engage with
Respondent’s reference to the decisions of the ECJ that affirmed that the transfer
provisions of extra-EU BITs are incompatible with EU law. Claimants ignored the fact
that the European Commission has taken a clear position and initiated infringement
proceedings against the EU Member States that maintain intra-EU BITs. Thus,
Respondent’s key point that Claimants’ claims raise irreconcilable incompatibilities
between the BIT and the TFEU and EU law remains unrebutted. However, it cannot be
denied that the provision of the TFEU allows EU Member States to take actions such as
bank holidays and restrictive measures in connection with the prudential supervision of
banks and reasons of public policy. The EU Commission in fact confirmed that the

restrictions imposed by Respondent were necessary”®.

b) Respondent's position on the merits

The dispute arises from the legislative acts and regulatory measures initiated by the
Republic of Cyprus in March-July 2013 to carry out the restructuring of the country’s
financial sector, and in particular the two largest banks, the Bank of Cyprus (“BoC”)
and Cyprus Popular Bank. Pursuant to the economic adjustment programme announced
on 25 March 2013 by the Troika, i.e the Eurogroup and the European Commission, the
International Monetary Fund (“IMF”) and the European Central Bank (“ECB”), the
recapitalization of BoC was one of the key elements. The bail-in measures were
implemented by the Central Bank by decrees issued on 29 March 2013, in the exercise

of its authority as the Resolution Authority pursuant to laws enacted by Respondent on

Respondent’s PHB, 1 December 2016, para 5, pages 3-4
Respondent’s PHB, | December 2016, paras 11-12, pages 8-9.

43

14

14

x

a

22 March 2013. The transfer restrictions were also issued on the same date by the
Finance Minister. This new approach aimed at ending bailouts at taxpayers’ expense*’.
It was the result of the 2007/2008 global financial crisis and of long discussions with
Tepresentatives of the Troika. Taking into consideration the risks of implementing the
16 March 2013 according to which the Republic would receive up to EUR 10 billion in
loans from the ESM and [MF in exchange, inter alia, of the imposition of a levy to
resident and non-resident bank depositors which would have for consequence that
people would have rushed to withdraw cash, the Ministry of Finance declared a bank
holiday for 19 and 20 March 2013. The bailout agreement was then rejected on 19
March 2013 and on 22 March 2013 the Parliament adopted the Resolution Law which
terms reflected the rules and principles of the BRRD. Another agreement was then
reached with the Eurogroup on 25 March 2013 regarding the terms of the economic

adjustment programme. A series of decrees were then taken’!

Following the Decree 103/203. the funds over EUR 100,000 that (i held as deposits
with BoC were subject to the bail-in measure i.e. 37.5% were converted into class A
shares of BoC, 22.5% of the funds were temporarily frozen according to the restrictions
of the decree and the remaining 40% were frozen temporarily pursuant to the
restrictions arising from the Restrictive Measures on Transactions Law”. On 30 July
2013. the Governor of the Central Bank indicated to the Bank of Cyprus that it was
necessary to have an additional 10% of the bailed-in eligible deposits to be converted to

equity, which conducted to apply equity to 47.5% on deposits over EUR 100,0007%,

. Claimants have changed their positions at the hearing and elaborated a new theory by

which they state that the declaration of public holidays over the weekend of 16-17
March 2013, combined with the subsequent application of resolution measures.
constituted a retroactive expropriation of the funds transferred to the BoC by @and
GERD s attempt to purchase shares in QP According to Respondent, this theory is

to be disregarded*’.

Respondent's Statement of Defence, 29 April 2015, para 9, page 3.
Respondent's Statement of Defence, il 2015, paras 111-122, pages 49-55.
Respondent's Statement of Defence, 2
Respondent's Statement of Defence, pril 2015, para 187, page 78.
Respondent’s PHB, 1 December 2016, para 3. page 1.

 

  

44

148. In their Statement of Claim, Claimants identified two investments that were to be

149.

o

protected by the Treaty: the property right to the funds ED deposited with the BoC
and the rights derived from their shareholding ina.

Respondent explained in its Reply that Claimants’ only protected investment was their
shareholding in QM but that they could not have property rights on the funds
deposited as they could not “step in the shoes” oY bringing cases confirming that
position, notably Enkev Beheer B.V. v. Republic of Poland. As a result, Respondent
concluded that the protected investment held by Claimants was their shareholding in
GRID and that the restrictive measures taken by Respondent did not deprive Claimants

of their shares or render them valueless’®. Claimants never answered to that argument.

Further, Claimants disavowed their prior claim that the property rights to the funds of
GEE deposited with BoC were protected investment under the BIT and confirmed that
their investment was their shares nD This is also confirmed by Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief where it is indicated that “the source of the claim is the value of the
investments of the Claimants in the company in Cypru§@@##i®” This has very significant
consequences as Claimants must prove that Respondent caused “a substantial
deprivation” of their shares in @ to establish an expropriation claim. Yet, it is
undisputed that Claimants retained control of their shares in@B and that the value of
their shares interest was not destroyed. This has been confirmed at the hearing by Mr.
GERD who indicated that QP owned other valuable assets apart from QD that
GERD was able to retain its 20% majority holding in QD and that Qs current
shareholding in QB was worth 250 million’.

In its Statement of Defence, Respondent has emphasized that Claimants’ damages claim
was based on the fact that they made the orders for funds to be transferred from the
account of 9 held with the BoC for the purchase of the shares on 25 March
2013 and that the second transfer was blocked as a result of the legislative measures
taken in the context of the bail-in measures. Respondent added that this account of

events was inaccurate as the transfer orders were actually made on [5 March 2013 and

Respondent’s PHB, 1 December 2016, para 13, page 9
Respondent’s PHB, | December 2016, paras 14-17, pages 9-11
Respondent's PHB, 1 December 2016, paras 22-25, pages 14-15.

45

150.

that the various legislative measures came into effect on 29 March 2013, which shows
that these measures were not the cause of the failure of the purchase transaction, which,
according to Claimants, needed to be completed by 20 March 2013. In fact, the second
transfer could not occur as Respondent had not received the relevant supporting
documentation (contracts, agreements etc....) needed for purpose of anti-money
laundering laws and directives**, Further, BoC’s handling of transfer orders
appeared reasonable as Mr. QB was advised by his Cypriot counsel that BoC was
entitled to request an English copy of the call for payment before processing the
transfer. Despite being invited to acknowledge these points and withdraw that claim,

Claimants did not do so*’.

Instead, Respondent argues that Claimants raised a new claim at the hearing by which
they hold Respondent responsible for the failure of the transaction, due to the bank
holidays. Revising their claims as such was not justified and it deprived Respondent of
the opportunity to submit documentary evidence or witness/expert testimony with
regard to the decision to announce additional bank holidays. Moreover, Respondent
adds that Claimants’ new claim can be dismissed as the decision to impose bank
holidays was justified by the need to preserve and protect the stability of the Cypriot
financial sector from a bank-run caused by a public announcement of a political
agreement with the Eurogroup on 16 March 2013 and the application of a levy on all
bank deposits in Cyprus, as confirmed by Mr. Stylianou at the hearing. The European
Commission confirmed that the restrictions taken by the Republic of Cyprus were
justified and lawful. Even a few months later, the Commission explained that the
Republic of Cyprus declared bank holidays to avoid bank-run. The need for the
imposition of bank holidays was also confirmed by the IMF’s May 2013 country report
on Cyprus. Undoubtedly, there was nothing improper in declaring bank holidays over
the weekend of 16 and 17 March 2013. Further, bank holidays do not have the features
to establish an expropriation, ie. character and duration. They were on the contrary
time-limited, non-discriminatory and taken for a proper regulatory purpose. Finally,
according to Respondent, Claimants have failed to establish why the decision to

announce bank holidays was expropriatory. This is not surprising as the notion that

Respondent's Statement of Defence, 29 April 2016, paras 184-185, page 77.
Respondent's PHB, 1 December 2016, paras 26-28, pages 16-17

46

151.

15

NS

bank holidays could constitute an expropriation is absurd, bank holidays being a

necessary component of financial regulation*”.

As to Claimants’ statement that their damages consist in the loss of business opportunity
to acquire, through an additional 200,000 shares on Pat a purchase price of
PLN @Bper share, which was assessed by the expert proffered by Claimants, Mr. >
at a loss of PLN 12,333,000. Respondent has emphasized that no evidence has been
brought as to the additional shares that have been brought by Qi. in the absence of
which neither Respondent nor the Arbitral Tribunal can properly assess the actual costs
incurred by Claimants in acquiring those additional shares. This information was
requested by Respondent on 4 April 2016 and in the absence of an answer in the reply,
was repeated in the second request for documents production. Yet, even though it was
granted by the Arbitral Tribunal in its Procedural Order no. 4, nothing was produced by
Claimants before 23 September 2016. The document produced showed two transactions
and that QB held 1,315,157 shares in QB at an estimated value of BD
GRD | At the hearing, Claimants provided an update of their claims (not signed
by Mr. i which determined the lost profits to PLN 16,720,000. However, they did
not disclose the additional acquisition of 100,000 Qi shares by QB as revealed
later by Mr. QB when being cross-examined"'.

According to Respondent even if it would have been liable for expropriating Qs
opportunity to acquire ii hares, the standard for assessing compensation for that
expropriation would be the fair value of the protected investment at the time of the
taking. Moreover, if Claimants were able to cover or mitigate their loss, this situation
should have been taken into account. Yet, Claimants concealed the purchase by @iiPof
approximately 100,000 shares in a” made, according to Mr. a” at an
additional cost of 20% over the applicable purchase price of PLNQ for the failed
transaction in March 2013. The fact that Claimants have not referred to this transaction
is particularly shocking as neither Respondent nor the Arbitral Tribunal would have
been aware of it if Mr. QB had not mentioned it. Claimants concealed this
information so that they could seek damages far in excess of a 20% premium on PLN
@ In fact, they based their case on the current six-month average of the share price,
Respondent's PHB, 1 December 2016, paras 29-40, pages 15-24.

Respondent’s PHB, 1 December 2016, paras 41-46, pages 24-29.

47

154.

155.

which is allegedly PLNQQED If this strategy had worked, it would have created a

massive windfall on Claimants”.

. Respondent states that Claimants have failed to establish that the application of the bail-

in and restrictive measures to @§iiMeposits constituted an expropriation. Yet, the

shares have not been destroyed or substantially deprived of their valuc.

Moreover, Respondent notes that BoC was insolvent and the resolution was the only
alternative to conventional insolvency procedures allowing the preservation of the bank
while ensuring that the insolvent bank’s creditors receive no less in resolution than what
they would have received in liquidation. This was the case for Qi) Claimants again
have not challenged these points and Claimants ignored the fact that the liquidation
proceedings are time consuming, are very costly and deprive creditors of the access to
their funds. They suggested instead that Respondent could have done more to bail-out
BoC and its creditors and could have accepted the “€ 10 billion builout deal with the
Eurogroup”. Claimants however ignored the consequences that a bailout would have
had and that there was no obligation upon the Republic of Cyprus to provide funding to
support insolvent banks. Claimants. in addition, have provided no authority that would
suggest that States have an obligation to use public resources to bail out and that

Respondent committed a breach of the BIT by not doing so”.

Respondent concludes that the bail-in and the imposition of temporary restrictive
measures were not discriminatory, unlawful or adopted without necessary due process.
Further. these actions were taken in close consultation with the European Commission
and the restrictions were approved. Even the ECJ recently confirmed that the Republic’s
acts were non-expropriatory. non-discriminatory and taken in the public interest.
Likewise, Professor Landau. an expert proffered by Respondent, also explained that the
bail-in was not discriminatory and that there was no evidence that depositors would
have been better off under a liquidation of BoC. Claimants have not responded to these

points’,

Respondent's PHB, 1 December 2016, paras 47-49, pages 29-30.
Respondent's PHB, 1 December 2016, paras 56-62, pages 33-35.
Respondent's PHB, 1 December 2016, paras 63-65, pages 36-37.

48

156.

158.

In this respect. Respondent notes that Claimants advanced two new theories at the
hearing: first, that the funds of Qi held with BoC were not a deposit but a sort of
funds in transfer, not subject to the bail-in and. second, that the bail-in measures were
applied retroactively. As to the first argument, Claimants brought no evidence that the
funds were not deposits and the fact that the monies were to be transferred quickly does
not alter that conclusion, as underlined by Mr. BB at the hearing. His testimony is
also consistent with the decree published on 29 March 2013. The alleged retroactivity
also lacks merits. It is likewise not supported by any documentary evidence or legal
authority. Claimants appear to invoke this construction to overcome the fundamental
defect in their original claim for lost profits which relied on the bail-in measures which
came into effect on 29 March 2013. However, the Resolution law was not retroactive, as
confirmed again by Mr. QD Further, the transfer request was not in the hands of
BoC on 15 March 2013 due to GED failure to provide the requested supporting
documentation requested for anti-money laundering purposes. Indeed, it was confirmed
that all banks operated on 15 March 2013 with no restrictions. Additionally, 18 March
2013 was already a bank holiday in Cyprus. Thus, @iiD transfer could only have been
processed by BoC on 19 or 20 March 2013 to meet the 20" March 2013 cut-off date for
the purchase of the QD shares. The banks were closed due to additional bank
holidays on 16 March 2013. As explained above, these actions were not expropriatory,
discriminatory or unlawful”,

Respondent requests that Claimants be jointly and separately condemned to bear the

costs of the arbitral proceedings**.

“For all these reasons stated above and in Respondent's prior submissions, the claims
asserted by Claimants in this Arbitration, should be dismissed, and Respondent should

be awarded all costs incurred in connection with this Arbitration.”

Respondent's PHB, 1 December 2016, paras 66-80. pages 37-42.

Respondent's Statement of Defence. 29 April 2016, para 372, page 163.

This is part of Respondent's PHB. However, in its Memorial on jurisdiction dated 29 April 2016,
Respondent indicated the following: “For all these reasons stated above and to be developed further
g the court of these proceedings, the claims asserted by Claimants should be dismissed for lack of
risdiction. Respondent should be awarded all costs incurred in connection with this Arbitration,
including, without limitation, the fees and expenses of the arbitrators and the SCC administrative fees, as
well as the legal and other costs incurred by Respondent in connection with this Arbitration.” Further, in
its Statement of Defense of the same date, it indicated: “For the reasons stated above and to be developed

 
  

further during the course of the proceedings, the claims asserted by Claimants in this Arbitration should

be dismissed, and Respondent should be awarded all costs incurred in connection with this Arbitration”.

49

159.

160.

161.

DISCUSSION

The Arbitral Tribunal preliminarily notes that in accordance with Procedural Order no.
1, the Parties were to deal with Respondent's Objections to the Jurisdiction of the
Arbitral Tribunal separately from the merits. Indeed, after Claimants filed their
Statement of Claim on 30 October 2015, Respondent submitted its Objections to the
Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal and its request for bifurcation on 16 November

2015, to which Claimants replied on 7 December 2015.

In its Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction’*. Respondent raised four objections

which were the following:

“a. Claimants’ claim alleging breach of Article 3(1) of the Treaty should be
dismissed because the Treaty’s dispute resolution provision, Article 9, provides
only for arbitration of disputes “concerning expropriation of an investment”.

b. Claimants’ claim should be dismissed because the Treaty was superseded by
European law and became inoperative when Cyprus and Poland became Member
States of the European Union (“EU”).

c. Claimants’ claims should be dismissed because they call for the Tribunal to
adjudicate a matter that it is not arbitrable under Swedish and EU law, and to
make an award that would directly contravene Swedish and EU policy.

d. To the extent that Claimants base claims on alleged breaches of customary
international law. which no longer appear to be the case, they should be
dismissed because such claims are outside the scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
and Claimants lack standing to enforce the Republic's obligations under
customary international law."

Respondent requested bifurcation in order for the Arbitral Tribunal “to resolve the first

Jurisdictional objection based on the limited scope of the Treaty’s dispute resolution

clause™ as this question was in fact well separated from the merits. Claimants indicated
in their Reply that they left the decision on the request for bifurcation to the discretion

of the Arbitral Tribunal.

Respondent's objections to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal and request for bifurcation, 16
November 2015, para 3, page 2.

50

162.

DQ
0

164.

165.

166.

By its Procedural Order no. 2, the Arbitral Tribunal decided that the proceedings were
bifurcated in order to deal with Respondent's objection based on the limited scope of
the Treaty’s dispute resolution clause. i.e. Article 9 of the Treaty. Thus. only the first
preliminary objection to jurisdiction was in fact dealt with at that first stage of the
proceedings which was then concluded with the Partial Award on jurisdiction of 7

March 2016.

. In the second phase of the proceedings, Respondent submitted by 25 January 2016 its

Rejoinder on the preliminary objection to the jurisdictional objection of the Arbitral
Tribunal. Further, as agreed during the conference call held on 11 January 2016,
Claimants were to submit. by 8 February 2016, their comments on Respondent's

submission.

In the event, Claimants merely indicated that all their assertions were included in their
Reply to Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction and Request for Bifurcation dated 7

December 2015.

In its Partial Award dated 7 March 2016, the Arbitral Tribunal decided that it did “nor
have jurisdiction over Claimants’ claim alleging a breach of Article 3 (1) of the Treaty

on the basis of Article 7 of the Treaty”.

Following the Partial Award, Respondent submitted its Memorial on Jurisdiction as
well as its Memorial on the Merits on 29 April 2016. In its Memorial on Jurisdiction, it
stated that “shis submission addresses the Republic's additional objection to jurisdiction
concerning the incompatibility of the Agreement between the Republic of Cyprus and
the Republic of Poland for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments

dated 4 June 1992 (...) and European Union law, including provisions of the

foundational treaties of the EU~. \t did not pursue any of its other jurisdictional

objections. This jurisdictional objection is closely linked with the merits, which
explained why it was dealt with at the merits stage. Respondent stated that the Treaty
had been terminated or substantially superseded and that consequently the Arbitral
Tribunal lacked jurisdiction. Claimants however did not reply to this objection within

their Reply of 29 June 2016 but did so at the hearing and in their Post-Hearing Brief.

51

167. In any event. the outcome is that the only jurisdictional objection which remains to be
dealt with by the Arbitral Tribunal. following the Partial Award. concerns the
applicability of the Treaty in the light of its alleged incompatibility with the European

treaties and law’,

168. Neither party disputes that the Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide on its own
jurisdiction and in particular whether the Treaty has been superseded by a subsequent
treaty. As underscored by Respondent at the hearing, “the Tribunal is competent to
decide its jurisdiction, and to resolve a full range of issues, and that is necessarily part
of resolving a dispute under Article 9 concerning an expropriation, so that would

encompass deciding whether the BIT has been superseded”.*°

169. As rightly pointed out by Claimants, neither the Republic of Cyprus nor the Republie of
Poland filed a notice of termination on the basis of Article 13 of the BIT*’.
Consequently, the Treaty is prima facie in force and binding and the Arbitral Tribunal
may prima facie conclude that it has jurisdiction under Article 9 of the Treaty to decide
a dispute concerning the expropriation of an investment of an investor of a Contracting

Party by the other Contracting Party.

170. It may be that such prima facie conclusion would be reversed if it were established by
the Court of Justice of the European Union (“CJEU™) that the Treaties for the protection
of investments between EU member States are superseded by the EU Treatics and laws
or are incompatible with such Treaties and laws. However this issue is presently

pending before the CJEU and has yet to be decided®”.

171. The Arbitral Tribunal notes in this regard that in the present dispute the issue whether
EU law supersedes the Treaty arises only if the Arbitral Tribunal concludes that
Claimants" investment in Cyprus was subject to expropriation under the Treaty.

© ‘This was also confirmed at the hearing, sec transcript day one, page 2, lines 10 to 15.

Transcript, Day 2, lines 1-6, page 58.

‘| Claimants’ PHB, 10 November 2016, para 16, page 7.

* CJEU, Case C-284/16, Summary of the request for a preliminary ruling pursuant to Article 98(1) of the
Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, dchmea B ¥ v, Slovak Republic, dated 22 June 2016

52

17

173.

174.

175.

176.

177.

178.

2.

oe

a

a

oe

The Arbitral Tribunal has been requested, on the basis of the arbitration clause
contained in the Treaty, to determine whether there was an unlawful expropriation

pursuant to its Article 4 and to draw the financial consequences of such decision.

For the above considerations and reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that it has prima
facie jurisdiction to decide the case submitted to it. Such prima facie decision might
have to be revisited should the Arbitral Tribunal decide that there was an expropriation

of Claimants’ investment under the Treaty. Otherwise, it will be a final decision.

The Arbitral Tribunal will consequently first examine whether there was an

expropriation of Claimants’ investment under the Treaty.

A. Was there an expropriation of Claimants’ investment?

In order to decide whether Claimants’ investment was or was not expropriated, the
Arbitral Tribunal first needs to analyze the investment itself to determine whether
Claimants owned an investment protected under the Treaty (A). It will subsequently be

in a position to establish whether this investment was expropriated (B).

a) Claimants’ investment

Claimants’ allegations as to the nature of their protected investment have evolved in the

course of the proceedings.

Their initial position was that they were deprived of their ownership offs deposits

 

in its bank account at the Cyprus bank. Mention was also made of the shares

Claimants however changed their views at the hearing as they no longer referred to the

deposits in the bank account but only to the shares in Qi

“Claimants have owned at the time of investing and continue to own property rights to the funds
deposited with the Bank of Cyprus. The BIT expressly states {hat title to money, goodwill und other assets
and to any performance having an ect ic value . The investors also hold 50%
of shares = According to Article 1 (1) (b) of the BIT, share es in the Company amount to a protected
investment”, Statement of Claim, para 66, page 27.

 

53

179.

180.

181.

182.

184,

185,

The Arbitral Tribunal will thus examine successively both positions in order to

determine whether Claimants effectively held a protected investment.

i. Claimants’ initial position regarding the investment at stake

In accordance with Article 2 of the Treaty, “the agreement applies to investments made
into the territory of either Contracting Party by investors of the other Contracting
Party”.

Further, pursuant to Article 3 (1) “Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and
equitable treatment to the investments of investors of the other Contracting Party and
shall not impair by unreasonable or discriminatory measures, the operation,

management, maintenance, used. enjoyment or disposal thereof of those investors”.

One of the objectives of the Treaty, as of every BIT, is thus to protect the investment of

a national of a Contracting Party on the territory of the other Contracting Party.

At the beginning of these proceedings, Claimants contended that their investment
consisted in the bank deposits themselves. They clearly stated that their “fiardamental
rights in regard to their investment have heen affected, starting with the Investors’
property rights to the funds held on the bank accounts managed by the Bank of
Cyprus.

Respondent objected to this, alleging that QJ was the holder of the Bank of Cyprus
deposit account and that, as such, Claimants had no standing to raise this claim. It added

that in any case the deposits were not intended to be kept in the said account’®.

The Arbitral Tribunal finds that this characterization of the investment raises two issues:

- Whether the funds were transferred by Claimants on is account at the Bank

of Cyprus: and

Statement of Claim, para 130, page 51.
Statement of Defence, 29 April 2016, paras 210 and 211, pages 88 and 89.

54

186.

187.

18

189.

#

- Whcether the deposits constituted an investment protected by the Treaty.

As to the first question. the Arbitral Tribunal notes that Claimants specified in their
Post-Hearing Brief that the money gathcred on the bank account came from QD 2
company indirectly owned by Claimants*’. However, according to the testimony of Mr.

GD GD: a Polish company established in 2002 by Claimants.

This was not challenged by Respondent. Nonctheless, Respondent observed at the
hearing that the funds were transferred by QP and not Claimants*’. Consequently.
although QD was established and is controlled by Claimants, the question whether
Claimants are entitled to seek protection of the funds under the Treaty would have to be

resolved should the Arbitral Tribunal find that the funds constitute an investment.

Whether the funds constitute an investment is a question of the utmost relevance.
Claimants contended that the funds transferred to the bank account in the Bank of
Cyprus were an investment pursuant to Article 1 (3) of the Treaty, which reads as

follows:

“The term “investment” shall comprise every kind of asset and in particular,

though not exclusively:

(a) Movable and immovable property as well as any other property rights in
respect of every kind of asset,

(b) Rights derived from shares, bonds, and other kinds of interests in
companies;

(c) Title to money. goodwill and other assets and to any performance having an

economic value”.

In Claimants’ view, the broad reference to “every kind of asset” and to “title to money,
goodwill and other assets and to any performance having an economic value”
encompassed the “finds deposited at the Bank of Cyprus”. Claimants conclude that they

had an investment falling within the definition of Article 1(3) of the BIT and that there

Claimants’ PHB, para 39, page 13
Transcript hearing, day 1, 12 October 2016, page 28, lines 1 to 3.

55

190.

191.

192.

193,

was no need to examine further requirements to establish the cxistence of this

investment.

However, although many awards and scholars sustain that it is sufficient for the party
claiming to have an investment to show that its asset falls into the categories listed as
“investments” within the applicable BIT, this subjective approach has not been
unanimously adopted. Other awards and authors have found that additional objective

requirements had to be satisfied.

It is indeed a fact that in the absence of a uniform definition in the applicable texts, be it
multilateral treaties, BITs or national laws on the protection of investments, there has
been, and still is, controversial debate on what constitutes an investment. Case law in

that regard is consequently contradictory and deserves a review.

Beside the “subjective” notion of investment, which rests on the will of the parties as
expressed under the BITs to define the investment, some arbitral tribunals rely on the
criteria established in the 2001 case of Salini Construtorri S.p.A.et Italstrade Sp.A.c.
Maroc®s, pursuant to which an investment usually requires a certain “contribution”, a
certain “duration of the performance of the contract”, the participation in the “risk” of
the transaction and a “contribution to the economic development of the host State of the

investment”.

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the Salini criteria were established in the context of
ICSID case law to the extent that Article 25 of the ICSID Convention did not provide a
definition of an investment. Arbitral tribunals relying on the Salini criteria thus consider
that they should be used to find out whether an investment exists when the 1CSID
Convention applies. For some of those taking this view, in such a case a double test
applies: the first test is to verify that the operation at stake is contemplated by the
Treaty, and the second test is that there is an investment pursuant to the ICSID

Convention by applying the different criteria.

ICSID No. ARB/00/4.
56

194,

195.

196.

197.

The Arbitral Tribunal further notes that the Sa/ini criteria are not unanimously applied.
Not only have they been subsequently reduced®? or, considered insufficient, but they
have also been disputed by arbitral tribunals on the ground that they are mere examples
of the features of an investment, without being conditions necessary to prove its
existence®!, Some arbitrators have consequently distanced themselves from the Salini

criteria”.

As mentioned above, arbitral tribunals applying the Sa/ini test usually did so when the
arbitration was conducted under the aegis of the ICSID Convention. Nevertheless, in the
case of Romak S.A. vs the Republic of Uzbekistan which was conducted in accordance
with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the arbitral tribunal took into consideration the
objective criteria in order to appreciate the existence of an investment. It decided that it
did not have jurisdiction in the absence of an “investment”, refusing the literal
construction of the term “investment” under the Swiss-Uzbekistan BIT, considered that
the kind of investment contemplated under the BIT was not exhaustive, and analyzed
whether there existed an investment under the BIT i.e. “whether they involved a
contribution that extended over a certain period of time and entailed some risk”. In

other words, it extended the Salini criteria somehow to a non-ICSID dispute.

The Arbitral Tribunal concludes from the above that there is no uniform definition or
understanding of the notion of investment and that arbitral tribunals have at their
disposal the possibility to use a subjective, or objective, approach in their analysis of the
question whether there exists an investment under a given BIT, in the absence of which

they do not have jurisdiction.

Notwithstanding the above, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that it need not enter into that
debate in the instant case. Pursuant to Article 2 of the Treaty, “the agreement applies to
investments made into the territory of either Contracting Party by investors of the other

Contracting Party”. The Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied that the funds transferred on

The criteria were reduced to 3 in L.e.s.i. S.p.A. and Astald S.p.A. v. Algeria, ICSID No. ARB/05/3. See
also Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, \CSID No. ARB/98/2.
‘The criteria were increased to 6 in Phoenix Action Ltd cl Czech Republic, (CSID No. ARB/06/5.

M.CJ. Power Group L.C.and New Turbine Inc. C. Equator, \CSID No. ARB/03/6.

Biwater c. Tanzania, ICSID No. ARB/05/22.

hitps://www. pcacases.com/web/sendAttach/491

Romak SA v. Ukzbekistan, paragraph 212, page 55.

57

198.

19

)

2°

S

GERD s account with the bank of Cyprus were not intended to be invested in Cyprus and

that, in actual fact, they were not so invested.

The Arbitral Tribunal acknowledges that those funds, pertaining to Polish citizens, were
transiting via the Bank of Cyprus pending their investment in the Polish company
GERD within a very short time period. QD account was used as the vehicle
allowing the investors to acquire shares in QP It was to this end that they
transferred PLN 10.000.000 to GEE: ccount in order for two other transfers to occur:
one amounting to PLN 7.000.000 for the acquisition of QED shares offered in a
retailed tranche (which transfer was made): and the other amounting to PLN 3,000,000
to buy shares offered in the institutional investors” tranche (which transfer was never

effected).

‘The fact that (i) was a Cypriot company is irrelevant as the funds were not aimed at
being invested in Cyprus, but in This is not denied by Claimants, who indicated
in their Opening Statement at the hearing on 13 October 2016 that “this case is not
about the—let's say the protection of bank deposits, this case is about the protection of
investment. This investment takes a form of the money kept at the bank account but at
the sume time the money was intended to be forwarded to buy the shares (....)".° The
Bank of Cyprus where the funds were located was a go-between pending transfer of the
funds to Poland. Claimants even referred to the Bank as an “economic bearer™ of the
investment®. There was no investment value in Cyprus. For this reason, there is no
doubt that these funds, subsequently subject to the bail-in, did not constitute an
investment, irrespective of what definition might be used for the notion of “investment”,

either in the Treaty or the criteria related to the objective definition.

. Consequently. the Arbitral Tribunal finds that the funds held in Bs account in the

Bank of Cyprus cannot be characterized as an investment protected by the Treaty and

that it need not examine whether they were expropriated by Respondent.

Transcript Day one, page 51, lines 3 to 7.
« This case is not about the bank deposit, or the money that was kept in the bank account, just us a sort of
economic bearer of the investment », Transcript day 1, October 12, 2016, page 49, lines 5 to 7.

58

201.

202.

204.

68

ii. Claimants’ latest position regarding the investment at stake

Claimants subsequently appeared to change their position in the course of the hearing.
When asked by the Arbitral Tribunal to elaborate on the notion of investment and its

source, Claimants indicated that:

“As regard the notion of investment and definition, and the source of the claim,
this is a rather complex issue in this case. since the claim is based around
different types of investment, and we believe that a general concept of investment
is the source, and also the definition in Article 1 of the BIT. it begins with the
general description of investment, and then the forms that are listed as examples
of possible form of investment in the other country, so coming from the concept
that here the case is somehow focused on the monetary—the money that were kept
with the bank account, it is not the money, it is not the deposit held with the hank
account that is the source here of the claim. The source of the claim is the value of

the investment of the claimants is in the company in Cyprus, this is i

The Claimants then explained that “hy transforming the money obtained by BB into
the shares mC the claimant would benefit, would make an investment”, adding
that “(...) the economic effect for the investment would be the value created for wy
and concluding that “we think that the general notion of the investment being either
money, or, - - well, yes shares are - - I have already mentioned it, it would be the best

- a 67
way to describe this investment”.

After Respondent objected to the ambiguous position of Claimants and tried to
summarize it, Claimants specified again that “(...) the general notion of investment, that
is every kind of asset, and of course claimants, as they stand here, they are the Polish
citizens who have title. shareholder title in MD so what is generated for them is the

value of the shareholding interest (...)"°.

In their Post-Hearing Brief the Claimants were more specific and explained that “The

source of the claim is the value of the investment of the Claimants in the company in

Transcript day 2, pages 61 and 62.
‘Transcript day 2, pages 65 and 66.

59

206.

207.

Cyprus- BB @BBB received certain amount of money from the Claimants that was
supposed to be transformed in other form of investment, the financial instrument in a
form of the shares in a public company QD. Thus. Claimants’ subsequent

argumentation regarding “he rights to,funds”” is irrelevant.

In that light, the Arbitral Tribunal understands that Claimants’ latest position is that they

owned an investment through their shareholding in7Z

[t cannot be denied that the holding of the shares in (constitutes an investment. The
“shares” are encompassed in Article 1 (b) of the Treaty which provides that the term
investment shall compromise every kind of asset and in particular “rights derived from
shares.” The acquisition of the shares in QM is also a contribution for a certain
duration and carries a risk associated with the company’s business. This is not denied by
Respondent”! and Respondent's observation that (is assets do not constitute assets
of Claimants is irrelevant with regards to the shares in) which belong to Claimants

and not to Qi

The Arbitral Tribunal finds that Claimants’ shares in QM therefore constitute an
investment in accordance with both the subjective and objective definitions of the

notion of investment.

Ilowever, the Arbitral Tribunal notes that in the present case the essence of the
operation envisaged by Claimants was not an additional acquisition of shares in@pin
Cyprus or an injection of additional capital in but rather the acquisition of shares
in@D a Polish company seated in Poland. Thus, Claimants intended to transform a
Polish investment in a Polish company into an investment by a foreign investor. ip
Cyprus, in Poland, with all related consequences as to fiscal and financial treatment, as
well as the international protection to which such “foreign’ investment would have been

entitled.

Claimants” PHB, para 32, page 12.

Claimants’ PHB, para 37, page 13.

“ While Respondent has never contested that Claimants’ shares in) would prima facie constitute an
investment pursuant to the Treaty, Respondent has been clear from the outset that Claimants are wrong to
assume that Bs assets constitute assets of Claimants”, Respondent's PHB. para 52. page 31.

60

209. In such context not exhaustively clarified by the Parties. the Arbitral Tribunal finds

appropriate to examine also the question whether the Cypriot bail-in measurcs, resulting
in the impossibility for Claimants to proceed to the operation envisaged. could be
assessed as expropriation measures by Respondent, affecting not only the deposit made
in@BB:ccount (which the Arbitral Tribunal already denied to be an investment), but
also the value of Claimants’ shares in (which the Arbitral Tribunal has found to be

an investment).

b) Claimants’ expropriation of their investment

210. Article 4 of the Treaty provides the following:

21

i)
nN

“I. Neither Contracting Party shall take any measures depriving directly or
indirectly, investors of the other Contracting Party of their investments

unless the following conditions are complied with:

(a) The measures are taken in the public interest and under due process
of law:

(b) The measures are not discriminatory;

(c) The measures are accompanied by provision for the payment of

prompt, adequate and effective compensation”.

It is a classical clause prohibiting direct and indirect expropriation measures unless they
are taken in the public interest, are not discriminatory and are promptly, adequately and

effectively compensated. However the Treaty provides no definition of expropriation.

In the absence of such a definition, the Arbitral Tribunal tums to the case law dealing

with these issues for guidance.

. The decisions taken by various arbitral tribunals show that onc of the most important

elements to take into consideration when evaluating the existence of an expropriation is
the economic impact that the measures may have on the investment. For an

expropriation to exist, a very substantial interference must take place, leading to the

61

214.

deprivation of the investor's fundamental right of ownership. Interference with the

 

investment lasting for a significant pcriod may also amount to expropriation.

For instance. it has been found that in order for an expropriation to occur. the investor
must have lost the contro] of its investment (Pope & Talbot v. Canada”). In PSGE y.
Turkey”, it was underscored that “there must be some form of deprivation of the
investor in the control of the investment, the management of day-to day-operations of
the company, interfering in the administration, impeding the distribution of dividends,
interfering in the appointment of officials and managers, or depriving the company of
its property or control in total or in part.” This deprivation has been appreciated by the
“(...) degree of possession taking or control over the enterprise the disputes measures
entail”. In other words, if the investor loses control over its investment. the measures

cannot be applied without compensation.

Moreover, the deprivation of the investment must be permanent or complete (LG&E v.
Argentina, Azurix v. Argentina”) and a distinction is made between a partial deprivation
of value (which does not constitute an expropriation) and a complete or near complete
deprivation of value. which constitutes an expropriation (Vivendi v. Argentina”). In that

light, the arbitral tribunal in Total v. Republic of Argentina has specified that “An

 

effective deprivation requires, however, a total loss of value of the property such as

 

when the property affected is rendered worthless by the measure, as in case of direct
expropriation (...) and concluded that Total has not shown that the negative economic

impact of the Measures has heen such as to deprive its investment of all or substantially

all its value.”

Pope and Talbot Inc.v. The Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Interim Award, 26 June 2000 : para 102
“While it may sometimes be uncertain whether u purticular interference with business act amounts
to an expropriation, the test is whether that interference is sufficiently restrictive to support a conclusion
that the property has been “taken” from the owner”.

PSEG Global Inc., the North American Coal Corporation and Konya Ingin Electrik Uretim ve. Ticaret
Limited Sirketi v. Republic of Turkey, [CSID Case No. ARB/02/5, Award dated 19 January 2007.
Nvkomb Synergetics Technology Holding AB v. The Republic of Latvia, SCC Award dated 16 December
2003.

LG&E v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability, 3 October 2006:
Argentina, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Award, 14 July 2006

Suez, Socieded General de Aguas de Barcelona 8.A., and Vivendi Universal Universal S.A. v. The
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB 03/19, Decision on Liability dated 30 July 2010.

Paras 194 and 196, Total S.A. v, Argentine Republic, 27 December 2010, Decision on Liability, ICSID
Case No. ARB/04/1.

 

  

 

 

nix ¥.

62

w
n

nN
n

21

o

219.

. Taking into consideration the above elements, the Arbitral Tribunal has to determine

whether there was an expropriation of Claimants’ shares ini as a result of the bail-

in measures undertaken in Cyprus.

. The Arbitral Tribunal is satisfied that, as Claimants have neither attempted to prove that

they were deprived totally of these shares nor proved that a substantial deprivation of

the value of their shares occurred, it cannot be said that the shares were expropriated.

. Claimants sustain that their investment was indirectly expropriated by Respondents”

actions, starting with the imposition of extraordinary bank holidays and combined with
the issuance by the Central Bank of Cyprus of Decree No. 103/2013 and Decree No.
104/2013 on 29 March 2013. They explain that as a result, 37.5% of the funds, namely
those funds exceeding 100,000 Euros kept on accounts at the Bank of Cyprus were
converted into shares of the Bank, and 22.5% of the excess amount was temporarily
frozen on interest-free deposit accounts. Claimants indicate that it was decided on 30
July 2013 that a further bail-in of 10% would occur, which meant that 47.5% of the

excess amount would be converted into shares of the Bank of Cyprus.

 

. Claimants then add that as regards their specific funds, among the PLN 10,000,000 in

GRBs account at the Bank of Cyprus, only PLN 7,000,000 was transferred to the
Offering Agent of the QD Shares - QD | hile.
contrary to Claimants” instructions, the ammount of PLN 3.000.000 was not transferred.
The amount of PLN 3,000,000 was the object of the bail-in measures and Claimants
consider that their resulting inability to purchase the shares in QD led to an

important decrease of the value of their shares in@>

The Arbitral Tribunal first notes that it is not the Claimants’ case that they were
deprived of their investment, i.e. their shares in QP In their Post-Hearing Brief.
Claimants assert that their 15 March 2013 request for the transfer of PLN 3,000,000 was
blocked because of the imposition of the bail-in measures and that they “Jost control of
their investment on 20 March 2013 when they could no longer transfer the funds from

the BoC accounts*"®, However this does not concern the shares in but the funds on

Claimants’ PHB, para 48, pages 15 and 16
63

iS)
Q
°

222.

224.

GEEBDs account which, as decided above. do not amount to an investment protected by

the Treaty.

For Claimants. indirect expropriation also occurred as a result of the impossibility for
BD to invest in a Polish company, thereby diminishing the value of their shares in
GERD They request compensation “for lost profits resulting from the loss of business

opportunity"?

The Arbitral Tribunal is not convinced, on the evidence before it, that the valuc of the

shares in@@p w:

so significantly affected as to reach the level of expropriation.

 

As underscored by Respondent, for there to be an instance of expropriation, Claimants
have to prove that there existed a “substantial deprivation” of value. The Arbitral
Tribunal finds that Claimants did not show that this was the case. They alleged that their
shares had reduced in value given the impossibility of buying Js shares at the
negotiated price of PLN @ per share, but not that their shares had been rendered
valueless. Moreover, Claimants* statement that the value of their shares im was

reduced remains unsupported by any evidence.

On this point, the Arbitral Tribunal finds extremely relevant that the value of GD
was in fact very high and that Claimants were able to buy additional shares, as was
revealed at the hearing. Indeed, Mr. @§fiiBindicated during cross-examination that he
had becn able to maintain the 20 per cent shareholding in @that he was targeting
by subsequently buying 100,000 shares i for approximately 20% more than the
agreed PLN @@er share. through a sister company*”. He also indicated that the value
0D shareholding in@iD was accordingly worth around 60 million euros. This
statement undermines Claimants’ allegations that the value of their shares in Qj was

substantially affected by the disputed measures.

Accordingly, the Arbitral Tribunal cannot conclude that Claimants lost a substantial
value of their investment. The issue whether or not the announcement of the bank

holidays and the bail-in measures were lawful, necessary and non-expropriatory

Claimants’ PHB, para 60, page 18.
Transcript Day 2, 13 October 2016, cross examination of Mr. QED pages 26 and 27

64

NV
iS

227.

a

therefore becomes moot. What matters is that Claimants were not deprived of their
sharcs in @MM and that they did not lose a substantial part of their value, quite the
contrary. The Arbitral Tribunal concludes that the bail-in measures did not constitute an

expropriation of Claimants* shares in@@

COSTS

 

. Pursuant to Articles 43 (4) and 43 (5) of the Rules. the Arbitral Tribunal shall include

the costs of the arbitration in its Final Award and shall apportion the costs between the
parties “having regard to the outcome of the case and other relevant circumstances”.

The SCC Board has fixed the costs of the arbitration as follows:

- The fees of Mr. Yves Derains of EUR 68.047. his expenses of EUR 1.803.09 and
his per diem of EUR 1,500, plus VAT at 20% applicable to his fees and expenses.

- The fees of Prof. Andrea Giardina of EUR 40,828, his expenses of EUR 501.11
and SEK 1,195, his per diem of EUR 1,500, his Mandatory Contribution to the
Italian Lawyer's Fund EUR 1,658.20 plus VAT at 22% applicable to his fees. his
expenses and the Mandatory Contribution to the Italian Lawyer's Fund.

- The fees of Ms. Sophie Nappert of EUR 40,828, her expenses of GBP 1.023.55
and her per diem of EUR 1,500, plus VAT at 20 % applicable to her fees.

- The expenses of Ms. Catherine Schroeder of EUR 2.737.78 and per diem of EUR
1.500 plus VAT at 20% on her expenses.

- The administrative fees of the SCC of EUR 20,869 as well as the hearing venue's

costs of EUR 7,410 plus VAT at 25% on these amounts.

. Pursuant to Procedural Order no. 6, the parties provided their respective Statements on

Costs on 15 December 2016.

Claimants indicated having incurred 286,579.76 EUR in total for their costs divided as
follows:

- 80.000 EUR for@iiBegal fees:

- 63,142.72 EUR for ED eval fees;

- 21.000 EUR for ii expert fees;

- 7.192.76 EUR fori out-of-pocket expenses for attending the oral hearing:

65

230.

N
Oo

Pp

- 944.28 EUR for Mr. ED attendance of the oral hearing:

- and 114.300 EUR for the arbitration advance fees.

Claimants have thus incurred QD EUR for their Icgal costs QD
GERRBD. Claimants insisted that tribunals in other cases under the SCC Rules had taken
into consideration the circumstances of the case, such as the conduct of the parties, and
that they were reluctant to order full apportionment when the losing party was the
claimant. Claimants added that tribunals also looked at the disadvantageous situation of

some claimants and weighed the reasonableness of the costs of legal representation.

. Respondent indicated on its side having paid 114.300 EUR as advance on costs and

incurred legal costs divided as follows:

- USD 1,401,057.71 and SEK 35,000 as legal fees:
- Euros 61,500 and USD149,134.69 as expert fees;
- GPB 5,001.24 and SEK 3.201 as Administrative costs:
- Euros 5.553.17 and USD 44,402.23 as expenses.

Respondent specified that if it were awarded its costs. those costs that are not in USD
would have to be converted into USD at the prevailing exchange rate on the date of the

award.

. On 22 December 2016, Respondent commented on Claimants” Statement on costs.

Respondent denied that the Arbitral Tribunal should have reluctance in awarding it all
its costs. adding that the Arbitral tribunal should be guided by the relevant facts,
including the submissions and positions taken by the partics, but that it should also take

into consideration the conduct of the parties.

. Both parties requested that the other party bear their legal costs and the costs of the

arbitration®!. Respondent also requested that Mr. QD and Mr. QD be

jointly and severally declared liable for the full amount on costs.

Claimants’ PHB, page 21 « order Respondent 10 compensate Claimants for their costs of arbitration in an
amount to be specified later together with interest thereon and, as between the parties, alone to bear the

66

233.

The Arbitral Tribunal first notes that Claimants have failed in all their claims, be it on
the jurisdictional issue by way of the Partial Award dated 7 March 2016, or on the

merits by the present Final Award.

234. The Arbitral Tribunal refers to Articles 43(5) and 44 of the SCC Rules whereby, in its

235.

2

i)

37.

an

_

oo

apportionment of the Costs of the Arbitration and party costs. it has regard to the

outcome of the case and other relevant circumstances.

The Arbitral Tribunal considers that Claimants, having failed in their claims, are to bear
the Costs of the Arbitration and consequently refund Respondent the amount of EUR
114.300 that they paid to the SCC as advance on costs. The Arbitral Tribunal also
considers it justified to order both Claimants jointly and severally to pay this amount as
Claimants did not object to this request and the arbitration proceedings were introduced

jointly by both Claimants.

. The Arbitra] Tribunal would be minded to apply the same principle to the legal costs

bome by the parties, even more so in light of the conduct of the Parties in the
proceedings. The Arbitral Tribunal finds that Claimants’ procedural position in the
course of the proceedings was not always loyal. particularly in choosing not to answer
some of Respondent's arguments in their Reply. waiting instead until the hearing on the
merits to put forward new arguments and informing Respondent and the Arbitral
Tribunal of the latest purchase of 100,000 QM shares at the very end of these

proceedings.

Nevertheless, the Arbitral Tribunal notes that there is a huge difference between the
amounts claimed on both sides. Respondent's legal fees amounting to almost 10 times

the Claimants’.

. Even though Respondent incontestably put more hours in its submissions, it remains

that the difference is substantial and its legal costs disproportionate to the amounts at

 

compensation to the Arbitral Tribunal and to the SCC Institute ». Respondents’ Post-Hearing Brief. page
46:" (...) Respondent should be awarded all costs incurred in connection with this Arbitration”.

67

issuc. Similarly, the difference between the experts’ fees and the expenses incurred by
both sides is significant. For this reason, the Arbitral Tribunal decides that Claimants
are to bear their own costs as well as 70% of Respondent's costs. Claimants must
accordingly reimburse Respondent the following amounts: USD 980.740.39 and SEK
24.500 for its legal fees. 43,050 EUR and 104,394.28 USD for its expert fees, 3.500.86
GBP and 2,240.7 SEK for administrative costs, and 3,887.2 EUR and USD 31,081.56
for its expenses, i.e. a total of USD1,173.134.56.

ON THE BASIS OF THE ABOVE, THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL UNANIMOUSLY
DECIDES THAT:

2)

3)

4)

The Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide on the existence of an expropriation

under the Treaty:

There is no expropriation of Claimants’ investment under Article 4 of the Treaty;
All other claims of Claimants are dismissed:

Claimants are, jointly and severally, condemned to bear the Costs of the Arbitration as

follows:

- The fees of Mr. Yves Derains of EUR 68,047, his expenses of EUR 1.803.09 and
his per diem of EUR 1.500, plus VAT at 20% applicable to his fees and expenses.

- The fees of Prof. Andrea Giardina of EUR 40,828, his expenses of EUR 511.11
and SEK 1,195, his Mandatory Contribution to the Italian Lawyer’s Fund of EUR
1.658.20 and his per diem of EUR 1.500, plus VAT at 22% applicable to his fees
expenses and Contribution.

- The fees of Ms. Sophie Nappert of EUR 40.828, her expenses of GBP 1023.55
and her per diem of EUR 1,500, plus VAT at 20% applicable to her fees.

- The expenses of Ms. Catherine Schroeder of EUR 2,737.78 and per diem of EUR
1,500 plus VAT at 20% on her expenses.

- The administrative fees of the SCC of EUR 20,869 as well as the hearing venue’s

costs of EUR 7.410 plus VAT at 25% on these amounts.

68

5)

These amounts will be paid out of the advances on costs paid by the Parties to the SCC.

Consequently, Claimants are jointly and severally condemned to refund Respondent
EUR 114.300.

Claimants shal] bear their own legal costs as well as 70% of Respondent’s legal costs
and are consequently jointly and severally condemned to pay Respondent USD
1,173,134.56.

69

Made on//February 2017
Place of arbitration: Stockholm, Sweden

(Mp des

Mr. Andrea Giardina
Arbitrator

Ah. res Paras

Chairman

HOW TO APPEAL IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN COSTS

Under Section 41 of the Swedish Arbitration Act, a party may bring an action against an
Award in respect of the remuneration of the arbitrators and the SCC Institute. A party having
reason to challenge the Award in this respect shall file an appeal with the District Court of
Stockholm within three months of the date the party received an original or a certified copy of

the Award.

70

 

Coro
Ms. Sophie Nappert
Arbitrator

