INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Washington D.C.

In the annulment proceeding between:

Total S.A.
(Claimant)
v.
Argentine Republic

(Respondent)

ICSID CASE NO. ARB/04/01

 

DECISION ON STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee:
Ms. Teresa Cheng, Member
Mr. Alvaro Castellanos, Member
Mr. Eduardo Zuleta J., President
Secretary of the ad hoc Committee:

Ms. Natali Sequeira

December 4, 2014

List of Defined Terms

 

4

Paragraph

 

Application

Application of Argentina for the Annulment
and Stay of Enforcement of the Award,
March 27, 2014

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

 

Argentina

The Argentine Republic

 

Argentina’s First Submission

Argentine Republic’s First Brief on
Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of
the Award, dated July 11, 2014

 

Argentina-France BIT or the

Agreement between the Republic of France

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BIT or the Treaty and Argentina on the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments,
entered into on June 28, 1990

Argentina’s Second | Argentine Republic's Second Brief on

Submission Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of
the Award, dated August 12, 2014

Award Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case
No. ARB/04/01, November 27, 2013

Claimant Total

Committee ad hoc Committee appointed for the
annulment proceeding

ICSID International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

ICSID Convention or | Convention on the Settlement of Investment

Convention Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States

Parties The Argentine Republic and Total S.A.

Respondent Argentina

Total S.A. Total

 

Total’s First Submission

Total’s Submission Opposition to Stay of
Enforcement, dated July 11, 2014

 

 

Total’s Second Submission

Total’s Second Submission Opposing the
Stay of Enforcement, dated August 12, 2014

 

 

 

TR

 

 

Transcript

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. THE PARTIES .............22.cceccceeece ence cneeece cece eeseeeeeeeeeeeeeseceeseeeesteneeeeeseneeess 4
I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY ...........22::02ccceeecceeeceeeeceeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeteneeseeeeeeeees 4
Ill. THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES CONCERNING THE STAY OF
ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD ...........022:2:-00eeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeneee 6
A. Position of Argentina.............2..22ccceeeceeeeceeeeeeeeecenesceeeeneeeeeneeseeeeeeeees 7
B. Position Of Total...............:.ccceccceeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeseeneeeeeeaeeneeeeeeseeeeeees 12
IV. ANALYSIS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE .

 

Vv. cosTs.
VI. DECISION .

 

I. THE PARTIES

[1] The Applicant is Total S.A. In this proceeding Total S.A. is represented
by:

Mr. Nigel Blackaby
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP
Washington, DC, USA

Mr. Noah Rubins

Mr. Ben Love

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
Paris, France

Mr. Sam Hunter Jones
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
London, United Kingdom

Mr. Luis Erize

Mr. Sergio Porteiro

Abeledo Gottheil Abogados SC
Buenos Aires, Argentina

[2] Respondent is the Argentine Republic. In this proceeding, the Argentine
Republic is represented by:

Dra. Angelina Abbona

Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
Buenos Aires, Argentina

[8] Argentina seeks the annulment of the Decision on Objections to
Jurisdiction rendered on August 25, 2006, the Decision on Liability
rendered on December 27, 2010 and the Final Award rendered on
November 27, 2013 in ICSID Case No. ARB/04/01, Total S.A. v.
Argentine Republic, whereby the tribunal declared it had jurisdiction to
entertain the dispute under the Argentina-France BIT. Under the
Decision on Liability the Tribunal upheld Total’s submission concerning
Argentina’s obligation to grant Fair and Equitable Treatment to Total
S.A. under the Argentina-France BIT and in the Final Award, the Tribunal
ordered Argentina to compensate Total for the damages suffered for the
violations of the Argentina-France BIT.

II. | PROCEDURAL HISTORY

[4] On March 27, 2014, Argentina filed an application requesting the
Annulment of the Decision on Jurisdiction rendered on August 25, 2006,

4

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

(11]

the Decision on Liability rendered on December 27, 2010 and the Final
Award rendered on November 27, 2013, in ICSID Case No. ARB/04/01,
Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic. The Application for Annulment was
submitted within the time period provided for by Article 52(2) of the
ICSID Convention.

In its Application, Argentina requested the Stay of Enforcement of the
Award provided for in Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention.

On April 2, 2014, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the
Application for Annulment of the Arbitral Award in accordance with
Arbitration Rule 50(2)(a) of the Arbitration Rules and provisionally
stayed the enforcement of the Award pursuant to Arbitration Rule 54
(2).

On May 6, 2014, the Secretary-General of ICSID informed the parties
the proposed names for the appointment of the ad hoc Committee. The
Secretary-General of ICSID recommended Ms. Teresa Cheng, a national
of China, Mr. Alvaro Castellanos, a national of Guatemala and Mr.
Eduardo Zuleta, a national of Colombia.

On May 21, 2014, ICSID Legal Counsel communicated to the arbitrators
their appointment in the ad hoc Committee. On May 27, 2014, the
Secretary-General informed the Parties that the ad hoc Committee had
been constituted. The Committee was composed of Ms. Teresa Cheng,
Mr. Alvaro Castellanos and Mr. Eduardo Zuleta, as President of the
Committee. The Parties were also informed that Ms. Natali Sequeira,
ICSID Legal Counsel, would be the Secretary of the Committee.

On June 9, 2014, the Committee requested the Parties to confer on the
date of the First Session and the timetable for the exchange of written
submissions on Argentina’s request for the continuation of the stay of
enforcement of the Award. On June 16, 2014, Total submitted a letter to
the Committee on behalf of both Parties requesting for additional time to
confer on these matters. On June 18, 2014, the Committee granted
additional time until June 26, 2014.

On June 26, 2014, the Parties agreed to hold the First Session in
Washington D.C. on August 15, 2014. In addition, the Parties agreed to
file their First Submissions on the Stay of Enforcement on July 11, 2014,
with translations due 18 July, and their Second Submissions on the Stay
of Enforcement on July 25, 2014, with translations due 1 August.
Argentina confirmed that this was the agreement reached by the Parties
by letter dated June 30, 2014.

On July 11, 2014, the Parties filed their First Submissions on the Stay of
Enforcement.

[12]

[13]

14]

[15]

[16]

17]

[18]

[19]

On July 11, 2014, after conferring with the Parties, the ad hoc
Committee changed the date of the First Session to October 6, 2014.

On July 15, 2014, the Secretary of the Committee circulated a Draft of
the First Procedural Order.

By letter dated July 24, 2014, Argentina requested the Committee to
extend time limits for the discussion of the Parties on Draft Procedural
Order No. 1 until July 28, 2014 and to extend the deadline of the Second
Submission on the Request for Stay of Enforcement of the Award until
August 12, 2014. Claimant confirmed its agreement to extend these two
deadlines by email dated July 25, 2014. On the same date, the
Committee granted the two time extensions. The Parties submitted their
comments and points of difference to the First Procedural Order on July
29, 2014.

On August 12, 2014, the Parties presented their Second Submissions on
the Stay of Enforcement.

The First Session of the Committee was held on October 6, 2014 in
Washington D.C. During the First Session the Parties made oral
submissions on Argentina’s request for the continuation of the stay of
enforcement and on the topics of the First Procedural Order on which the
Parties had not reached agreement.

On October 21, 2014, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 1
whereby the Parties agreed on the number of written pleadings that
each of them would have, the corresponding deadlines for their
submission and reserved dates for a hearing on annulment. The Parties
confirmed that the Committee had been properly constituted in
accordance with the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules. It was
agreed that the proceeding would be conducted in accordance with the
ICSID Arbitration Rules in effect as of January 1, 2003. The Parties
agreed on several other procedural matters, inter alia, that the
procedural languages would be English and Spanish, and that the place
of the proceedings would be the seat of ICSID in Washington, D.C.

The Committee has conducted its deliberations on the request for the
continuation of the stay of enforcement of the Award. The Committee’s
Decision has taken into account all written submissions and oral
arguments of the Parties.

THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES CONCERNING THE STAY OF
ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

Following is a summary of the claims and reliefs of the Parties on the
continuation of the stay of enforcement of the Award. The Committee
has carefully reviewed all claims, reasoning, documents and legal

6

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

authorities submitted by the Parties on this matter. The fact that an
argument, document or legal authority is not cited or referred to in the
summary does not mean that the Committee has not considered it.

The Argentine Republic requests the ad hoc Committee to order the
continuation of the stay of enforcement of the Award until a decision on
annulment is rendered in these proceedings, and that no conditions are
imposed on Argentina in order to stay the execution of the Award.

Total S.A. requests the ad hoc Committee to dismiss Respondent’s
request to continue the stay of enforcement of the Award pending the
Committee’s decision on annulment of the Award. In the alternative,
Total requests the ad hoc Committee to order the Respondent: (i) to
provide financial security in the form of a bank guarantee or a payment
into escrow sufficient to satisfy the Award in full; (ii) to provide a letter
confirming its intention to satisfy the Award as required under Article 53
of the ICSID Convention, including its intention not to subject
satisfaction of the Award to any further legal proceeding or remedies;
and (iii) to declare that Respondent's failure to comply with these two
orders will result in immediate lifting of the stay of enforcement of the
Award.

A. Position of Argentina

In Argentina’s view, the Committee must take into account the
seriousness of the grounds invoked in its request in order to grant the
stay of the Award’. The merits of Argentina’s request for annulment are
sufficiently serious and cannot be considered a dilatory measure or
superficial in nature®. In any case, contrary to what has been suggested
by Total, the merits of the request for annulment shall not be considered
at this stage®.

Argentina holds that it is not acceptable to argue that applying for
annulment is a dilatory tactic.4 Moreover, a party cannot be considered
to be acting in bad faith or as using dilatory tactics because it has
exercised its rights under the ICSID Convention. The opportunity to
apply for annulment of an award is a fundamental right under the ICSID
Convention®, a central feature of the ICSID arbitration system that
confers stability and reliability.°

Regarding the applicable standard to continue the stay of enforcement,
Argentina quotes to the decision in Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic

| Argentina's First Submission (Translation), (2
? Tr. 8:15-19
® Argentina's Second Submission, 418-20

“Tr:

Tr:

 

22:13-19
7916-17
8:20-9:2

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

Republic of the Congo, to argue that there is no indication as to what
circumstances require staying the enforcement of the Award and
therefore that the Committee is free to evaluate the arguments of the
Parties in view of the particularities of each case.”

Based on the decisions in Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (“Azurix”)
Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. & Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine
Republic (“Enron”) and Victor Pey Casado y Fundacién Presidente
Allende v. Chile (“Pey Casado”), Argentina submits, that in general, a
stay should be granted under Article 52 (5) of the Convention, if
requested, and there are no exceptional circumstances in the instant
case that may render such stay inadmissible.® In this regard, the
practice of annulment committees, as acknowledged in E/samex, S.A. v.
Honduras (“Elsamex”) and in Enron, has been to grant the continuation
of the stay.? The Pey Casado committee concluded that it had been the
practice of the committees to grant the stay of enforcement of the
award in a practically automatic manner.'°

Argentina submits that there are sufficient guarantees to ensure its
compliance of the Award.

On October 2013, Argentina entered into settlement agreements
concerning the final awards in the following cases: Compafiia de Aguas
del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. (formerly “Compagnie
Générale des Eaux”) v. Argentine Republic, Azurix, CMS Gas
Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, Continental Casualty
Company v. Argentine Republic, and National Grid P.L.C. v. Argentine
Republic (UNCITRAL Arbitration). '"

Argentina claims that the settlement agreements reached in October
2013 were prompted by requests of the investors, and that these
investors have affirmed that they are satisfied with the settlement. It
adds that creditors in /mpregilo S.p.A v. The Argentine Republic
(“Impregilo”) and E/ Paso Energy International Company v. The
Argentine Republic (“El Paso”) have still not made contact with Argentina
to enforce the Awards and have not started proceedings to do so. '*

In addition, Argentina asserts that its legal system is, in itself, an
adequate guarantee of compliance with the BIT, the ICSID Convention
and any award rendered pursuant to those instruments, because under
the laws of Argentina international treaties take precedence over
domestic laws.'* In 1992 the Argentine Supreme Court handed down a

7 Argentina's First Submission (Translation), 17
® Argentina's First Submission (Translation), 5; Argentina's Second Submission, 9-10
° Argentina's First Submission (Translation), 48; Argentina's Second Submission, 11-12

   
 

6
’s First Submission (Translation), 10
's Second Submission, [25-30; Tr: 15:6-16

'8 Argentina's First Submission (Translation), 11; Argentina's First Submission, (21

8

decision that established precedence of treaties over domestic laws
(Case of Ekmekdjian v. Sofovich) and, in 1994 the Constitution was
amended to include in Article 75 (22) an express provision in this
regard. '* Moreover, Argentinean judges must do everything within their
reach to prevent the State from being found internationally liable.'®

 

[30] The CMS committee recognized the treatment of international law in
Argentinian law and concluded that the commitments of Argentina under
the ICSID Convention were sufficient." The Azurix committee stated
that the primary security of the award were the obligations assumed by
Argentina under the Convention’. According to Argentina, the decision
by the CMS committee signals that Article 54 of the ICSID Convention is
the key issue and that the Committee must be satisfied that the
obligations have been incorporated into domestic law when deciding the
stay.

[31] Argentina also refers to the decision of the ad hoc committee in the
Elsamex case, according to which an award has to be complied with
under the specific terms of Article 54 of the ICSID Convention and that
Article 53 of the ICSID Convention is equally applicable because it sets
forth the binding nature of the award. '?

[32] | In Argentina’s view, Articles 53 and 54 of the ICSID Convention shall be
interpreted jointly. Article 53 of the ICSID Convention establishes the
final and binding nature of ICSID awards and Article 54 cannot be
understood to limit this provision.”° Argentina posits that under Article
54 of the ICSID Convention, investors must follow the domestic
proceedings to enforce an award*', yet it clarifies that these are not
confirmation or exequatur proceedings. ”*

‘4 argentina’s First Submission (Translation), 111, 117-20

'S Tr: 23: 5-22

‘6 Argentina's First Submission (Translation), 413

17 argentina’s First Submission (Translation), 14

'® Tr: 27: 6-16 In its first submission, Argentina added that “(...) the conclusions of the annulment
committees in CMS and Azurix should be sufficient in order to provide the necessary guarantees that the
Award will be complied with in the event that this Committee decides to reject the Application for Annulment
(..)" Argentina's First Submission (Translation), 416

19 Tr: 31:10-14

20 argentina’s Second Submission, 437

2! argentina’s Second Submission, 438

22 Tr: 81:4-6. In response to a question by the Committee, Argentina explained the manner in which this
domestic proceedings work: “So, the procedure is to appear before the designated authority, and then that
is taken to the judge, and the judge decides whether the Decision is paid based on the availability of funds.
And this is the same procedure followed for final Decisions, but this has nothing to do with exequatur
because the idea is with this standard to make a foreign Decision valid in the territory (...)" Tr: 137:16-138:1
Argentina further clarified that: “This is an administrative court judge that verifies the existence of the funds.
If the funds are not available the Executive is requested to make those funds available, and then if the
Executive does not make those funds available, assets are attached so that that execution is carried out
immediately. It doesn't mean that if the Executive doesn't provide the funds, this is an order that will not be
fulfilled.” Tr: 143:17-144:3. In addition, the parties discussed on the requirement to pay a 3 per cent charge
to initiate this process. Tr: 140:11-142:22

9

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

Argentina disagrees with Total’s interpretation of Articles 53 and 54 of
the Convention because it does not consider that Article 54 applies only
in cases of breach of the Award. To hold this proposition would be to
modify the text of the treaty.”°

Argentina also advances that the balance of interest in this case favors
the continuation of the stay of the award.

On the one hand, continuing the stay of enforcement of the Award will
not be detrimental for Claimant since the interest accrued during the
annulment proceedings would compensate Total for the passage of time
from the issuance of the Award until its payment.”*

On the other hand, it would be difficult, if not impossible, for Argentina
to recover amounts paid for an award rendered null®°. This factor was
taken into account by the CMS, Enron and E/ Paso committees.*° The
risk of attachment by third parties of sums paid to Total inclines the
balance of interest towards staying the enforcement of the award.?” In
addition, the consequences of not having the sums paid would be very
severe for a developing country like Argentina.”°

During the hearing, Argentina contested Total’s assertions on the factors
that should be taken into account by an ad hoc committee to lift the stay
of execution of an award. First, Argentina argued that annulment
proceedings are not a remedy to deal with enforcement of an award, in
those instances in which the State wishes to repudiate it.22 Moreover,
according to Argentina, most ICSID annulment committees, and
specifically the committee in E/ Paso, have acknowledged that it is not
the committee’s task to ensure compliance with the award.°° Second,
Argentina is not repudiating the award; it recognizes that the Award
exists and will abide by its conclusions, once it has been analyzed by the
Committee.*' Argentina is the country that has enforced more ICSID
awards in history? and it has complied with its international
obligations.** Third, Argentina assesses the prejudice that might be
caused to Total and concludes that the award equals less than 1 percent
of the sales of Total in 2013.** Yet, as has been publicly reported,
Argentina is undergoing a very complex financial situation, and it could
suffer great harm in committing resources that could be otherwise

8 Tr: 11421-17
24 Argentina's First Submission (Translation), 122
25 Argentina's Second Submission, 143
28 Argentina's Second Submission, 4143-46
27 argentina’s First Submission (Translation), 24: Argentina's Second Submission, 172; Tr: 34:17-36:8
28 argentina’s Second Submission, 449
Tr:11:8-18

 

8 Tr: 5-19
Tr 1711-13,

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

  

earmarked to social assistance and other public programs.*° Thus,
Argentina considers that in the event the enforcement of the award is
stayed, it cannot be affirmed that a greater harm would be caused to
Total.*° Payment of interest by Argentina would still be available as a
remedy in the event the Committee determines the award should not be
annulled.°”

Regarding the allegation of Total as to the dilatory nature of the
application for annulment, Argentina asserts that Total has not
presented evidence to support this claim.*® It refers to the decisions in
Azurix and Enron, where the committees stated that:“...the fact that a
State is going to lose the annulment of all Awards that are adverse to it
does not mean that this is a dilatory tactic. Rather, it means it is a right
that is expressly provided for under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention,
and as you know, it also implies the responsibility of a public official,
who, if they understand that there are grounds for annulment, it is their
duty and their right to apply for annulment of the Award.”®°

Finally, Argentina opposes Total’s subsidiary request that the stay be
granted only with the provision of a financial guarantee. Relying on the
decision of the ad hoc committee in Azurix, Argentina holds that
requiring financial security to stay the execution of an award is contrary
to the ICSID Convention.*° Also, Argentina posits that at the time of
negotiation of the ICSID Convention, the drafters did not include the
possibility of posting guarantees to stay the execution of an award.*"

Argentina, further relies on the decision of the E/ Paso committee
indicating that the requirement to provide a guarantee was not provided
for in the ICSID Convention or in the Arbitration Rules and that “(...) this
would be tantamount to punishing the State asking for the annulment
because the State would have to pay a price to maintain the stay while
everything is being processed and that this sanction is not provided for
in any of the rules applicable to this case.”*?

In addition, Total has failed to demonstrate circumstances that require a
financial security. As stated above, Argentina’s legal system is sufficient
guarantee of compliance. The delay in payment is an inherent risk to the
annulment proceedings and there is no risk of non-payment since
creditors to Argentinian awards have been paid.“*°

's Second Submission, 953-54

“' Argentina's Second Submission, 56-60
* Tr: 33:15-20
43 argentina’s Second Submission, 161-64

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

Also, Argentina claims that there might be a risk of attachment by third
parties of the financial guarantee.** During the hearing, Argentina
explained that the Enron committee considered the possibility of
constituting an escrow account in a foreign bank, and the risk that, if
Argentina prevailed in the annulment proceedings, this financial security
would be attached by third parties. The Enron committee concluded that
it was not advisable to be exposed to this risk. Argentina suggests that
this risk exists today in light of its current disputes with vulture funds.“°

Argentina further holds that granting a financial security would pose a
burden on the party that requested annulment*® and would place the
investor in a better position than it would have been if annulment
proceedings had not been initiated. In its view, imposing a financial
security is contrary to the principles of state immunity that have not
been waived by States under the ICSID Convention.*”

. Position of Total

Total submits that the baseline of ICSID Awards is that awards are
immediately enforceable, except due to compelling reasons. Argentina
cannot overcome this presumption in this case.*®

According to Total, the request for annulment and for a continuation of
the stay filed by Argentina seeks to delay the satisfaction of an adverse
arbitral award as it has been done by Argentina with other awards in the
past.“° This is part of a systematic Government strategy to defy the core
obligations of the ICSID Convention and to obey the dictates of ICSID
Awards immediately and unconditionally. °°

According to Total, Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention is the starting
point for assessing Argentina’s request for continuation of the stay of
enforcement: “This provision reflects the default position that ICSID
awards are immediately enforceable upon issuance and, absent a ruling
from the Committee to extend a temporary stay of enforcement, remain
enforceable throughout the annulment process. Granting a stay of
enforcement is by no means automatic. It is a form of extraordinary
relief, available only if Argentina is able affirmatively to demonstrate
that the circumstances require a stay.’*'

In addition to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention, the Committee
shall turn to Article 53, according to which the obligation to comply with

“4 Argentina's Second Submission, 72

“ Tr: 33:21- 36:8

*® Argentina's Second Submission, 67

“” argentina’s Second Submission, 473-78
“8 Total's First Submission, {2

* Total's First Submission, 3

5° Tr:37:16-21

5! Total's First Submission, 99

[48]

[49]

[50]

Tr: 4
5° Total's First Submission, 9; Total's Second Submission, 98; Tr:41:21-42:2
®? Total’s Second Submission, {8

*8 Total's Second Submission, 94

5° Tr: 42: 6-9

°° Total's First Submission, 410-11

Tr: 42:15-19

ICSID Awards arises as soon as they are issued, the only exception
being the stay of enforcement.®* Before turning to other decisions, the
Committee shall first interpret the ICSID Convention as an international
treaty in accordance with its plain meaning: “These words, both those in
Article 52(5) stating the default position that the stay should be lifted
and Article 53 dictating that Awards must be complied with immediately,
have only one meaning. There is no ambiguity about them, and there is
no place to refer, for example, to subsidiary sources of international law,
such as, for example, the Opinions of learned commentators or the
Opinions of other ad hoc committees.”**

The drafters of the Washington Convention rejected a proposal to make
stay of enforcement automatic.** Total also refers to the decision in the
Kardassopoulos and Fuchs v Georgia (“Kardassopoulos”), to support its
proposition that under Article 52 (5) of the ICSID Convention, awards
are immediately enforceable and that granting a stay is not automatic.*°
As stated by the Kardassopoulos committee and the committee in SGS
Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v Republic of Paraguay (“SGS v.
Paraguay”), the Party requesting the stay of enforcement bears the
burden of demonstrating that there are circumstances requiring stay of
enforcement.°© Argentina has failed to identify any circumstances that
might merit the continuation of the stay.°”

Total considers that Argentina has erroneously referred to the decision
by the Enron committee to state that there is a presumption in favor of
granting the stay, but ignores that most recent committees have
“sought to correct this counter-textual interpretation of Article 52 (5) of
the ICSID Convention” .*®

Total admits that the Convention offers no guidance as to the particular
considerations that should be taken into account to determine whether
an extension of the stay is required®®. However, it points out to three
considerations, among the variety of factors that have been taken into
account by prior ICSID ad hoc committees: (i) dilatory motives of the
application for annulment; (ii) likelihood of compliance with the award in
case it is upheld and (iii) the balance of the respective interests of the
parties®.

On the first consideration, Total argues that Argentina’s request for
annulment is part of a government policy implemented to extend

 

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

investment treaty arbitrations and to delay payment of the award.
Argentina has sought to nullify every single adverse award rendered
against it, including 11 ICSID annulment proceedings and two court
challenges for UNCITRAL awards®; therefore, a challenge to this Award
was preordained.® Argentina has been successful in only 3 out of 13
challenges; the vast majority of awards have survived challenge.®

Argentina has raised the same three grounds for annulment in other
proceedings and it has based its complaints on the same facts and
issues, which ultimately lie in a disagreement with the merits of the
Tribunal’s decision.°°

Determining whether Argentina’s application for annulment is dilatory
may require a high-level review of the grounds for annulment of Article
52 that were invoked and the likelihood that the alleged defects in the
Award have any merit.°” Total stresses that no ICSID rules of procedure
have been identified by Argentina as the bases for the allegation on a
serious departure of a fundamental rule of procedure and that the
alleged defects of the Award concern the merits of the Tribunal’s
decisions that have been alleged consistently by Argentina in other
annulment proceedings.

As to the second consideration, Total argues that Argentina has not
complied with its enforcement obligations under the ICSID Convention.
Citing to Sempra Energy International v The Argentine Republic
(“Sempra”), Total argues that the prospects of compliance are essential
to the decision on whether to terminate the stay®’; if the Respondent
State intends to defy the Award, there will be no justification for
assisting it for a year or more by suspending the treaty remedy for non-
compliance.”°

Total conceives Argentina’s interpretation of its enforcement obligations
under the ICSID Convention as nihilist.”’ In its view, the plain meaning
of this provision is that Argentina is under an immediate obligation to
satisfy awards that are not subject to a stay of enforcement.”* Contrary
to what has been stated by Respondent, Article 54 of the ICSID
Convention does not require award creditors to bring their awards to its

courts before it is obligated to satisfy the

© Total's First Submission, 412
8 Tr: 4!

  

°? Tr: 49: 6-10

8 Tr: 49:15-50:12
®° Total's First Submission, 21
Tr: 5 4

7" Total's First Submission, (22
72 Total's First Submission, {22
73 Total's First Submission, 422

 

  

Award.” Respondent’s

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

interpretation was rejected by the Sempra committee and is contrary to
other authorities”.

Total accepts that under the Constitution of Argentina international law
takes precedence over domestic law.”° However, it suggests that it is for
Argentina itself to determine the content of its obligations under
international law, and that in the case of the ICSID Convention, these
obligation have been reduced to their minimum.”®

Total counters Argentina’s arguments on the need to have a domestic
enforcement mechanism by stating that the “positive obligation under
Article 54 to provide for a domestic enforcement mechanism cannot
affect Argentina’s obligation under Article 53 to satisfy an award without
qualification”.”’” The committee in E/ Paso criticized Argentinas stance
on requiring procedures for the compliance of awards.”° Total adds that
Article 54 of the ICSID Convention is a remedy for cases in which States
do not comply with Article 53 of the ICSID Convention.”®

Additionally, Total argues that Argentina routinely defies its international
obligations, particularly its financial obligations.®° Argentina requires
creditors to start lengthy proceedings before its domestic courts in order
to satisfy the award and uses delay to obtain settlements with investors
whereby only a portion of the amount owed is paid.*"

Referring to the recent settlement agreements between Respondent and
award creditors, Total affirms that partial payment may well constitute
the extinguishment of obligations under the Award, but it does not imply
compliance with Article 53 of the Convention. The Convention requires
States to pay Awards and does “not envisage partial payment in
government bonds of dubious value and liquidity’.°* Furthermore, in
these settlements, the time waited by the investor was not compensated
because only a fraction of the actual value of interests recognized by the
Award was included.**

In addition, Total argues that prior committees did not have the benefit
of “Argentina’s now extensive record of non-compliance when they

decided to maintain the stay of enforcement in those proceedings” .**

74 Total's First Submission, (23

7 Tr: 55:19-22

78 Tr: 55:19-56:4

7” Total's Second Submission, 49

78 Second Submission, 410; Tr: 58:19-59:4

7° Tr: 59:20-60:7

°° Tr: 51: 6-12

®' Total's First Submission 422-27; Tr: 52: 1-14

82 Tr: 5:

 

15-53:1

°8 Tr: 53:5-13
®4 Total's Second Submission, 111-12

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

° Tr: 6

 

Finally on this second factor, Total regards Argentina’s interpretation of
Article 53 as demonstrative of its lack of intention of complying with
Article 53 and with the Award, in case Argentina’s application for
annulment is rejected. This was the conclusion of the Sempra
committee.**

The third factor upon which Total relies its request for lifting the stay of
enforcement is the balance of interests. Argentina’s intention to evade
payment shifts the balance of interests in favor of lifting the stay, since
Total risks the total destruction of the value of its Award.®” The recovery
of Argentina since the 2000 crisis is in the public record and the Award is
equivalent to 1/100" of Argentina’s foreign exchange reserves.®°
Therefore, Argentina’s arguments on impecuniosity offer no justification
to extend the stay of enforcement of the Award.®?

In addition, it is unlikely that Argentina could not recover any amounts
seized by an award creditor if the award was eventually annulled.°°
Total has no intention of retaining assets in case the award is annulled
and Argentina could eventually attach its assets in Argentina or
elsewhere.®' The existence of third-parties that might eventually attach
assets in satisfaction of Argentina’s international obligations is of no
concern to this Committee, and evidences Argentina’s non-compliance
with its international obligations.°*

Moreover, Total argues that it has a right under the Convention to full
payment as of the date of the Award, and that it would be prejudiced by
any reduction or suspension of that right.°°

Total has not received the money to which it is entitled as of late 2012
and it is clear from Argentina’s submissions that the Award will not be
paid in full regardless of the outcome of these proceedings, and that it
must initiate time-consuming processes to attach Argentina’s assets
elsewhere.** The longer Total is forced to wait, the more difficult and
costly the enforcement proceedings become.* During this time,
Argentina will obtain more leverage over Total to push for a settlement
in extremely favorable conditions for it, as it did in the past round of
settlements. °°

9-18

8 Tr: 61:19-62:6

®” Total's First Submission, 428, 131

® Total's First Submission, (29; Tr: 65: 10-20
® Total's First Submission, (29

°° Total's First Submission, 430

°" Total's First Submission, (30

 

63:4

°° Tr:62:22-63:10

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

Total submits that the precedent of other award creditors that had to
wait over six years to receive partial payment poses a substantial risk
over Total’s recovery of interests ordered in this proceeding.°” Interests
fixed in the Award were set at a low rate and will not be able to
compensate for the opportunity costs to Total of not having these
resources promptly.%°

Alternatively, Total requests that in the event the stay of enforcement is
granted, it should be conditioned on Argentina providing financial
security in the form of escrow funds or bank guarantee®? because
Argentina has demonstrated that it does not intend to honor adverse
arbitral awards. "°° A letter assuring compliance with the Award shall not
suffice as a condition to extend the stay of enforcement for Argentina
has not honored them in the past.'°’ However, such a letter could be
provided in addition to a financial security, in the event that the
Committee considers it necessary to extend the stay of enforcement.‘
In such letter, Argentina should not require procedural preconditions to
make payments under the Award: payment shall be immediate. '

Total affirms that the Committee has the authority to require security as
a condition to extending the stay “/sJince you have full discretion
entirely to reject an application to extend the Stay of Enforcement, it
must be the case that you have the lesser power to approve the
application subject to appropriate protection of the judgment creditors’
rights” .'°*

In addition, Total submits that in over half the cases where ICSID
annulment committees have granted a stay of enforcement, they have
done so on the condition that the losing party posts security or some
other form of assurance." The practice of ICSID ad hoc annulment
committees is to grant stay of enforcement of the award on the
condition that a bond is provided for the full amount of the award. '°

Claimant contests Argentina’s submission that ordering security would
be contrary to the ICSID Convention. Argentina cannot expect to seek
annulment without payment of the Award, because Article 53 of the
ICSID Convention obliges it to pay awards immediately.'°’ For this
reason, security will not place Total in a better position; it will place it in

°” Total's Second Submission, 14
° Tr: 64:2-22

°° Tr: 69:20-21

19 Total's First Submission, 14

'' Total's First Submission, 435,
1°2 Total's First Submission, 5

 

  

: 73:5-14 (Quoting Paul Friedland’s paper on RA-30)
2711-7

17

Iv.

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

a position nearly equivalent to that which would have existed if
Argentina had paid in the first place. '°

ANALYSIS OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

The parties do not dispute that pursuant to Article 53 of the ICSID
Convention arbitral awards are final and binding. The parties also agree
that a party to an arbitration under the ICSID Convention has the right
to request annulment of the award under the grounds provided for in
Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. Argentina considers that it is a
fundamental right that is part of the ICSID system.

Argentina and Total also seem to agree on the basic standards that
other committees have identified for the granting or extension of the
stay of enforcement. They differ, however, on the interpretation and
application of such standards and on whether the burden of such
standards lies on Argentina or on Total.

It is well established, first, that annulment under the ICSID system is an
exceptional remedy" that applies only under the very limited grounds
provided for under Article 52 of the Convention and second, that such
grounds do not constitute an appeal or allow for a review of the merits
of the case.

These undisputed principles — finality of the award and exceptional
nature of the annulment — that derive from Articles 52 and 53 of the
ICSID Convention must be considered in the interpretation of the
provisions related to the stay of enforcement. ''°

The rules on the stay of enforcement of the award are contained in
Article 52 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules 52 to 54.
Pursuant to such provisions:

(a) _ If the application for annulment contains a request for stay
of enforcement of the award, the Secretary-General of
ICSID shall order the provisional stay thereof.

(b) Such provisional stay is temporary and if no request is
made for the committee to continue the stay, it shall
automatically terminate;

(c) | Unless the committee decides to continue the stay, it shall
automatically terminate.

18 Tr: 71:14-18

108 As stated by the ad-hoc committee in SGS v Paraguay “The actions taken by the “Contracting Parties”,
who created the ICSID system must lead us to the conclusion that the binding nature of the award is the
rule, whereas its annulment is the exception. The ICSID system is built on the premise that the awards
rendered by ICSID tribunals settle in a definite manner the issues submitted to their consideration, and that
only under exceptional and highly limited circumstances may their annulment be declared.” Société Générale
de Surveillance S.A. v. The Republic of Paraguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/29, Decision on Paraguay’s
Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, March 22, 2013, 484

"® Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Articles 31 and 32.

18

[76]

[77]

(d) In the event that the committee considers “that the
circumstances so require”, it may order that the stay be
continued pending its decision on the application for
annulment.

(e) If the committee grants a stay of enforcement, it may at
any time modify or terminate the stay at the request of
either party.

The aforementioned provisions of the ICSID Convention lead to the
inevitable conclusion that the stay of enforcement in the ICSID system is
far from automatic. The fact that statistically ad hoc committees may
have granted the stay in the vast majority of cases does not mean that
the stay is automatic. Moreover, in the decisions quoted by Argentina,
and particularly in the annulment decisions of E/samex, Enron and Pey
Casado, the ad hoc committees have simply acknowledged that it had
been the practice of the committees to grant the stay of enforcement of
the award in a practically automatic manner''’ and that stay of
enforcement had been granted in all of the cases where it had been
requested'!?. However, none of those committees have indicated that
the relevant Articles of the ICSID Convention should be construed as
considering the stay automatic.''? In fact, the ad hoc committee in
Elsamex granted the continuation of the stay of enforcement of the
award in light of specific circumstances which were present in that case
and not because it deemed the stay of enforcement to be automatic'’*.

The above reasoning is in conformity with decisions of previous ad hoc
committees, for example, the committee in Sempra v. Argentina held
that:

“Against that background, the view of the present Committee as to the
prerequisites for granting a stay can be summarized as follows. An
ICSID award is immediately payable by the award debtor, irrespective of
whether annulment is sought or not. A stay of enforcement should not in
any event be automatic, and there should not even be a presumption in
favour of granting a stay of enforcement. This follows, in the
Committee’s opinion, from the ordinary meaning to be given to the
terms of Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention, which authorizes the
Committee to stay enforcement of the award pending its decision ‘if it
considers that the circumstances so require’. Although the ICSID
Convention does not give any indication as to what circumstances would

' Tr:85:5-16
"2 argentina’s Second Submission, 412
"3 For example, the committee in E/samex stated that it did not share the position that under the ICSID
system stay of enforcement was automatic. See: E/samex S.A. v. Republic of Honduras, ICSID Case No.
ARB/09/4, Decisién sobre la solicitud de la Reptiblica de Honduras para la continuacién de la suspension de
la ejecucién del Laudo, January 7, 2014, 490

* Elsamex S.A. v. Republic of Honduras, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/4, Decisién sobre la solicitud de la
Republica de Honduras para la continuacién de la suspensién de la ejecucién del Laudo, January 7, 2014,
1998-101

19

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

warrant a stay, it is nonetheless clear from this language that there
must be some circumstances present that speak in favour of granting a
stay. As a consequence, it cannot be assumed that there should be a
presumption in favour of a stay or that the primary burden is placed on
the award creditor to show that continuation of the stay should not be
granted”."’°

The committee in Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey
indicated that:

’The exercise of the discretion of the Committee depends on the
circumstances surrounding the Stay Request and, therefore, the
granting of a stay of enforcement or its continuation should in no way be
regarded as automatic. The Committee is aware that some ad hoc
annulment committees have considered that, “absent unusual
circumstances, the granting of a stay of enforcement pending the
outcome of the annulment proceedings has now become almost
automatic.” However, this does not follow from the ICSID Convention or
the Arbitration Rules, and the Committee considers that its decision
should be based on an assessment of all relevant circumstances.’

Finally, Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention provides that the stay
shall only be continued if the committee considers that “the
circumstances so require”. The Committee notes that the ICSID
Convention does not use other less categorical verbs, such as
“recommend”, “deserve”, “justify” or similar words, but resorts to the
imperative verb “require”.

In sum, to order the continuation of the stay of enforcement of the
Award, the Committee has to be satisfied that the circumstances of the
particular case so require. It is for the party seeking the stay to show
that such circumstances exist, and thus, the stay of enforcement of the
award should be continued.

The ICSID Convention does not identify the special circumstances that
should be considered in order to maintain the stay of enforcement of the
award. However, ICSID ad hoc committees have identified, amongst the
circumstances the following: (i) prospect of prompt compliance with the
award; (ii) hardship to one of the parties; (iii) risk of non-recovery; (iv)
irreparable harm to the award debtor; (v) dilatory requests for
annulment; (vi) enforcement regime and (vii) balancing of interests.''”

"8 Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Decision on the
Argentine Republic's Request for a Continuation of Stay of Enforcement of the Award, March 5, 2009, 27

"8 Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Decision on Applicant's
Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, May 7, 2012, 43. Footnotes omitted.

"7 D. Bishop, S. Marchili, Annulment under the ICSID Convention, Oxford University Press, UK, 2012,
112.17-12.28

20

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

Even though the Parties in these annulment proceedings have referred
substantially to all of the above circumstances, they have mainly
focused on (i) dilatory requests for annulment; (ii) prospect of prompt
compliance with the award; (iii) enforcement regime; and (iv) risk of
non-recovery.

Dilatory request for annulment

As regards the issue of whether or not the application for annulment by
Argentina is well founded or dilatory, the ad hoc Committee agrees with
the statements made by other annulment committees in that the merits
of an annulment application are not relevant for purposes of the decision
on whether or not to grant the stay, unless the application is manifestly
dilatory.'"® Likewise, the mere fact that the application is not dilatory is
not sufficient to grant the extension of the stay. ''®

Having reviewed the application for annulment by Argentina, the ad hoc
Committee does not find that the allegations of Argentina to support its
request for annulment could be considered, as clearly unfounded or as
mere allegations to delay the enforcement of the award. This, however,
does not automatically imply that the stay should automatically be
maintained. First, because at this stage of the proceedings it is not for
the Committee to decide on whether the application for annulment is
well founded or not. Second, because a serious application is the least
that can be expected from an applicant, and nowhere in the ICSID
Convention — or in the practice of ad-hoc committees — compliance with
such minimum duty results in the extension of the stay.

Prospect of prompt compliance with the award and enforcement
regime

The Committee will analyze these two circumstances together given the
form in which the allegations of the parties on the subject were
submitted and particularly the impact that the allegations of Argentina
as to the enforcement regime impact the prospect of prompt compliance
with the award.

Argentina devotes a significant portion of its allegations to discuss the
supremacy of international law and international obligations under the
Argentinian Constitution and hierarchy of laws resulting pursuant to its
legal regime. Argentina concludes that under the laws of Argentina
international treaties take precedence over domestic laws and therefore,
given such precedence, the Argentine legal system is, in itself, an
adequate guarantee of compliance with the BIT, the ICSID Convention,

"8 Elsamex S.A. v. Republic of Honduras, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/4, Decisién sobre Ia solicitud de la
Republica de Honduras para la continuacién de la suspensién de la ejecucién del Laudo, January 7, 2014

196-97

"8 Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. The Republic of Paraguay, \CSID Case No. ARB/07/29, Decision
on Paraguay’s Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, March 22, 2013, 94

21

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

and any award rendered pursuant to those instruments.

This discussion, whatever the relevance it may have, does not allow the
ad hoc Committee to conclude that an award against Argentina,
rendered pursuant to the ICSID, Convention will be enforced as a final
judgment of an Argentine court under Article 53.

Article 53 (1) of the ICSID Convention provides that “The award shall be
binding on the parties and shall not be subject to any appeal or to any
other remedy except those provided for in this Convention. Each party
shall abide by and comply with the terms of the award except to the
extent that enforcement shall have been stayed pursuant to the relevant
provisions of this Convention”. The language does not leave room for
doubt: the award is final and Article 53 (1) imposes an unconditional
obligation to comply with the award, provided only that a stay ordered
pursuant to the provisions of the ICSID Convention will temporarily
release a party from that obligation.

The ad-hoc Committee agrees with the conclusion of the Sempra
committee that stated “Article 53 is directed to the parties to a particular
arbitration (“the award shall be binding on the parties”). Hence, the
obligation to abide by and comply with the terms of the award is
imposed on a party to the arbitration irrespective of whether that party
is the foreign investor or the host State.”'”°

The Parties in these annulment proceedings do not seem to disagree
with the above conclusion. The substantial difference in their positions
refers to the scope of Article 54 of the ICSID Convention.

While Article 53 imposes an obligation on the parties to the arbitration —
“the award shall be binding on the parties” - Article 54 imposes an
obligation on all the ICSID Convention States - “[eJach Contracting
State” — to “recognize an award rendered pursuant to this Convention as
binding and enforce the pecuniary obligations imposed by that award
within its territories as if it were a final judgment of a court in that
State.”

Therefore, in this particular case, Argentina has an obligation, as a party
to this arbitration, both to comply with the award (Article 53) and as a
Contracting State to recognize the award “as binding and enforce the
pecuniary obligations imposed by that award” within the territory of
Argentina “as if it were a final judgment” of an Argentinian court (Article
54). In other words, the fact that Argentina, as a Contracting State to
the ICSID Convention, has an obligation to recognize and enforce ICSID

120 Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Decision on the
Argentine Republic's Request for a Continuation of Stay of Enforcement of the Award, Marc 5, 2009,§38

22

awards under Article 54, neither deprives Article 53 of its effects nor
relieves Argentina of its unconditional obligation, as a party to the
arbitration, “to abide by and comply with the terms of the award.”

[90] With respect to Article 54, Argentina claims that it should be interpreted
jointly with Article 53 and that Article 54 does not limit the final and
binding nature of ICSID Awards provided for under Article 53. According
to Argentina, under Article 54 of the ICSID Convention, investors must
follow the domestic proceedings to enforce the award. These
proceedings, according to Argentina, are not the equivalent to an
exequatur or confirmation proceedings, but in any event procedures that
must be followed before the Argentinian courts. '*' In Argentina’s view,
Article 54 does not apply only in the event of enforcement of an award
resulting from non-voluntary compliance with the obligations contained
therein. It also refers to compliance with the requirements that a State
deems necessary to pay the monetary obligations under the award.

[91] According to the explanations provided by Argentina, particularly during
the hearing, (i) the award creditor must contact Argentina and
commence the local proceedings; '** (ii) the local proceedings require the
submission of a certified copy of the award to an Argentinian
administrative court; (iii) the court will then verify that the decision is
against the State and will inquire with the pertinent authority of the
Government of Argentina as to whether the accounts that are used to
pay the debts of the State have the necessary funds to pay for the
award; (iv) if there are funds the award would be paid; (v) if there are
no funds, the judge may order the Government to obtain the funds and
pay; (vi) if the Government does not pay, the court may order the
attachment of assets. '”°

 

[92] This ad hoc Committee considers that the overall interpretation of
Argentina of Articles 53 and 54, as presented in these annulment
proceedings, is not consistent with the ICSID Convention.

[93] According to Article 54 of the ICSID Convention:

“(1) Each Contracting State shall recognize an award rendered
pursuant to this Convention as binding and enforce the pecuniary

 

Tp: . In response to a question by the Committee, Argentina explained the manner in which this
domestic proceedings work: “So, the procedure is to appear before the designated authority, and then that
is taken to the judge, and the judge decides whether the Decision is paid based on the availability of funds.
And this is the same procedure followed for final Decisions, but this has nothing to do with exequatur
because the idea is with this standard to make a foreign Decision valid in the territory (...)” Tr: 137:16-138:1
A further clarification was added: “This is an administrative court judge that verifies the existence of the
funds. If the funds are not available the Executive is requested to make those funds available, and then if
the Executive does not make those funds available, assets are attached so that that execution is carried out
immediately. It doesn't mean that if the Executive doesn't provide the funds, this is an order that will not be
fulfilled.” Tr: 143:17-144:3. In addition, the parties discussed on the requirement to pay a 3 per cent charge
to initiate this process. Tr: 140:11-142:22

12 Tr: 15: 6-16

"8 Tr: 137:3-138:1

23

[94]

[95]

[96]

obligations imposed by that award within its territories as if it were a
final judgment of a court in that State. A Contracting State with a
federal constitution may enforce such an award in or through its federal
courts and may provide that such courts shall treat the award as if it
were a final judgment of the courts of a constituent state.

(2) A party seeking recognition or enforcement in the territories of a
Contracting State shall furnish to a competent court or other authority
which such State shall have designated for this purpose a copy of the
award certified by the Secretary-General. Each Contracting State shall
notify the Secretary-General of the designation of the competent court
or other authority for this purpose and of any subsequent change in
such designation.

(3) Execution of the award shall be governed by the laws concerning the
execution of judgments in force in the State in whose territories such
execution is sought.” (Emphasis added).

The plain meaning of the wording in the aforementioned Article leaves
no doubt: on the one hand, it imposes, as already discussed above, an
obligation on Contracting States, not only on the State party to the
arbitration. On the other, it refers to the recognition and enforcement of
the awards under the ICSID Convention.

The recognition and enforcement of awards are also addressed in other
international treaties, the most relevant being the 1958 Convention on
the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards. The terms
“recognition” and “enforcement” have been widely analyzed in the
context of international arbitration and it is now settled that the process
seeking for recognition and enforcement of an award takes place when
the award debtor does not voluntarily comply with the terms of the
award.'*4 In other words, obtaining recognition and enforcement is not a
requirement for compliance with an award, but merely a mechanism by
which an award creditor may invoke to compel compliance if the award
debtor does not voluntarily abide by and comply with the terms of the
award. Further it must be noted that the reference to recognition and
enforcement connotes two stages: the recognition stage is to
incorporate the award into the legal system of a given jurisdiction and
the enforcement stage corresponds to the proceedings to force
compliance of the award by the debtor, which may include the
attachment of assets in execution of the court judgment. These stages
are well established and evidenced in Articles 54 and 55.

There is, however, a fundamental difference between enforcement of
awards under the New York Convention and the ICSID Convention. The

124 “In practice, the overwhelming majority of international arbitral awards are complied with voluntarily and,
when they are not, they are usually recognized and enforced". Born, Gary B. International Commercial
Arbitration. Kluwer Law International, 2009, Volume II. p. 2711

24

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

ICSID Convention requires a contracting State to enforce an ICSID
award (as far as it concerns pecuniary obligations) "as if it were a final
judgment of a court in that State". It is an automatic recognition process
where no court proceedings are envisaged, which admits no review by
courts and no grounds to resist recognition. This is in contrast with New
York Convention which does not provide for such automatic recognition.
Article Ill obliges the enforcing state to enforce the award in accordance
with its own rules of procedure, subject, inter alia, to the conditions laid
down in the New York Convention, including Article V which sets out
specific grounds by which an award may be refused recognition and
enforcement by a court, and thus is not incorporated into the legal
system of the given State.

Argentina claims that the proceedings for payment of the award are not
the equivalent of an exequatur or a revision. Ad arguendo, this may be
true with respect to the stage of enforcement of the award, where the
local procedures — and the courts - may come into play according to
Articles 54(3) and 55. However the allegation that these proceedings
must be undertaken (including what seems to be a non-automatic
recognition stage) as a condition for Argentina“s compliance with the
award, suggests that Argentina is not willing to comply with its
obligations under Article 53 to abide by and comply with the terms of
the award, but will rather insist that the award creditor must subject
itself to the process envisaged in Article 54.

Finally, the Committee is not convinced, and the record does not contain
clear evidence, that under Argentinian law the monetary obligations
under a final decision of a local court cannot be voluntarily complied with
unless a judicial proceeding is commenced to seek funds for compliance.

In sum, the obligation to enforce the award contained in Article 54 is an
obligation imposed on all Contracting States and thus, different in scope
from the obligation of Article 53. While the latter imposes on the party to
the arbitration the obligation to comply with the award, the former
obliges all Contracting States, whether or not a party to the given
arbitration, to enforce the pecuniary obligations of the award as it were
a final decision of their own courts. Steps to secure recognition and
enforcement of an award is only required when the award has not been
voluntarily complied with and not as a requisite for payment.

On the basis of the above considerations, the Committee concludes that
a State party to the arbitration, must (like a foreign investor party)
abide by and comply with an ICSID award, and as a Contracting Party a
State cannot force the award creditor to submit to local court
proceedings to seek payment of the pecuniary obligations of the award,
as envisaged by Article 54 of the ICSID Convention.

25

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

Risk of non-recovery

The Committee is not persuaded that if it were to lift the stay, it would
render it very difficult or impossible for Argentina to recover the
amounts paid out to Total under the award.

Prior committees have considered the risk of non-recovery of payments
made by a respondent State on account of an award that is eventually
rendered null as a relevant factor to determine whether the stay of
enforcement of the award should be continued. In conducting this
assessment, some committees have considered the profile of the
claimant in order to assess this risk. Particularly, the committee in
Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of Congo signaled that since
claimant was a natural person, whose assets and activities were difficult
to localize, thus posing difficulties in recoupment. '7°

However, in this case Total, a large international company, has assets in
Argentina and elsewhere, and the amount of the award represents a
relatively small percentage of the assets and revenues of Total. There is
nothing in the record that suggests that Total would refuse payment in
the event the award is annulled, nor is there persuasive evidence that
an attachment of assets of Total may affect the company to such as
extent as to prevent payment to Argentina if the Committee were to
annul the award.

Balance of Interests

In balancing the interests of the parties in these annulment proceedings
the Committee considers, first, that aside from a general statement that
lifting the stay would prevent Argentina from using funds that it
otherwise needs to satisfy the needs of Argentinians, there is no
concrete allegation, much less evidence, of the existence of special
circumstances that merit extending the stay of enforcement.

Second, that the mere fact of the application for annulment being
serious or not evidently dilatory is not sufficient to continue the stay of
enforcement.

Third, that for the reasons explained in paragraphs 103 to 105 above,
there seems to be no risk of non-recovery in the event the award were
partially to totally annulled.

Last, but not least, the Committee has found that Argentina is under an
unconditional duty to “abide by and comply with” the Award according to
Article 53. Argentina cannot insist in that it is complying with the ICSID
Convention, and rely on such alleged compliance as a factor to maintain

128 ir. Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision on the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, November 30, 2004, 124

26

[108]

[109]

Vi.

the stay, if at the same time it insists in forcing Total to activate Article
54 as a condition for payment. Total may, if Argentina refuses to comply
with the award, enforce it under Article 54. The insistence of Argentina
that it has no obligation to comply in the absence of Total going through
its national judicial procedures implementing Article 54 must necessarily
lead to the conclusion that Argentina is not willing to abide with its
Article 53 obligations to comply with the award.

The above considerations lead the Committee to conclude, that in the
balance of interest, the stay of enforcement of the Award should be
lifted and it will so decide.

COSTS

The decision on costs for proceedings related to the stay of the award
will be made together with the final decision on the application for

annulment.

DECISION

The Committee, based on the above considerations:

1.

Rejects the request from Argentina to continue the stay of enforcement
of the Final Award rendered on November 27, 2013, in ICSID Case No.
ARB/04/01, Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic.

. Orders the lifting of the stay of enforcement effective as of the date

hereof.

27

7 | Ll,

Mr, Alvaro Castellanos week Nell Ms, Teresa Ms, Teresa Cheng
Member of the Committes Member of the Committee

Mr, Eduardo Zuleta Jaramillo
President of the Committee

