INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.
DECISION ON OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION
ICSID Case No. ARB/04/01

Total S.A.
Claimant

v.

The Argentine Republic
Respondent

before the Arbitral Tribunal composed of:
Prof. Giorgio Sacerdoti (President)

Sr. Luis Herrera Marcano (Arbitrator)

Mr. Henri C. Alvarez (Arbitrator)

Secretary of the Tribunal
Gabriela Alvarez Avila

Washington, D.C., 25 August 2006

Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction

Table of Contents

Index of Abbreviations i
I. Procedural background 1
IL. The Subject Matter of the Dispute ..

   

III. The objections of Argentina to jurisdiction

 

 

 

 

 

A. First objection: 11
B. Second objection: 12
C. Third objection: 14
D. Fourth objection: 17
E. Fifth objection: 21

 

 

IV. Consideration by the Tribunal of the Objections to Jurisdiction

The proper methodology to resolve the jurisdictional challenge.............

 

The first objection to jurisdiction by Argentina..

   

The second objection to jurisdiction by Argentina............0cccceeeees

Third jurisdictional objection of Argentina ........

 

Fourth jurisdictional objection of Argentina.......

7" moO D>

Fifth jurisdictional objection of Argentina

   

G. Sixth jurisdictional obj of Argentina 44

Decision 46

Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction

Index of Abbreviations

 

“Total” or the “Claimant”

Total S.A.

 

“Argentina” or the “Respondent”

The Argentine Republic

 

 

“ICSID Convention” The Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States

“BIT” The Treaty between France and Argentina

concerning the Reciprocal Promotion and

Protection of Investment

 

“Institution Rules”

The ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution

of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings

 

“Arbitration Rules”

Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

 

 

 

 

“CMM” Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits
“RMJ” Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction
“CCMJ” Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on jurisdiction

 

 

 

1. Procedural background

1. On October 12, 2003 Total S.A. (hereinafter “Total” or the “Claimant”) filed
with the Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes a “Request for Arbitration” against the Argentine Republic (hereinafter
“Argentina” or the “Respondent’”) pursuant to the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (hereinafter the
“ICSID Convention”) and the Treaty between France and Argentina concerning the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investment (hereinafter the “BIT’) of July 3,
1991.

2. In accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution
of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (hereinafter the “Institution Rules”), the
Secretary-General on November 3, 2003 acknowledged receipt of the request and on
November 4, 2003 transmitted a copy of the request to the Argentine Republic and to
the Argentine Embassy in Washington, D.C. After further correspondence, the
Secretary-General duly registered Total’s request for arbitration on January 22, 2004
pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and gave notice thereof to the
parties. At the same time, the Secretary-General invited the parties, pursuant to Rule
7(d) of the Institution Rules, to proceed as soon as possible to constitute an Arbitral
Tribunal in accordance with Articles 37 to 40 of the ICSID Convention.

3. On March 29, 2004, the Claimant appointed Mr. Henri C. Alvarez, a Canadian
national, as arbitrator. On April 14, 2004, the Argentine Republic appointed Dr. Luis
Herrera Marcano, a national of Venezuela, as arbitrator. On August 20, 2004, in
accordance with Rule 4 of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
(hereinafter the “Arbitration Rules”), the Chairman of the Administrative Council of

ICSID appointed Professor Giorgio Sacerdoti, a national of Italy, as President of the

Tribunal. On August 24, 2004, the Deputy Secretary-General of the ICSID informed
the parties that all members of the Tribunal had accepted their appointment so that, in
accordance with Arbitration Rule 6(1), the Tribunal was deemed to have been
constituted on that same day.

4. The first session of the Arbitral Tribunal was held on November 15, 2004. The
parties appeared and were duly represented. The parties confirmed that the Tribunal
had been properly constituted on August 24, 2004 in accordance with the ICSID
Convention and the Arbitration Rules and that they did not have any objections in this
respect.

5. During the course of the first session, the parties agreed on a number of
procedural matters as reflected in the written minutes signed by the President and the
Secretary of the Tribunal. Among the various procedural decisions taken at that
hearing, it was agreed that, in accordance with Arbitration Rule 22, the languages of
the proceedings would be English and Spanish. The Claimant would file its pleadings
in English and Argentina would file its pleadings in Spanish, without the need of
subsequent translation of the written pleadings into the other party’s chosen
procedural language. After hearing the parties, the Tribunal decided by Procedural
Order No.1 that the Claimant would file its Memorial on the merits within five
months from the date of the first session. The Tribunal also decided that if the
Respondent wished to raise any objections to jurisdiction, it should do so within 45
days from the receipt of the Claimant’s Memorial on the merits. In the event of an
objection to jurisdiction, the Claimant would file its counter-Memorial on jurisdiction
within 45 days from the receipt of the Respondent’s Memorial on jurisdiction. In the
same Procedural Order, the Tribunal further decided that should the Respondent not

raise any objections to jurisdiction, it should file its Counter-Memorial on the merits

within five months from the receipt of the Claimant’s Memorial on the merits; the
Claimant should thereafter file its Reply on the merits within 60 days from the receipt
of the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the merits; and the Respondent should file
its Rejoinder on the merits within 60 days from the receipt of the Claimant’s Reply on
the merits.

6. The Claimant filed its Memorial on the merits on April 11, 2005 (hereinafter
“CMM”); Argentina filed its “Memorial sobre objeciones a la jurisdiccién del Centro
y ala competencia del Tribunal” (hereinafter “RMJ’) on June 3, 2005. In accordance
with Arbitration Rule 41(3), the proceeding on the merits was thereby suspended. In
conformity with Procedural Order No.1, the Claimant then submitted its Counter-
Memorial on jurisdiction (hereinafter “CCMJ”) on August 1, 2005.

7. The hearing on jurisdiction was held in Washington on September 5, 2005.
Ms. Cintia Yaryura, Ms. Maria Victoria Vitali and Mr. Ariel Martins addressed the
Tribunal on behalf of Argentina. Mr. Nigel Blackaby, Mr. Georgios Petrochilos and
Mr. Luis A. Erize addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Claimant. During the course
of the hearing, the Tribunal posed questions to the parties, as provided for in

Arbitration Rule 32(3).

IL The Subject Matter of the Dispute

8. Before examining the issue of jurisdiction submitted to the Tribunal, it appears
useful to highlight briefly the subject-matter of the dispute, in fact and in law, as
presented by the Claimant in its “Request for Arbitration”, as thereafter expanded in
the CMM taking into account also the statements presented to date by Argentina.
Such presentation is made for the sole purpose of setting out the factual circumstances

and the legal claims made by Claimant in respect of which Argentina has raised

objections to jurisdiction. No legal evaluation is hereby implied or made by the
Tribunal, nor should any such significance be attached to it for the purpose of the
present case.

9. As indicated by Total in its submissions, the Claimant is a company
incorporated in accordance with the laws of France and has its registered office in
France, therefore qualifying as a French “investor” within the meaning of Article
1.2(b) of the BIT. Total has made a number of investments in Argentina in the gas
transportation, hydrocarbons exploration and production and power generation
industries. According to Total, its investments in Argentina include majority and
minority shareholding interests in companies operating in the gas transportation,
exploration and production, and power generation sectors, as well as various licenses
and rights, concessions and loans, all and each of them qualifying as an “investment”
in accordance with the meaning of this term in Article 1.1 of the BIT.

10. In the gas transportation industry, Total has an indirect 19.21% stake in
Transportadora de Gas del Norte S.A. (“TGN”), one of two gas transmission
companies established when the Republic of Argentina privatized Gas del Estado,
Sociedad del Estado, in 1992. TGN was granted a license to transport gas in northern
and central Argentina for a term of 35 years, extendable at TGN’s option for a further
ten years. In May 1992, Argentina enacted Law 24,076 (the “Gas Law”) and
Decree 1738/1992 (the “Gas Decree”), which established the legal framework for the
privatization of the gas industry. After a public bidding process, the Government of
Argentina then sold a 70% share in TGN to Gasinvest, a consortium of investors, in
1992. In May 2000, one of the investors in Gasinvest, the TransCanada Group, agreed

to sell its 19.21% share in TGN to Total. This agreement was completed on January

23, 2001. Total currently holds its shares in TGN through Gasinvest, in which it holds
a 27.23% indirect stake, and a number of other indirect shareholdings.'

11. Total’s investments in the petroleum exploration and production industry
commenced in 1978 when it formed a consortium with three other companies (the
“Consortium”) to explore and exploit a series of oil and gas lots in the area around
Tierra del Fuego. In 1979, each of the Consortium members, including Total
Exploracion, S.A., now known as Total Austral S.A., entered into a contract (Contract
19.944) with Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales Sociedad del Estado (“YPF”) to
explore and exploit hydrocarbons in that area. As part of a plan to privatize the oil and

gas industry beginning in 1989, this contract was replaced by a new 25 year

 

concession to exploit oil and gas in accordance with Law 17,319/1967 (the
“Hydrocarbons Law”) and its regulating Decrees Nos. 1055/1989, 1212/1989 and
1589/1989. According to Total, in order to induce it and the other investors to agree to
terminate their previous contract and to enter into the new concession, Argentina
offered the Consortium partners the right to explore and exploit additional lots and
certain rights to dispose of the oil and gas they extracted.” Further, according to Total,
the representations made by Argentina were incorporated into Decree 214/1994 (the
“Concession Decree”) which was adopted to govern the new investment.’ Other
aspects of the legal and regulatory framework governing Total’s investment were set
out in a number of decrees and laws. Total states that as a result of the representations
and assurances provided to it and incorporated in the legal and regulatory framework,

it agreed to terminate its earlier contract and make new investments as part of the new

' Request for Arbitration, para. 101 and Exhibit C-56 which shows the structure of Total’s shareholding
in TGN. See also copies of extracts from TGN’s share register reflecting Total’s shareholdings in TGN
at Exhibit C-44,

2 See Request for Arbitration, paras. 122-123.

3 See Request for Arbitration, para, 124 and the decrees and sources referred to at footnotes 126 and
127.

concession. These investments were made through Total Austral and include
exploration and production assets in various areas in southern Argentina, production
facilities and equipment and long-term gas sale contracts.

12. In the power generation industry, Total has invested in two major power
generation companies, Central Puerto S.A. (“Central Puerto”) and Hidroeléctrica
Piedra de Aguila S.A. (“HPDA”). Central Puerto is a large dual-fuel electricity
generator, having the capacity to produce 2,165 megawatts, which represents 9.5% of
Argentina’s total installed capacity. Central Puerto was created in 1992 as part of the
privatization of Servicios Electricos del Gran Buenos Aires S.E. (“SEGBA”), a state-
owned enterprise, whose power generation business was split into four thermal power
generation companies. At the time of privatization, approximately 63.93% of the total
stock of Central Puerto was acquired by three Chilean companies. Eventually, one of
these companies, Compania Chilena de Generacién Eléctrica (later renamed “Gener’’)
acquired the interest of the other two companies. In July 2001, Total acquired all of
the shares in Central Puerto held by Gener (which had been acquired in 2000 by AES
Corporation). Total says it paid approximately US $255 million and subscribed to US
$120 million of debt to acquire the shares of Central Puerto.‘ Total states that Central
Puerto subsequently made significant investments of approximately US $387 million
in acquiring power generation units to expand and upgrade its capacity. HPDA is said
to be the largest private hydroelectric generation company in Argentina. It was
created in 1993, as part of the privatization of Hidroeléctrica Norpatagénica S.A., the
state-owned hydroelectric generation company which was split into five separate
business units for the purposes of privatization. At the time of privatization in 1993, a

number of foreign investors created an Argentine company, Hidroneuquén S.A., for

* See Exhibit C-70 for a diagram of Total’s shareholdings in Central Puerto and Exhibit C-44 for a
copy of an extract from Central Puerto’ share register.

the purposes of bidding for and acquiring 59% of HPDA’s shareholding.
Hidroneuquén S.A. remains the owner of the shares. In September 2001, Total,
through Total Austral, acquired 70.03% of Hidroneuquén from Gener for the payment
of US $72.5 million and by acquiring approximately US $57 million of subordinated
debt in the form of bonds. As a result, Total owns indirectly a 41.3% shareholding in
HPDA.©° After privatization, HPDA expended significant sums to acquire equipment
and services (US $161.7 million) and has assumed existing debt (US $405 million).
According to Total, HPDA’s hydroelectric plant currently comprises four units with
an aggregate installed capacity of 1,400 megawatts. These units entered into service in
1993-1994 and represent 6.13% of Argentina’s installed electricity capacity.
13. Total maintains that in respect of each of the areas in which it invested, it did
so on the basis of the representations and promises made by the Argentine
government in the legal and regulatory framework for privatized gas transmission
companies, the oil and gas exploration and production industry and the power
generation industry. Total alleges that a number of measures taken by the Argentine
government, most of which derive from or followed Law 25,561/2002 (the
“Emergency Law’) together with the Emergency Law itself, breached or revoked the
commitments given to attract investment upon which Total relied in making its
investments.
14. More specifically, Total indicates that the measures (the “Measures” in Total’s
submissions) include

- the forced conversion of dollar-denominated public service tariffs into

pesos (or “pesification”) at a rate of one to one

5 See Request for Arbitration, paras. 158-160 and Exhibits C-72, a diagram showing Total’s
participation in HPDA and Exhibit C 44, a copy of HPDA’s share register.

the abolition of the adjustment of public service tariffs based on the US
Producer Price Index and other international indices

the “pesification” of dollar-denominated private contracts at a rate of
one to one

the freezing of the gas consumer tariff (which is the sum of the: (a)
well-head price of gas; (b) gas transportation tariff; and (c) gas
distribution tariff)

the imposition of (a) export withholding taxes on the sale of
hydrocarbons; and (b) restrictions on the export of such hydrocarbons
the abandonment of the uniform marginal price mechanism in the
power generation market by price caps and other regulatory measures
the pesification, at a one to one rate, of all other payments to which
power generators are entitled; and

the refusal to pay power generators their dues, even at the dramatically

reduced values resulting from the Measures.°

The Claimant complains that those Measures adopted by Argentina have

resulted in several breaches of the BIT. As to Total’s gas transmission assets, Total

argues that the Measures expropriated Total’s investment in TGN, in breach of Article

5.2 of the BIT; that the Measures treated Total’s investment in TGN unfairly and

inequitably, in breach of Article 3 of the BIT; that the Measures discriminated against

Total’s investment in TGN in breach of Articles 3 and 4 of the BIT; and that

Argentina has breached its obligation to respect specific undertakings in violation of

Article 10 of the BIT.

© This list is contained in para. 33 of the CMM of April 8, 2005. A more detailed description of the
measures complained of and their specific impact is found in Total’s Request for Arbitration, paras.
104-116, 135-140, 180-198.

16. As to Total’s investments in the exploration and production of crude oil and
natural gas, Total complains that the various measures listed revoked Total’s right
freely to dispose of its hydrocarbons in breach of the duty of fair and equitable
treatment pursuant to Article 3 of the BIT; that the measures treated Total in respect
of its hydrocarbon production in an arbitrary and discriminatory manner contrary to
Articles 3 and 4 of the BIT by benefiting domestic, industrial, commercial or
residential consumers to the detriment of Total; and that the measures restricting
export of hydrocarbons constitute further, separate breaches of the duty of fair and
equitable treatment pursuant to Article 3 of the BIT.

17. As to Total’s investments in the power generation sector, according to Total,
Argentina through the Measures has failed to observe the obligation not to take
measures equivalent to expropriation without prompt, adequate and effective
compensation in breach of Article 5.2 of the BIT; has breached the duty of fair and
equitable treatment in Article 3 of the BIT and that of refraining from discriminating
against Total (Article 4) owed to Total in respect of its investments in Central Puerto
and HPDA.

18. Based on the above, the Claimant asks the Tribunal to declare that Argentina
by its various acts and conduct specified in Claimant’s Request for Arbitration and
Memorial has breached the above mentioned Articles of the BIT. The Claimant
further seeks compensation for the alleged damages caused thereby to its investment

“in an amount to be a: ssed to be no less than

 

ssed and which is provisionally a:

 

US$ 940 million”,’ in addition to interest, additional reparation to be further specified
and payment by Argentina of all costs and expenses of this arbitration. Total considers

that an ICSID Tribunal is competent under the ICSID Convention and the BIT to

7 CMM para. 403.

examine its claims and grant to it the relief sought. Total asserts that it is a French
investor having made protected investments in Argentina in accordance with Article
1.1 of the BIT. Total asserts further that the parties to the dispute have duly given
their consent to the present arbitration in accordance with Article 25(1) and (2) of the
ICSID Convention and Article 8 of the BIT, so that all the requirements to establish
jurisdiction are met.

19. Argentina has yet to reply to the Claimant’s arguments on the merits since
Argentina has raised preliminary objections to jurisdiction. Acceptance of any of
these cannot therefore be inferred from Argentina’s silence on any given matter.
However, for the sole purpose of deciding the preliminary objections, the Tribunal
takes note that certain matters pertaining directly to its jurisdiction in this case have
not been challenged by Argentina. Thus, Argentina has not challenged the claim that
Total is a French corporation that has made investments in Argentina, nor has it
basically challenged the facts referred to by Total concerning its operations in
Argentina, nor Claimant’s references to the various Argentine laws in force before,
during and after the privatization process relevant to Total’s operations. Neither has
Argentina challenged the existence and scope of the measures it enacted in 2001/2002

to which Total refers as relevant to the legal regime applicable to its investments.

IIL The objections of Argentina to jurisdiction

20. In the RMJ Argentina raises six grounds for challenging the jurisdiction of
ICSID and the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal to hear the present dispute. The
objections to jurisdiction are listed here and thereafter specifically described and

addressed together with the counter-arguments of the Claimant.

A. The claim is not admissible ab initio, since the foreign investor seeks

 

remedies from the effects of a general crisis.

B. The dispute submitted to the Tribunal does not arise directly from a
measure adopted against the investment.

Cc. The dispute submitted to the Tribunal is not an “investment dispute”
according to Article 8 of the BIT, because: (1) the dispute is not a legal
dispute; (2) even if the dispute were a legal dispute, it would be of a
contractual nature, and it consequently would fall outside the
competence of the Tribunal.

Dz Total lacks the ius standi to sue under international law and applicable
Argentine law.

E. The Tribunal lacks competence because the parties agreed on the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Federal contentious-administrative
tribunals of the City of Buenos Aires, for the interpretation and
enforcement of the concession contract.

F. The claim is i

 

inadmissible due to lack of damages.

A. First objection:

Inadmissibility of the claim

 

21. According to Argentina, any damages which may have been suffered by

the foreign investor have been caused by the economic crisis which affected the

Republic of Argentina. As a consequence of the crisis, all those who have been
affected have suffered proportionately to their means. It follows that the foreign
investor cannot claim protection from the effects of a general crisis under the

protection standards laid down in a bilateral investment treaty.

 

22. In the CCMJ, the Claimant maintains that the so-called ab initio objection is to
be considered “a point going to the merits, not the admissibility, of the claim.” In
support of this position, the Claimant refers to various decisions to this effect by

other ICSID tribunals before which Argentina raised the same objection.

B. Second objection:

The dispute submitted to the Tribunal does not arise directly from a measure adopted
against the investment.

 

Argent ‘gument:

23. The second objection presented by Argentina concerns the requirement
that the “dispute aris[e] directly out of an investment” according to Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention. In order to meet such a requirement, in Argentina’s view, the
measure or measures alleged in violation of the pertinent BIT have to be specifically
addressed to the investment. Universal measures addressed to everyone — investors

and others, nationals and foreigners alike - cannot be considered by ICSID Tribunals.

* The text of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention is as follows: “The jurisdiction of the Centre shall
extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a
national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to
the Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.”

12

Argentina argues that to hold otherwise would be judging Argentina’s public policy
and not deciding a legal dispute.

24. Argentina considers that none of the measures complained of by the
Claimant have been addressed or directed specifically at its investments. The fact that
the Claimant suffered as a consequence of the economic crisis which had a general
character, does not automatically mean that the investor has been directly affected by
a measure specifically taken against it. In support of this approach, Argentina relies
on the theory of legal causation construed by the Methanex tribunal in its Partial
Award of August 7, 2002. In Argentina’s view, since the various measures at issue
adopted by the Republic of Argentina have not been directed specifically at the
investor, the dispute cannot be considered as “arising directly out of an investment”,

under the terms of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

Claimant’s counter-arguments:

25. To reply to the second jurisdictional objection made by the Respondent,
the Claimant relies, first of all, on a literal interpretation of Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention requiring that the disputes submitted to the Centre “arise directly out of
an investment”. According to the Claimant, Argentina reads this requirement wrongly
as relating not to the investment per se but to the measures complained of by the
Claimant. Moreover, the Claimant submits Argentina errs in considering the word
“directly” in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention as synonymous with “specifically”,
thus reading the above-mentioned article “as providing for ICSID jurisdiction in

respect of disputes ‘arising directly out of measures specifically directed_at an

investment’. According to the Claimant, on the contrary, Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention must be correctly interpreted as requiring that the dispute brought to the
Centre be “directly” — and not “specifically” — related to “an investment” — and not to
the “measures complained of”.

26. The Claimant specifies also that it “does not complain of the economic
conditions in Argentina, nor does it take issue with the Government’s general
economic policies, including the floating of the peso and its devaluation. Rather the
Claimant complains of “specific” measures taken by Argentina “in furtherance or as a

wl0

consequence of its general economic policies. These measures were, in the

“!! and violated the

Claimant’s view, “directly aimed at Total’s investments’
commitments given by Argentina in order to attract investment and relied on by the
investor, thus constituting a breach of the BIT provisions granting protection to
French investors.

27. Secondly, the Claimant opposes Argentina’s reliance on the award
rendered in the Methanex case to support its position. The Claimant argues that since
that dispute concerned a claim under different language contained in NAFTA Chapter
11 and was decided according to different procedural rules from the case at issue here
(that is, the UNCITRAL Rules), it would be misleading to use the reasoning
developed by the arbitral tribunal on that occasion to address the issues in dispute in

these proceedings.

Cc. Third objection:

The dispute submitted to the Tribunal is not an “investment dispute” according to
Article 8 of the BIT because: (1) the dispute is not a legal dispute; (2) even if the
dispute were a legal dispute, it would be of a contractual nature, and it consequently

° CCMI para. 27.
"© Ibid. para 42.
" Idem.

would fall outside the competence of the Tribunal. In any case Total’s minority
shareholdings were not affected.

Argentina’s arguments:

28. Argentina maintains that the dispute submitted to the Centre should be
about rights and obligations and not about some negative factual consequences that
affected the Claimant. In Argentina’s view, the dispute at issue here is about a price
control system, concerning the alleged intangibility of the public service utility tariffs:
the only right that the Claimant could invoke in this respect is the right to renegotiate
a contract. Since Total’s claim is of a contractual nature, the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction and competence to hear the case. Argentina suggests that the alleged legal
disputes that may arise from any disagreements about the process of tariff revision,
which is still ongoing, should be submitted to the domestic tribunals freely agreed by
the parties in dispute. For these reasons, Argentina denies that the Claimant’s
complaints give rise to a “legal dispute” under the terms of Article 25 of the ICSID

Convention, or to an “investment dispute” according to Article 8 of the BIT.’

}? Art. 8.1, 2 and 3 of the Argentine-France BIT is as follows:
1. Any dispute relating to investments made under this Agreement between one Contracting
Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party shall, as far as possible, be settled
amicably between the two parties concerned.
2. If any such dispute cannot be so settled within six months of the time when a claim is made
by one of the parties to the dispute, the dispute shall, at the request of the investor, be
submitted:

- Either to the domestic courts of the Contracting Party involved in the dispute;

- — Or to international arbitration under the conditions described in paragraph 3 below.
Once an investor has submitted the dispute to the courts of the Contracting Party concerned or
to international arbitration, the choice of one or the other of these procedures is final.

3. Where recourse is had to international arbitration, the investor may choose to bring the

dispute before one of the following arbitration bodies:
The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), established
by the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States opened for signature in Washington on 18 March 1965, if
both States Parties to this Agreement have already acceded to the Convention. Until
such time as this requirement is met, the two Contracting Parties shall agree to
submit the dispute to arbitration, in accordance with the rules of procedure of the
Additional Facility of ICSID;

- An ad hoc arbitral tribunal established in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of

the United Nation Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

15

29. Argentina also challenges the competence of the Tribunal on the ground
that the dispute at issue concerns the rights of minority shareholders (19.23 % in TGN
and 41.3 % in HPDA) and no measure taken by the Republic of Argentina has ever
impaired those rights. Argentina recalls in this regard that the BIT refers to “any body
corporate effectively controlled, directly or indirectly, by nationals of one Contracting
Party or by bodies corporate having their registered office in the territory of one
Contracting Party”. In any case, according to Argentina, the BIT requires a situation
of control. Argentina concludes that the dispute at issue is not a legal dispute because
it concerns indirect minority shareholders who do not exercise any control over the
Argentine companies involved. The Claimant complains of the impairment of rights

pertaining to those companies due to alleged contractual violations of their rights.

Claimant’s counter-arguments:

30. In the CCMJ, the Claimant stresses that the third objection raised by
Argentina relates only to Total’s investment in TGN. Total then addresses separately
the different aspects of the third objection to jurisdiction. First, the Claimant disputes
Argentina’s argument that Total’s claim does not involve an “investment dispute”
under the BIT because it is about a tariff renegotiation process. Second, it contests the
argument that the dispute is a “political dispute or — at most - a contractual matter
subject to the ‘renegotiation process’ under Argentine law”.'°

31. According to the Claimant “‘renegotiation’ was a mechanism that

Argentina unilaterally imposed on TGN ... in order to evade its international

old

obligation to arbitrate under Article 8 of the Treaty.”"" The Claimant submits that the

renegotiation process is not a bar to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction because the Claimant

"3 CCMI para. 54.
44 [bid. paras. 58-59.

does not ask the Tribunal to second-guess the on-going renegotiation process, but to
decide on the breaches of the BIT by Argentina. Total has never participated directly

in the renegotiation proces

 

and its treaty claims are entirely distinct from that
process. The Claimant contends at length in the CMM that in taking the measures at
issue Argentina has breached the legal rules contained in the BIT. The fact that the
legal dispute stemming therefrom may have political repercussions or aspects is
immaterial. Claims involving the international responsibility of a State, such as those
presented by Total in this case, often involve the compatibility of the exercise of
sovereign powers with treaty obligations and entail a political dimension. Such a
dispute does not cease to be legal and does not become, as a consequence, non-
justiciable because of those dimensions.

32. As to Argentina’s argument that it has taken no measure that impairs the
rights of Total as a minority shareholder and that the BIT protects French investors
only if they exercise control, Total points to the definition of investments in Article
1.1(b) of the BIT. The definition includes explicitly “Shares...and other forms of
participation, albeit minority or indirect, in companies constituted in the territory of
either Contracting Party” (emphasis added), without any requirement that control be
exercised by the foreign investor. Total addresses further this point within its response

to Argentina’s fourth objection which involves the same or similar arguments.

D. Fourth objection:

Total lacks the ius
law.

 

standi to sue under international law and applicable Argentine

  

33. Argentina submits that Total lacks ius standi to sue because, according to a
well-known principle of both international and Argentine law, a company’s
shareholders cannot bring a claim to redress the impairment of rights of the company
itself. Allowing shareholders to exercise such an action and eventually obtain
compensation for damages suffered by the company, would lead to the ultimate
destruction of the company. Therefore, corporate claims of a derivative nature are
inadmissible unless a specific provision, as found also in some international
agreements, would provide for them. In Argentina’s view, if the Tribunal allowed the
action brought by some shareholders, it could not ensure (in the event of deciding in
their favor) that the resources so recovered by the shareholders would compensate the
company for the corporate property allegedly damaged. This would lead to the
anticipatory liquidation of the company because of the ensuing diversion of the
company’s resources, a measure that an ICSID tribunal is clearly not competent to
order. The shareholders, as shareholders, have no legal right to the preservation of the
value of their shares.

34. To support its argument, Argentina relies first of all, as to international
law, on the International Court of Justice (“ICJ’’) decision in the Barcelona Traction
case. In the Respondent’s view, the pronouncement by the ICJ in that case supports its
argument that a harm caused to shareholders by measures taken by the State against
the company itself cannot imply the shareholders’ entitlement to compensation.
Argentina submits that the ICJ’s decision is still valid and also extends beyond the
exercise of diplomatic protection. The same principles apply in respect of ICSID
because foreign shareholders do not enjoy under the Convention a right of action on
behalf of their locally incorporated subsidiary, which does enjoy such a right in

accordance with Article 25(2)(b). A specific international treaty provision would be

necessary to that effect which, Argentina submits, is found in the NAFTA and some
other free trade agreements.

35. Further relying on its Companies Law (Ley de Sociedades Comerciales N°
19550),'° Argentina explains that only the corporation can defend its own interests.
There is no provision in the Companies Law that allows a shareholder to make a
complaint on behalf of the corporation. According to the same line of reasoning, a
shareholder cannot make a complaint on its own behalf in order to obtain
compensation for the alleged damages suffered by him in proportion to his corporate
participation. This would be tantamount to a misappropriation of the company’s
assets. Argentina distinguishes the inadmissible derivative claims that in its view
Total has put forth from certain corporate actions that its company law grants in
certain cases to a shareholder in defense of the corporate interest. In the present
proceedings, the Claimant did not however introduce such a claim, nor an individual
claim for damages directly caused to its own property. The Claimant is seeking to
enforce rights of another legal person. This is inadmissible according to Argentine

law, which Argentina submits is the only law applicable to the present case.

 

Claimant’s counter-arguments:

36. To address the fourth objection to jurisdiction advanced by Argentina,
Total relies, first of all, on the provision of the BIT defining covered investments. In
fact, Total’s equity participation in TGN, Central Puerto and HPDA, all of which are
companies incorporated in Argentina, is contemplated by Article 1.1 of the BIT as:
“(b) Shares, ... and other forms of participation, albeit minority or indirect, in

'5 In support of its arguments based on Argentine corporate law, Argentina has submitted a legal
opinion by Prof. Ricardo Augusto Nissen, Chief Inspector of the Argentine Regulatory Agency of
Corporations.

companies constituted in the territory of either Contracting Party.” (emphasis added).
Consequently, according to the Claimant, the dispute at issue relates to investments
made under the BIT within the coverage of Article 8.1 of the BIT.
37. The reference made by the Respondent to Argentine Companies Law,
which would not admit derivative claims, is irrelevant in these proceedings because
Total’s claim is a claim based on the BIT. For this reason, general international law,
referred to by the Respondent, also has no bearing on the matter. Total challenges
consequently the reliance by Argentina on the Barcelona Traction case.
38. The Claimant submits that in order to dismiss the objection to jurisdiction
at issue, it suffices to refer to Article 1.1(b) of the BIT, which defines an investment
as including different forms of participation — including minority or indirect - in
companies constituted in the territory of the other Contracting State. In order to
protect these investments, the BIT grants a direct right of protection, including access
to international arbitration under the ICSID Convention. According to Total, the
Respondent’s position that a claim for the defense of the rights of the shareholders
would be admissible under the ICSID Convention only through Article 25(2)(b), that
is through a direct claim by the locally incorporated company, runs contrary to the
ICSID Convention itself and does not take into account the very provision of the BIT
which defines covered investments. According to the Claimant, Article 1.1(b) of the
BIT was meant to enlarge the jurisdictional protection available to investors pursuant
to the ICSID Convention. Answering the Respondent’s assertion that derivative
claims are admissible only when an international agreement so provides, the Claimant
maintains that “Article 1.1(b) of the Treaty contains a clear and dispositive rule to that
>» 16

effect”.”” Total concludes that treaty provisions such as Article 1.1(b) of the BIT

"6 CCMIJ para. 107.

20

“permit shareholders to claim for the damage caused to their shareholdings by

”!7 as is well established in

measures directed at the company in which they participate
arbitral case law, independent from any right of action that the company itself may

have.

E. Fifth objection:

The Tribunal lacks competence since the parties agreed on the exclusive jurisdiction
of the Federal contentious-administrative tribunals of the City of Buenos Aires, for
the interpretation and enforcement of the concession contract.

 

39. Argentina points out that the Bidding Rules for the privatization of Gas del
Estado provide (at Section 1.3.5) that “The Bidders, the Investor Company and the
Licensee shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Contentious-Administrative
Courts of the City of Buenos Aires for the purpose of any conflict arising in
connection with the Bidding Process, including performance or termination of the
Transfer Agreement, hereby waiving any other competent court or jurisdiction.”
(Translation).

40. Argentina cites as relevant precedents the Woodruff case decided by the
Claims Committee between the US and Venezuela; the North American Dredging
Company (NADC) case decided by the American-Mexican Claims Committee in 1926
and the more recent SGS vy. Pakistan and SGS v. Philippines cases. In the
Respondent’s view, such jurisprudence points out a fundamental theory of continental
law, namely the theory of “actos propios”, known also in international law under the

common law term of “estoppel”.

" Ibid. para. 109.

21

41. According to the Respondent, the Claimant, by agreeing to a clause
providing for exclusive jurisdiction of domestic courts, waived its consent to the
jurisdiction of the ICSID to hear the dispute. Article 26 of the ICSID Convention
provides for the exclusive jurisdiction of the Centre, “unless otherwise stated”.'* In
the Respondent’s view, through the above-mentioned clause of the Bidding Rules,
Total clearly declined Argentina’s offer to arbitrate under the ICSID Convention and
consented instead to the jurisdiction of domestic tribunals of Argentina over any
dispute related to the investment. Argentina concludes that Total has waived its
consent to arbitrate under the ICSID Convention by agreeing to a clause recognizing a
different jurisdiction. As a result, the written consent required by Article 25 of the

ICSID Convention is lacking as to the Claimant since it has consented instead to

 

cept the jurisdiction of the domestic courts.

 

42. The Claimant rejects Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal cannot hear
the claim because the Bidding Rules for the privatization of the Gas del Estado
provide, at section 1.3.5, for the exclusive jurisdiction of domestic tribunals to hear
any dispute arising in connection with the Bidding Process. The Claimant maintains
that it is not bound by the Bidding Rules, since it was not a party to that agreement,
and that its claims have nothing to do with the Bidding Rules since its claims are
founded on the BIT. Article 26 of the ICSID Convention, invoked by Argentina, is
totally irrelevant here. Total never signed a clause regarding disputes related to its
18 Article 26 of the ICSID Convention provides as follows: “Consent of the parties to arbitration under
this Convention shall, unless otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to the exclusion of

any other remedy. A Contracting State may require the exhaustion of local administrative or judicial
remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration under this Convention.”

22

investment which would have the effect of “declin[ing] Argentina’s offer to arbitrate
Treaty disputes pursuant to the ICSID Convention”.'”

43. To distinguish the NADC case relied upon by the Respondent, the
Claimant points out that NADC dealt with the subscription by an investor to a so-
called “Calvo clause” in a contract with the host State. Such a clause would prevent
the investor from asking its home State to intervene in diplomatic protection; it cannot
however bar a foreign investor from pursuing its claim under international law. In the
same line of reasoning, according to the Claimant, the reference by the Respondent to

the SGS y. Philippines case is misplaced. That case concerned a contractual claim

 

brought under the cover of an “umbrella clause” of a BIT before an arbitral tribunal.
Although the tribunal admitted in principle its competence to hear the case, it declined
to exercise it because the parties had submitted the claim to the Philippine courts. In
the present case, on the contrary, Total’s claims are not contractual, they are not
asserted under Article 10 of the BIT, and they have not been submitted to any other
forum. In support of this argument, the Claimant relies on various decisions on
jurisdiction by arbitral tribunals in investment disputes, such as Impregilo v. Pakistan;
CMS vy. Argentina; Enron v. Argentina; and Azurix v. Argentina. The Claimant goes
on to refer to other cases in support of its position that “claims asserting a cause of
action under a treaty cannot be reduced to contract claims ... simply because they

may raise some contractual iss

 

es, or be somewhat related to an underlying

contract.””?

F. Sixth objection:

The claim is inadmissible due to lack of damage.

'° CCMI para. 116.
°° Thid. para. 128.

23

 

44. Under this argument Argentina asserts the non-existence of a controversy
because the damages that Total claims it has suffered do not exist and the issues
raised by Total have been resolved by an agreement for the normalization of the
“Mercado Electrico Mayorista” (MEM). Argentina considers that the dispute has
thereby ceased to exist so that the contentious jurisdiction of the Tribunal does not
subsist. To support its view, Argentina relies on a passage of the ICJ decision in the
Nuclear Tests case to the effect that “the existence of a dispute is the primary

condition for the Court to exercise its judicial function.”?!

In Argentina’s submission,
this function cannot be further exercised if the dispute has disappeared.

45. Specifically, as far as the alleged lack of damage is concerned, Argentina
refers to certain measures that it has taken, as part of its emergency measures, in order
to cope with the increase of costs incurred by energy generators. Argentina maintains
that, during the period January 2002 to December 2003, power generators did not
suffer any damage because, when the costs of power generation companies increased,
the differences were covered by the Stabilization Fund of the MEM. As far as the
subsequent period from January 2004 to December 2006 is concerned, the special
fund “Foninvemem” (established in 2004) will use the “sales credit” (liquidaciones de
venta) of the generators in order to finance new power plants. These generators
(including the Claimant) would become shareholders of the new plants, entitled to
receive dividends, as allegedly accepted by the Claimant. At the present time,

Argentina maintains that power generators’ income has increased by 25% in 2005

2! See the Nuclear Tests Case (Australia v. France). International Court of Justice. December 20, 1974.
para. 55. Respondent’s Legal Authority AL RA 14.

24

compared with 2001. The profits of the Claimant being unchanged, the non-existence
of damage on the part of the Claimant is so evident that the claim must be considered

inadmissible, without any need to look further to the merits.

 

Claimant’s counter-arguments:

46. In reply to the sixth objection to jurisdiction advanced by Argentina, Total
relies on two arguments: first, it maintains that the existence of damage is not a
necessary element of a dispute under international law; second, it contests the
Respondent’s refutation of any damage suffered by Total in respect of Central Puerto
and HPDA as contrary to the evidence and belonging to the merits.

47. In order to assert its jurisdiction, the Tribunal must be satisfied, according
to Article 8 of the BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, of the existence of a
“dispute”. According to international law, a dispute is a “disagreement on a point of
law or fact, a conflict of legal views or of interests between two persons.””? The
reliance on the Nuclear Tests case is thus misleading because it concerned “the
absence of a legal interest in the resolution of a dispute on account of the
disappearance of the facts that give rise to the dispute”.”’ In the present case, on the
contrary, the Claimant complains of measures taken by the Respondent which have
reduced the value of its investment in an amount that the Claimant provisionally
estimated in its Request for Arbitration.

48. For the above-mentioned reason, the Claimant considers the assertion by
Argentina that it has not suffered any damage since 2002 as “disingenuous”. The

Claimant explains with reference to the various periods referred to by Argentina how

? See The Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions case, PCI, Series A, No.2 (1924) at 11.
> CCMJ para. 134.

25

the stabilization funds and other actions referred to by Argentina did not eliminate or
mitigate the damages brought about by the measures in respect of which Total

complains.

IV. Consideration by the Tribunal of the Objections to Jurisdiction

49. In conformity with Article 41 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 41 of the
Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal is called upon to decide, as a preliminary question, the
objections raised by the Respondent to the effect that the dispute is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre nor within the competence of the Tribunal. While the parties
have advanced many arguments, some of which touch upon the merits, the Tribunal
will consider hereafter only those that are relevant to its decision regarding the
Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction.
50. The Tribunal must therefore ascertain, for the sole purpose of determining
its jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention and the BIT, whether the criteria that
define disputes for the purpose of ICSID jurisdiction under those two instruments are
met. These criteria are the following:

a) that the dispute is between Argentina (as a contracting party to the

ICSID Convention and the BIT) and a national of France (as defined in the

BIT and in the ICSID Convention);

b) that the dispute is a “legal” dispute (Article 25(1) of the ICSID

Convention),

c) that said legal dispute arises “directly” out of an investment (Article

25(1) of the ICSID Convention);

d) that said dispute is a “controversia relativa a las inversiones, en el

sentido del presente Acuerdo, entre una Parte Contratante y un inversor de

26

la otra Parte Contratante”, that is a “dispute relating to investments made
under this Agreement between one Contracting Party and an investor of the
other Contracting Party” (Article 8.1 of the BIT)"; and

e) that such investments are of the type protected by the BIT (Article 1.1

 

of the BIT).
A. The proper methodology to resolve the jurisdictional chall
Sl. Before starting the above examination on the basis of the parties’

arguments and documentation, but not necessarily in the same order as the parties
have raised them, the Tribunal finds it appropriate to elucidate the type of analysis
that it is called upon to make in order to ascertain its jurisdiction in the present case.

52.. Since, as has been noted above, preliminary objections to jurisdiction are
made before the Respondent has replied to Claimant’s memorial on the merits, in

order to determine i

 

jurisdiction, the Tribunal must consider whether the dispute, as
presented by the Claimant, is prima facie within the jurisdiction of an ICSID tribunal
established to decide a dispute between a French investor and Argentina under the
BIT. The requirements of a prima facie examination for this purpose have been
elucidated by a series of international cases.*° The object of the investigation is to
ascertain whether the claim, as presented by the Claimant, meets the jurisdictional
requirements, as to the factual subject matter at issue, the legal norms referred to as
applicable and having been allegedly breached, and the relief sought.?° For this
The BIT was made “in the French and Spanish languages, both texts being equally authentic” (Art.
13, last paragraph). When using an English translation, the Tribunal will use the text appearing in 1728
UNTS 298 (1993), No. 30174, also relied upon by the Claimant.

°5 A detailed examination of international cases can be found in the recent Decision on Jurisdiction by
the ICSID Tribunal in Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3),
Decision on Jurisdiction of April 22, 2005, paras. 237-253, available _—_ at:
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/awards.htm.

°6 This corresponds to the traditional Roman law description of the elements of a claim: factum, causa
petendi and petitum.

27

purpose the presentation of the claim as set forth by the Claimant necessarily forms
the basis of the Tribunal’s decision. The investigation does not prejudge whether the
claim is well founded, but aims only to determine whether the Tribunal is competent
to pass judgment upon it.

53. As to the facts of the case, the presentation of the Claimant is fundamental:
it must be assumed, for the sole purpose of determining jurisdiction, that the Claimant
would be able to prove to the Tribunal’s satisfaction in the merits phase the facts that
it invokes in support of its claim. That is, the existence and impact of Argentina’s
measures and actions that the Claimant considers have affected its investments in

breach of the BIT. This does not nec

 

arily mean that the Claimant’s description of
the facts must be accepted as true, without further examination of any type. The
Respondent might supply evidence showing that the case has no factual basis even on
a preliminary scrutiny, so that the Tribunal would not be competent to address the
subject matter of the dispute as properly determined.

54. In the present dispute, however, there does not appear to be any basic
disagreement between the parties as to most of the factual elements of the case, as far
as this may be relevant to identifying the ambit of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in
relation to the dispute. Argentina does not dispute, factually, that Total has made and
holds certain investments, as Total has described in detail in its submissions and
supporting documents, in the gas transportation industry, the petroleum exploration
and production industry, and the power generation industry in Argentina.
Furthermore, Argentina has not disputed that the Measures” complained of by Total
as having breached its rights under the BIT, have had generally the scope described
by Total. As mentioned above at paragraph 16, these measures have eliminated the

7 Referred to by the Claimant in its various submissions and summarized above at paragraph 16,
including specifically the Emergency Law of 2002 and those others that followed it and derived from
it.

28

free convertibility of the peso into US dollars at the rate of one to one; have abolished
the right of regulated public utilities - including TGN — to adjust their tariffs
according to the CPI, the US dollar or other foreign currencies and indexes; have
frozen the gas consumer tariff; have imposed an export withholding tax on the sale of
hydrocarbons and have restricted export thereof; and have restricted the ability of
power generators to adjust their prices. Argentina does not dispute either, as far as it
might have addressed this issue in the jurisdictional phase, that those measures have
specifically affected the operations of the local companies in which Total has
invested, in accordance with the conditions that resulted from the legislation
applicable to those operations when Total had made its investment therein.

55. As to the legal foundation of the case, in accordance with accepted judicial
practice, the Tribunal must evaluate whether those facts, if established, namely the
unilateral changes of the legal regime just mentioned and their alleged negative
impact on Total’s investment, could possibly give rise to the Treaty breaches that the
Claimant alleges, and which the Tribunal is competent to pass judgment upon.”* In
other words, those facts, if proven to be true, must be “capable” of falling within the
provision of the BIT and of having caused or representing treaty breaches as alleged
by the Claimant.” It is of course a question for the merits whether the alleged facts
(that is Argentina’s measures and conduct) constitute breaches of the BIT for which
Argentina must be held liable under the BIT in accordance with applicable legal

provisions.” It is also for the merits to determine whether those measures have

*8 See ICI, Oil Platforms case (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), Order of March
10, 1998, ICJ Reports 1998, p. 806, para. 16; see also the separate Opinion of Judge Higgins at para.
32; SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v Republic of the Philippines, (ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/6), Decision on Jurisdiction of January 29, 2004, in ICSID Reports (2005), p. 518, para. 157.
?° ICI, Case Concerning Legality of the Use of Force (Yugoslavia v. Italy), ICJ Reports 1999-1, Order
of June 2, 1999 para. 25.

* Art. 8.4 of the BIT is as follows: “The ruling of the arbitral body shall be based on the provisions of
this Agreement, the legislation of the Contracting Party which is party to the dispute, including rules

29

actually had on Total’s investments the specific negative impact of which Total
complains, to the extent such determination is relevant to establish the alleged

breaches and as

 

ss damages.

56. As to the relief sought, there is no doubt as to the admissibility of the
claim for relief that the Claimant has sought against and from Argentina, notably a
declaratory judgment that Argentina has committed various breaches of the BIT
provisions and an order that Argentina compensate Total for the damages stemming
therefrom.

57. With these considerations in mind the Tribunal will turn to examine the
jurisdictional basis of the claim challenged by Argentina. The Tribunal wishes
immediately to dispose of the first requirement listed above, namely the nationalities
of the parties. Total has submitted evidence that it was incorporated and constituted in
accordance with the laws of France and maintains its registered office (siége social) in
France. Argentina has not disputed that the Claimant, Total S.A., is a juridical person

having the nationality of another Contracting State in conformity with Article 25(2)(a)

 

of the ICSID Convention. More specifically, Argentina has not disputed that the
Claimant meets the requirement of being a French body corporate having its

registered office in France in accordance with French law as required by Article

1.2(b) of the BIT.

B. The first objection to jurisdiction by Argentina

Inadmissibility of the claim.

 

governing conflict of laws, the terms of any private agreements concluded on the subject of the
investment, and the relevant principles of international law”.

30

58. Argentina considers that Total’s claim is inadmissible because a foreign
investor cannot claim to be sheltered from the effects of a general crisis in the host
country by invoking a BIT’s protection. In other words, Argentina submits that
general measures of the host country cannot be challenged as being in breach of a BIT
by an investor who alleges that it has been damaged thereby. However, international
practice shows that many disputes based on an alleged breach of international
standards concerning the treatment of the property of aliens, settled either by means of
diplomatic protection or direct arbitration, have arisen from general measures taken
by host States which affected those investments. Were this not admissible,
nationalization measures, either aimed at the property of both nationals and
foreigners, or just at foreign property, which have been the subject matter of a
substantial portion of those disputes, would have escaped any international litigation
and dispute settlement mechanisms.

59. It is

 

important to clarify that the subject matter of the dispute is not those
general measures of Argentina per se (including the changes of its exchange policy);
nor is the Tribunal entitled to pass judgment on whether they were right or wrong
from an economic or domestic legal point of view. The Tribunal is called upon by the
Claimant to determine whether any specific measures, “or measures of general
economic policy having a direct bearing on such investment have been adopted in
violation of legally binding commitments made to the investor in treaties, legislation
or contracts”.*! “What is brought under the jurisdiction of the Centre [are] not the
general measures in themselves but the extent to which they may violate those

99 32,

specific commitments”.

*! CMS Gas Transmission Co v. Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/08), Decision on
Jurisdiction, July 17, 2003, para. 33. available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/awards.htm

® Ibid, para. 27 cited by Argentina. The approach of the CMS Tribunal has been consistently followed
by other ICSID tribunals before which Argentina has raised this argument; see, for example, Enron

31

60. The Tribunal sees therefore no bar to its jurisdiction in this respect: the fact
that the breach of the BIT’s protection alleged by Total might derive, in whole or in
part, from general measures adopted by Argentina does not deprive the present
dispute of the requirement that it be a “legal dispute” in accordance with Article 25(1)

of the ICSID Convention.

Cc. The second objection to jurisdiction by Argentina
The dispute submitted to the Tribunal does not arise directly from a measure adopted
against the investment.
6l. We turn now to Argentina’s objection that its measures are not

“specifically” addressed against Total’s investments. Argentina b:

 

this objection
on the premise that by referring to “any legal dispute arising directly out of an
investment”, Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention requires that the measures
impugned by the Claimant as being contrary to the BIT must be “specifically”
addressed to, or directed at an investment. In the present case, according to Argentina,
Total complains of general measures, taken for the general welfare (“con el objeto de
lograr el bien conuin”). Furthermore, according to Argentina, Total’s claims raise
contractual issues stemming from tariff questions pertaining to public services
concessions.

62. The Tribunal does not agree with Argentina’s argument nor its conclusions
for the following reasons. From a textual point of view, Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention refers to “any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment”: this

cannot be construed as meaning “any legal dispute arising from a measure by the host

 

Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3), Decision
on Jurisdiction (Ancillary Claim), August. 2, 2004, para’ «12.— available at
hep: worl csi htm; Camuzzi 1 S.A. v. Argentine Republic,
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/2), Decision on Jurisdiction, May 11, 2005, para. 59. available at
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/awards.htm.

32

country directed specifically at an investment”. First, it is the “legal dispute” that must
arise directly from, or be related to the investment (in a direct relation with the
investment), not any “measure” that may have caused the legal dispute; second,
“arising directly out of an investment” is not the equivalent of “specifically directed at
an investment”. In any case, a measure of the host State can affect an investment
directly, so that the dispute as to the international legality of that measure arises
directly out of that investment, even if the measure is not specifically aimed or
directed at that investment.

63. In the present case, it appears from Total’s claims and prima facie
evidence, (as is sufficient for purpose of establishing jurisdiction) that certain
measures, starting with Emergency Law N° 25.561, and more particularly its
Sections 8 and 10, specifically affected Total’s investments. For example, the legal
regime applicable to the gas distribution service performed by TGN was changed and
appears to have affected TGN’s operations.

64. The requirement that the dispute arise directly out of an investment
according to Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention is met when, as is here the case,
the Claimant challenges certain measures of the host State that affected the investment
directly, in that these measures were applicable to such an investment as a matter of
law and that they were in fact implemented in respect of such an investment.

65. Moreover, in the present case one could consider that the more restrictive
criterion advocated by Argentina is also met. This is because a number of the
measures referred to by Total as having affected adversely its investments, both
legally and economically, were directed at and applied specifically to public services
(servicios publicos) and their providers under license (los concessionarios), including

gas and electricity distributors, such as TGN, and Total’s power generation

33

companies. In this respect, the Tribunal does not consider that for a measure to be
found “specifically” directed at a certain entity or at its assets it is necessary that said
entity be singled out by name as an addressee of such measure.

66. Argentina relies to the contrary on the decision on jurisdiction in the well
known Methanex case, rendered under Chapter 11 of NAFTA. In that case, the
arbitral tribunal found that a measure enacted by the state of California that restricted
the use of an additive of gasoline (MTBE) for environmental purposes, thus
preventing Methanex from supplying to the producers of that additive a component it
manufactured in the USA (methanol), did not present a measure “relating to” a
protected investor or to an investment as required by Article 1 101(1).* The Methanex
Tribunal held that the language of Article 1101(1) required that “there must be a
legally significant connection between the measure and the investor or the
investment”. It concluded that since the measure did not relate to methanol or
Methanex it had no jurisdiction over the claim: Methanex had not alleged facts
“establishing a legally significant connection between the US measures, Methanex
and its investments”.*° It must be noted that NAFTA does refer to “measures”, while
the ICSID Convention, as has been pointed out above, refers to “legal disputes”, and
that while NAFTA refers to measures “relating to” an investment, the ICSID
*° See above para. 62. As to its hydrocarbons exploration and production operations, Total points to
Decrees 1606/2001 and 2703/2002 which imposed on hydrocarbon producers the obligation to
repatriate all or a substantial part of the foreign currency income derived from oil and gas exports. As
to its power generation operation, Total points to various measures that have forcibly changed the
previous mechanisms of price adjustment and frozen or capped relevant electricity prices “at artificial
levels” (such as a number of Resolutions of the Secretariado de Energia issued in 2002/2003).

* Methanex Corp. v. USA, Preliminary Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, August 7, 2002, para.
127-139 (this decision on jurisdiction has since been applied in the Final Award of August 3, 2005),
available at: www.naftalaw.org. Art. 1101(1) of NAFTA is as follows: “This Chapter applies to
measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to: (a) investors of another Party; (b) investments
of investors of another Party in the territory of the Party; and (c) with respect to Articles 1106 and
1114, all investments in the territory of the Party.”

* Tbid, para. 139. Even if the Tribunal were to consider jurisprudence under the NAFTA, the Tribunal
notes that other tribunals have interpreted the same NAFTA language differently and reached different

results.
% Tid, para. 150.

     

34,

Convention refers to legal disputes “arising directly out of an investment’.
Irrespective of this question, however, the Tribunal believes that the factual
circumstances are here quite different. In the present case, the assets that the Claimant
indicates as representing its investments in Argentina were directly subject to, and
legally and economically affected by the measures at issue. In the light of what has
been said above, the jurisdictional requirement that the dispute arise “directly” from

an investment is satisfied.

D. Third jurisdictional objection of Argentina

The dispute submitted to the Tribunal is not an “investment dispute” according to
Article 8 of the BIT because: (1) the dispute is not a legal dispute; (2) even if the
dispute were a legal dispute, it would be of a contractual nature, and it consequently
would fall outside the competence of the Tribunal. In any case Total’s minority
shareholdings were not affected.

67. The Tribunal is unable to share Argentina’s view that Total is claiming a
tariff revision while invoking a “supuesta intangibilitad de las tarifas de los servicios
publicos”.*" Rather, as emerges clearly from Total’s Request for Arbitration,
subsequent memorials and documents, Total challenges the various measures taken by
Argentina from 2001 onward that modified the tariff regimes as being in breach of
various BIT provisions. Specifically as to gas transmission, Total has claimed that it
invested in TGN based on the dollarized adjustable tariff structure and that this was a
basic premise and condition of the IPO of Gas del Estado in 1992. Total alleges that
as a result of the Argentinean measures of 2001-2003, which subverted that regime, it

has been substantially deprived of the value and economic benefit that it reasonably

expected to obtain from its investment in TGN. Total claims that Argentina breached
37 RMJ para. 40.

35

thereby the BIT’s obligations not to take measures equivalent to expropriation, to
accord fair and equitable treatment, to refrain from discriminating and to respect
specific undertakings as to TGN.

68. For the purpose of ascertaining jurisdiction, the Tribunal considers the
above claims to fall within its competence since, prima facie, they present conduct by
Argentina that may constitute a violation of the BIT obligations and standards of
protection to which Total as a French investor is entitled. Total has clearly not asked
this Tribunal to evaluate the renegotiation process under Argentina’s regulations nor
to enter into the merit of this process, on which — as Argentina points out — this

Tribunal would have no competence. On the contrary, Total claims that the

 

renegotiation proc

 

's itself in breach of the BIT and that, by invoking such process
under its domestic law, Argentina attempts to evade its international obligations,
including that of arbitrating the dispute in accordance with Article 8 of the BIT.

69. In the light of the above, the Tribunal cannot accept Argentina’s arguments
that the present dispute is not a legal dispute involving the application of the BIT
under international law. Nor can the Tribunal accept that it is a contractual dispute
involving the renegotiation process.

70. With reference to Total’s rights as a minority shareholder in TGN
(19,23%) and in HPDA (41.3%), Argentina objects in substance that a minority
shareholder is not legally protected in respect of measures that cause prejudice to the
local company in which such shareholding is owned by the other country’s investor,
as long as the latter’s legal rights as an owner of those shares are not thereby affected

in breach of the BIT.**

8 Although Argentina does not specifically refer to Central Puerto in this section of its memorial, from
the Tribunal’s review of the facts it appears that this objection also applies to Total’s minority
shareholding in Central Puerto.

36

71. Total relies to the contrary on the inclusion of “Shares, issue premiums and
other forms of participation, albeit minority or indirect, in companies constituted in
the territory of either Contracting Party”, within the definition of the term
“investment” in Article 1.1(b) of the BIT. Total considers that it is immaterial that its
rights as an owner of those shares may not have been affected, suppressed or
interfered with by the measures it challenges. Total submits that since the minority
shareholdings fit within the definition of “investments” in the BIT, Article 8.1 of the
BIT unequivocally grants Total a direct right to protect its shareholdings from
Argentina’s measures, including access to international arbitration under the ICSID
Convention.

72. Total argues further that Argentina’s measures affected the economic
conditions and value of the local companies in which Total holds both majority and
minority investments. Total submits that Argentina radically changed — contrary to
promises, guarantees and legitimate expectations — the legal regime in which the local
companies operated, by changing the denomination and adjustment of tariffs and by
unilaterally altering the terms of the licenses held by these companies.” Total further
submits that the measures had an economic impact on the value of the companies: in
particular, TGN’s tariff income was reduced by about 70% due to the various
measures that affected its operations, while its dollar-denominated costs and liabilities
remained unchanged so that, as a consequence, TGN had to default under its loans. As
a result, TGN’s value plummeted, which in turn impacted the value of Total’s
shareholding in TGN. As to HPDA, Total says that as a consequence of the measures

that affected its operations and dramatically reduced its source of income, HPDA

* Total argues that its acquisition of an equity participation in TGN in the year 2000 “was predicated
on several explicit, firm guarantees provided by Argentina in the Gas Law, the Gas Decree and the
TGN Licence” (CCMJ para. 56; CMM para. 51 ff.)

37

defaulted on its loans, and both HPDA and Central Puerto are currently at the mercy
of their creditors.

73. The question at issue here is whether the measures of Argentina that
allegedly adversely affected the local companies, in which Total holds minority
shareholdings and whose value was in turn affected, are capable of constituting a
breach of the protection afforded by the BIT to Total’s investments as therein
defined.” If the answer is affirmative on the basis of a prima facie examination, then
the present case is one of a “dispute arising directly out of an investment” on which
this Tribunal has jurisdiction.

74. The definition of “investments” in BITs is generally broad in accordance
with their purpose of promoting reciprocally investments by nationals of one
Contracting Party in the territory of the other in the form of capital, technology,
know-how and related activities, by ensuring to the investors a definite standard of
protection.*! The employment of capital and other factors in the host economy is
normally made through companies incorporated in the host country, owned and
controlled by the foreign investor. As shareholder in these companies, the foreign
investor is entitled and able to manage and control its investments. This is often the
only way for a foreign investor to make investments, whenever the host State requires
that certain activities be carried out by locally incorporated companies, as was the
case for Argentina’s privatization schemes. The protection that BITs afford to such
investors is accordingly not limited to the free enjoyment of the shares but extends to

the respect of the treaty standards as to the substance of their investments.

*° Some of the arguments raised and discussed in respect of this issue here are also relevant in case of
majority shareholdings and have been raised by Argentina in its fourth objection to jurisdiction.

“| UNCTAD, Bilateral Investment Treaties in the Mid-1990s, United Nations 1998, at p.1-2: “Bilateral
investment treaties are one of the policy instruments available to provide legal protection to foreign
investments under international law and thus to reduce as much as possible the non-commercial risks
facing foreign investors in host countries”. See also Rudolf Dolzer & Margrete Stevens, Bilateral
Investment Treaties (1995), pp. 25-31.

38

75. These considerations are applicable to the BIT between Argentina and
France interpreted in the light of its object and purpose.*” The above conclusions are
supported by international case law’, by authors and by studies of international
organizations active in this field.“4 There is no reason to hold otherwise when
minority shareholdings in a locally incorporated company are at issue in a situation
such as the present one.*° The BIT specifically includes minority shareholdings
within the definition of investment. The fact that minority participations are at stake
here does not change the nature of the investment nor the exposure of the foreign
investor to risks in respect of which the BIT is meant to afford protection. The
position and role of Total as a French investor in respect of the companies in which it
held minority shares does not appear different than in respect to the other companies it
owns and controls in Argentina and their activities.

76. The Tribunal finds therefore that claims with respect to Total’s indirect

and minority shareholdings in TGN, HPDA and Central Puerto are disputes relating to

” The Preamble recites that the two Governments have agreed on the operative provisions of the BIT
“[DJesiring to develop economic cooperation between the two States and to create favourable
conditions for French investments in Argentina and Argentine investments in France; Convinced that
the promotion and protection of such investments are likely to stimulate transfers of capital and
technology between the two countries in the interest of their economic development”. Moreover, the
BIT, besides defining investments and related terms, also covers “activities in connection with such
investments”, granting most-favored-nation and national treatment in that respect (Article 4, first
paragraph of the BIT).

*% See i.e. Antoine Goetz and others v. Republic of Burundi (ICSID Case No. ARB/95/3), Award,
February 10, 1999, para. 89“... le Tribunal observe que la jurisprudence antérieure du CIRDI ne
limite pas la qualité pour agir aux seules personnes morales directement visées par les mesures
litigieuses mais l'étend aux actionnaires de ces personnes qui sont les veritables investisseurs”; Alex
Genin and others v. Republic of Estonia (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/2), Award of June 25, 2001, para.
324: Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v. Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/10), Decision on
Jurisdiction, June 17, 2005, paras. 34-35; Comp. de Aguas del Aconquija and Vivendi Universal v.
Argentine Republic, ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002 para. 46-48; Azurix Corp. v.
Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. AR/01/12), Decision on Jurisdiction, December 8, 2003.

+ UNCTAD, IIA Series, Scope and Definition, United Nations 1999, p.8; reprinted in UNCTAD,
International Investment Agreements: Key Issues; United Nations 2004, Chp. 3, Scope and Definitions,
p. 115,

4 For recent cases where jurisdiction has been upheld in case of minority shareholdings by the foreign
investor see CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8), Decision
on Jurisdiction, July 17, 2003; Enron Corp. and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. Argentine Republic, (CSID
Case No. ARB/O1/3), Decision on Jurisdiction, January 14, 2004, para. 21; GAMI Investments Inc. v.
The United Mexican States, Final Award, November 15, 2004, para. 33 (NAFTA Chapter 11,
UNCITRAL arbitration), www.naftaclaims.com.

 

39

an investment, as defined in the BIT. Thus, the Tribunal finds that it has jurisdiction
under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and Article 8.1 of the BIT with respect
to these legal disputes arising directly out of an investment. The issue of whether
Argentina’s measures actually breached any of Total’s treaty rights is one for the
merits stage of the proceedings and has not been considered by the Tribunal at this

stage.

E. Fourth jurisdictional objection of Argentina“®

Total lacks ius standi to sue under international law and applicable Argentine law.

77. The Tribunal has concluded that, notwithstanding Argentina’s third
objection, Total’s claims fall within the ambit of the BIT and the Tribunal has
jurisdiction to hear these claims.

78. Argentina is misplaced when it relies on the Barcelona Traction case to
assert that action taken by the host country against the activities and assets of a local
company cannot constitute a breach of the BIT. The factual and legal context was
different in that case and only the protection of foreign shareholders under customary
international law was at issue in that dispute. Without entering into the specifics of
that case, the ICJ itself recognized in its decision that the protection of shareholders
required that recourse be made to treaty stipulations. The Court recalled that “indeed,
whether in the form of multilateral or bilateral treaties between States, or in that of
agreements between States and companies, there has since the Second World War
been considerable development in the protection of foreign investments”."” The
*© Objection D by Argentina is mistakenly indicated as
caption at page 22 of the RMJ.

47 ICJ Reports (1970), para. 90. Respondent’s Legal Authority AL RA 10. In the subsequent ELST

case (Elettronic Sicula $.p.A.) the Court upheld the applicability of Art. III.2 of the bilateral treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Navigation of 1948 between the US and Italy (granting to nationals and

 

‘cera defensa” in the index and in the

40

impressive development of BITs has been a response to the uncertainty of customary
international law relating to foreign investment.
79. The other defenses raised by Argentina under its fourth objection are based

on the assumption that the

 

ets and rights affected by the measures of Argentina
challenged by the Claimant pertain exclusively to the local companies in which the
foreign investor has bought shares representing the investment. As a consequence,
Argentina considers that the claim brought here by Total could only be defined as a
derivative suit. Argentina describes a derivative suit as one by which the shareholder
attempts to make good in its own name rights that belong instead to its subsidiary in
the host State. Such “derivative” suit being inadmissible under the domestic law of the
subsidiary, namely the law of Argentina, the Claimant cannot present such a claim to
an international arbitral tribunal.

80. Having found, however, that the assets and rights that Total claims have
been injured in breach of the BIT fall under the definition of investments under the
BIT, it is immaterial that they belong to Argentine companies in accordance with the
law of Argentina. Total asserts its own treaty rights for their protection, regardless of
any right, contractual or non-contractual that the various companies (TGN, Total
Austral, Central Puerto, HPDA) might assert in respect of such assets and rights under
local law before the courts of other authorities of Argentina, in order to seek redress
or indemnification for damages suffered as a consequence of actions taken by those
authorities.

81. Total, on the other hand, invokes here treaty rights concerning its

investment in Argentina protected by the BIT. The claims of Total cannot therefore be

 

corporations of either party the right to “control and manage” corporations controlled by them and
created under the law of the other party), in a case where Italian authorities had requisitioned property
of an Italian company owned by two US corporations, ICJ Reports (1989), paras. 68 ff. The relevance
of this decision for the interpretation of BITs has been highlighted by F.A. MANN in his comment
Foreign Investment in the International Court of Justice, in Am. J. Int. Law, 1986, p. 92-102.

41

defined as indirect claims (or “derivative” claims), as if Total was claiming on behalf

or in lieu of its subsidiaries in respect of rights granted to the latter by the laws of

 

Argentina. It is therefore irrelevant that such claims would be inadmissible under
those laws and that they would not be amenable in any case to the jurisdiction of an

ICSID arbitral tribunal. This objection of Argentina is therefore without merit.

F. Fifth jurisdictional objection of Argentina

The Tribunal lacks competence since the parties agreed on the exclusive jurisdiction
of the Federal contentious-administrative tribunals of the City of Buenos Aires, for
the interpretation and enforcement of the concession contract.

82. Total claims that Argentina has breached its BIT obligation; the Claimant
does not rely on any breach of contract under Argentine law. To the contrary, Total
considers that the terms of the Bidding for Gas del Estado to which Argentina refers
are foreign to the present case and do not bind Total, which was not a party to the
Bidding Rules.

83. Since this Tribunal has concluded that the rights that Total invokes qualify
for protection under the BIT, recourse to the treaty dispute settlement mechanism
provided in Article 8 is possible as a matter of right. The claim that the host State has
breached the protections granted by the BIT in respect of a given investment can be
entertained by this Tribunal irrespective of the existence of contractual remedies
available to the Argentine companies in which Total has invested or to Total itself,
should this be the case. The exclusive choice of forum clause contained in the TGN
Bidding Rules and related documents operates therefore only in respect of claims
based on those rules and documents and between parties bound by them. It cannot

prevent the performance by this Tribunal of its obligations in accordance with the

42

BIT. Argentina’s consent to ICSID arbitration under the BIT and the ICSID
Convention has not been displaced or rendered ineffective with respect to the present
dispute by the choice of forum clause in the Bidding Rules.

84. The Claimant has referred in support of its position to various cases where

 

ICSID tribunals have held that claims based on alleged breaches of the BIT with
respect to an investment by a foreign investor cannot be equated with contractual
claims under a license agreement."* Argentina on the other hand relies on various
cases to the effect that a contractual choice of local forum should be given effect over
the international agreement that serves as the foundation of the jurisdiction of the
international tribunal.”

85. It is not necessary to examine closely the issues raised in those cases and
the decisions rendered by those tribunals because those issues are not before us in this
case. Based on its examination of the claims made by Total and the respective
arguments of the parties, this Tribunal considers that the subject-matter of the claims
of Total to be decided here, and of which Argentina challenges the jurisdiction, is not
the breach of a contract containing a choice of domestic forum clause. Total is not
pursuing a contractual claim in these proceedings. The choice-of-forum clause of the
Bidding Rules is therefore immaterial and cannot be a bar to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. The Tribunal is presented here with a claim based on the alleged breach

by Argentina, through its legislative and other measures from 2001 onwards, of the

* See, for example, LG&E Energy Corp. v. Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1),
Decision on Jurisdiction, April. += 30,2004, para. «66, — available at:
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/awards.htm.

* Woodruff Case (1974), IX Reports of International Arbitral Awards, p. 213 ff; North America
Dredging Co. (1926), IV Reports of International Arbitral Awards, p. 26 ff; SGS Société Générale de
Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6), Decisions of the Tribunal
on Objections to Jurisdiction, cit. para. 154.

43

legal regime applicable to Total’s investments in violation of various terms of the

BIT. The jurisdiction of this Tribunal over such claims must therefore be upheld.°°

G. Sixth jurisdictional objection of Argentina

The claim is inadmissible due to lack of damages.

86. Total has claimed that the measures enacted by Argentina that affected its
investments have inflicted on it substantial damages, notably by the transformation of
the tariffs from US dollars (to which the peso was pegged at the rate of one to one) to
devalued pesos; by the elimination of certain adjustment mechanisms; the imposition
of restrictions on exports and on the use of the proceeds thereof; and by the
introduction of regulatory measures affecting electricity producers. Total says that this
constitutes a breach of the BIT’s protection to which its investments in Argentina are
entitled.

87. In order to establish jurisdiction over the claims made by the Claimant, the
statements, arguments and documents submitted by Total appear sufficient to
conclude prima facie that Total may have suffered economic prejudice from those
measures. Contrary to Argentina’s position that the dispute is non existent or has
ceased to exist, a dispute definitely exists between the parties, because Argentina
opposes the claims, while Total insists on them notwithstanding the argument of
Argentina that Total suffered no damage.

88. The possible uncertainty as to the final amount of the damages does not
represent a bar to jurisdiction, but rather an issue to be decided in the merits phase.
5° This would not prevent the Tribunal when dealing with the merits, from examining incidenter tantum
whether there have been breaches of the Bidding Rules, should this be relevant in order to ascertain

whether Argentina has committed the BIT breaches that Total alleges. See also the Vivendi Annulment
decision, Comp. de Aguas del Aconquija (Annulment),41 ILM 1135 (2002) at para. 112.

44

Thus the arguments developed by Argentina concerning the establishment and
operation of the Stabilization Fund and other measures it took in order to cover the
additional costs incurred by power generators pertain to the merits. Further, the
arguments raised by Argentina address only some of the claims made by Total,
namely those concerning the measures affecting the power generation companies.

89. Finally the Tribunal observes that the Claimant has requested a declaratory

judgment that Argentina has breached the BIT. In this respect the issue of the

 

damages is immaterial.*' As a consequence, the objection by Argentina based on the

alleged lack of damages must be rejected.

51 A basic issue in the present dispute is whether Argentina has committed an internationally wrongful
act, that is whether it has breached the international obligations contained in the BIT by conduct
attributable to it. As held by the LL.C. these two conditions are sufficient to establish such a wrongful
act giving rise to international responsibility. Having caused damage is not an additional requirement,
except if the content of the primary obligation breached has an object or implies an obligation not to
cause damages, see I.L.C., Draft Articles on State Responsibility cit., commentary to Art. 2, para. 9.

45

Decision

90. For the reasons stated above the Tribunal concludes that all jurisdictional
requirements set out in the ICSID Convention and in the BIT are met in the
present dispute. The Tribunal rejects accordingly Argentina’s objections to
jurisdiction and decides that the present dispute is within the jurisdiction of ICSID
and the competence of the Tribunal. Each party has requested that the costs of the
jurisdictional phase of the proceedings, including its own costs, be borne by the
other. The Tribunal decides to consider this matter as part of the merits.

So decided.

Done in English and Spanish, both versions being equally authoritative.

[SIGNED]

Giorgio Sacerdoti

President of the Tribunal

[SIGNED] [SIGNED]
Henri C. Alvarez Luis Herrera Marcano
Arbitrator Arbitrator

46

