INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the matter between

TOTO COSTRUZIONI GENERALI S.P.A.
(Claimant)

and

THE REPUBLIC OF LEBANON
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/12)

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal

Professor Hans van Houtte
Mr. Alberto Feliciani
Mr. Fadi Moghaizel

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Aissatou Diop

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent

Mr. Bechara S. Hatem Mr. Nabil B. Abdel-Malek
Hatem, Kairouz, Moukheiber and Messihi —_ Nabil B. Abdel-Malek Law Offices
Law Firm

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: September 11, 2009
Page 1 of 65

Table of Contents

I.

A.
B.
Cc.

V.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Regi: ion of the Request
Constitution of the Tribunal
Written and Oral P: di

THE DISPUTE

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS ON JURISDICTION .
Lebanon’s Memorial on Jurisdiction...

Toto’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdicti
Lebanon’s Reply on Jurisdiction seseseeseesensesessesessesussecuesssesessesnssesuesesucsesneensseenenneneeneneene®
Toto’s Rejoinder on Jurisdi

ANALYSIS OF ARGUMENTS

Relationship between the CEGP and its successor, the CDR, and the State of Lebanon..

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
  
  

 

 

 

Is there an In ? 19
An investment as defined in the Treaty? 00... 19
An investment as per the meaning of the ICSID Convention 21

Can Toto rely on Article 7.2.b to submit claims to an ICSID tribunal? oe 29

Breach of Article 2 of the Treaty: Failure to Promote and Protect the Claimant’s

Investment
Delay in expropriation
Failures to remove Syrian troops and to protect legal possessio:

Erroneous instructions and design
Change of the regulatory framework

Breach of Article 3.1 of the Treaty: Lack of Fair and. Equitable Treatment
Disruption of negotiations with the CDR regarding claims submitted between 2000
and 2002.

Delay in the two lawsuits before the Conseil d’Etat
Lack of Transparency in the two lawsuits before the Conseil d’Etat
Other claim:

Breach of Article 4.2 Treaty: Indirect Expropriation.......

Breach of Article 9.2 of the Treaty: Failure to Observe Obligations.

The Fork in the Road — Contractual Claims

Fork in the Road — Treaty Claim:

Stay of P: di

DECISION

 

Page 2 of 65

L PROCEDURAL HISTORY
A. Registration of the Request

1. On April 12, 2007, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or the “Centre”) received a request for arbitration (the “Request”) dated March 19,
2007, from Toto Costruzioni Generali S.p.A. (“Toto”) against the Republic of Lebanon
(“Lebanon”). Toto is a company incorporated under the laws of Italy, registered at the

commercial register of the Chamber of Commerce of Chieti.

2. The Request invoked the ICSID arbitration provisions contained in the Agreement
between the Italian Republic and the Lebanese Republic on the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments (the “Treaty”) which was signed on November 7, 1997, and entered

into force on February 9, 2000.

3. In accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of
Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (the “Institution Rules”), the Centre acknowledged
receipt of the Request on April 12, 2007, and on April 13, 2007, transmitted copies thereof to
Lebanon and its Embassy in Washington, D.C.

4, In the process of reviewing the Request, the Centre addressed a letter dated May 21,
2007, to Toto asking for clarification on the date on which the alleged dispute arose. The
Claimant responded on May 25, 2007, specifying that the dispute arose in June 2004.
Subsequently on July 3, 2007, the Centre registered the Request as supplemented by the letter of
May 25, 2007, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID Convention”). On the same
day, the Centre notified the parties of the registration of the Request and invited them to proceed

without delay to constitute an arbitral tribunal, in accordance with Institution Rule 7.
B. Constitution of the Tribunal

5. On June 8, 2007, Lebanon appointed Mr. Fadi Moghaizel, a Lebanese national, as
arbitrator. By letter of July 27, 2007, the Centre informed Lebanon that it could not proceed with

Page 3 of 65

Mr. Moghaizel’s appointment in view of Rule 1(3) of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”) according to which the co-national of a party to a
proceeding cannot be appointed as an arbitrator by a party without the agreement of the other
party to the dispute. On August 21, 2007, Toto appointed Mr. Alberto Feliciani, an Italian
national, as arbitrator, and proposed that it would not object to Lebanon’s appointment of Mr.
Moghaizel as a co-national of Lebanon provided that Lebanon does not object to Toto’s
appointment of Mr. Feliciani as a co-national of Toto. On September 24, 2007, Lebanon
confirmed that it had no objection regarding Mr. Feliciani’s appointment. On September 27,
2007, the parties filed a joint letter invoking Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and
appointing Professor Hans van Houtte, a Belgian national, as the third, presiding arbitrator. On
October 1, 2007, the Centre asked the parties to clarify whether Professor van Houtte’s
appointment was by the two party-appointed arbitrators, reflecting the method of constituting the
Tribunal agreed by the parties, or by another method and, if so, to indicate which one. The
parties informed the Centre by joint letter of October 16, 2007, that the appointment of the third
arbitrator was by the two party-appointed arbitrators. Thus, the Centre contacted the two party-
appointed arbitrators who, on October 19, 2007, confirmed their appointment of Professor van

Houtte as the third arbitrator.

6. All three arbitrators having accepted their appointments, the Centre informed the parties,
pursuant to Arbitration Rule 6(1), of the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal and the
commencement of the proceedings as of October 30, 2007, with Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu,

and later Ms. Aissatou Diop, serving as Secretary.
Cc. Written and Oral Proceedings

7. By joint letter of November 9, 2007, the parties proposed Paris as the venue of the
proceedings. On November 20, 2007, the Tribunal, after consulting with the ICSID Secretariat,
scheduled a first session with the parties for December 13, 2007, at the World Bank European
Headquarters in Paris, France. By joint letter of December 6, 2007, the parties communicated
their agreement on certain matters identified in the provisional agenda for the first session, which

the Secretary had circulated in preparation for the first session.

Page 4 of 65

8. The first session took place as scheduled. Participating were:

Members of the Tribunal
1. Professor Hans van Houtte, President
2. Mr. Alberto Feliciani, Arbitrator

3. Mr. Fadi Moghaizel, Arbitrator
ICSID Secretariat

4. Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu, Secretary of the Tribunal (by video conference from
Washington, D.C.)

 

Toto

5. Mr. Bechara S. Hatem, Counsel, Hatem, Kairouz, Moukheiber and Messihi Law
Firm

6. Mr. Hadi Slim, P de Droit, C I en Droit du Cc

Lebanon

7. Mr. Nabil B. Abdel-Malek, Counsel, Nabil B. Abdel-Malek Law Offices

9. At the session, the parties reiterated their agreement on the matters indicated in their joint
letter of December 6, 2007, and reached an agreement on the remaining aspects of the
proceedings, including bifurcation of the jurisdiction and merits phases, and a schedule for the
submission of written pleadings on jurisdiction. All conclusions were recorded in the Minutes of
the first session, which were signed by the President and Secretary of the Tribunal and circulated
to the parties and other members of the Tribunal on January 15, 2008. The Minutes were

subsequently amended at items 15 and 20, and re-circulated on February 27, 2008.

10. The following calendar was tentatively agreed for the preliminary phase of the

proceedings:
. Lebanon to file its Memorial on jurisdiction by February 29, 2008;
. Toto to file its Counter-Memorial on jurisdiction by April 30, 2008;

Page 5 of 65

. Lebanon to file a Reply on jurisdiction by June 30, 2008;
. Toto to file a Rejoinder on jurisdiction by August 31, 2008;
. A pre-hearing conference call to take place at the beginning of October 2008; and

. A hearing for the examination of witnesses and/or experts, if any, or for oral

arguments on jurisdiction to take place on October 16 and 17, 2008, in Paris.

11. In accordance with the schedule, the parties filed their submissions on the agreed dates,

except Toto which filed its Rejoinder two days early, on August 29, 2008.

12. On September 8, 2008, the Centre invited the parties to submit items they wished to
include on the agenda for the pre-hearing conference. On September 25, 2008, the parties
submitted a response on the basis of which the Secretary prepared and circulated a provisional
agenda on October 1, 2008. The Tribunal held a pre-hearing conference by telephone with the
parties on October 3, 2008. During the pre-hearing conference, the Tribunal asked the parties to
submit a synthesis of the agreed facts relating to jurisdiction, which the parties did on October 9,
2008. Before the conclusion of the pre-hearing conference, the parties reached an agreement on
all the substantive, procedural, logistical, and administrative matters listed on the agenda
circulated in advance of the pre-hearing conference. The parties’ agreement was recorded in the

Minutes of the pre-hearing conference which were circulated on October 7, 2008.

13. In accordance with the agreed schedule, the Tribunal held a hearing on jurisdiction at the
World Bank European Headquarters in Paris, France, on October 16-17, 2008. The parties were
represented by their respective Counsels who made presentations to the Tribunal. There were no
witnesses. Present at the hearing were:

Members of the Tribunal

1. Professor Hans van Houtte, President

2. Mr. Alberto Feliciani, Arbitrator

3. Mr. Fadi Moghaizel, Arbitrator

Page 6 of 65

4, Mr. Bechara S. Hatem, Counsel, Hatem, Kairouz, Moukheiber and Messihi Law
Firm

5. Mr. Hadi Slim, Professeur de Droit, Consultant en Droit du Commerce

Lebanon

6. Mrs. Mireille Rached, Counsel, Nabil B. Abdel-Malek Law Offices

7. Mr. Joseph Bsaibes, Counsel, Nabil B. Abdel-Malek Law Offices

14. After the hearing, the Tribunal started to deliberate on the case. However, as both parties
had not yet paid their share of the advance payment on arbitration costs requested by the Centre
on September 29, 2008, in spite of several oral and written reminders, the deliberations had to be
suspended. After Lebanon and thereafter Toto paid their respective shares of the advance, the
deliberations could be resumed by the Tribunal and completed on June 15, 2008, leading to a

decision which is reported herein.
I. THE DISPUTE

15. For the purpose of this Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal does not need to provide a
detailed description of the factual background of the dispute between the parties. The Tribunal
shall limit the scope of its decision to the jurisdiction issue and summarize the facts that are
pertinent in that regard. Such summary, however, is not to be taken as prejudging in any way the

issues of fact or law considered by this Tribunal.

16. The dispute arose from a Contract dated 11 December 1997 entered into between the
Lebanese Republic — Conseil Exécutif des Grands Projets, on one hand, and Toto Costruzioni
Generali S.p.A., on the other hand, in the context of the construction of a portion of the Arab
Highway linking, inter alia, Beirut to Damascus. Pursuant to the Contract, Toto undertook to
build the section of the Arab Highway identified as the “Hadath Highway-Syrian Border-

Saoufar-Mdeirej Section.”

17. Toto alleges that the Lebanese Government and first the Conseil Exécutif des Grands
Projets (the “CEGP”), and later its successor, the Council for Development and Reconstruction
Page 7 of 65

(the “CDR”), acting on behalf of the Government, created numerous problems for Toto and/or
refused to adopt adequate corrective measures. These actions and omissions, according to Toto,
caused material damage to the construction of the Highway, jeopardized Toto’s investment in
Lebanon, and had, and are still having, a direct negative impact on the reputation of the Toto
group. Toto seeks an award of damages for breaches of the Treaty and payment for moral

prejudice.

18. Although the Contract set a start date of February, 10, 1998, and a completion date of
October, 24, 1999, for the execution of the works, i.e. a time-span of 20 months, the formal
contractual time contemplated for completion was 18 months, with December, January and
February being considered as one month because of weather conditions. Moreover, the Contract
provided for a post-completion maintenance period of 12 months. The total contractually-
provided time (including the maintenance and guarantee period) thus ended on 24 October 2000,
i.e, 12 months after the contractual construction completion date. However, the actual
construction was only completed in December 2003 and the project was handed over after the 12

month maintenance and guarantee period in December 2004.!

19. Between 1997 and 2003, various claims were submitted by Toto to the CEPG and its
successor the CDR. Such claims covered (a) additional costs due to changes in legislation
leading to (i) change in customs duties, (ii) increase of the price of diesel, (iii) increase in
‘government fees on cement, and (iv) increase in aggregates prices; (b) increase in the price of
bitumen due to delayed execution; (c) additional works due to misleading information; (d) loss of
productivity due to unforeseen circumstances; (e) additional costs occasioned by the nature of
the soil not meeting the qualifications originally set in the Contract; (f) additional works resulting
from a change in the design; (g) delayed site possession and expropriation and unforeseen works;

and (h) extra works due to damages caused by third parties on site.

20. In August 2001, Toto filed two claims before the Conseil d’Etat (the Lebanese
Administrative Court). Pursuant to the first claim, submitted on August 1, 2001, Toto requested
to be indemnified for unforeseen works it had to carry out because the nature of soil did not meet
the specifications set out in the Contract. Pursuant to the second claim, submitted on August 24,

" Request of Arbitration, p. 12.
Page 8 of 65

2001, Toto requested to be indemnified for additional works it had to carry out because the

design specified in the Contract had been substantially changed.

21. On June 30, 2004, Toto addressed a letter to Lebanon extending an invitation to
negotiations between the parties for possible settlement as per Article 7 of the Treaty (cited in
paragraph 24 infra) and, in the alternative, requesting arbitration. On August 18, 2004, Lebanon
informed Toto that the CDR’s Board of Directors had appointed its President to carry out the

negotiations.

22. In October 2004, a new Lebanese Government came into power and decided to nominate
a new Board of Directors for the CDR. The new Board was effectively appointed in December
2004.

23. On May 11, 2005, Toto attempted to restart the negotiations, addressing a letter to the
new President of the CDR’s Board of Directors. Toto did not receive an answer to this second
request for negotiations. According to Toto, up to its filing of the Request for Arbitration in

March 2007, it continuously tried to negotiate a settlement but remained unsuccessful.

24. By its Request for Arbitration, Toto submitted the dispute to ICSID arbitration in
accordance with Article 36 of the ICSID Convention and on the basis of Article 7 of the Treaty

which states:

1. In case of disputes regarding investments between a Contracting
Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party, consultations
will take place between the Parties concerned with a view to
solving the case, as far as possible, amicably.

2. If these consultations do not result in a solution within six months
from the date of written request for settlement, the investor may
submit the dispute, at his choice, for settlement to:

gy
b) the International Center (sic) for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID) provided for by the Convention on the

Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of the other States, opened for signature at

Page 9 of 65

CC]

Washington, on March 18, 1965, in case both Contracting
Parties have become members of this Convention; or

25. In its Request for Arbitration, Toto alleged various breaches of the Treaty by Lebanon,

such as changing the regulatory framework; delaying or failing to carry out the necessary

expropriations; failing to deliver sites; failing to protect Toto’s legal possession; and giving

erroneous design information and instructions. Moreover, Toto asserts that the fact that the

Lebanese Conseil d’Etat had not yet decided on the two cases pending before it, from August 2,

2001, to the date of submission of the Request for the Arbitration, constitutes a denial of justice.

26. — Asa result of the alleged breaches, Toto submits the following request for relief:

10.1. The Claimant respectfully requests an award in its favour

10.1.1. Declaring that the Respondent has breached its legal obligations
under the BIT, thus jeopardizing the Investment made by the
Claimant through the Contract and caused damages to said
Investment;

10.1.2. Directing the Respondent to indemnify the Claimant for all
material damages set below, caused to its Investment as a result of
BIT breaches for a total amount of L.P /41,199,514,712.59/ (i.e.
US$ /27,320,633.10/):

10.1.2.1.

10.1.2.2.

10.1.2.3.

Damages suffered by the Claimant due to additional costs
and charges occasioned by the change of legislations after
the submission of the tender amounting to L.P
/1,016,076,098/ (i.e. US$ /673,790.52/);

Damages suffered by the Claimant as a result of the delays
it faced during the execution of the Project which were
totally beyond its control and which amounted to L.P.
/15,289,737,554/ (i.e. US$ /10,139,083.26/);

Damages suffered by the Claimant for extra works and
charges due to erroneous instructions, misleading
information, and errors in Design for a total amount of L.P
/5,782,357,809/ (i.e. US$ /3,834,454.78/);

Page 10 of 65

10.1.2.4. Interests on payments received from the Respondent but
which were received after their due date and amounting to
L.P/807,799,237/ (i.e. US$/535,675.89/);

10.1.2.5. Interests on the amounts claimed under this Request from
the issuing date of each unpaid claim calculated on the
basis of the legal rate applicable in Lebanon, which is 9%,
and until December 31, 2006, amounting to L.P
/10,976,833,391.23/ (i.e. US$  /7,279,067.24/), plus
additional interests until the date of final effective payment;

10.1.2.6. Losses suffered by the Claimant depriving it from new
investment opportunities calculated at the rate of 8% per
year starting from the date the last claim was duly
submitted i.e. from December 19, 2002 until December 31",
2006 and amounting to L.P /7,326,710,623.36/ (i.e. US$
/4,858,561.42/);

10.1.3. Directing the Respondent to pay the Claimant for moral prejudice
suffered by the latter as a result of all the hassle calculated at the
rate of 10% of the main Contract value for an amount of L.P
/6,048,403,161.90/ (i.e. US$ /4,010,877.43/);

10.1.4. Directing the Respondent to pay the Claimant the arbitration and
arbitrators’ fees and expenses as will be substantiated later on, as
well as the Claimant's attorneys fees;

10.2. Ordering any such further relief as may be available and appropriate in the
circumstances.

Ill. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS ON JURISDICTION

27. The submissions of the parties can be briefly summarized as follows, without prejudice or

limitation of their actual content, which has been considered in details by the Tribunal:
A. Lebanon’s Memorial on Jurisdiction

28. Lebanon argues that the claims made by Toto fall outside the jurisdiction of ICSID,
asserting that the building of the Arab Highway is not an investment as intended in the ICSID
Convention, that Toto was not entitled to invoke Article 7(2) of the Treaty to submit claims to an
ICSID arbitral tribunal, that Lebanon had not committed breaches of the Treaty and is not

directly a party to the Contract, and that the claims are contractual claims and not Treaty claims.

Page 11 of 65

29. Lebanon asserts that the dispute settlement clause stated in the Contract has priority over

the general jurisdiction clause contained in the Treaty.

30. According to Lebanon’s Memorial, Toto’s choice to submit to the Lebanese Courts the
disputes arising out of the Contract is final under Article V.1.2 of the Cahier des Clauses
Juridiques et Administratives, which is part of the Contract and precludes Toto from resorting to
ICSID arbitration.

31. Lebanon stresses that the Treaty entered into force in February 2000 and, under its
Article 10, does not apply to disputes that have arisen before that date. In addition, Lebanon
adhered to the ICSID Convention only in 2003 thus excluding to submit to ICSID all the disputes

for alleged breaches that had arisen before the ICSID Convention entered into force.
B. Toto’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction

32. Toto, in its Counter-Memorial, infers that, notwithstanding the dispute settlement
mechanism provided for in the Contract, the Treaty provisions and the ICSID Convention entitle

referral of the dispute to an ICSID arbitration panel.

33. According to Toto’s Counter-Memorial, Lebanon was a direct party to the Contract and
the alleged breaches are to be considered as Treaty breaches because they relate to public works,

which implies the exercise of puissance publique.

34. Toto rejects Lebanon’s position of lack of jurisdiction rationae temporis of the Tribunal,

asserting that Article 10 of the Treaty gives retroactive effect to the ICSID Convention.
Cc. Lebanon’s Reply on Jurisdiction

35. Lebanon reaffirms that the alleged claims have to be treated as contractual ones and not

as Treaty breaches.

36. Lebanon argues that Toto did not point to any action taken by Lebanon which can be

considered as discriminatory.

Page 12 of 65

37. Lebanon asks the Tribunal to grant relief only for Treaty breaches, if any, and not for

damages resulting from any other breaches.

38. According to Lebanon, Lebanon is not a party to the Contract because it was entered into

between Toto and the CDR, a council with separate legal personality from the State.

39. Lebanon reiterates that the claims set forth in the Request are essentially contractual in
nature. Thus, the agreement between Toto and the CDR to submit their disputes to the Lebanese

courts should prevail over the general dispute settlement provisions of the Treaty.

40. Lebanon asserts that ICSID arbitration would be premature until Toto’s contractual

claims are decided by the competent Lebanese courts.
D. Toto’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction

41. Toto in its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction denies Lebanon’s assertions, reiterates its assertion
of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the dispute as submitted in the Request and makes reference to

and confirms all arguments set out in the Request for Arbitration and in the Counter-Memorial.

IV. ANALYSIS OF ARGUMENTS

42. In its analysis, the Tribunal has determined the points that must be studied in accordance
with the claims submitted by Toto and with Lebanon’s response. For every point, the Tribunal
has summarized the position of the two parties to the arbitration and then stated its decision with

due regard to the arguments put forward by each of them.

A. Relationship between the CEGP and its successor, the CDR, and the State of

Lebanon

43. The Republic of Lebanon, which is the Respondent in the present arbitration, is a
Contracting Party to the Treaty on which the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is based as well as a
Contracting Party to the ICSID Convention, under which rules the arbitration proceedings are
conducted. However, Toto concluded the contract, which lies at the origin of the dispute, with

the CEGP, later succeeded by the CDR, and the claims follow from acts and omissions of the

Page 13 of 65

CEGP and the CDR. Lebanon will only be held responsible under the Treaty for such acts and

omissions that can be attributed to Lebanon.

44. The principal rule of international law on attribution are presently reflected in Articles 4
and 5 of the International Law Commission’s (“ILC”) Draft Articles on Responsibility of States
for Internationally Wrongful Acts, 2001 (“Draft Articles”).

Article 4 reads :

Conduct of organs of a State

The conduct of any State organ shall be considered an act of that
State under international law, whether the organ exercises
legislative, executive, judicial or any other functions, whatever
position it holds in the organization of the State, and whatever its
character as an organ of the central Government or of a territorial
unit of the State.

Article 5 reads :

Conduct of persons or entities exercising elements of governmental
authority

The conduct of a person or entity which is not an organ of the State
under Article 4 but which is empowered by the law of that State to
exercise elements of the governmental authority shall be
considered an act of the State under international law, provided
the person or entity is acting in that capacity in the particular
instance.

Consequently, the Tribunal has to determine whether the CEGP and the CDR are State organs or

entities exercising governmental authority as defined above.

45. In the event the domestic law of Lebanon would consider the CEGP and/or the CDR as
State organs, they would unquestionably have the status of State organs under international law.
Indeed, under Article 4.2 of the ILC Draft Articles, “[a]n organ includes any person or entity

which has that status in accordance with the internal law of the State.”

Page 14 of 65

46. In the event that Lebanese law would not give the CEGP and/or the CDR the status of
State organs, the Tribunal will have to examine whether these bodies exercise executive or any
other functions of the Republic of Lebanon, as required under Article 4.1 of the ILC Draft
Articles. The circumstances in which the CEGP and/or the CDR would be considered separate
entities pursuant to Lebanese law would be irrelevant in this context: a State cannot escape
international responsibility by delegating its State functions to entities to which it gives separate

legal personality under its domestic law.

47. If the CEGP and/or the CDR do not have the status of State organs under Lebanese law,
but they exercise some of the functions of governmental authority, enumerated in Article 4.1 of
the ILC Draft Articles, their acts and/or omissions in the exercise of governmental authority
would still be attributable to Lebanon under the principle formulated in Article 5 of the ILC
Draft Articles.

The Tribunal will now examine to which extent these principles apply in the case at stake and

make the acts and/or omissions of the CEGP and the CDR attributable to Lebanon.
Toto’s Position

48. Toto argues that the CEGP was fully controlled by the Government of Lebanon through
the Ministry of Public Works and Transport. The CEGP undertook only public works projects
entrusted to it by the Council of Ministers of the Lebanese Government. Moreover, the President
and Board of Directors of the CEGP were appointed by decree of the Council of Ministers and

its funding came mainly from the State budget.

49. Toto adds that, following the merger by absorption of the CEGP by the CDR, the CDR
replaced the Ministry of Planning and became the successor of the CEPG in all its rights and
obligations, including the Contract in the matter at hand. The CDR ensures the study and
implementation of the public works entrusted to it by the Council of Ministers. Its President and

Board of Directors are designated by the Council of Ministers. Its projects are funded by the

 

? See K. Hober, State Responsibility and ion, in P. inski ¢.a., Ed., i Law,
Oxford University Press 2008, 549 at 582.

Page 15 of 65

State budget and are awarded in line with the public adjudication process. Therefore, Toto
concludes that the CEGP and, later, the CDR are two entities acting on behalf of the Republic of
Lebanon to carry out public works projects decided by the Council of Ministers, and they thus

form one single entity with the State.
Lebanon's Position

50. Lebanon contends that it is not a party to the Contract which was signed by the CEGP
and assumed by the CDR, two independent entities that are distinct from the State. Both the
CEGP and the CDR have financial and administrative autonomy. Lebanon adds that the Contract
itself names the CEGP as the contacting party. The same applies to the Cahier des Charges
Juridiques et Administratives (Article 1.03) which names the CEGP as the employer. Lebanon
explains further that it does not take part in the implementation of the projects carried out by the
CEGP; and later, the CDR. Lebanon concludes that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction because

Article 7 of the Treaty does not apply to breaches of contracts by entities that are not the State.
Tribunal’s Decision
The status of the CEGP

51. The Contract was initially made with the CEGP, which was established by Decree no.
6839 of June 15, 1961. Article 1 of this Decree provided that the CEPG is in charge of studying
and implementing the projects entrusted to it by the Council of Ministers. The CEPG was
attached to the Ministry of Public Works and Transport which monitored the execution of the
projects entrusted to the CEPG. The CEPG had a distinct legal personality and enjoyed
administrative and financial autonomy. However, it operated under the control of the
aforementioned Ministry and the authority of the Council of Ministers, and was also subject to
the disciplinary authority of the Central Inspectorate. The CEPG had its own funds, which
originated from the amounts allocated in the State budget to the projects to be performed by the
CEPG.

52. Based on the foregoing, the CEPG, being an établissement public administratif linked to
the Ministry of Public Works and Transport and operating under the authority of the Council of

Page 16 of 65

Ministers, was a public entity (“personne morale de droit public’) that was created and

mandated by Lebanon to exercise elements of governmental authority.

53. In brief, the CEPG, with projects funded by the State budget, and in charge of
implementing the decisions of the Council of Ministers, exercised Lebanese governmental
authority when it entered into the Contract with Toto. As also confirmed by Article 5 of the ILC

Draft Articles, its conduct has to be considered as an act of the Lebanese state.
The Status of the CDR

54, By Law no. 295 of April 5, 2001, the CEGP was absorbed by the CDR, which assumed
all the rights and obligations of the CEPG (Article 1, amending Article 15 of Law no. 247 of
August 7, 2000). Following the absorption, all the projects entrusted to the CEPG were
transferred to the CDR including the Contract at hand, made between the CEPG and Toto in
1997. The CDR therefore became the universal successor (ayant cause universel) to the CEPG.
The Contract made by the CEPG with Toto thus has been transferred to the CDR. In this way the

CDR equally exercised elements of governmental authority of the Republic of Lebanon.

55. Moreover, as to its institutional status, the CDR is a public entity (in the form of an

établissement public administratif) established by Decree-Law no. 5 of January 31, 1977. It has a

1 «a]

legal p ity and enjoys administrative and fi 'y. It is directly attached to the

Council of Ministers.

56. The CDR has two types of prerogatives. It acts autonomously, notably for the tasks of the
Ministry of Planning that were transferred to the CDR when the CDR replaced the Ministry
pursuant to Decree-Law no. 5 of January 31, 1977. Moreover, the CDR acts as an agent of the

State.

57. The CDR acts autonomously when, as the Council of Ministers’ consultant, it plans and
programs development and reconstruction and elaborates the economic, social, and financial
policy to attain the set objectives.’ The CDR prepares the budget relating to the implementation

of the general plan that it lays down, and it ensures consistency between the State budget and the

* Article 3-1 of Decree-Law no. 5.
Page 17 of 65

general plan by giving its opinion regarding the draft of the State budget law.“ It also acts as a
consulting authority for the drafting of legislation falling within the scope of development and
reconstruction.’ However, all the plans and projects entrusted to the CDR must finally be

approved by the Council of Ministers.

58. The CDR, however, mainly acts as the agent and implementing authority of the Lebanese
Government. Pursuant to Article 5 of Decree-Law no. 5, it is in charge of studying and
implementing development and reconstruction projects. It elaborates and implements the projects
included in the general plan and the successive plans as well as any development and

reconstruction projects assigned to it by the Council of Ministers.

59. The CDR implements all the projects entrusted to it by the Council of Ministers in the
field of reconstruction and development, in areas stricken by war or natural disasters, and areas
posing a threat to public health and safety.® Through adjudication, solicitation of proposals or
mutual agreement, it designates the public authority, public entity, municipality, mixed company,
or private company which will perform the project. It represents all the public authorities and
municipalities in their expropriation prerogatives: it carries out expropriations on behalf of all
public authorities and municipalities. ’ It controls all the projects included in the general plan,
the projects established by it and the projects entrusted to it by the Council of Ministers.* The
funds allocated to the performance of the projects included in the plans approved by the Council

of Ministers are provided for in the State budget.

60. Based on the foregoing, the Tribunal’s view is that the CEGP and thereafter the CDR are
exercising in the context of the Contract the governmental authority of the Republic of Lebanon,
Therefore their acts are acts of the State of Lebanon, as also confirmed by Article 5 of the ILC
Draft. Lebanon may be internationally liable for the acts of the CEGP and thereafter the CDR.

* Article 3-2 of Decree-law no. 5.
* Article 4, paragraph | of Decree-Law no. 5.
“In line with Decree-Law no. 107 of June 30, 1977.
7 Article 5, paragraph 3 of Decree-Law no. 5.
* Article 7-1 of Decree-Law no. 5.
Page 18 of 65

This means that the Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione personae pursuant to Article 7 of the Treaty

for acts committed by the CEGP and the CDR.

B. Is there an Investment?
1. An investment as defined in the Treaty?

Toto’s Position

61. In its Request for Arbitration Toto argues that the dispute arises out of an investment as

defined in the Treaty. Article 1.2 of the Treaty states:

The term “investment” means every kind of asset established or
acquired by an investor of one Contracting Party in the territory of
the other Contracting Party in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the latter and shall include particularly, but not
exclusively:

a) movable and immovable property as well as any other
rights in rem, such as mortgages, liens, and pledges;
b

o) claims to money which have been used to create an
economic value or claims to any performance having an
economic value;

ad) intellectual property rights, such as copyrights, patents,
industrial designs or models, trade or service marks, trade
names, technical processes, know-how and goodwill, as
well as other similar rights recognized by the laws of the
Contracting Parties;

LJ]

62. — In arguing for the existence of an investment in the sense of Article 1.2 of the Treaty,

Toto points out several elements:

(a) the claims for payment of amounts that were necessary “to create an economic
value,” i.e., major infrastructure works for the building of the Saoufar-Mdeirij

section of the Arab Highway, including the construction of the highest viaduct of

Page 19 of 65

the Middle East (Treaty, Article 1.2.c). These claims are listed in the Request for
Arbitration (Section 6, p. 25) and include:

- a claim for reimbursement of the extra charges incurred by Toto as a result

of a change in legislation after the submission of the tender;

- a claim for payment of the cost of additional works carried out upon the

request or with the approval of the Respondent;

- a claim for compensation for losses incurred as a result of delays

attributable to the Respondent;

- a claim for compensation for extra costs resulting out of misleading

information;

- a claim for payment of interest on all outstanding amounts due to delayed

payments during the execution of the Contract.

(b) “the industrial designs or models ... know-how and goodwill” (Treaty, Article
1.2.d): for the execution of the construction project Toto brought in especially

skilled personnel from Italy.

(c) “movable property” (Treaty, Article 1.2.a): heavy equipment, machinery and
technical processes were brought in by Toto for the purpose of carrying out the

project.

63. Toto contends that the Tribunal has jurisdiction because the dispute arises out of an
“investment” in the sense of the Treaty. It refers in this context to M.C./. Power Group L.C. and
New Turbine inc. v. Ecuador,’ in which the Tribunal stated that elements such as duration and
risk, which some Tribunals take into account to accept the existence of a Treaty-protected
investment, are not essential or required elements for the existence of an investment but rather

mere illustrations.

° MCI Power Group LC and New Turbine Ine v. Ecuador, Award, ICSID Case n° ARB/03/6, IIC 296 (2007), 31
July 2007.

Page 20 of 65

Lebanon’s Position

64. Lebanon disagrees with Toto that it is sufficient that the dispute arises out of an
“investment” as it is defined in the Treaty to be within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. What Toto
must prove, and has failed to prove, according to Lebanon, is that the dispute arises out of an
“investment” as understood in the ICSID Convention. Otherwise, the mere agreement of the
parties on the scope of “investments” in a bilateral investment treaty would become the sole

determinant of the ICSID jurisdiction.
Tribunal’s Decision

65. | This Tribunal agrees with Toto that in the case at hand the requirements for an
“investment” as set forth in Article 1.2 of the Treaty are indeed fulfilled since an investor of Italy
has established in accordance with Lebanese laws and regulations in the territory of Lebanon
assets which included movable property (Article 1.2 a of the Treaty), claims to money which
have been used to create an economic value or claims to any performance having an economic
value (Article 1.2 ¢ of the Treaty), and technical processes and know-how (Article 1.2 d of the
Treaty).

2. An investment as per the meaning of the [CSID Convention ?

66. This being said, given that the case at hand is submitted to an ICSID Tribunal, the
Tribunal agrees with Lebanon that, for this Tribunal to have jurisdiction, it is not sufficient that
the dispute arises out of an investment as per the meaning of “investment” given by the parties in

the Treaty, but also as per the meaning of “investment” under the ICSID Convention.
67. Article 25.1 of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment between a Contracting State
(...) and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties
to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre.

68. The ICSID Convention itself does not set forth a definition of the term “investment”
which it mentions in its Article 25 as a requirement to bring a dispute within its jurisdiction.

However, as Lebanon points out, its preparatory works do not suggest in any manner that by
Page 21 of 65

leaving out such a definition the founders of ICSID intended to bestow upon the Centre a

jurisdiction ratione materiae without limits.

69. The notion of “investment” under the ICSID system has been clarified by legal scholars
and jurisprudence. A number of legal scholars and some ICSID Tribunals follow the four criteria
to be found in Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco’ to
determine whether a transaction qualifies as an “investment” in the sense of the ICSID
Convention. These four criteria, sometimes called the Salini test, comprise a) duration, b) a
contribution on the part of the investor, c) a contribution to the development of the host state, and

d) some risk taking.
Toto’s Position

70. Although Toto, as noted above, regards compliance with the requirements of the Treaty
as sufficient to determine the jurisdiction of this Tribunal, it contends that the dispute at hand
relates to an “investment” also in the sense of the ICSID Convention. Toto argues that the four

criteria of the Salini test are fulfilled:

- the perpetuation of the contract for a certain period of time: the expected
duration was 30 months (including the maintenance period), but the execution of

the Project ended up taking more than five years.

- a contribution by the investor: Toto brought in its own skilled personnel,
heavy equipment and machinery required because the nature of the works,
including the building of the highest viaduct in the Middle East. The works

required indeed specialized skills and knowledge.

- a substantial contribution to the State’s economic development: Toto’s
involvement in the Project significantly contributed to the economical
development of Lebanon: the highway built by Toto is part of the backbone of

Lebanese economic activity, connecting Lebanon with Syria and other Arab

"© Salini Costruttori S.P.A. and Italstrade S.P.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco, Decision on Jurisdiction, ICSID Case n°
ARB/00/4, 42 ILM 609 (2003), 23 July 2001 (Salini v. Morocco).

Page 22 of 65

countries, making Lebanon a passage way for international trade between Europe

and the Middle East;

- a risk: the risk stems from the nature of the Contract. Toto refers to Salini v.

Morocco:

With regard to the risks incurred by the Italian companies, these
flow from the nature of the contract at issue. ... Notably, among
others the risk associated with the prerogatives of the Owner
permitting him to prematurely put an end to the contract, to impose
variations within certain limits without changing the manner of
fixing prices; the risk consisting of the potential increase in the
cost of labour in case of modification of Moroccan law, any
accident or damage caused to property during the performance of
the works; those risks relating to problems of co-ordination
possibly arising from the simultaneous performance of other
projects; any unforeseeable incident that could not be considered
as force majeure and which, therefore, would not give rise to a
right to compensation; and finally those risks related to the
absence of any compensation in case of increase or decrease in
volume of the work load not exceeding 20% of the total contract
price.

71. Regarding the element of risk, Toto also refers to SAIPEM v. Bangladesh," in which the
Tribunal states that the fact that the investor receives an advance payment does not mean that it
does not incur commercial risks. Moreover the exorbitant clauses that contribute to the risk
element in SAJPEM v. Bangladesh also exist in the present case, where furthermore no advance
payment has been received: “the contract, the construction, the retention money, the warranty, in

addition to other dispositions concerning non scheduled works, increase or decrease of the

"Cf. supra, footnote 10, para. 55.

2 Saipem S.p.A. v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case n° ARB/0S/07, Decision on Jurisdiction and
Recommendation on provisional measures, para. 110.

Page 23 of 65

volume of works, variation of economical conditions, which are also exorbitant clauses.”'> On

each monthly payment, 10% had to be retained as retention money. '*
Lebanon’s Position

72. According to Lebanon, Toto failed to prove that the Project meets the definition of an
“investment” for the purposes of the ICSID Convention. Lebanon does not object to the
application of the Salini criteria; indeed it applies such criteria itself. However, it argues that the
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because the dispute at hand does not arise out of an investment, since,

in its view, the Contract does not involve taking risks.

73. For Lebanon, an investment requires the specific risk that the operation might not be
profitable, not the general risk that some contractual obligation will not be honoured, since the
latter kind of risk is inherent to any contract whatsoever. The possibility that a contractual
obligation will be defaulted or that a force majeure event may occur, is not the kind of risk

required to qualify the operation as an “investment” under the ICSID Convention.

74, For Lebanon a road construction contract, such as the present Contract, involves a
commercial sale of goods and services and is not an “investment,” since the contractor’s remun-
eration is guaranteed under the contract and covers the profits and estimated costs and risks. It is
only when a construction contract is linked with the management of the operation, whereby the
contractor’s remuneration is contingent on the outcome of its management and whereby profits
depend on the success of the operation that such construction contract may be considered part of

an investment.

75. Lebanon points out that, in those ICSID cases in which the Tribunal had to decide on the
qualification of a civil engineering contract, the contract constituted part of an entrepreneurial

activity, such as the building and operation of a hotel, the construction of housing units, the

8 Claimant’s Rejoinder, 29 August 2008, para 86. Toto refers to Exhibit 11 of its Request for Arbitration: CEDG,
Autoroute Hadath Frontiére Syrienne, Troncon Saoufar-Mdeirej, Cahier des Clauses Juridiques et
Administratives, Articles I-10, I1I-01, 111-02, TH-04, IV-03.

'$ Article IV.03 (2) of the Cahier des Clauses Juridiques et Administratives, (“Attachements et établissement des
décomptes”)

Page 24 of 65

construction and management of a hospital ward, etc. 'S Tn such cases, the risk that was taken into
consideration for qualifying the operation as an investment under the ICSID Convention was the

one associated with the chances of success of the business operation.

76. Lebanon refers to SAJPEM v. Bangladesh, in which the Tribunal considered the entire

operation, including “the Contract, the construction itself, the Retention Money, the warranty,

216

and the related ICC Arbitration,”’” and not just the civil construction part of it. According to

Lebanon, it was exorbitant clauses like the retention money of 10% that led the Tribunal in
SAIPEM v. Bangladesh to decide that there was a risk in the operation and to qualify it as an

investment.
Tribunal’s Decision

77.  Lebanon’s argument that there is no element of risk in the present case is unconvincing.
The Tribunal finds, rather, that the criteria as set forth by legal scholars and jurisprudence

following Salini v. Morocco are met in the present case.'7

78. The Tribunal agrees with Toto that the risk stems from the nature of the contract and, as
stated in Salini v. Morocco, does not require that the investor be “linked to the exploitation of the
completed work.”'® A construction contract in which the execution of the works extends over a

substantial period of time involves by definition an element of risk.'? The duration of the

'S_4MCO v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID case n° ARB/81/1; Holiday Inns S.A. and other v. Morocco, ICSID Case
No. ARB/72/1; Gabon v. Société Serete $.4., ICSID Case n° ARB/76/1; Klockner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and
others v. United Republic of Cameroun and Société Camerounaise des Engrais, \CSID Case n° ARB/81/1; Société
Ouest Africaine des Bétons Industriels v. Sénégal, 1CSID Case n° ARB/82/1; MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile
S.A. v, Republic of Chile, CSID Case n° ARB/O1/7.

‘© Cf. supra, footnote 12, para. 110.

"’ This conclusion holds regardless of the discussion between the parties as to how these requirements should be
assessed. Toto argues that the criteria as defined in the Salini v. Morocco are to be assessed globally rather than
cumulatively. Toto refers to Farouk Yala, “Rapport préliminaire — La notion d’ « investissement » dans la
jurisprudence du CIRDI : actualité d’un critére de compétence controversé”, Colloque 3 mai 2004, p. 6, para. 18-
19: “... une opération d'investissement suppose la réunion de quatre éléments interdépendants ...”.. Toto contends
that “interdépendent” should be translated as “interrelated” and not as “cumulative”. According to Lebanon, the
Tribunal in Salini v. Morocco did require the four conditions to exist cumulatively.

'§ Cf. supra, footnote 10, para. 56.

'° One might argue whether it is the expected or the actual duration of the project that should be considered, but in
either case the criterion of duration would be passed.

Page 25 of 65

contract is a determining factor with regards to the magnitude of the risk since the exposure to

changes and unexpected occurrences increases in proportion to the duration of the contract.

79.  Lebanon’s argument that Toto’s alleged risk was covered by a “guaranteed payment”
does not stand: profits and costs are seldom fully covered by a payment agreed in advance when

the price has been negotiated competitively and when many unforeseen events may occur.

80. In this regard this Tribunal refers to SAJPEM v. Bangladesh, in which the Tribunal stated:
“Bangladesh's argument appears to refer more to... the fact that the investor did not incur any
commercial risk because it received an advanced payment. The Tribunal cannot agree with this
argument. In the present case, the undisputed stopping of the works which took place in 199]
and the necessity to renegotiate the completion date constitute examples of inherent risks in long

term contracts.”*°

81. The Tribunal finds that, regarding the issue of investment, the requirements for
jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention are fulfilled in this case. However, the Tribunal wishes
to make clear that it does not reach this conclusion strictly on the basis of the Salini test, even if
it agrees with Toto that in the present case that test is met, as demonstrated above. The Tribunal
deviates from this commonly followed test in a desire to delineate the necessary features of an

investment in a way that it considers more appropriate to the present case.

82. It should indeed be noted that the Sa/ini test has not been universally applied by ICSID
Tribunals. An alternative set of criteria was used, for example, in an award rendered on July 24, ©
2008 in the ICSID case Biwater v. Tanzania,”' in which the Tribunal stated that there is no basis

for a “rote or overly strict” application of the test in every case:

These criteria are not fixed or mandatory as a matter of law. They
do not appear in the ICSID Convention. On the contrary, it is
clear from the travaux préparatoires of the Convention that

"Cf. supra, footnote 12, para. 109.
”! Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID case 05/22, para. 312
Page 26 of 65

several attempts to incorporate a definition of ‘investment’ were

made, but ultimately did not succeed.
83. As stated in Biwater v. Tanzania, in the ICSID Convention the term “investment” “was
left intentionally undefined, with the expectation (inter alia) that a definition could be the subject
of agreement as between Contracting States.”*> And: “[gliven that the Convention was not
drafted with a strict, objective, definition of ‘investment’, it is doubtful that arbitral tribunals
sitting in individual cases should impose one such definition which would be applicable in all
cases and for all purposes.”**
84. In the absence of specific criteria or definitions in the [CSID Convention, the underlying
concept of investment, which is economical in nature, becomes relevant: it implies an
economical operation initiated and conducted by an entrepreneur using its own financial means
and at its own financial risk, with the objective of making a profit within a given period of time.
It has been argued that “investment” should include some duration, e.g., a minimum duration of
two years, although a shorter duration also may be conceivable, or that the investment should

serve the public interest.”°

85. Additional criteria have been applied in some cases, for example, in Phoenix v. Czech
Republic, in which the Tribunal added two criteria to have an “investment” under the ICSID
Convention: that assets be invested in accordance with the laws of the host state and that they be

invested bona fide. °° These two criteria, however, are not relevant to the case at hand.

2Cf. supra, footnote 21, para. 310. In Biwater v. Tanzania the Tribunal attributes five, rather than four, criteria to
Salini v. Morocco. These five criteria were originally suggested by the Tribunal in Fedax N.V. v. Republic of
Venezuela, ICSID case ARB/96/3, Decision on Jurisdiction of July 11, 1997, 5 ICSID Rep. 183 (2002): (i) duration,
(ii) regularity of profit and return, (iii) of risk, (iv) i i and (v) signi for the
host State’s development. Four of these criteria were taken over by the Tribunal in Salini.

 

3 Cf. supra, footnote 21, para. 312, with reference to Ch. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2001),
p. 121-125, paras. 80-88.

4 Cf. supra, footnote 21, para. 313.

°5 This is not a requirement of the ICSID Convention. See L.E.S.I. S.p.A. et Astaldi S.p.A. v. République algérienne
démocratique et populaire, ICSI case 05/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, July 12, 2006, para 72 (iv) : «II ne parait en
revanche pas nécessaire qu'il réponde en plus spécialement a la promotion économique du pays, une condition de
toute facon difficile & établir et implicitement couverte par les trois éléments retenus. »

?6 Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. The Czech Republic, 1CSID Case n° ARB/06/5, Award, April 15, 2009, para. 114.

Page 27 of 65

86. In the present case, Toto’s construction project meets the requirements deemed necessary

by this Tribunal, i.e., a contribution by the investor, a profitability risk, a significant duration and

a substantial contribution to the State’s economic development, as follows:

(a)

(b)

©

(d)

Toto used its financial means before, during, and until completion of the works.
At the start of the project, organizing personnel, machineries, and materials
involved expenditures. The investment remains even though the contractor
receives payments during the progress of the work. Indeed, these payments are
received only after the contractor has pre-financed himself the costs of personnel,
machineries, and materials. Moreover, as the costs must be certified by the
engineer in order to obtain payment, there is always a risk that the costs will not
be approved. Furthermore, 10% of the amounts, certified by the engineer, was
retained as retention money, of which half would be paid at the provisional taking

over and half at the final taking over.

There is no guarantee that the price paid by Lebanon, the employer, will be
sufficient to cover the actual costs of the contractor for the performance of its

obligations, especially since many unknown factors might intervene.

Toto was involved in the investment for well over five years (and even well over
six years if Toto’s maintenance period is also included). Several activities were

carried out during the period in order to perform its contractual obligations.

The project at hand is a major construction work that will facilitate land
transportation between Lebanon, Syria and other Arab countries and thus increase
Lebanon’s position as a transit country for goods from and to Middle East

countries.

87. Thus, it is the considered conclusion of this Tribunal that the construction carried out by

Toto in Lebanon was an “investment” according to Article 25 of the [CSID Convention, and as

such, the disputes related to this construction qualify for the ICSID arbitration.

Page 28 of 65

Cc. Can Toto rely on Article 7.2.b to submit claims to an ICSID tribunal?

Lebanon's Position

88. Lebanon has argued that Toto was not entitled to rely on Article 7.2.b of the Treaty to
submit for settlement to an ICSID tribunal the dispute related to claims which dated from before
the Treaty entered into force on February 9, 2000. Indeed, Article 10 in fine of the Treaty
indicates that it “shall not apply to disputes that have arisen before its entry into force.” In this
context, Lebanon points out that the subject-matter of the many claims that Toto has submitted to
Lebanon or its engineer between 1997 and February 9, 2000, would be excluded from the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. It refers to Tradex v. Albania that stated: “[t]he term “arise” indicates that
the beginning of the dispute is relevant and the term “dispute” is rather general and would

0 27

usually be understood not to be restricted to a legal procedure”.
Toto’s Position

89. For Toto, a mere claim is not a dispute. The Clauses et Conditions Générales (“CCG”),
Articles 50 and 51, and the Cahier des Charges Particuliéres, Article V.01, provided for an
intricate claim system, whereby Toto, in the event it disagreed with the decision of Lebanon’s
engineer, had to object to the latter’s position. When the engineer then replied and Toto did not
agree with this reply, it had to submit a formal Memorandum to the Owner within 60 days. Then,
when the Owner did not reply or did not reply satisfactorily, again within 60 days after the
submission of this Memorandum, there was a dispute and Toto had to bring the claim before the
appropriate jurisdiction. Mere claims are not disputes. In fact, the dispute submitted to the
Tribunal arose in 2004, well after the Treaty entered into force, when it became clear that
Lebanon in different ways was jeopardizing the investment and a claim had to be introduced
before an ICSID arbitral tribunal.

2” Tradex Hellas S.A. (Greece) v. Republic of Albania, ARB 94/2, Decision on Jurisdiction, December 24, 1996, p.
188.

Page 29 of 65

Tribunal’s Decision

90. | The Tribunal agrees that a mere demand is not a dispute. In the Tribunal’s view the
dispute arose on June 30, 2004, for the following reasons: The CCG, which are part of the
Contract, distinguish between “difficultés” or problems (Article 50) and “contestations” or
disputes (Article 51). The former arise when the engineer and the contractor have different views
which need to be referred for final decision to the employer/administration. The latter implies
that the contractor does not agree with the position of the employer/administration. However, in
the case at stake, the CDR did not take a position so that Toto invited it on June 30, 2004, to have

recourse to Article 7 of the Treaty (“Settlement of Disputes”).

OL. Lebanon, moreover, alleges that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the present dispute
under the ICSID Convention as that Convention only became applicable to Lebanon in 2003,
while the Agreement was concluded in 1997 and Lebanon’s general offer to submit investment
disputes to arbitration under the ICSID Convention, contained in Article 7 of the Treaty, became

effective in 2000 with the entry into force of the Treaty.

92. However, a general offer from Lebanon, made in 2000, is only the preliminary step for
the consent to submit a dispute to ICSID arbitration because it needs acceptance. In fact, this
general offer was only accepted by Toto on June 30, 2004, when Toto informed Lebanon of its
intention to submit the dispute to ICSID arbitration. It was thus well after the ICSID Convention
entered into force, i.e., on June 30 2004, that, by: Toto’s acceptance, the parties consented to

submit the dispute to ICSID Arbitration.

93. Moreover, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is not affected by the fact that Lebanon has made
the general offer to accept ICSID arbitration for investment disputes with Italian investors, well
before the ICSID Convention entered into force for Lebanon. It is sufficient that Lebanon had
offered to accept ICSID jurisdiction and that the ICSID Convention was in force at the time of

the consent, i.e., on June 30, 2004.78

°8 See C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2001, nos. 322 and 323, referring, inter alia , to
Holidays Inns v. Morocco, N° ARB 72/1, also discussed in Lalive, The First ‘World Bank’ Arbitration, 1 ICSID
Reports 645.

Page 30 of 65

94. With respect to Lebanon’s argument that Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention requires
a written consent of the parties to submit the dispute to ICSID, the Tribunal considers that such
consent has been given by Lebanon in its written offer to accept ICSID’s jurisdiction under
Article 7.2 of the Treaty, and by Toto pursuant to its letter of June 30, 2004 and its actual

submission of the Request for Arbitration.

D. Breach of Article 2 of the Treaty: Failure to Promote and Protect the Claimant’s
Investment

95. Toto argues that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over Lebanon’s failure to promote and

protect its investment in breach of Article 2 of the Treaty, which provides:

1. Each Contracting Party shall in its territory promote investments
by investors of the other Contracting Party and admit such
investments in accordance with its laws and regulations.

2. Each Contracting Party, in accordance with its laws and
regulations, shall allow the investor to engage top managerial and
technical personnel of his choice, regardless of nationality and
grant the related permits.

3. Each Contracting Party shall protect within its territory
investments made in accordance with its laws and regulations by
investors of the other Contracting Party and shall not impair by
unreasonable or discriminatory measures the management,

use, ion, sale or liquide of such
investments. In particular, each Contracting Party or its competent
authorities shall issue the necessary permits mentioned in
paragraph 2 of this Article.

4. Each Contracting Party shall create and maintain, in its territory
favourable economic and legal conditions in order to ensure the
effective application of this Agreement.

96. Toto has claimed that Lebanon, exercising its sovereign authority, has failed to protect its

investment, in breach of Article 2 of the Treaty, by:

a. delaying the necessary expropriation required under the contract to enable the

Claimant to take possession of the site;

b. failing to deliver major sites due to presence of Syrian troops in the area;

Page 31 of 65

c. failing to protect legal possession due to problems with occupants who opposed

leaving the expropriated properties;

d. providing erroneous instructions, misleading information, and errors in design;
e. changing the regulatory framework in which the investment was made”’; and
f. changing legislations after the submission of the tender.

1. Delay in expropriation

Toto’s Position

97. | The Government of Lebanon, according to Toto, failed to carry out the required site
expropriations in order to deliver the sites, a responsibility under Lebanese law of the
Government in the exercise of its prerogatives. This failure adversely affected Toto’s investment,

in breach of Article 2 of the Treaty.

98. Contrary to what Lebanon alleges in its Reply, the delay to carry out the necessary
expropriations is distinct from the delay to deliver the sites. The expropriation is a legal measure
that can be carried out notwithstanding the factual situation of the expropriated parcels, i.e.,
notwithstanding the fact that the expropriated parcels are occupied by squatters or by army

troops.

99. Toto does not claim specific compensation because of delays in expropriation. It claims
a total amount of US$10,139,083.26 to cover damages suffered as a result of all the delays it
faced (due to delay in expropriation, failure to protect legal possession, etc.) that were beyond its

control.
Lebanon's Position

100. Lebanon argues that the alleged delay to carry out the expropriations does not constitute a
breach of the Treaty because it concerns the performance of the works, required under the

Contract. Consequently it is a pure contractual claim and is not covered by the Treaty. Although

?° Sometimes Toto refers to a “change of the regulatory framework,” sometimes “changes in the legal framework

Page 32 of 65

Toto distinguishes the delay in expropriation from the failure to deliver sites. Both result in an
alleged delay in the delivery of the site, a performance required from the CEGP/CDR under the

Contract; it is not an act of the Government of Lebanon as State.

101. The fact that the delay in expropriation is constituent of the contractual claim for delay in
delivery of the site is confirmed by the fact that Toto is not seeking specific compensation for the

former but only a global compensation for the latter.
Tribunal’s Decision

102. The Tribunal starts from the fact that, pursuant to the applicable law and to the terms of
the Contract,*° the CEGP and the CDR had committed themselves to site expropriations.
Lebanon is responsible for these commitments made by an entity in the exercise of its
governmental authority. In its capacity as a sovereign authority, it is moreover responsible for
deciding and implementing site expropriations. The question that arises is whether the Tribunal
has jurisdiction because the failure by Lebanon to carry out the required site expropriations, if
established, constitutes a violation of Article 2 of the Treaty, which obliges Lebanon to create
and maintain favourable economic and legal conditions that allow investors to perform their
obligations and use their rights without hindrances and to protect investments and refrain from

any unreasonable or discriminatory actions that would impair such investments.

103. As a general rule, a mere non-performance of a contractual obligation does not by itself
fall within the scope of the State’s undertakings under the Treaty. In /mpregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic
Republic of Pakistan, the Tribunal stated that exceptional geological conditions “that concern the
implementation of the Contracts, and do not involve any issue beyond the application of a
contract and the conduct of the contracting parties.”*' In particular, these exceptional geological

conditions did not result in “unfair and inequitable treatment” or “unjustified or discriminatory

» article 11.03, §6 of the Cahier des Charges Particuliéres.
3! ICSID case no. ARB/03/3, Decision dated April 22, 2005, §268.
Page 33 of 65

measures.” They moreover did not “concern any exercise of ‘puissance publique’ by the

State.”*?

104. A State could, as an ordinary contracting partner, have a dispute with an investor. For a
breach of Article 2 of the Treaty, however, the State or its emanation has to go beyond what an

ordinary contracting partner would do and act within its sovereign authority. *°

105. In Consortium RFCC v. The Kingdom of Morocco the Tribunal stated: “[a] violation can
certainly result from the violation of the contract, but without a possible violation of the contract
constituting, ipso jure, and in itself, a violation of the Treaty.” ** Moreover, the Tribunal hereby
also referred to Joy Mining Machinery v. Republic of Egypt, which stated that “a basic general
distinction can be made between commercial aspects of a dispute and other aspects involving the

existence of some form of State interference with the operation of the contract involved.”?*

106. On the contrary, when the State acts as an administrative authority, holder of the
“puissance publique,” while performing obligations arising from the Contract, such State must

be viewed both as a party to the contract and as a sovereign.

107. The authority to expropriate is a typical example of a prerogative that can only be

exercised by the State (or by its emanation) as holder of the “puissance publique.”

108. Thus, clearly, in the matter at hand, expropriation by Lebanon through the CDR is a
prerogative that does not pertain to the simple performance of ordinary contractual duties. It
falls within the scope of the “puissance publique” that must be used to allow performance of the

contract by Toto and enters within the scope of Article 2, paragraph 3 of the Treaty.

*ICSID case no. ARB/03/3, Decision dated April 22, 2005, §268.

°3 E. Gaillard, “Chronique des Sentences Arbitrales”, IDI 2006, p. 296.
* ICSID case no. ARB/00/6, Decision dated December 22, 2003, § 48.
+5 ICSID case no. ARB/03/11 ~ Decision on jurisdiction dated August 6, 2004, §72.
Page 34 of 65

109. Consequently the Tribunal decides that it has jurisdiction over the alleged failure by
Lebanon to timely carry out the expropriations required for the performance of the works by

Toto under the Contract.

Page 35 of 65

2. Failures to remove Syrian troops and to protect legal possession

Toto’s Position

110. The State of Lebanon also failed to free major sites — as required under the Contract -
because of the presence of Syrian troops in the area. The Syrian troops, which were assisting the
Lebanese State in restoring and maintaining peace and order on the Lebanese territory, were
legally under the command of Lebanon.*® Consequently, the Lebanese Government was
responsible for their occupation of the sites and thus for the delays and damages resulting from

it.

111. As a matter of fact, Lebanon was aware, at the time when the Contract was concluded

with Toto, that Syrian troops were occupying the site so that it assumed the risk related to it.

112. Toto further alleges that Lebanon failed to protect access to the expropriated sites when

occupants refused to leave the expropriated properties.

113. Again, Toto does not claim specific compensation due to failure to remove Syrian troops
and to protect legal possession but rather claims a total amount of US$10,139,083.26 to cover
damages which resulted from all the delays it faced due to late expropriations, failure to protect

legal possession, etc.
Lebanon’s Position

114. For Lebanon, the delay in the delivery of sites due to Syrian troops breaches the
obligation under the contract to deliver and give access to the site. The reasons for the presence
of the Syrian troops at the site and for the failure to vacate do not affect the characterisation of

the failure to give access to the site as a contractual claim.

6 Toto refers to Makssoud v. Republic of Lebanon (1986), which ruled that the Lebanese State is responsible for the
Syrian troops present in Lebanon (CRJ, p. 14 $41, Toto’s exhibit RJ2: Civil judge Baabda (concerning rent matters),
file n° 474/1983, judgment n° 54, dated August 7, 1986).

Page 36 of 65

115. Besides, there is international consensus that Lebanon had no control over the Syrian
troops at the time the works had to be performed under the Contract. Their removal by force was
factually impossible and an attempt thereto could have threatened the existence of the country
itself. As stated in LG & E v. Argentina: “(t]he stability of the legal and business framework
should not pose any danger for the existence of the host state itself which could not be put at risk

by meticulously respecting contractual engagements. 27

116. For Lebanon, the alleged failure to protect legal possession is likewise related to the
delay in the execution of the works and thus is “a pure contractual claim, not covered by the

Treaty.”
Tribunal’s Decision

117. The same reasoning that applies to Lebanon’s alleged failure to expropriate also applies
to its alleged failure to remove Syrian troops from the site and to prevent protesters and
occupants from obstructing the works. Lebanon, although concerned with these matters as a
contracting party through the CEGP and the CDR, had itself to act as holder of the “puissance
publique.” .

118. | The alleged inaction of Lebanon with respect to those two matters, if proven, would thus
constitute a failure to protect investments under Article 2 of the Treaty. Therefore, the Tribunal

has jurisdiction to decide on this matter.

3. Erroneous instructions and design

Toto’s Position

119. Toto further claims that Lebanon failed to protect its investment by giving misleading
information, wrong instructions and erroneous design. Toto requests the Tribunal to award
US$3,834,454.78 for damages suffered for extra works and charges due to wrong instructions,

misleading information and erroneous design.

37 LG&E Energy Corp. LG&E Capital Corp., LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine Republic (hereafter “LG&E v.
Argentine”), ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability, October 3, 2006, para. 124 in fine).

Page 37 of 65

Lebanon’s Position

120. For Lebanon, construction instructions and design are not a prerogative of “puissance
publique;” an error in design is a purely technical matter. The claims related to the alleged
erroneous instructions and design are thus pure contract claims concerning technical issues

which the Treaty obviously does not cover.
Tribunal’s Decision

121. Toto’s claims appear to relate to the standard duties in a construction contract, i.e., an
alleged failure by an employer to comply with his obligations towards the contractor. It does not

involve the use of sovereign authority or “puissance publique.”

122. Consequently, such a claim does not fall within the scope of Article 2, paragraph 3 of the
Treaty. The Tribunal thus has no jurisdiction under Article 2 of the Treaty with respect to the

claim of “Erroneous Instructions and Design.”

4, Change of the regulatory framework

Toto’s Position

123. Lebanon introduced new legislation that changed the regulatory framework under which
the Claimant had entered into the contract with the CEGP/CDR. It increased, for instance,
customs duties and taxes as well as government fees on cement. These and other such changes

negatively affected Toto’s investment in breach of Article 2 of the Treaty.

124. While Lebanon is certainly entitled to change the legal and regulatory framework in the
public interest of the country, Toto is entitled to compensation for the losses its investment
suffered due to these changes under Article 1.13 of the Cahier des Clauses Juridiques et

Administratives.

125. On this ground, Toto requests to be awarded by the Tribunal US$ 673,790.52 for
damages suffered due to additional costs and charges occasioned by the changes in the regulatory

framework.

Page 38 of 65

Lebanon’s Position

126. For Lebanon, changes in the regulatory framework and in administrative law are
remedied under the contract law concept of “fait du prince,” to which Toto itself has referred in

its submission. Such reference confirms that this claim is a contractual claim.

127. Further, the new legislation applied generally and did not affect Toto in an unjustified or
discriminatory manner. Besides, the alleged effect of the legislative change on the execution of
the contract is rather small (US$673,790.52), compared to the total amount of the works.
Consequently, Toto’s argument that such changes constitute a breach under the Treaty becomes

manifestly groundless.

128. Finally, the Treaty does not aim at forbidding mere changes in legislation but rather at the
maintenance of a favourable legal framework. Toto’s claim referring to mere changes in

legislation is manifestly without legal merits and should be dismissed at the jurisdictional phase.
Tribunal’s Decision

129. The Tribunal finds that the Treaty does not sanction changes in legislation. It rather
obliges Lebanon to create and maintain favorable economic and legal conditions. The Tribunal
does not regard a mere increase in customs duties and taxes as prima facie evidence of failure to

maintain “favorable economic and legal conditions” of the investment.

130. However, if Toto could demonstrate that these changes in legislation were
discriminatory, unreasonable, or otherwise in violation of the Treaty, the Tribunal would have
jurisdiction under Article 2, paragraph 3 or other provisions of the Treaty.

E. Breach of Article 3.1 of the Treaty: Lack of Fair and Equitable Treatment

131. Toto argues that Lebanon failed to “ensure fair and equitable treatment” of its investment

and thus breached Article 3.1 of the Treaty.

Page 39 of 65

Disruption of negotiations with the CDR regarding claims submitted between
2000 and 2002

Toto’s Position

132. Between 1997 and 2002, Toto submitted various claims first to the CEGP and then, when

the CEGP was replaced in 2001 by the CDR, to the latter. Some of these claims were resolved,

some were not. The claims from the first years of the works were largely dealt with at the time.

However several claims from the later years remained unaddressed.

133. Between October 2000 and December 2002, the following claims for additional

compensation to the CEGP/CDR remained unanswered up to March 27, 2007, date of the

Request for Arbitration, and beyond.

Claims:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

for changes of legislation (increase in customs duties on steel in October 2000,
increase in price of diesel in June 2001, increase in government fees on cement in

October 2001, increase in aggregates price in December 2002);

for extra works executed due to misleading information given to Toto (April
2001);

for loss of productivity due to landslides (August 2001);

for delays in expropriation and site possession as well as for additional unforeseen

work and conditions (September 2002);

for an increase in the price of bitumen due to delays in the works (December
2002); and

for extra works due to third-party damages that occurred after the opening of the
highway (December 2002).

Page 40 of 65

134. On June 30, 2004, Toto submitted to the CDR a draft Request for Arbitration and an
invitation to negotiate as provided for per Article 7.1 of the Treaty.** In August 2004, the CDR
authorised its President to conduct the negotiations. Because of a change in the Lebanese
Government and in the CDR’s Board of Directors, the negotiations were suspended at the end of
2004. The negotiations did not resume despite Toto’s renewed invitation thereto in May 2005.
Upon the request of the Italian Government, there were two or three meetings; but at the last

meeting, in May 2008, it became clear that the negotiations were at a standstill.

135. For Toto, Lebanon’s failure to seriously negotiate was “a clear manifestation of serious
i ative lis and inconsi: y jeopardizing the i of the Claimant....”
The disruption of negotiations and the refusal to resume them is contrary to standards of fair and

equal treatment and thus a violation of Article 3.1 of the Treaty.
Lebanon’s Position

136. Lebanon contends that the Treaty does not require that negotiations be undertaken
without disruption or that such negotiations ultimately succeed. It only requires that consul-
tations between the parties take place, which is what happened. Thus the CDR’s failure (if any)

to resume the negotiations cannot be considered a breach of the Treaty.

137. Moreover, there is no indication that, if the negotiations had been resumed, they would

have resulted in acceptance of Toto’s claims.
Tribunal’s Decision

138. The Treaty requires that negotiations take place between the parties, which is what
happened in the present case. However, nothing in the Treaty addresses the conduct of the
negotiations or requires a positive outcome. Consequently, when Toto became dissatisfied with
the negotiations, it was entitled to submit its claims under the contract to the Conseil d’Etat. The
Tribunal’s prima facie review of those and other previously mentioned facts relevant to this issue
lead it to decide that it has no jurisdiction under Article 3.1 of the Treaty with respect to the

claim for disruption of negotiations.

*§ Toto’s letter of June 30, 2004 to the Chairman of the CDR.
Page 41 of 65

2. Delay in the two lawsuits before the Conseil d’Etat

Toto’s Position

139. Toto also refers to two proceedings it introduced before the Lebanese Conseil d’Etat in
August 2001 under the jurisdiction clause of Article V.01 (1) of the Cahier des Clauses
Juridiques et Administratives, which forms part of the Contract. The first of these proceedings,
which started on August 1, 2001, concerned a claim for compensation for additional “crushed
materials” required because the soil did not meet the contractual qualifications. The second,
which started on August 24, 2001, concerned a claim for compensation for unforeseen changes
to the original, erroneous design.” According to Toto, these proceedings have not progressed

substantially since the end of August 2002 when the parties submitted their last briefs of reply.

140. Toto emphasizes that it does not criticize the Conseil d’Etat in general. However, in these
two particular cases, the slow pace of the Conseil d’Etat constitutes a breach of Article 3.1 of the
Treaty. Indeed, the proceedings began in 2001 and both parties submitted their briefs to the
Conseil d’Etat by the end of August 2002. The lawsuits then remained unattended for six years.
No report of the Juge-Rapporteur has been issued yet. In January 2008, well after the start of the
present ICSID arbitration, the Conseil d’Etat requested the parties to submit copies of some
documents, which Toto regards as irrelevant to the lawsuits. In fact, because the entire
documents, such as the signed Contract, would be too voluminous Toto had already submitted

excerpts of such documents, as is usually done.

141. Toto argues that Lebanon, as a State, is liable for the Conseil d’Etat’s behaviour, even if
it did not intervene in its functioning. The judicial system is one of the attributes of a sovereign

State for the functioning of which the State is responsible.

142. In comparison with other proceedings before the Conseil d’Etat, the two lawsuits at issue
have proceeded at an abnormally slow pace, the normal time for proceedings being one to five
years. The fact that the lawsuits were not attended to for such a long period constitutes a denial

of justice under international law that entails the responsibility of Lebanon.

* Exhibits R24 and R25 submitted by the Respondent.

Page 42 of 65

143. Moreover, the fact that the lawsuits were not attended to for such a long period also
constitutes a breach of Article 3.1 of the Treaty. Indeed, the obstruction of the Conseil d’Etat

proceedings is in breach of good faith, the most basic component of fair and equitable treatment.

144. Although Lebanon is not party to the Council of Europe, Toto finally refers to the case
law on due process of the European Court of Human Rights. It also refers to Article 14 of the
1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (“ICCPR”), ratified by Lebanon,

which imposes the right of every person to have an equitable trial.
Lebanon's Position

145. Lebanon argues that the time required by the Conseil d’Etat should not be compared to
the swift resolution of disputes through arbitration in general, and through ICSID arbitration in

particular.

146. Besides, the time needed to settle a case depends on the complexity and the

circumstances of each case.

147. Despite the fact that Toto was well aware that proceedings before the Conseil d’Etat may
extend over a number of years, it nevertheless “knowingly and willfully” agreed to submit the

disputes to the Conseil d’Etat.

148. In fact, the delay in Toto’s procedure before the Conseil d’Etat is not abnormal: most
cases extend over five years. Moreover, the two cases are advancing, as evidenced by the
decisions for production of additional documents, issued by the Conseil d’Etat in January 2008.

Due process is thus being respected.

149. Lebanon also points out that Toto has not requested a separate or specific compensation
for these claims, and that it has only submitted two claims to the Conseil d’Etat, whereas it now

submits fifteen claims before this Tribunal.

150. Lebanon dismisses the references made by the Claimant to the European Convention on
Human Rights (“ECHR”) and to the case law of the European Court of Human Rights as
irrelevant, since Lebanon is not a member of the Council of Europe.

Page 43 of 65

151. Lebanon reiterates that “denial of justice entails scandalous behaviour and bad faith on

the part of the court.” Toto has offered no prima facie evidence for such a charge.
Tribunal’s Decision

152. Toto does not allege that it has been treated less favourably by the Conseil d’Etat than
have Lebanese investors or investors of any third State who have submitted claims to the Conseil
d’Etat. Rather, it merely alleges that the Conseil d’Etat is malingering with regard to the two

cases Toto has submitted to it.

153. Only if there is prima facie evidence that the court delays in the case at stake are unfair

and inequitable would the Tribunal have jurisdiction under Article 3.1 of the Treaty.

154. The Treaty sanctions not only breaches of specific Treaty provisions, such as Article 3.1,
but also breaches of any rule of international law (Article 7.3). The Treaty thus covers also a

denial of justice under international law.

155. It has to be conceded that international law has no strict standards to assess whether court

delays are a denial of justice.

156. As a matter of principle, the failure to render justice within a reasonable period of time
may constitute a breach of international customary law. In the Fabiani case of 1896, Fabiani, a
French national wanted to enforce an arbitral award in Venezuela, but his request for an
exequatur met with a long series of suspensions and appeals, culminating in the refusal of a
tribunal d’exception, especially selected to deal with this case, even to schedule a hearing. The
sole arbitrator found that “upon examining the general principles of international law, denial of
justice includes wrongful delays of the judicial authority in giving judgment.”*° The question,
however, is whether in the case at hand the delay in the proceedings of the two claims before the

Conseil d’Etat constitutes a denial of justice.

157. Article 6 of the ECHR certainly covers the question to which extent lengthy court

proceedings are a breach of the right to due process and to a fair and equitable trial. This matter

“° Antoine Fabiani (n°1) (France v. Venezuela) , Moore , Arbitrations, 4878 at 4895
Page 44 of 65

has been extensively subject of decisions from domestic courts and from the European Court of
Human Rights. However, as Lebanon is not party to the ECHR and lies outside the territorial

scope of the ECHR, these decisions are not relevant in this case.

158. On the other hand, Lebanon is a party to the ICCPR, Article 14.1 which requires the right

to a fair hearing:

All persons shall be equal before the courts and tribunals. In the
determination of ... his rights and obligations in a suit at law,
everyone shall be entitled to a fair and public hearing by a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal established by
law...

The right to a fair hearing entails a number of requirements, including the requirement that the

procedure before the national tribunals be conducted expeditiously.*!

159. Under the Optional Protocol to the ICCPR, a State may accept that individual persons file
a complaint against the State before the ICCPR Commission, which then gives its opinion.
However, Lebanon has not ratified this Protocol and thus cannot be summoned before the
Commission. Nevertheless, the decisions of the Commission are relevant to interpret the scope of

Article 14 of the ICCPR.

160. To assess whether court delays are in breach of the requirement of a fair hearing, the
ICCPR Commission takes into account the complexity of the matter, whether the Claimants
availed themselves of the possibilities of accelerating the proceedings, and whether the

Claimants suffered from the delay. The ICCPR Commission thus decided that a two-and-a-half-

year delay in the p dings to annul an ive order was .? Likewise, a two-

ig
year period to obtain a judgment from an administrative tribunal against a dismissal was equally
acceptable.*? On the other hand, a delay of seven years to obtain a judgment for someone who
asked to be reinstated in his position and an additional delay of two-and-a-half years to get this
“| See Commission ICCPR (1060/2002), Deis! v. Austria, A/59/40, vol. II (July 27, 2004) 283, para 11.2;
Commission ICCPR (203/1986), Munoz v. Peru, A/44/40 (November 4, 1988) 200 at para. 11.3. Communication n°

441/190, Robert Casanovas v. France, A/49/40 vol. II (July 19, 1994) at para. 7.3; Communication N° 238/1987,
Floresmilo Bolanos v, Ecuador, at para. 8.4, Communication N° 207/ 1986, Yves Morael v. France, at para. 9.3.

*® Commission ICCPR Deis! v. Austria, A/59/40, vol. II (July 27, 2004) 283, para 11.2.
* Communication N° 41/1990, Robert Casanovas v. France, A/49/40 vol. II (July 19, 1994) at para. 7.3.
Page 45 of 65

judgment implemented was considered unacceptable.** Likewise, eleven years of proceedings to
obtain a final judgment regarding custody of and access to the claimant’s children was

unreasonable.*°

161. Lebanon has argued that, when concluding the Contract, Toto was aware of the length of
procedures before the Conseil d'Etat. The Tribunal is not impressed by this argument. Toto did
not find itself in a bargaining position to refuse the jurisdiction of the Lebanese domestic courts.
It is the obligation of Lebanon to make sure that its domestic courts function fairly and equitably,

as required especially by Article 3.1 of the Treaty.

162. Lebanon also has invoked overcharged dockets to justify the delay. Although
overcharged dockets may explain the fact that a decision in a civil matter was not rendered

within a reasonable time, it does not excuse the delay.*°

163. In fact, whether justice is rendered within a reasonable delay depends on the
circumstances and the context of the case.*” Each lawsuit must be analyzed individually with

regard to:
- the complexity of the matter“

- the need for celerity of decision;”

* Commission ICCPR, Munoz v. Peru, A/44/40 (4 November 1988) 200 at para. 11.3; Cf. M. Nowak, “U.N.
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. ICCPR Commentary” (2nd revised edition), 322-323: “Mufoz Hermoza v.
Peru ... Following discontinuance of criminal proceedings against him, he unsuccessfully fought for his
reinstatement for ten years before various administrative and judicial authorities. The Committee held that the
administrative proceedings lasting seven years constituted unreasonable delay and thus a violation of the right to a
fair hearing under Article 14 (1).”

* Commission ICCRP Fei v. Columbia (514/1992), A/S0/40 vol. II (April 4, 1995) 77 at para 8.4;

Cf. M. Nowak, “U.N. Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. CCPR Commentary” (2nd revised edition), 322-323:
“In Fei v. Columbia, the Committee stressed that “the very nature of custody proceedings or proceedings
concerning access of a divorced parent to his children requires that the issues complained of be adjudicated
expeditiously.”

 

“© Anglo-Mexican Claims Commission, El Oro Mining and Railway Co., quoted in Paulsson, Denial of Justice in
International Law, 2007, p. 178.

“"Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador, Nr. 113

“ The French Conseil d’Etat has decided that ECHR Article 6.1 and 13 were violated when a lower administrative
court took seven and a half years to rule on “a request which did not present any particular difficulty.”

Page 46 of 65

- the diligence of claimant in prosecuting its case.°°

164. Moreover, a state can only be held liable for denial of justice when it has not remedied

this denial domestically. As summarized by Jan Paulsson:

States are held to an obligation to provide a fair and efficient

system of justice, not to an undertaking that there will never be an

instance of judicial misconduct. National responsibility for denial

of justice occurs only when the system as a whole has been tested

and the initial delict has remained uncorrected... The very

definition of denial of justice encompasses the notion of exhaustion

of local remedies. There can be no denial of justice before

exhaustion.
165. It has to be admitted that in the present case there was indeed a very long delay between
the closing of the debates in the two proceedings before the Conseil d’Etat in 2002 and the
request by the Conseil d’Etat for submission of documents on 16 January 2008. In the eyes of the
Tribunal, this in itself, however, does not constitute a breach of Article 3.1 of the Treaty. In
February 2005, Lebanon’s former Prime Minister, Rafic Hariri, was assassinated. This was
followed by several terrorist bombings and assassinations that disrupted normal life in Lebanon.
In summer 2006, a destructive war took place between Lebanon and Israel. In Mid-2007 there
was severe internal fighting between the organization Fatah al-Islam and the Lebanese Army. In
May 2008, another internal armed conflict exploded following a 17-month-long political crisis.
These circumstances undoubtedly were not conductive to the functioning of Lebanon’s judicial

system and affected the proper functioning of Lebanese courts between 2002 and 2008.

166. In fact, as Lebanon points out, the two cases are presently advancing, as evidenced by the

two decisions for document production from the Conseil d’Etat issued in January 2008.

 

* To decide whether the delay was unreasonable, i.e., the complexity of the matter, the conduct of the parties in the
course of the proceedings as well as the specific legitimate interest in celerity have to be evaluated .

“Ecuador alleged that Chevron had knowingly allowed the BIT breach to occur through their deliberate lack of
diligence in prosecuting their Ecuadorean court cases. The Claimants have countered with evidence that they
prosecuted their cases to the point where a decision could be rendered and with an argument that doing any more
would have been futile. (Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador, Nr. 145). In fact, the Claimants have done everything they
could to advance proceedings. Ecuador indicated that they could have raised a number of procedural remedies. This
will be decided in the merits phase (Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador, Nr. 238).

*' Jan Paulsson, Denial of justice in International Law, 2007, p. 245-246.
Page 47 of 65

167. More importantly, the Tribunal has not seen evidence that Toto made use of local
remedies to speed up the proceedings before the Conseil d’Etat.” Toto had the right to consult
the case files at the Conseil d’Etat (Article 82 of the Law regulating the Conseil d’Etat). It could
have shown diligence — but did not do so — and request the Conseil d’Etat to issue its report on
the case or review the matter quickly. Lebanon cannot be blamed for its practice not to disclose
the name of the Juge-Rapporteur to prevent direct contact between the parties and the Juge-
Rapporteur. Nor did non-disclosure prevent Toto from using its right to submit a written request
to the President of the Conseil d’Etat’s Chamber to cause prompt issuance of the decision of the

Juge-Rapporteur.

168. The Tribunal has therefore not seen prima facie evidence that Toto itself has made use of
the local remedies to shorten the procedural delays. In the absence of such evidence the Tribunal
has no jurisdiction under Article 3.1 of the Treaty to decide whether the delays before the

Conseil d’Etat were unfair and inequitable.

3. Lack of Transparency in the two lawsuits before the Conseil d’Etat

Toto’s Position

169. Toto further argues that, since it has been unable to obtain information regarding the
progress of the procedures before the Conseil d’Etat or to learn the name of the Magistrate in
charge of the file, these two procedures are contrary to the fundamental right to transparency,
another breach of the “fair and equitable treatment” standard contained in Article 3.1 of the

Treaty.

170. According to Toto, transparency is a basic requirement in any judicial system. Toto refers

in this context to LG & E Energy Corp. v. Argentine Republic and to Tecmed v. The United

°° In the absence of a specific regulated remedy in the law with respect to denial of justice in administrative courts,
reference must be made to the Code of Civil Procedure (“CPC”) that, pursuant to Article 6 CPC, is the general
procedural law, Article 4 CPC defines “denial of justice”: these provisions should apply to the Conseil d'Etat given
that its governing law is silent in this regard.

 

Page 48 of 65

Mexican States, which decided that the host State must “act in a consistent manner, free from

ambiguity and totally transparently in its relations with the foreign investor...” ©

Lebanon's Position

171. Lebanon maintains that the procedures before the Conseil d’Etat do not lack transparency
and denies that a claimant is entitled to know the name of the Juge-Rapporteur in charge of

submitting a report to the Conseil d’Etat.

172. Besides, Toto apparently was nevertheless informed about the progress of the lawsuits,

since it is aware that the file has been remitted to a Magistrate of the Conseil d’Etat.
Tribunal’s Decision

173. On the basis of the facts submitted, the Tribunal does not find a prima facie lack of
transparency in the proceedings before the Conseil d’Etat that would give it jurisdiction to decide

whether these facts amount to a breach of Article 3.1 of the Treaty.

4, Other claims

174. Toto has brought forward other claims with regard to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under
Article 3.1 of the Treaty such as the claim related to the failure to expropriate, the failure to
remove Syrian troops and to protect legal possession, the claim related to erroneous instructions
and design and the claim for the changes in its regulatory framework. Lebanon has raised

objections to Toto’s arguments.

175. The Tribunal confirms that erroneous instructions and design appear related to the
standard duty in a construction contract, not involving use of sovereign authority or “puissance
publique.” No sufficient prima facie evidence has been submitted to grant the Tribunal
jurisdiction to decide whether they involve a breach of fair and equitable treatment as required

under Article 3.1 of the Treaty.

53 LG&E Energy Corp. LG&E Capital Corp., LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine Republic (hereafter “LG&E v.
Argentine”), ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability, October 3, 2006, p. 235, para. 127; Técnicas
Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. The United Mexican States, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/02, Award, May 29,
2003, para. 154.

Page 49 of 65

As for the failure to expropriate, the failure to remove Syrian troops and to protect legal
possession, the changes in the regulatory framework, which -as already discussed- there is prima
facie evidence that they may fall under the protection of Article 2.1 of the Treaty and under
Article 3.1 of the Treaty if proven to be unfair and inequitable. Consequently the Tribunal has

jurisdiction over such matters.

F. Breach of Article 4.2 Treaty: Indirect Expropriation

Toto’s Position

176. Toto argues that the manner Lebanon acted can be considered as an indirect expropriation
of Toto’s investment, in violation of Article 4.2 of the Treaty, which assimilates “measures
having the same nature or the same effect against investments” to expropriation and reads as

follows:

Neither of the Contracting Parties shall take, either directly or
indirectly, de jure or de facto, measures of expropriation,
nationalisation or any other measures having the same nature or
the same effect against investments of investors of the other
Contracting Party, unless the measures are taken in the public
interest as established by law, on a non-discriminatory basis,
under due process of law, and provided that provisions be made
for effective and adequate compensation, according to the
enforced national law without any kind of discrimination.

177. In addition Toto refers to paragraph 3 of the Protocol attached to the Treaty, which states

with reference to Article 4.2:

Any measure undertaken by one of the Contracting Parties relating

to an investment made by an investor of the other Contracting

Party, which shall substantially diminish the value of the assets or

create major obstacles to the activities or substantial prejudice to

the value of the same asset as well as any other measure referred

to in paragraph 2 of Article 4.
178. According to Toto, it invested, in addition to the US$ 40 million that was the final value
of the Project, an amount equivalent to US$ 15 million for costs and charges incurred due to acts
or omissions of Lebanon and for which Toto was not reimbursed. The fact that Toto had to
invest an extra amount of US$ 15 million, i.e., 37% of the Project’s total amount, that was not

Page 50 of 65

provided for in the Contract, “substantially deprives the investment of economic value and is to

be considered as an indirect expropriation as per Article 4.2 of the Treaty.”

179. Moreover, the original duration of the Project was foreseen to be 18 months, but its

completion took more than five years by Lebanon’s fault. In Toto’s view:

By extending the time for completion, because of acts and

measures adopted by the Respondent in addition to changing the

institutional framework by decisions adopted by the Respondent

through increasing taxes, closing quarries and other similar

measures, the Respondent eroded the Claimant's profits and

deprived the investment of economical values which is equivalent

to an indirect expropriation and constitutes breach of Article 4.2 of

the Treaty™*
180. For Toto, the fact that its two claims, submitted to the Lebanese Conseil d’Etat, have
remained unsettled to this day and that the claims submitted to the CDR since 2001 have not

only remained unsettled, but also unanswered, constitutes a further indirect expropriation.
Lebanon's Position

181. Lebanon considers Toto’s contention to be unfounded. Its claims for an amount of US$
15 million for alleged additional costs and charges resulting from the performance of the contract
were disputed and are still disputed as of today. The mere non-payment of a disputed amount
cannot be considered as an indirect expropriation which takes away the claim. Lebanon referred
in this context to the award in SGS v. The Republic of Philippines, where the Tribunal reasoned
that “whatever debt the Philippines may owe to SGS [the investor] still exists, whatever right to
interest for late payment SGS had, it still has.”*° As long as the Philippines had not enacted a
statute or decree to expropriate or annul the debt or otherwise attempted to expropriate, the debt
continued to exist. Given that Toto’s claims are based on a mere refusal to pay and not on an
allegation that the debt was in one way or another annulled by Lebanon, Toto’s alleged breach of

non-payment cannot constitute an indirect expropriation under the Treaty.

* Request for Arbitration, p. 24, para. 5.3.3.
55 ICSID Case n° ARB/02/6, SGS v. Philippines, para. 161.
Page 51 of 65

Tribunal’s Decision

182. To assess expropriation, the effect of the disputed measures on the investment is more
important than the presence of a formal expropriation decree or the government’s intention
behind these measures,®° which is no constitutive requirement for indirect expropriation.*”
Although an indirect and de facto expropriation does not transfer the title to property, it may

8

have the same consequences as a formal expropriation.** For the Tribunal in Metalclad, an

expropriation could also be :

Covert or incidental interference with the use of property which
has the effect of depriving the owner, in whole or in significant
part, of the use or reasonably-to-be-expected economic benefit of
property even if not necessarily to the obvious benefit of the host
State.

183. In order to be considered as an (indirect) expropriation, the government measures need to
“effectively neutralize” the enjoyment of property.” The measures should result in “substantial
effects of an intensity that reduces and/or removes the legitimate benefits [...] to an extent that

6 As was decided in National Grid v. Argentina,

they render their further possession useless.
an expropriation requires a radical deprivation. Although the provision of the Treaty covers
also measures of the same effect and nature as a formal expropriation, it does not lower the

relevance of the effect to qualify measures as de facto expropriation.

184. For Toto, the additional costs, representing 37% of the total value of the investment, lead
to a deprivation of economic value and constitute an indirect expropriation. However, this 37%

is based solely on Toto’s calculations. Moreover, no prima facie evidence has been submitted

% Tippets, Abett, McCarthy, Stratton v. TAMS-AFFA Consulting Engineers of Iran, The Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran 6 Iran-USCTR 219, 225.

57 Siemens v. Argentina, Award, February 6, 2007, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8.
%8 Petrobart Lid v. The Kyrgyz Republic (Award) SCC Arg 126/2003 (SCC/ECT, 2005, Danelius P, Bring & Smets).
* Metalclad Corp v. Mexico (Award) August 30, 2000, 5 ICSID Rep (2002) 457, para. 103.

© CMS v. Argentina, Award, May 12, 2005, 44 ILM (2005) 1205, para. 262, referring to the same wording in
Lauder v. Czech Republic, Award, September 3, 2001, UNCITRAL (United States/ Czech Republic BIT) para. 200.

 

*! RFCC v, Morocco, Award, December 22, 2003, 20 ICSID Rev-FILJ (2005) 391, para. 69.

© National Grid P.L.C. v. Argentina (UNCITRAL),November 3, 2008, published in extenso on the website of the
American Society of International Law, http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/NGvArgentina.pdf.

Page 52 of 65

that the activities and their remuneration, initially foreseen by Toto, were an adequate
performance of Toto’s contractual obligations and adequately covered the risk Toto had
assumed, so that no additional works and costs were required to fulfill Toto’s contractual
obligations. Consequently, because the Tribunal is of the opinion that Toto has not offered prima
facie proof that uncovered costs in the amount of 37% of the value of the project may constitute
a deprivation of its rights on the investment, or a measure having the same effect, it has no

jurisdiction to assess such facts under Article 4.2 of the Treaty.

185. Furthermore, even if Lebanon would have to pay additional costs for an amount up to
37% of the initial contract price and has failed to do so, this does not constitute an indirect
expropriation, but a mere breach of contract. For the Tribunal, an indirect expropriation
fundamentally requires a taking of property. As the Tribunal in Waste Management correctly
stated: “an enterprise is not expropriated just because its debts are not paid or other contractual
obligations are breached.”® Referring to the authority’s failure to make available land promised
for the investment project, the arbitrators concluded: “a failure by a State to provide its own land
to an enterprise for some purpose is not converted into an expropriation of the enterprise just
because the failure involves a breach of contract.” Along similar lines, the Azurix Tribunal
held that “contractual breaches by a State party or one of is instrumentalities would not normally
constitute expropriation.”®* Further, relevant to the extent Toto’s claims are based on regulatory
changes made by Lebanon, the Feldman v. Mexico award held with regard to Article 1110 of the
NAFTA Agreement that “not all regulatory activity that makes it difficult or impossible for an
investor to carry out a particular business, change in the law or change in the application of
existing laws that makes it uneconomical to continue a particular business, is an

expropriation.”

® Waste Management Inc v. United Mexican States (2004) 43 ILM 967, (NAFTA/ICSID (AF)), 2004, Crawford P,
Civiletti & Magallon Gomez) 995, 999, para. 160.

“ Tbid. para. 159.

% Acurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (Award) ICSID Case ARB/01/12 (ICSID, 2006, Rigo Sureda A, Lalonde &
Martins).

® Feldman v. Mexico 7 ICSID Rep 341, 370 (NAFTA/ICSID (AF), 2002, Kerameus K, Covarrubias Bravo &
Gantz).

Page 53 of 65

186. After having given due consideration to all the arguments brought forward by the parties,

the Tribunal concludes that in this case it has no jurisdiction under Article 4.2 of the Treaty.

G. Breach of Article 9.2 of the Treaty: Failure to Observe Obligations

Toto’s Position

187. Toto claims that the Tribunal moreover has jurisdiction over what it considers to be
Lebanon’s breaches of Article 9.2 of the Treaty, i.e., the “observance of obligations” clause,
which states: “[e]ach Contracting Party shall observe any other obligation it has assumed with
regard to investments in its territory by investors of the other Contracting Party.” Article 9.2 is
commonly called an “umbrella clause” as it may provide an “umbrella” to cover all obligations

and bring them within the ambit of the treaty-protection.
Lebanon’s Position

188. Lebanon submits that in the presence of an agreed contractual forum selection clause, the
“observance of obligation clause” (Article 9.2 of the Treaty) does not elevate contract claims to

treaty claims falling within the jurisdiction of ICSID.
Tribunal’s Decision

189. The question that arises for this Tribunal, then, is what actions and/or omissions of
Lebanon, if any, could constitute a violation of Article 9.2 and therefore fall within the scope of

the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

190. The Tribunal will address this question keeping in mind that it already has determined
that the CEPG and the CDR are considered to be public entities of the Republic of Lebanon
(“personnes morales de droit public”). Indeed, it is only when Lebanon can be held liable for

acts of the CEPG and the CDR, that the question becomes relevant.

191. Besides the specific commitments, contained in Articles 2 to 5 of the Treaty, in Article
9.2 of the Treaty, Lebanon has undertaken to “observe any other obligation it has assumed with
regard to investments in its territory by investors of the other Contracting Party.” Lebanon has

thus undoubtedly assumed all its obligations as a sovereign authority under international law.
Page 54 of 65

However, does Article 9.2 also imply that the Treaty obliges Lebanon to observe any and all
obligations it has assumed with regard to Toto’s investments in its territory, whatever their

nature, including also ordinary contractual obligations assumed by the CEPG and the CDR?

192. To respond to such question, and determine the intent of the parties with respect to the
scope of Article 9.2, it is relevant to review the standard wording of similar umbrella clauses in

other investment treaties and to consider their interpretation by other Tribunals.

193. In some instances, it can be inferred from the wording of the umbrella clause that it
encompasses obligations arising from the Treaty as well as obligations arising from the contract.
The Tribunal in S.G.S v. Philippines had to interpret the following umbrella clause from the
Bilateral Investment Treaty between the Philippines and the United Kingdom: “[e]ach party
shall observe any obligation arising from a particular commitment it may have entered into with

regards to specific investment.” (Article VII)

194. The Tribunal found that the parties’ intent to cover all their contractual obligations,
including ordinary contractual obligations that do not involve any use of “puissance publique”
transpired from the wording of the contract, and particularly from the use of the terms “particular
commitment” and “specific investment.” Consequently it held that it had jurisdiction with
respect to contractual obligations by stating:®” “To summarize the Tribunal’s conclusions on this
point, Article X(2) makes it a breach of the BIT for the host state to fail to observe binding
commitments including contractual commitments, which it has assumed with regard to specific

investments [...]”

195. Other umbrella clauses were drafted in more general terms and leave room for
interpretation. For instance, the Investment Treaty between the United Kingdom and Peru states:
“Teach contracting party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to
investments of investors of the other contracting party.” (Article 3(1)). This clause is only
slightly different in terms from Article 9.2 of the Investment Treaty between Lebanon and Italy:
“{e]ach Contracting party shall observe any other obligation it has assumed with regards to

investments in his territory by investors of other Contracting Party.”

°7 ICSID case no, ARB/02/6, Decision on jurisdiction dated January 29, 2004, paragraph 128.
Page 55 of 65

196. These clauses, which must be interpreted in accordance with the objectives sought by the
parties in line with the customary rules of interpretation of treaties in public international law,

have been interpreted in different ways.

197. One interpretation held that such clauses are operative only when the parties have clearly
expressed their intent to consider breaches of contract as breaches of the Treaty. This was the
case of the Tribunal in SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of
Pakistan. The Tribunal had to interpret the umbrella clause in the Investment Treaty between
Switzerland and Pakistan that states: “[e]ither contracting party shall constantly guarantee the
observance of commitments it has entered into with respect to the investments of the investors of
the contracting party” (Article 11). The Tribunal stated first its canon for interpretation: “A
Treaty interpreter must of course seek to give effect to the object and purpose projected by that
Article and by the BIT as a whole. That object and purpose must be ascertained, in the first

instance, from the text itself of Article 11 and the rest of the BIT.” \t found:

[alpplving these familiar norms of customary international law on
Treaty interpretation, we do not find a convincing basis for
accepting the Claimant’s contention that Article 11 of the BIT has
had the effect of entitling a Contracting Party’s investor, like SGS,
in the face of a valid forum selection contract clause, to “elevate”
its claims grounded solely in a contract with another Contracting
Party, like the PSI Agreement, to claims grounded on the Treaty,
and accordingly to bring such contract claims to this Tribunal for
resolution and decision.”

Because no evidence was submitted that the contracting parties intended to extend the scope of
application of the umbrella clause, the Tribunal asserted that the clause was restricted to the
liability of the State in pursuance of the substantial provisions of the Investment Treaty and

could not be extended to the liability ensued from the contract.

198. Other Tribunals limited the protection of umbrella clauses to actions taken by the State in

the exercise of its sovereign authority. This was the case of the decision of E/ Paso Energy

®8 ICSID case no. ARB/01/13, Decision dated August 6, 2003 on jurisdiction.
® Paragraph no. 165 of the Decision.
Page 56 of 65

International Company v. Argentina,” that has categorically confirmed that the umbrella clause,
even if drafted as broadly as possible, will only confer jurisdiction to the Tribunal on the basis of

the Treaty when the State is acting in its capacity as a sovereign authority.

199. A third view considers that umbrella clauses transform all contractual claims into treaty

claims. This was the case of the Decision in Noble Ventures Inc. v. Romania.”!

200. A fourth view held that umbrella clauses may form the basis for treaty claims, without
transforming contractual claims into treaty claims. Such view is described by Professor James

Crawford who states

Finally, there is the view that an umbrella clause is operative and

may form the basis for a substantive treaty claim, but that it does

not convert a contractual claim into a treaty claim. On the one

hand it provides, or at least may provide, a basis for a treaty claim

even if the BIT in question contains not generic claims clause; on

the other hand, the umbrella clause does not change the proper

law of the contract or its legal incidents, including provisions for

dispute settlement.
201. Taking into consideration the spirit and purpose of the Treaty in the matter at hand, the
Tribunal espouses the fourth view. That view best conforms with the unqualified commitment
assumed by Lebanon to comply with “any other obligation it has assumed” as well as with the
fourth paragraph of the Preamble to the Treaty which confirms the importance of the
“contractual protection” of investments — again without further qualification. Moreover, when
the Treaty provides for submission of disputes to Lebanese courts in its Article 7.2.a, these
national courts in any event will decide the dispute in accordance with national contract law.
Article 7 does not provide for the application of international law by national courts as it does for
the two other options: for claims submitted to ICSID arbitration (Article 7.2.b indirectly by
referring to the ICSID Convention Article 41 of which is considered to provide for the
application of international law; and for claims submitted to an ad hoc arbitral tribunal, directly

by Article 7.3 of the Treaty).

 ICSID case no. ARB/03/15, Decision on jurisdiction dated April 27, 2006.

7" ICSID Case no. ARB/O1/11, dated October 12, 2005,paras 46-62.

” “Treaty and Contract in investment Arbitration”, Arbitration Intemational, Vol. 24, no. 3 (2008), pp. 351-374.
Page 57 of 65

202. Although Article 9.2 of the Treaty may be used as a mechanism for the enforcement of
claims, it does not elevate pure contractual claims into treaty claims. The contractual claims
remain based upon the contract; they are governed by the law of the contract and may be affected
by the other provisions of the contract. In the case at hand that implies that they remain subject to
the contractual jurisdiction clause and have to be submitted exclusively to the Lebanese courts
for settlement. Because of this jurisdiction clause in favor of Lebanese courts, the Tribunal has
no jurisdiction over the contractual claims arising from the contract referring disputes ‘to
Lebanese courts. As in the case of SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic

Republic of Pakistan,” the Tribunal does not see a reason in the case at hand and

in the face of a valid forum selection contract clause, to “elevate”
its claims grounded solely in a contract with another Contracting

Party... to claims grounded on the Treaty, and accordingly to
bring such contract claims to this Tribunal for resolution and
decision.

H. The Fork in the Road — Contractual Claims

203. The Treaty includes a so-called “fork-in-the-road” clause in Article 7.2:

If these consultations do not result in a solution within six months from the date of written
request for settlement, the investor may submit the dispute, at his choice, for settlement

to:

(a the competent court of the Contracting Party in the territory of which the

investment has been made; or

(b) the International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)
provided for by the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of the other States, opened for signature at Washington, on
March 18, 1965, in case both Contracting Parties have become members of this

Convention; or

* ICSID case no. ARB/01/13, Decision dated August 6, 2003 on jurisdiction.
”4 Paragraph no. 165 of the Decision.
Page 58 of 65

(o) an ad hoc tribunal which, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties to the dispute,
shall be established under the arbitration rules of the United Nations Commission

of International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).
The choice made as per subparagraphs a, b, and c herein above is final.

204. The Contract between the CEPG and Toto includes in Article V.01, paragraph 2 of the
Cahier des Charges Particuliéres - Cahier des Clauses Juridiques et Administratives, the
following dispute resolution clause: “[l]es tribunaux libanais sont seuls compétents pour régler

les litiges au cours de l’exécution de l’adjudication ou en application du cahier des charges.”

On the basis of such jurisdiction clause, Toto has initiated two different proceedings before the

Lebanese Conseil d’Etat.
Lebanon’s Position

205. Lebanon argues that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the claims already submitted to
the Conseil d’Etat because Article 7.2 of the Treaty gives the Claimant the option of submitting
claims either to the host State’s domestic courts (in casu Conseil d’Etat) or to international
arbitration (ICSID), but not to both. Even assuming arguendo that these claims amount to Treaty
claims (which Lebanon firmly rejects, considering them to be purely contractual in nature), the

fork-in-the-road clause would bar Toto from submitting these Treaty claims to ICSID.

206. For Lebanon, the claims submitted to both the Conseil d’Etat and ICSID have the same
aim of obtaining compensation for extra costs incurred in the execution of the Contract. If the
Tribunal were to decide that it has jurisdiction to hear this case, the parallel proceedings could

result in “conflicting, contradictory and more importantly, unenforceable decisions.”

207. It would be “unreasonable” and “against the wording and spirit” of Article 7.2 of the
Treaty to allow Toto to submit some of its claims to the Conseil d’Etat and some to ICSID. The
fork-in-the-road principle, i.e., “electa una via, non datur recursus ad alteram,” belongs to the
essence of the Treaty. Some ICSID awards have considered the principle as reflecting a public

policy of the host State.

Page 59 of 65

Toto’s Position

208. For Toto, the claims brought before the Tribunal are different from those brought before
the Conseil d’Etat: the cases pending before the Conseil d’Etat relate to breaches of the Contract,
while the claims submitted before the Tribunal relate to breaches of the Treaty. The prejudice
suffered because of the alleged breach of the Treaty is of a different nature and goes far beyond
the two cases submitted to the Conseil d’Etat. As stated in CMS v. Argentina: “as contractual
claims are different from Treaty claims, even if there had been or there currently was a recourse
to the local courts from breach of contract, this would not have prevented submissions of the

Treaty claims to arbitration.”

209. The fork-in-the-road clause of Article 7 can only bar submission of Treaty claims to an
international forum if those claims have already been submitted to the domestic courts. In the
present proceeding, Toto chose “without any hesitation” to submit its Treaty claims (failure to
protect its investment and denial of justice) to an ICSID arbitration tribunal and it clearly stated

its intention to do so in its letter to the Chairman of the CDR of June 30, 2004.

210. Toto’s position is supported by Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v.
Argentine Republic and by Vivendi v. Argentine Republic. Moreover, as Panels in M.C./. Power
Group L.G. and New Turbine v. Ecuador and Vivendi v. Argentine Republic indicated: “having
recourse to a domestic forum for breaches of contract does not involve exercising the right to.
choose an alternative under the BIT, unless the claim in the domestic forum is based on breach
of the BIT.”

Tribunal’s Decision

211. The fork-in-the road clause in Article 7 of the Treaty does not take away jurisdiction
from the Tribunal over Treaty claims. In order for a fork-in-the-road clause to preclude claims
from being considered by the Tribunal, the Tribunal has to consider whether the same claim is

“on a different road,” i.e., that a claim with the same object, parties and cause of action, is

75 CMS Gas Transmission Company v. the Republic of Argentina (Case No. ARB/01/8), Decision of the Tribunal on
Objections to Jurisdiction of July 17, 2003, 42 ILM 800, para. 80. This case is quoted in Azurix Corp. v. The
Argentine Republic (Case No. ARB/01/12), Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 December 2003, para. 89.

Page 60 of 65

already brought before a different judicial forum. Contractual claims arising out of the Contract

do not have the same cause of action as Treaty claims.

212. Consequently, the fact that Toto has brought two contract claims before the Conseil
dEtat does not restrict Toto’s right to submit its Treaty claims to the Tribunal. This Tribunal
hereby refers to CMS v. Argentine, also cited by Toto and to Genin v. Estonia, in which the
Tribunal concluded: “[a]/though certain aspects of the facts that gave rise to this dispute were
also at issue in the Estonian litigation, the ‘investment dispute’ itself was not, and the Claimant

should not therefore be banned from using the ICSID arbitration mechanism.””°

L Fork in the Road — Treaty Claims

213. Moreover the contractual jurisdiction clause, which has given rise to the proceedings
before the Conseil d’Etat, cannot exclude the jurisdiction of the Tribunal for claims based upon
Articles 2, 3 and 4 of the Treaty (see, e.g. Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v.
Kingdom of Morocco;"’ SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of

Pakistan.” As the ad hoc Committee in Vivendi v. Argentina has stated clearly:

Where “the fundamental basis of the claim” is a Treaty laying
down an independent standard by which the conduct of the parties
is to be judged, the existence of an exclusive jurisdiction clause in
a contract between the claimant and the respondent state or its
subdivisions cannot operate as a bar to the application of the
Treaty standard. At most, it might be relevant - as municipal law
will often be relevant - in assessing whether there has been a
breach of the Treaty.”

214, The contractual jurisdiction clause and the Treaty jurisdiction clause are not mutually
exclusive clauses. The contractual jurisdiction clause provided for in the Contract applies to
actions and matters that are violations of the Contract; the Treaty jurisdiction clause applies to

actions and matters that constitute violations of the substantive Treaty provisions even if the

© Genin Eastern Credit Ltd. and AS Baltoil v. Republic of Estonia (Award), 2001, 6 ICSID Rep 236, 292.
7 ICSID case no. ARB/00/04, Decision dated 23 July 2001, para. 27.
78 ICSID case no. ARB/01/13, Decision dated August 6, 2003 on jurisdiction, para. 54.
” ICSID case no. ARB/97/3, Decision dated July 3, 2002, para. 101...
Page 61 of 65

same actions and matters may give rise to breach of contract.*° It must also be noted that
contractual claims founded on the investment contract do not have the same cause of action as

the Treaty claims.

215. When the State acts in the context of the performance of the contract as a “puissance
publique,” a violation of the Contract would also constitute a violation of the Treaty, and the
Tribunal will have jurisdiction for disputes arising from such violations. When the State acts as
an ordinary employer, the contractual jurisdiction clause will be fully operative, and the Tribunal

will have no jurisdiction.

216. In SGS v. Pakistan, the Tribunal, having examined the effect of a dispute resolution

clause, stated:

from that description alone [of the factual subject matter], without
more, we believe that no implication necessarily arises that both
BIT and purely contractual claims are intended to be covered by
the Contracting Parties in Article 9 [the dispute resolution clause].
Neither, accordingly, does an implication arise that the Article 9
dispute settlement mechanism would supersede and set at naught
all otherwise valid non-ICSID forum selection clauses in all
earlier agreements [...] thus we do not see anything in Article 9 or
in any other provision of the BIT that can be read as vesting this
Tribunal with jurisdiction over claims resting ex hypothesi
exclusively on contract.*!

217. Based on the foregoing, it can be said that the Contract’s jurisdiction clause does not
affect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over Treaty claims since the Contract’s jurisdiction clause

covers only contractual matters and does not extend to Treaty matters. In the presence of a

® Ibrahim Fadlallah comments in “La distinction « Treaty claims — contract claims » et la compétence de l'arbitre
Cirdi: faisons nous fausse route ? », Chronique Arbitrage et Investissements Internationaux — Gazette du Palais,
December 5 to 7, 2004, p. 3612, ef seq.,as follows:

« I-La concurrence d'une clause attributive de juridiction dans le contrat :

Lorsque le contrat prévoit une clause attributive de juridiction a un arbitre étranger au Cirdi ou aux tribunaux
étatiques, la jurisprudence dominante donne effet a cette clause au détriment de larbitre Cirdi. Mais elle
limite la compétence du juge désigné aux litiges purement contractuels ».

It is in that sense that the Tribunal gave in Joy Mining Machinery v. Egypt ICSID ARB/03/11) full effect to the
contractual jurisdiction clause for a dispute concerning an ordinary contractual obligation (performance bond) when
there is no violation of the Treaty.

SUICSID case no. ARB/O1/13, Decision dated August 6, 2003 on jurisdiction, para no. 161.
Page 62 of 65

contractual jurisdiction clause, the Tribunal will not have jurisdiction with respect to claims for
actions that are only contract violations and are not at the same time Treaty violations. However,
when such actions are breaches of the contract and also violations of the Treaty, the Tribunal will

have jurisdiction notwithstanding the Contract’s jurisdiction clause.

J. Stay of Proceedings.

Lebanon's Position

218. Lebanon finally has argued — with reference to SGS v. Philippines, that the Tribunal
should in all events stay its proceedings to allow the Conseil d’Etat, the jurisdiction chosen in the

Contract, to decide on disputes about the breaches of contract.
Toto’s Position

219. Toto requested the Tribunal not to stay the proceedings as these proceedings concern

breaches of the Treaty and not of the Contract.
Tribunal’s Decision

220. The Tribunal deems it improper to stay its proceedings, which only concern breaches of
the Treaty. It has indicated that it will not deal with the specific facts underlying the two claims
submitted before the Conseil d’Etat. Besides, as no other contractual claims have presently been
introduced, the settlement of these claims, if ever introduced before the Conseil d’Etat, could
take a substantial period of time. Even for mere reasons of expediency, the Tribunal cannot
suspend its proceedings for such a substantial period waiting for judgments which, although
indirectly related to some facts which are also the basis of Treaty claims before this Tribunal,
have a completely different scope and cause of action. In the event the Lebanese Conseil d’Etat
will have to decide on the contract claims at a later moment, the Tribunal expects that the
Conseil d’Etat will take into account this Tribunal’s decision with regard to the Treaty claims,

whenever this would be appropriate.

Page 63 of 65

Vv. DECISION

IN VIEW OF THE ABOVE, THE TRIBUNAL HEREBY DECIDES AS FOLLOWS:

1) The Conseil Exécutif des Grands Projets and the Council for Reconstruction and

Development are public legal entities whose actions are attributable to the

Republic of Lebanon;

2) Toto’s project meets the requirements to be considered as an “investment” under

the Treaty as well as under the ICSID Convention;

3) The Tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute ratione temporis under Article 7.2.b

and Article 10 of the Treaty as the dispute has arisen on June 30, 2004, i.e., after

the Treaty entered into force;

4) The Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide the dispute pursuant to the ICSID

Convention, the ICSID Arbitration Rules and the Treaty rules;

5) Subject to the Tribunal’s considerations, stated above, the Tribunal has

jurisdiction to decide whether (i) the delay in expropriation, (ii) the failure to

remove Syrian troops and (iii) the changes in the regulatory framework, constitute

breaches of Article 2 and/or Article 3.1 of the Treaty;

6) The Tribunal has no jurisdiction with respect to the following claims:
a) Erroneous Instructions and Design as breaches of Article 2 and Article 3.1
of the Treaty;

b) Disruption of negotiations as breach of Article 3.1 of the Treaty;

c) Delays in two law suits before the Conseil d'Etat as breach of Article 3.1

of the Treaty;

d) Lack of Transparency in the proceedings before the Conseil d’Etat as

breach of Article 3.1 of the Treaty; and

Page 64 of 65

e) Indirect expropriation as breach of Article 4.2 of the Treaty.

7) With regard to Article 9.2 of the Treaty, and in the presence of a jurisdiction
clause in the Contract, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction with respect to breaches to
the extent they are violations of the Contract;

8) The Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide over breaches of Articles 2, 3 and 4 of the
Treaty, its jurisdiction thereover not being affected by Article 7.2 of the Treaty;
and

9) The Tribunal deems it improper to stay the proceedings because of the
proceedings already pending before the Conseil d’Etat as the Tribunal will not
deal with matters covered by these proceedings.

10) The decision of the Tribunal with respect to the party who will bear the legal costs
and the costs and expenses of the arbitration, and in what proportion, will be
included in the final award.

[signed] [signed]

Arbitrator Arbitrator

[September 7, 2009] [September 5, 2009]

Date:

Date:

By signature of this decision Mr. Alberto Feliciani
confirms that he voted in favor of Chapters I,II,
IH, and TV (limited to A,B,C,H,1J) while he
dissents in several respects on the other parts of

the decision.

[signed]

Prof. Hans van Houtte
President

[September 8, 2009]
Date:

Page 65 of 65

