Date of dispatch to the parties:
April 29, 1999

AWARD

in the Arbitration ARB/94/2 of the

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID)

Tradex Hellas S.A. (Greece)

represented by Mr. E. Koronis
Counsel: Prof. L. Georgakopoulos

vs.
Republic of Albania

represented by the
Ministry of Agriculture and Food
which was represented
by Ms. Rezarta Gaba
by Mr. Sali Metani
and by Ms. Julinda Hajno

Counsel: Prof. James Crawford
Mr. Philippe Sands

by the Arbitral Tribunal
consisting of
Prof. Dr. Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel, President
Mr. Fred F Fielding, Esquire, Arbitrator
Prof. Andrea Giardina, Arbitrator

Date of Award:

197

198 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abbreviations used page iii
Paragraph
A. Introduction 1
B. Procedure 5
1. Procedure Leading to Decision on Jurisdiction 5
2. Procedure Leading to Award on Merits 18
3. Decision on Documents Submitted by Tradex with
Letter of 4 December 1998 45
4. Declaration of Closure of Proceeding (Rule 38)47
C. Relief Sought 50
D. Summary of Facts and Contentions 52
E. Legal Scope of Decision on Merits, Applicable Law 67
F__ Reasons for the Decisions 73
1. Burden of Proof 73
2. Rules of Evidence 76
3. Major Disputed Conditions for the Claim 85
a) “Foreign Investment” 86
b) Expropriation 91
c)  Illegality or Wrongfulness 94
d) Compensation 100
4. Foreign Investment by Tradex 101
a) Investment by Tradex 103
b) Broad Interpretation of “Foreign Investment” 105
c) Relevance of Financial Sources of Such Foreign
Investment 108
d) Factual Considerations Investment 112
e) Legal Considerations—Investment 126
5. Expropriation 132
a) Preliminary Observations 132
b) Privatization Process prior to August 1992 138
c) Decision No. 364 of 22 August 1992 142
d) Alleged Invasion August/September 1992 146
e) Decision 452 of 17 October 1992 149
f) Berisha Speech of 27 October 1992 155
g) Alleged Occupation October/November 1992 158
h) Alleged Occupation and Destruction of Crops
by Animals on 4 December 1992 166

i) Alleged Occupation by Villagers in December 1992 171

CASES

j) Dissolution of the Joint Venture in April 1993

k) Issuance of Titles to Mr. Pellumbi and Others

1) Decisions and Measures after the Dissolution
Agreementof 21 April 1992

m) Combined Evaluation of the Decisions and
Events as Expropriation

n) General Conclusion

6. Costs of the Proceedings
G. Decisions

199

176
184

187

191
204
206
208

200

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

ABBREVIATIONS USED

For the many references made in this Award to the file of the Case, for
convenience and shortness the Tribunal will use the following abbrevia-

tions:

Art.

Al

All

AU

ATExh. 1 seq.
ATI Exh. 1 seq.
H I-III

J

TI

TI

T Ill

TIV

TV

T 1 seq.

Tr

Article of 1993 Law

Albania’s Counter Memorial of 28.12.97
Albania’s Rejoinder of 2.3.98

Albania’s Post-Hearing Memorandum of 8.12.98
Exhibits submitted by Albania with A I
Exhibits submitted by Albania with A IT
Handouts by Parties at the Hearing

Decision on Juristiction 24.12.96

Tradex’ Request for Arbitration of 17.10.94
Tradex’ Memorandum of 8.7.98

Tradex’ 2nd Memorandum of 27.1.98

Tradex’ 3rd Memorandum of 25.6.98

Tradex’ Post-Hearing Memorandum of 4.12.98
Exhibits submitted by Tradex

Transcript of Final Hearing

CASES 201

A. Introduction

1. The Claimant, “Tradex Hellas S.A.”, is a corporation established in
and according to the laws of Greece, with its head office in Thessaloniki,
Greece, and is referred to hereafter as “Tradex”.

2. The Respondent is the Republic of Albania, duly represented by its
Government in Tirana, Albania, and is referred to hereafter as “Albania”.

3. After the Tribunal provisionally accepted to have jurisdiction in this
case by the terms of its Decision dated 24 December 1996, and after the
procedure then continued on the merits, this is now the Award in this case.

4. This Award contains the declaration of closure of the proceeding
according to Rule 38 (the term “Rule” is used to refer to the ICSID Arbi-
tration Rules) as well as the award on the merits according to Rule 47.
Therefore, any references to the file of the case, by using the abbreviations
or otherwise, are not meant to be exhaustive. The Tribunal has taken into
account all pleadings, documents and testimony in this case insofar as it
considered them relevant.

B. Procedure
1. Procedure Leading to Decision on Jurisdiction

5. On 2 November 1994, the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID) received from Tradex a Request for Arbitra-
tion against Albania. The Request asserted a claim for compensation for
an alleged expropriation in Albania. Details of the Request and the Claim
are described in a later section of this Award.

6. In the absence of agreement upon the number of arbitrators and the
method of their appointment more than 60 days after the registration of
the Request, Tradex chose the formula provided for in Art. 37 (2) (b) of
the ICSID Convention, i.e. a tribunal consisting of three arbitrators, one
appointed by Tradex, one appointed by the Republic of Albania and the
third, who would be the President of the Tribunal, appointed by agree-
ment of the Parties. By letter dated 6 June 1995, Tradex appointed as arbi-
trator in this case Fred F. Fielding, Esquire, a US national. Mr. Fielding
subsequently accepted his appointment.

202 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

7. Though ICSID in various ways communicated the Request for Arbi-
tration and subsequent correspondence to Albania, no appointment of the
second arbitrator was received from Albania, and no agreement was reached
between the Parties with respect to the appointment of the third arbitrator.
As Art. 38 of the ICSID Convention and Art. 4 of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules provide that, if the tribunal has not been constituted within 90 days
after the notice of registration of the Arbitration Request, the Chairman of
the ICSID Administrative Council shall, at the request of either party and
after consulting both parties as far as possible, appoint the arbitrator(s) not
yet appointed and designate an arbitrator to be President of the tribunal,
Tradex requested ICSID to appoint the other two arbitrators.

8. In December 1995, after notifying the Parties, the Chairman of the
Administrative Council of ICSID appointed Prof. Andrea Giardina, an
Italian citizen, as the second arbitrator and Prof. Dr. Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel,
a German citizen, as the third arbitrator and President of the tribunal.
Both accepted the appointment.

9. By a decision of 26 December 1995, the Council of Ministers of
Albania accepted the appointments of Prof. Giardina and Prof. Béckstie-
gel as arbitrators and charged the Ministry of Agriculture and Food with
representing the Republic of Albania in the proceedings.

10. The Tribunal scheduled a first session with the Parties for 27 Feb-
ruary 1996, in Washington. After consultation with the Parties and with
their agreement, the session in Washington was cancelled and instead the
first session of the Tribunal with the Parties was scheduled to take place
in Frankfurt (Germany) on 10 April 1996.

11. At that session, in addition to other procedural details discussed
and agreed, it was agreed that subsequent meetings of the Tribunal with
the Parties would take place in London. Also at the session, counsel for
Albania confirmed that Albania would shortly be sending to the Centre
written objections to jurisdiction in accordance with Arbitration Rule
41(1). Counsel for Albania gave a summary presentation of the grounds
on which such objections would be based. Counsel for Tradex responded.
Thereafter the proceedings on the merits were suspended in accordance
with Arbitration Rule 41(3). Dates for written submissions by the Parties
were agreed upon and it was also provisionally agreed that an oral hearing
on jurisdiction would take place in London on 10 September 1996.

CASES 203

12. After the session in Frankfurt, written submissions by Albania were
received dated 15 April 1996, 10 June 1996, and 9 August 1996, and
written submissions by Tradex were received dated 31 May 1996 and 30
July 1996.

13. At the Hearing in London on 10 September 1996, after an intro-
duction by the President of the Tribunal regarding procedural matters,
both Parties made presentations regarding jurisdiction, responded to the
other Party’s presentation in several rounds and answered questions by
members of the Tribunal regarding certain factual or legal aspects related
to jurisdiction. Also during the Hearing, Tradex asked whether Albania,
in view of its objections to ICSID jurisdiction, was ready to accept this
case under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules as provided for in the
Albanian Investment Protection Law of 1992. Counsel for Albania
responded that they were not authorized to express any commitment of
Albania regarding submission to UNCITRAL arbitration.

14. By a letter dated 25 September 1996 addressed to Albania repre-
sented by the Minister for Agriculture and Food, Counsel for Tradex
asked for a binding answer by Albania regarding acceptance of UNCITRAL
arbitration in this controversy and added that, if no answer was received
within 30 days, he would interpret this to the effect that Albania “has not
preferred the arbitration of UNCITRAL”.

15. By a letter dated 8 November 1996 to ICSID, Counsel for Tradex
confirmed that no answer had been received from Albania.

16. On5 December 1996, ICSID provided the Tribunal with a copy it
had received of a letter dated 2 December 1996 from Counsel for Albania
to Counsel for Tradex containing the following wording:

“T am instructed by the Minister to respond to your letter of
25 September 1996.

As indicated during the hearing held in London on 10 Sep-
tember 1996, the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of
Albania considers that the dispute settlement rules applicable
to the facts raised in Tradex’ Request for ICSID arbitration, if
any, are those set forth in Law No. 7594 of 4 August 1992.

Article 15 of the 1992 Law is therefore applicable. It provides

204 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

for UNCITRAL arbitration and sets forth certain conditions
and exclusions for such arbitration to be effective. Whether
those conditions or exclusions have been satisfied or are
applicable in respect of the matter brought by Tradex to
ICSID raises questions of fact and law which would need to
be considered further by the Ministry of Agriculture and
eventually by any arbitral Tribunal that might be constituted
pursuant to the 1992 Law. In the first place it will be a matter
for Tradex whether to decide to make an application for arbi-
tration under UNCITRAL rules in reliance of the 1992
Law.”

17. Thereafter, having deliberated by correspondence and in a meeting
in New York on 14 November 1996, the Tribunal issued its Decision on
Jurisdiction dated 24 December 1996 as follows:

“1. The Tribunal has jurisdiction subject to the following:
The issue as to whether or not an “expropriation” has
been shown as required by the 1993 Law is joined to the
merits of this case.

2. After consultation with both Parties a procedural order
will be issued regarding the further procedure.”

2. Procedure Leading to Award on Merits

18. By a Procedural Order of 21 January 1997 the Tribunal informed
the Parties of its intention regarding the further procedure on the merits,
in particular regarding a possible schedule and the format and length of
the Hearing, and asked for any comments from the Parties.

19. Having received such comments from Tradex and Albania by letters
of 23 and 30 January 1997 respectively, the Tribunal then, by its Proce-
dural Order of 7 February 1997, set a schedule for further filings by the
Parties leading to a Final Hearing to be held from 29 September to 2
October 1997.

20. When Albania submitted a request for postponement dated 12
March 1997, and after Tradex had submitted its comments dated 26
March 1997, the Tribunal, by its Procedural Order of 7 April 1997, set a

CASES 205

new schedule postponing the time limits for the Parties’ submissions by 3
months, indicating at the same time that new dates for a Hearing would
be set at a later stage after consultation with the Parties.

21. On 8 September 1997, Albania submitted a request for a further
postponement on which Tradex submitted its comments dated 10 Septem-
ber 1997. Taking these into account, the Tribunal, by its Procedural Order
of 16 September 1997, set a new time schedule for filings from the Parties
and suggested 28 April to 1 May 1998 as the new Hearing dates, subject
to comments from the Parties.

22. With the agreement of the Parties, the Tribunal then, by its Proce-
dural Order of 22 September 1997, confirmed these dates for the Hearing
to be held in London.

23. After receiving Albania’s Counter Memorial of 28 December 1997
and letters from Tradex of 8 and 9 January 1998 respectively, the Tribunal,
by its Procedural Order of 9 January 1998, confirmed that, as expressly
indicated in its previous Procedural Orders, the filings of both Parties were
to deal with “all aspects of the merits” and the Final Hearing would deal
with “all factual and legal aspects of the case”, including the quantum of
damages.

24. By its Procedural Order of 20 March 1998, the Tribunal, in confor-
mity with its earlier Procedural Orders, provided the Parties with further
details regarding the logistics and format of the Hearing and ruled on cer-
tain procedural requests that the Parties had submitted.

25. After some further submissions from the Parties regarding, in par-
ticular, the admissibility of certain witness testimony and arguments and
evidence on the quantum of damages, the Tribunal, by its Procedural
Orders of 13 and 16 April 1998, ruled on the respective objections and
decided that the Hearing should not be postponed.

26. Having been informed by the Parties that visas to enter the United
Kingdom for the purpose of giving evidence at the Hearing had not been
granted to the Parties’ witnesses of Albanian nationality, with the agree-
ment of both Parties, the Tribunal, by its Procedural Order of 23 April
1998, postponed the Hearing to dates to be established later after contact
with the Parties.

206 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

27. In consultations between the Tribunal and the Parties, it became
clear that the period of 5 to 8 October 1998 provided the earliest set of
dates when all members of the Tribunal and the representatives and wit-
nesses of the Parties would be available for a Hearing. Accordingly, by its
Procedural Order of 6 May 1998, the Tribunal rescheduled the Hearing to
those dates. By the same Order, the Tribunal ruled that, in view of the late
submission of certain arguments and evidence on the quantum of damages
by Albania, Tradex was authorized to file a final submission on damages by
30 June 1998.

28. Responding to submissions by the Parties of 9 and 13 July 1998
respectively, the Tribunal, by its Procedural Order of 14 July 1998 ruled
that it would only consider the final submission by Tradex insofar as it
dealt with damages and that the Tribunal, in addition to the 4 days previ-
ously foreseen for the Hearing, would be available for a Sth day, should
that become necessary.

29. The Tribunal’s Procedural Order of 21 September 1998, in confor-
mity with previous Orders, provided the Parties with some additional
details regarding the logistics and format of the Hearing.

30. The Hearing was held in London at the seat of the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). It started in the morning
of 5 October 1998 and was concluded on 8 October 1998 after the Parties
had made their final oral presentations and it was agreed that the addi-
tional time reserved as a precaution for the Hearing was not needed.

31. A transcript was made of the Hearing which records the following as
attending:

Tribunal Members
1. Professor Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, President
2. Fred E Fielding, Esquire
3. Professor Andrea Giardina
Secretary of the Tribunal
4. Mrs. Margrete L. Stevens
Tradex Hellas S.A.
5. Professor L. Georgakopoulos

CASES

eon

10.

207

Mr. E. Spinelis

Mr. C. Azas

Mr. S. Hadjigeorgiou
Mr. D. Stergioulas
Mr. S. Lapardhaja

Republic of Albania

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

Ms Rezarta Gaba

Mr. Fatos Gjini

Mr. Ardian Takaci
Mr. Arden Pata

Mr. James Crawford
Mr. Philippe Sands
Ms Ruth Mackenzie
Mr. Edward Helgesen
Mr. Anthony Nannini
Mr. Stephen Hodgson
Mr. Elez Lohja

Mr. Mark Ndoci

Mr. Nikolin Ujka

Mr. Frank Alexander
Professor Saul Estrin

Interpreters
Dr. Z. Tofallis, Greek Interpreter
Mr. Gezim Guri, Albanian Interpreter

32. The following Agenda had been indicated in previous Procedural
Orders to the Parties and was implemented at the Hearing:

NAWRYNE

Introduction by the President of the Tribunal
First Round Presentation by Tradex

First Round Presentation by Albania
Questions by Arbitrators

Rebuttal Presentation by Tradex

Rebuttal Presentation by Albania

Further Questions by Arbitrators

33. In his introduction, the President of the Tribunal recalled again the
major rulings regarding the Hearing which had been included in previous

208 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Procedural Orders of the Tribunal starting with the Order of 21 January
1997. In particular, he reminded the Parties that both Parties would be
given equal periods of time for their first round and rebuttal presentations
and that each Party would be free to determine how much of its time it
would spend on the presentation of evidence, including witnesses and
experts, on arguments, and on cross-examination of witnesses and experts
presented by the other Party.

34. There was some discussion on preliminary procedural matters (see
Tr 7 seq.; Tr 17 and Handout H I Tradex). In particular as a preliminary
matter, Tradex requested not to admit the testimony of witnesses Ujka and
Ndoci because, as Tradex alleged, these testimonies were partly based on
forged documents and partly contradicted by their own documents to the
effect that their admission would be “contrary to the principles of fair
trial”. Albania objected. The Tribunal, after a short internal deliberation,
ruled that all witnesses should be heard including the two objected to by
Tradex, and that the points raised by Tradex in this context could be raised
in cross-examination of the witnesses which would be taken into account
by the Tribunal in evaluating the evidence.

35. During the same preliminary procedural discussion (Tr 9 + 10),
Albania withdrew objections it had earlier raised to the admissibility of
certain documents filed by Tradex with its last submission. On that basis,
with the consent of both Parties, the President stated that all documents
submitted up to now, including their English translations, were ruled to
be admissible.

36. The Parties then made their presentations as provided in the
Agenda using the time available to them at their discretion for factual and
legal arguments and for examination and cross-examination of witnesses.
During the two rounds of presentations the following witnesses and expert
witnesses were examined by the presenting Party, cross-examined by the
other Party and questioned by members of the Tribunal:

Witnesses presented by Tradex:
Mr. C. Azas
Mr. S. Lapardhaja
Mr. D. Stergioulas
Mr. S. Hadjigeorgiou

CASES 209

Witnesses presented by Albania:
Mr. M. Ndoci
Mr. N. Ujka
Mr. E. Lohja
Mr. FE Alexander
Prof. S. Estrin

37. The Hearing was concluded by final questions by members of the
Tribunal and final remarks by the President of the Tribunal including the
rulings mentioned hereafter.

38. Regarding the details of the Hearing, which cannot be repeated in
this Award, reference is made to the transcript of the Hearing. However,
specific aspects of the Hearing which the Tribunal considers as of major
relevance in coming to its decision, will to some extent be mentioned in
the Section “Summary of Major Facts and Contentions” and to some
extent in the Section “Reasons for the Decision” in this Award.

39. At the end of the Hearing, after consultation with the Parties, the
Tribunal ruled that

— the transcript, when available, would be transmitted by
the ICSID Secretariat simultaneously to the Parties and
the members of the Tribunal,

— the Parties had 4 weeks after receiving the transcript to
file Post-Hearing Memoranda with their final comments
on the results of the Hearing and any errata in the tran-
script, but that no new documents could be submitted at
that stage.

40. In concluding the Hearing, the President expressed the gratitude of
the Tribunal to the representatives of the Parties for their professional par-
ticipation in the Hearing and to Mrs. Stevens of the ICSID Secretariat for
the efficient administrative support.

41. By letter of 6 November 1998, the ICSID Secretariat distributed
the transcript of the Hearing to the Parties and the members of the Tribu-
nal, indicating that, in accordance with the ruling of the Tribunal, the

210 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Post-Hearing Memoranda by the Parties were due at the latest by 9
December 1998.

42. Within that time limit, the Memoranda were submitted by Tradex
dated 4 December 1998 and by Albania dated 8 December 1998.

43. Furthermore, with an additional letter of 4 December 1998, Tradex
submitted 11 attachments containing correspondence in the period
between 10 March and 11 June 1997 as evidence “that negotiations took
place towards settlement”. Albania objected to this submission by letter of
18 December 1998 and, by Procedural Order of 21 December 1998, the
Tribunal ruled the submission to be inadmissible in view of its express ear-
lier ruling that no new documents could be submitted by the Parties at
this stage. This ruling is confirmed with reasons, in the next subsequent
Section of this Award.

44. Thereafter, the Tribunal entered into deliberations by written com-
munications and meeting in person in Bergisch-Gladbach (Germany) on
20 and 21 January 1999 which results in this Award.

3. Decision on Documents Submitted by Tradex with Letter
of 4 December 1998

45. Procedural Orders preceding the Final Hearing had expressly ruled
that no new documents could be submitted by the Parties at the Hearing.
At the Hearing, in his introduction, the President of the Tribunal had
recalled this, and at the end of the Hearing, without any objection from
the Parties, the Tribunal had ruled expressly, as reflected in the Transcript,
that, also with the Post-Hearing Memoranda, “no new documents and no
new evidence can be submitted”.

46. Therefore, the Tribunal decides that the documents submitted with
Tradex’ letter of 4 December 1998 are not admissible. But in order to indi-
cate that this procedural decision is without relevance for the outcome of the
case on the merits, the Tribunal subsidiarily adds that, in any case, these
documents would not have changed its reasoning or decision on the merits.

4. Declaration of Closure of Proceeding (Rule 38)

47. ICSID Arbitration Rule 38 requires that, when the presentation of

CASES 211

the case by the Parties is completed, the proceeding shall be declared
closed.

48. After reviewing the presentations by the Parties up to and including
the Post-Hearing-Memoranda, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that
there is no request by a Party nor any reason to reopen the proceeding, as
is possible under paragraph (2) of Rule 38.

49. Therefore, by Order dated 2 March1999, the proceeding was
declared closed according to paragraph (1) of Rule 38.

C. Relief Sought

50. Based on its Request of Arbitration of 17 October 1994 and as
updated by its final submission, its Post-Hearing Memorandum of 4
December 1998, Tradex requests that Albania be obliged and condemned
to pay:

US.$
“a. Fair Market value as of 01.01.1993
per our Request for Arbitration: 2.200.000
Less:
Machinery & equipment returned on
Liquidation of the J.V.
(attachment 20 of Request): (352.187)
Net Fair Market Value of
TRADEX share to T.& TJ.V. 1.847.813
b. Interest as per para 23 hereabove: 824.013
c. Arbitration fees: 107.000
d. Legal, Valuation and other
consulting fees and services: 246.255
e. Travel, typing, printing,
translations and other expenses: 81.993
Total 3.107.074”

51. After Albania had first raised objections to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal, on which the Tribunal decided by its Decision on Jurisdiction of
24 December 1996, in its final submission, its Post-Hearing Memoran-

212 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

dum of 8 December 1998, Albania requests the Tribunal to adjudge and
declare:

“— that Tradex has shown no prima facie act of expropriation
attributable to the Albania, and that accordingly Albania
has not under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention
and Law No. 7764 of 2 November 1993 expressed its
consent for the matters raised by Tradex in its Request
for arbitration dated 17th October 1994 to be subject to
ICSID jurisdiction, and that the Tribunal does not have
jurisdiction to entertain the claim;

— further or alternatively, that no act of expropriation has
occurred or is attributable to Albania within the meaning
of Article 4 of Law No. 7764 of 2 November 1993;

— that the Request by Tradex be dismissed; and

— that Tradex and its shareholders be required to pay Alba-
nia’s costs in this matter and the costs of the Arbitral Tri-
bunal.”

D. Summary of Facts and Contentions

52. Hereafter, the Tribunal will give a short summary of major facts
and contentions in this case insofar as it is considered appropriate in the
context of the decision given in this Award. Regarding further details, ref-
erence is made to the many and voluminous written briefs and docu-
ments submitted by the Parties as well as to the oral presentations by the
Parties and witnesses, as recorded in the transcript of the final Hearing
and the documents submitted with these oral presentations. Further
details will be taken up in the later Section “Reasons for the Decision” in
this Award.

53. Tradex entered into negotiations in 1991 with Albania in order to
undertake an engineering, industrial, and agricultural investment in Alba-
nia. Negotiations were completed and Albania appointed a state-owned
company, “T.B. Torovitsa”, to enter into a joint venture with Tradex for
realizing the investment on the basis of a proportional participation of 67
to 33. The land would be contributed by T.B. Torovitsa for the use of the
joint venture.

CASES 213

54. On 10 January 1992, Tradex and T.B. Torovitsa signed an agree-
ment (“the Agreement”) which established a joint venture between them.
T.B. Torovitsa was the owner of 1170 ha farmland in T.B. Torovitsa,
Lezha, Albania, and the object of the joint venture was the commercial
and agricultural use of this land connected with “the development of the
agricultural engineering, the cultivation of agricultural plants/crops, fruits
and vegetables in the fields, development of stock raising/animal products,
and the necessary activities pertaining to the processing of milk, meat, and
any activities relative to the land and to products yielded by it for the
domestic market or exportation” (Art. 2 of the Agreement). The invest-
ment was planned for a duration of 10 years, renewable by common agree-
ment for another period of 10 years.

55. On 21 January 1992, the Agreement was approved by an act of the
Albanian Ministry of Foreign Economic Affairs called Authorization No.
26. The registrations of the joint venture with competent courts and
administrative authorities were completed by 7 March 1992.

56. Upon the authorization and the completion of formalities concern-
ing the establishment of the joint venture, Tradex commenced the invest-
ment according to schedules contained in the Agreement in order to use
the farm during the first crop raising period in spring and summer 1992.
The investment included various payments totalling US $ 786,343. T.B.
Torovitsa contributed further payments and the capital thus established
was used to finance the cattle production, the field cultivation, and the
payment of 700 personnel.

57. Tradex claims that, in particular, the following measures made the
development of the joint venture impossible and left the participation and
investment in the joint venture valueless, so that these acts must be con-
sidered as acts of expropriation:

a) On 22 August 1992, a most significant part of the farm was for-
mally expropriated and transferred to villagers by Albania,
namely 140 ha amounting to 15 % of the total farm and its
most fertile area.

b) Crop production, cattle, and seed supplies were stolen by the
villagers at an almost steady rate of 15 % between March and
October 1992 and work of the management of the joint ven-

214 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

ture was often impossible because of threats and acts of vio-
lence.

c) Beginning December 1992, the entry of Tradex’ personnel to
the farm was made completely impossible because of the seizure
and occupation of the farm by villagers.

d) By letters in late 1992 and early 1993, Tradex requested in vain
the intervention by Albania as a last effort to save the invest-
ment, but Tradex was obliged to hand over the 140 ha men-
tioned together with cultivations, cattle, and supplies.

58. Under the circumstances, Tradex and T.B. Torovitsa found it nec-
essary to dissolve the joint venture; the dissolution was agreed on 21
April 1993 “as of 30.4.1993”. The Minutes of the Liquidators’ Meeting
on 2 March 1994 resolved “that the liquidation was completed on
16.12.1993.”

59. Further details and the various incidents that, according to Tradex,
must be considered to be expropriations either each by itself or at least in
their combination, will be taken up in the subsequent Section “Reasons
for the Decision” in this Award.

60. Inits Request for Arbitration of 17 October 1994, Tradex evaluated
the market value of its investment according to recognized valuation
methods and experience to US $ 2,2 Mill., less US $ 176,093 which repre-
sented the value of the machinery and equipment returned to Tradex as
their share of the liquidation process. Thus, it estimated the net market
value of its loss at US $ 2,023,907 while it estimated its “real damages” to
be much higher. On that basis, Tradex requested first that Albania be
obliged and condemned to pay:

a) the market value of Tradex’s expropriated investment amount-
ing to US $ 2,023,907;

b) interest on that amount mentioned at current banking interest
rate, from December 1, 1992, until payment, and

c) fees and legal expenses of Tradex, to be calculated later.

61. In its final submission, the Post-Hearing-Memorandum of 4 Decem-
ber 1998, Tradex updated the calculation of its claim, introducing new fig-

CASES 215

ures regarding the machinery and equipment returned on liquidation of the
joint venture and regarding interest. Thus, Tradex now formulates its claim
as identified in Section C. (Relief sought) above of this Award.

62. Albania, in a first stage of the proceeding, objected to the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal invoking particularly five arguments which were considered
by the Tribunal in the separate procedure and its Decision on Jurisdiction of
24 December 1996 mentioned in Section B. of this Award. As mentioned
there, the Tribunal decided that it had jurisdiction in this case subject to the
reservation that the issue as to whether or not an “expropriation” had been
shown as required by the 1993 Law was joined to the merits.

63. Now, regarding this issue of jurisdiction joined to the merits and
regarding the merits themselves, Albania requests the Tribunal to adjudge
and declare as identified above in Section C. (Relief Sought) of this
Award.

64. Albania submits that the facts as presented by Tradex do not sup-
port Tradex’s claim and are, by themselves, sufficient to support its own
request as cited above. Furthermore, regarding the factual background,
Albania, in particular, points out the following additional aspects: Under
Albanian law, T.B. Torovitsa is a separate legal entity with full capacity to
sue and be sued. The capital provided by Tradex comprised machinery,
chemicals, seeds, and irrigation investments while the capital provided by
TB. Torovitsa comprised buildings, machinery, life stock, and finished
products as well as other assets. None of the joint venture’s capital com-
prised land. The 1992 Agreement noted that T.B. Torovitsa was the owner
of 1170 ha of land, that the area of land would not change “during the
term of the agreement”, and that the joint venture “shall respect the sup-
plementary needs which will be created for the land” (Art. 15). In particu-
lar, Albania refers to Art. 16 of the Agreement which provides that
disputes between the Parties shall be resolved by arbitration of the Interna-
tional Chamber of Commerce and that Swiss law shall be applicable. Fur-
thermore, Albania points out that the authorization for the joint venture
dated 21 January 1992 expressly provided that the joint venture should
conform with Albanian legislation concerning land.

65. As far as the liquidation of the joint venture is concerned, Albania
indicates that the Dissolution Agreement dated 21 April 1993, led to the
dissolution completed on 16 December 1993 according to the liquidators’

216 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

report. At the state of liquidation, the liquidators’ report valued the joint
venture’s net worth at Leke 6,175,599.05 to be distributed in the propor-
tions 67 % to Tradex and 33 % to T.B. Torovitsa in accordance with Art. 5
of the 1992 Agreement. The liquidators’ report proposed that Tradex
receive a total of Leke 20,842,420 comprising Leke 8,804,675 in fixed
assets and Leke 12,037,745 to be paid by T.B. Torovitsa in installments on
the basis of the progress in the liquidation and not later than 31 December
1994. A final partners’ meeting was held on 2 March 1994 which resolved
to approve the balance sheets drawn up by the liquidators and approved
the distribution of the net worth of the joint venture in accordance with
the liquidators’ report. Tradex did not reserve its rights against T.B. Toro-
vitsa or Albania at that final meeting.

66. The Tribunal will deal with further contentions by both Parties later
in this Award in the context of its reasons insofar as it considers such con-
tentions relevant.

E. Legal Scope of Decision on Merits, Applicable Law

67. Before the Tribunal can enter into evaluating the facts and conten-
tions of the Parties in this case for its decision on the merits, it seems
appropriate to identify the legal framework in which the relevance of the
factual aspects can and must be considered.

68. An important limitation of this framework is that, in its Decision
on Jurisdiction of 24 December 1996, the Tribunal found that it only had
jurisdiction on the basis of the Albanian Law No. 7764 of 2 November
1993 on Foreign Investments (the 1993 Law).

69. Therefore, in its consideration of the merits, the Tribunal is pre-
vented from examining the claim on any other possible legal basis such as
any other of the various investment laws issued in Albania, the Bilateral
Investment Treaty between Albania and Greece, as well as other sources of
international law. Although court and arbitral decisions and legal writings
dealing with such other sources may be of relevance in interpreting the
1993 Law, it is this 1993 Law which the Tribunal will examine as to
whether Tradex’ claim is justified on the merits. This is in conformity with
Art. 42 (1) of the ICSID Convention according to which “the Tribunal
shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute (including

CASES 217

its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international law as may
be applicable”. Accordingly, the Tribunal will make use of sources of inter-
national law insofar as that seems appropriate for the interpretation of
terms used in the 1993 Law, such as “expropriation”. In this context, it
should be noted that, though the authentic version of the 1993 Law only
exists in the Albanian language, both Parties have used the English transla-
tion of that Law in these proceedings and it has not been claimed that this
translation is not a true reflection of the 1993 Law. Therefore, the Tribunal
also bases its considerations on this English translation of the 1993 Law.

70. A further limitation comes from the 1993 Law itself. Art. 8 para-
graph 2 of the Law which the Tribunal accepted as the basis of its jurisdic-
tion provides for submission to ICSID only,

“if the dispute arises out of or relates to expropriation, com-
pensation for expropriation, or discrimination and also for
the transfers in accordance of Article 7,...”.

71. As no discrimination and no breach of the obligations under Art. 7
regarding transfers are claimed by Tradex (see latest Memorandum of 4
December 1998), in view of the above mentioned limitation, for the Tri-
bunal’s examination on the merits only the following Articles of the 1993
Law must be considered as possible sources of the claim insofar as they
may become relevant for an expropriation and a compensation for expro-
priation:

Article 2
Entry and Treatment

1. Foreign investment in the Republic of Albania are nto
(sic) conditioned from a preliminary authorization. They
are permitted and treated on a basis no less favourable
than that accorded in like situations to Albanian invest-
ments, except that ownership of land which will be
treated by a special law.

2. In all cases and at all times, foreign investment shall
receive fair and equitable treatment, shall enjoy full pro-
tection and security.

218 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

3. In any case foreign investments shall be treated on a basis
no less favorable than that accorded by rules generally
accepted by international law.

Article 4
Expropriation and Nationalization

Foreign investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized
either directly or indirectly or subject to any measure of tan-
tamount effect, except for a public purpose determined on
law, in a non-discriminatory manner, upon payment of
prompt, adequate and effective compensation and in accord-
ance with due process of law.

Article 5
Compensation for Expropriation and Nationalization

1. Compensation shall be equivalent to the fair market
value of the expropriated investment immediately before
the expropriatory action was taken or become known,
whichever is earlier.

2. Compensation shall be paid without delay and include
interest at a commercially reasonable rate from the date
of the expropriation, be fully transferable and convertible
at the market rate of exchange on the date of the expro-
priation.

3. In cases in which a foreign investor asserts that all or part
of its foreign investment has been expropriated or con-
siders the compensation therefor to be unsatisfactory, the
foreign investor shall have a right to prompt review by
the appropriate judicial or administrative bodies in
accordance with the provisions of Article 8 of this Act.

72. Though Article 4 also mentions “Nationalization” as a possible
basis for a claim, Tradex has not alleged that its investment was national-
ized and, therefore, this aspect of a possible claim also does not have to be
considered.

CASES 219

FE. Reasons for the Decisions
1. Burden of Proof

73. As many factual aspects of this Case are disputed between the Par-
ties, the Tribunal at the outset has to establish who has the burden of
proof, i.e. who has to show the elements required as conditions for the
claim, and—insofar as they are disputed—has to prove them to the satis-
faction of the Tribunal.

74. As seen above, the conditions for the compensation claimed by Tra-
dex are mentioned in Art. 4 and 5 of the 1993 Law. The wording of these
provisions confirms what can be considered as a general principle of inter-
national procedure—and probably also of virtually all national civil proce-
dural laws—, namely that it is the claimant who has the burden of proof
for the conditions required in the applicable substantive rules of law to
establish the claim. In the ICSID Case Arb/87/3, Asian Agricultural
Products Ltd. v. Republic of Sri Lanka (published in 6 ICSID Review—
Foreign Investment Law Journal (1991), p. 527 seq.) the Tribunal consid-
ered this to be one of the “established international law rules” (at p. 549),
relying on Bin Cheng, General Principles of Law as Applied by Interna-
tional Courts and Tribunals, Cambridge 1987, p. 327, and further
sources. Relying also on Bin Cheng (p. 329-331, with quotations from
further supporting authorities), the Tribunal also considered as an estab-
lished international law rule that “A Party having the burden of proof
must not only bring evidence in support of his allegations, but must also
convince the Tribunal of their truth, lest they be disregarded for want, or
insufficiency, of proof” (at p. 549).

75. Thus, taking these considerations into account, this Tribunal con-
cludes that Tradex has the burden of proof, in the above sense, for the con-
ditions required in the 1993 Law to establish its claim for compensation.

2. Rules of Evidence

76. After having established which Party, in principle, has the burden of
proof, the Tribunal must now clarify the rules of evidence applicable in
this Case in order to establish the procedural framework within which it
has to decide whether or not a disputed fact has, indeed, been proved.

220 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

77. Primarily, the rules on evidence in this Case are established by Rules
33 to 37 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. Particularly relevant is Rule 34 (1):

“The Tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility and of
any evidence adduced and of its probative value.”

78. In this context, the Tribunal must deal with some objections raised
by a Party to evidence provided by the other Party in this Case:

79. Tradex (T V p. 2) has objected to the evidential value of witness
statements submitted by Albania, because none of them are produced as
sworn affidavits. In this regard, the Tribunal notes that, according to
ICSID Rule 36 (a) it may

“admit evidence given by a witness or expert in a written dep-
osition.”

80. As this provision does not call for a sworn affidavit, and as in many
national jurisdictions non-sworn written witness statements are admissible
and customary, the Tribunal is not prevented from giving evidentiary
value to non-sworn written witness statements.

81. Regarding oral testimony, the Tribunal notes that ICSID Rule 35
expressly provides the wording of declarations that witnesses and experts
have to make before giving their evidence. Each of the witnesses and
experts heard in the Oral Hearing in this Case was asked by the President
of the Tribunal to make, and then, indeed, made such a declaration. In
view of the express declarations provided in Rule 35 without the require-
ment of an oath, the Tribunal has no hesitation to accept the evidentiary
value of oral testimony given in this Case.

82. Both Parties have pleaded further reasons against the value of evi-
dence submitted by the other Party (see: T V p. 2 to 10 and A III p. 3, 4
and 10). Both have claimed that witnesses lacked independence from the
Party presenting them. Tradex particularly alleged interference by Albania
on Albanian witnesses proposed by Tradex, testimony of Albania’s witnesses
“against their own signature”, forgery of documents, “the loan”, the “Ujka-
letters”, and other reasons against the credibility of witnesses presented by
Albania. Albania particularly objected, because Tradex did not bring cer-
tain witnesses and an expert to the Hearing for cross-examination, Tradex

CASES 221

did not cross-examine Albania’s witnesses Ujka and Ndoci, and that certain
testimony of witnesses presented by Tradex contained contradictions to
their own earlier testimony and to the testimony of other witnesses.

83. The Tribunal finds that none of these objections makes the respec-
tive evidence inadmissible. But, in making use of its authority under
ICSID Rule 34 (1) to “be the judge ... of its probative value”, the Tribu-
nal, in evaluating the respective evidence, shall take into account the
objections raised by the Parties insofar as the Tribunal considers that the
evidence objected to is relevant for the award on the merits. On the other
hand, the Tribunal sees no need to deal with and decide on objections
regarding evidence which, in the Tribunal’s judgment, is not relevant for it
in deciding on the claim before it.

84. In evaluating the evidence before it under Rule 34(1), the Tribunal
is aware of certain principles accepted in earlier international cases which
have some relevance here. While it does not seem necessary to go into
much detail in this regard in this section of the Award, at least the follow-
ing principles cited, with supporting sources, in the Final Award of ICSID
Case Arb/87/3 (op. cit. at pages 549 and 550) may be mentioned:

“\..Rule (J)—The international responsibility of the State is
not to be presumed. The party alleging a violation of interna-
tional law giving rise to international responsibility has the
burden of proving the assertion.

Rule (K)—International tribunals are not bound to adhere to
strict judicial rules of evidence. As a general principle the
probative force of the evidence presented is for the tribunal to
determine...

Rule (L)—In exercising the free evaluation of evidence pro-
vided for under the previous Rule, the international tribunals
decided the case on the strength of the evidence produced by
both parties, and in a case a party adduces some evidence
which prima facie supports his allegation, the burden of
proof shifts to his opponent.”

3. Major Disputed Conditions for the Claim

85. After the Tribunal has thus identified its procedural approach

222 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

regarding the burden of proof and rules on evidence, it now will shortly
identify which are the elements of the claim that have to be shown by
Tradex—and proved if disputed—as conditions necessary for the claim to
be successful on the merits. After this short identification, each of these
conditions will have to be taken up in subsequent sections of this Award
for a detailed examination.

a) “Foreign Investment”

86. The first condition for a successful claim by Tradex is that there
must be a “foreign investment”.

87. This is already required as a condition for the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal according to Art. 8 of the 1993 Law which mentions “foreign
investment” at the beginning of both its paragraphs 1 and 2. In this
regard, reference can be made to the Decision on Jurisdiction of this Tri-
bunal dated 24 December 1996. Particularly in section D.3. of that Deci-
sion the Tribunal found that Tradex had to be considered as a “foreign
investor”. And on that basis the Tribunal concluded that the conditions
for its jurisdiction under the 1993 Law were fulfilled, leaving open, how-
ever, the question whether or not an “expropriation” has been shown as
required by the 1993 Law, which issue was joined to the merits of the
Case. As an expropriation can only be established, if a “foreign invest-
ment” has been made as the possible object of such an expropriation, the
Tribunal now, in its consideration of the merits, has to examine whether
Tradex has shown that, indeed, it made a “foreign investment”. The Tribu-
nal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, therefore, does not prejudge its examina-
tion of a “foreign investment” in its consideration of the merits of the
Case.

88. Regarding the merits, Art. 2 (1) as well as Art. 4 of the 1993 Law
start their wordings with the term “Foreign investment” and thereby
clearly indicate that their applicability, as a first condition, depends on
such a foreign investment having been made. Furthermore, Art. 5 (1) of
the 1993 Law, in establishing further standards for compensation, also
refers to the “investment”.

89. Therefore, there can be no doubt that the first condition for Tradex’
claim to be successful is that a “foreign investment” has been made.

CASES 223

90. As Albania has disputed both the existence and the value of such an
investment (see T V p. 5 and Tr 214, 228, 233 seq.), Tradex has to meet
the burden of proof in this regard. The Tribunal, therefore, in Section 4 of
this Award, will have to examine whether it has fulfilled, to the Tribunal’s
satisfaction, that burden of proof.

b) Expropriation

91. Both Art. 4 and Art. 5 (1) of the 1993 Law expressly use the term
“expropriated” and thereby make it clear that a further condition for the
claim to be successful is that there is an expropriation. Again, as Albania
disputes that any expropriation took place, Tradex has the burden of proof
in this regard.

92. The Tribunal recalls that, according to Art. 8 (2) “expropriation” is
already a condition for the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and that the Tribunal’s
Decision on Jurisdiction of 24 December 1996 expressly left that condi-
tion undecided and joined to the merits the “issue as to whether or not an
“expropriation” has been shown as required by the 1993 Law”.

93. Therefore, in the subsequent Section 5 of this Award the Tribunal
will have to examine that issue in detail. In doing so, the Tribunal will
have to take into account that Art. 4 expressly provides that three kinds of
measures may qualify, namely direct expropriation, indirect expropriation,
and thirdly “any measures of tantamount effect”.

c) Illegality or Wrongfulness

94. Should the Tribunal find that, indeed, an expropriation has
occurred, the question arises—and the Parties have discussed to some
extent (see T II p. 4; T III p. 2, 22; Albania in Tr p. 229)—whether “‘ille-
gality” or “wrongfulness” of that expropriation is a further condition for
the claim to be successful.

95. The wording of Art. 4 of the 1993 Law clearly indicates that an
expropriation is illegal, if:

¢ it is not “for a public purpose determined on law”,

¢ or it is effected in a discriminatory manner,

* or it is not in accordance with due process of law.

224 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

96. But neither of these conditions is alleged by Tradex. Rather, Tradex
alleges that it did not receive compensation for its expropriated assets,
thereby relying on a fourth condition mentioned in Art. 4:

¢ “upon payment of prompt, adequate and effective com-
pensation”.

97. Further requirements for the compensation are provided for in Art.
5 of the 1993 Law.

98. Though it is beyond doubt that in case of expropriation a compen-
sation has to be paid, it seems less clear both in the discussion by the Par-
ties and in legal writings on the subject what is the legal significance of
this requirement. Is an expropriation illegal if no compensation is paid?
Or is compensation always due, even if the expropriation is legal? The Tri-
bunal feels it does not have to resolve these questions, however, because in
any case it is clear from the 1993 Law that, if an expropriation occurred,
compensation has to be paid to Tradex fulfilling the criteria for such com-
pensation mentioned in Art. 4 and Art. 5 (1).

99. The issue of illegality might become relevant in another context in
this Case: The authorization of the Joint Venture by Decree No. 26 dated
21 January 1992 (T 2) contains, in its Section 5, a reference to the Alba-
nian “legislation concerning land” and a “necessary addendum” thereto.
On that basis it could be argued that a privatization of land in conformity
with this legislation must be considered legal, even without compensation,
thereby granting an exception to the duty of compensation in the 1993
Law. The Tribunal will deal with this issue when, in the subsequent Sec-
tion 4 of this Award, it considers the legal scope of Tradex’ investment.

d) Compensation

100. Should the Tribunal find that, indeed, all or part of Tradex’ invest-
ment has been expropriated, it would then have to examine in detail the
quantum of the compensation due, applying the criteria for compensation
mentioned in Art. 4 and Art. 5 of the 1993 Law. In that context, the Tri-
bunal would have to take into account that Tradex received some assets
back after the agreed dissolution of the Joint Venture so that only compen-
sation is due insofar as its value goes beyond the value of such assets.

CASES 225

4. Foreign Investment by Tradex

101. The Tribunal will now examine in detail the first condition found
to be necessary for a successful claim, namely whether and, if so, for what
value a “foreign investment” by Tradex in Albania has been shown and
proved.

102. As mentioned above in Section 3. a) of this Award, this condition is
required by Art. 8 of the 1993 Law for jurisdiction and by Art. 2, 4 and 5
for the merits in this Case.

a) Investment by Tradex

103. As Tradex is the (only) Claimant in this Case, only an investment by
Tradex itself is relevant. It is undisputed between the Parties that the Joint
Venture “Tradex Torovice” formed by the Agreement of 10 January 1992 (T 1)
is a separate legal entity under Albanian law (see Art. 1 paragraph 2 of the
Agreement and Section 2 of the Authorization of 21 January 1992 = T 2).
Therefore, while a Tradex contribution is an investment covered by the 1993
Law, any investment by the Joint Venture itself is not a “foreign investment”.

104. Furthermore, for the same reasons, the Joint Venture is not identical
with the Albanian State and, therefore, any measures taken by the Joint
Venture itself per se are not attributable to the Republic of Albania and
thus cannot qualify as an expropriation. In any case, if and insofar as Tra-
dex claims that measures taken solely by the Joint Venture or by its partner
in the Joint Venture, T.B. Torovitsa are illegal and have caused damage to
Tradex on one hand, procedurally, such a dispute would not fall under the
jurisdiction of this Tribunal, because Art. 16 of the Joint Venture Agree-
ment provides that disputes between the parties involved in the Joint Ven-
ture “will be resolved by arbitration of the International Chamber of
Commerce in Paris according to its regulations”.

b) Broad Interpretation of “Foreign Investment”

105. Before examining in detail whether and to what extent Tradex has
proved an investment, the Tribunal notes that Art. 1 (3) of the 1993 Law
provides a very broad definition of what is to be considered a “foreign
investment”:

226 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

“3. “Foreign investment” means every kind of investment in
the territory of the Republic of Albania owned directly
or indirectly by a foreign investor, consisting of

a) moveable and immoveable, tangible and intangible
property and any other property rights;

b) a company, shares in stock of a company and any
form of participation in a company;

c) loans, claim to money or claim to performance hav-
ing economic value;

d) intellectual property, including literary and artistic
works, sound recordings, inventions, industrial designs,
semiconductor mask works, know how, trademarks, ser-
vice marks and trade names; and

e) any right conferred by law or contract, and any
license or permit pursuant to law.”

106. The Tribunal considers this as a confirmation of the broad interpre-
tation given in international law to “property” or “investment” as the possi-
ble object of an expropriation. (See most recently e.g. the Decisions of the
ICSID Tribunal in the Case Fedax v. Venezuela: Decision on Jurisdiction of
11 July 1997, ILM XXXVI, 1998, p. 1378 seq. at sections 31 to 43; Award
of 9 March 1998, ILM XXXVII, 1998, p. 1391 seq. at section 29).

107. In its examination of a possible foreign investment by Tradex in
Albania, the Tribunal will, therefore, take into account the broad interpre-
tation provided by the applicable law in this context.

c) Relevance of Financial Sources of Such Foreign Investment

108. There is a dispute between the Parties in this Case both regarding
the factual basis and the legal relevance of the financial sources of Tradex’
alleged foreign investment in Albania (see: A II 2; A III 16; T V 10). In
particular, Albania alleges that whatever Tradex invested in Albania was
financed either by an “offshore company of unspecified identity and
nationality, or by Greek state banks and the European Community”. Tra-
dex claims that the financial sources of its investment are irrelevant in the
context of its expropriation claim.

109. The Tribunal agrees with Tradex on this point. The 1993 Law, in its

CASES 227

definition of “Foreign investment” in Art. 1 (3), nowhere requires that the
foreign investor has to finance the investment from his own resources. As
seen above, quite to the contrary, the law provides for a broad interpreta-
tion of “investment”. In the present context it may be particularly noted
that Art. 1 (3) expressly includes “every kind of investment...owned
directly or indirectly by a foreign investor”, “loans, claim to money or
claim to performance having economic value” and “any right conferred by
law or contract...”.

110. The Tribunal also recalls that, in its Decision on Jurisdiction of 24
December 1996, in Section D.3. the Tribunal pointed out that the
detailed wording in Art. 1 “Definitions” of the 1993 Law “does not give
room for further conditions” and concluded that Tradex qualifies as a “for-
eign investor” under the 1993 Law.

111. On the basis of the above considerations, the Tribunal concludes
here that the sources from which the investor financed the foreign invest-
ment in Albania are not relevant for the application of the 1993 Law as
long as an investment is proved, which the Tribunal will examine hereafter.

d) Factual Considerations—Investment

112. As Albania disputes that any investment was made by Tradex, tak-
ing into account the considerations in Section F. 1., F 2., F 3. a) and F 4.
b) above of this Award, the Tribunal now has to examine how far Tradex
fulfilled its burden of proof regarding the investment.

113. Regarding Tradex’ investment in kind, by supply of equipment, the
Document No. 31843, signed by the members of the Board of Directors of
the Joint Venture Company and dated 30 December 1992 (= T 7) provides a

“Register

Regarding the itemized account and registration of the capital
transferred from “Tradex Hellas” to the Agricultural Com-
pany Torovice till 30.12.1992.”

114. It lists every piece of equipment together with a value in US Dollars
and leads to a total value of US $ 432,803.-, a value which is confirmed on
the signed cover sheet of the document.

228 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

115. Albania has not submitted any concrete challenge of this document
and, therefore, the Tribunal concludes that an investment by Tradex in
Albania in that amount has been proved.

116. On the other hand, Tradex itself has admitted that equipment val-
ued at US $ 352,187.- was returned to Tradex in connection with the dis-
solution of the Joint Venture and, therefore, has to be deducted from the
value of the original investment (T V 28). The “Liquidators Report” of 2
March 1994 attached to the “Minutes of Liquidators Meeting” of the
same day (= T 20) provides a “List A” of the equipment returned to Tradex
and evaluates it in total as Leke 20,842,420.-. Neither of these documents
is challenged by Albania. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that, indeed, a
value of US $352,187.- has to be deducted from Tradex’ original invest-
ment in kind.

117. Regarding Tradex’ investment in payments, however, many aspects
are disputed between the Parties (see: T I 2; T V 6-8; AI 6-8; A II 5-11;
A III 2 and 5; A in Tr 214 seq.).

118. In its summary of the investments it claims to have made (particu-
larly in T III p. 7 seq.), Tradex mentions a number of investments not in
Albania, but in other countries allegedly in favour of the Joint Venture. In
this context, the Tribunal notes that, according to Art. 1 (3) of the 1993
Law, only those investments qualify to be covered by that Law that are
made “in the territory of the Republic of Albania”. In principle, therefore,
investments made by Tradex outside Albania do not qualify. This is partic-
ularly the case for the various investments for expenses Tradex evaluates as
amounting to US $ 160,000.- (see: T III 9) which, as Tradex concedes,
were not debited to the Joint Venture.

119. On the other hand, investments in fact debited to the Joint Venture
and recognized in the Liquidator’s Report (T 20) could qualify as “in the
territory of the Republic of Albania”, because “loans, claim to money” are
expressly mentioned as possible “foreign investment” in Art. 1 (3) para-
graph c) of the 1993 Law. Tradex evaluates such investments debited and
accepted in the Liquidator’s Report as amounting to US $ 175,840.- and,
for proof, refers to “items 3 b and 3 c in the Liquidator’s Report” (T III p.
9). Albania has not directly contested that figure, but has claimed in gen-
eral, based on the testimony of Mr. Hadjigeorgiou, that “Tradex made no

CASES 229

financial contribution whatsoever” to the investment of the Joint Venture
(A III 2 and also A II 10). That, in the opinion of this Tribunal, is suffi-
cient to keep the burden of proof on Tradex.

120. The Joint Venture Agreement (T 1), in Art. 4 mentions certain con-
tributions to be made by Tradex to the basic capital of the Joint Venture
evaluated as a total of Leke 16,039,000.-, but none of these contributions
is identified as an actual payment by Tradex.

121. The Articles of Association of the Joint Venture (T 3), in Art. 9,
provide that the “contracting parties deposit a capital in the order of
957.575 USA dollars distributed according to the provisions of the con-
tract”, but are not proof that any payments were actually made by Tradex
in addition to its uncontested investment in kind discussed above.

122. The governmental Authorization of the Joint Venture (T 2) in its
section 3, expressly mentions the same amount of US $ 957,575.- as the
initial capital and also as Tradex’ share: “Greek part 641.575 USD $”. But
that provision goes on to say that “the contributions of each part will be
deposited and/or will be at disposal till 31/03/1992”. As the Authorization
itself is dated 21 January 1992, it is clear that it does not indicate actual
payment by Tradex, but only an obligation to contribute by 31 March 1992
leaving it open whether the contribution will be by payment or in kind.

123. Neither documents nor witness testimony has provided proof that
actual payments were made by Tradex to the Joint Venture though, if
actually money was transferred or paid in cash, such proof should be
available.

124. On the basis of all the above considerations, the Tribunal concludes
that on one hand an investment in kind in a value of US $ 432,803.- has
been proved, from which US $ 352,187.- has to be deducted as the value
of the equipment returned to Tradex. Thus an investment in the value of
US $ 80,616.- remains which could be an investment by Tradex as the
object of an expropriation without compensation.

125. On the other hand, the Tribunal concludes that Tradex has not ful-
filled its burden of proof regarding any other foreign investment in Alba-
nia, particularly by way of payment.

230 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

e) Legal Considerations—Investment

126. Once after the factual basis of the investment has been established,
now the legal scope of Tradex’ investment in Albania has to be established
because the investment can only be the object of an expropriation—and a
successful claim for compensation—insofar as Tradex has acquired legal
rights as they are described in Art. 1 (3) of the 1993 Law under the defini-
tion of “Foreign investment”.

127. Paragraph a) of that provision mentions “immoveable ... property”
and “any other property rights”. In this context, the Tribunal notes that
Tradex does not claim to have acquired property rights on the land used by
the Joint Venture. In fact, the Joint Venture being a separate legal entity
under Albanian law, even if the Joint Venture had or acquired any prop-
erty rights, these would not be rights of Tradex. Art. 15 of the Joint Ven-
ture Agreement mentions that Tradex’ partner in the Joint Venture, the
Torovitsa Agricultural Company, owns 1170 ha of land which will be used
by the Joint Venture. No transfer of this ownership is recorded or alleged
by the Parties and therefore, it is uncontested that neither Tradex nor the
Joint Venture owned the land it used for its administrative and agricultural
purposes, but that the Joint Venture had the right to use the land. But
even that was only a right of the Joint Venture and not of Tradex itself.
Thus, though this right to use the land may be considered as “any right
conferred by law or contract” and thereby qualify as an “investment”
under Art. 1 (3) e) of the 1993 Law, if that right was expropriated it was
not expropriated from Tradex.

128. On the other hand, such an expropriation of a right of the Joint
Venture could affect the value of Tradex’ share in the Joint Venture and
such a share clearly is a “foreign investment” according to Art. 1 (3) b) (“a
company, shares in stock of a company and any form of participation in a
company”). Therefore, the Tribunal will have to examine whether Albania
expropriated the Joint Venture’s right to use the land and thereby indi-
rectly expropriated part of Tradex’ share in the Joint Venture.

129. There is one further qualification for such an examination: The
Joint Venture Agreement, in Art. 15 provides with regard to the land that
“Such area will not change during the term of the agreement”, but adds
that “The joint venture shall respect the supplementary needs which will
be created for the land”. While it is not quite clear whether thereby a pro-

CASES 231

viso is made for the implementation of future privatization of land by law,
a clearer reference is contained in the Authorization of 21 January 1992 of
the Joint Venture (T 2). Section 5 of that Authorization provides:

“The joint venture will be also conformed to the necessary
addendum will taken place to the albanian legislation con-
cerning the land.” (sic the official translation provided to the
Tribunal.)

130. The Parties have presented diverging views regarding the rele-
vance of the Land Law (T III 2; T V 17; AIS, 6, 8; ATI 5 seq.; A in Tr
217, 221-223, 227, 228). In particular, Albania argues (Tr 221, 227; A
1 8) that the Land Law 7501 of 1991 was well-known in the public and
that the above references in the Joint Venture Agreement and particu-
larly in the Authorization made it quite clear to Tradex that privatiza-
tions might take place on the basis of the Land Law. Tradex (T III 2),
on the other hand, argued that it is irrelevant whether the expropriation is
lawful according to local law. Indeed, as mentioned above (Section 3. c)),
it can be argued that even a legal expropriation requires compensation
according to Art. 4 of the 1993 Law, and this would have been the conclu-
sion if no references to the Land Law were made in the Joint Venture
Agreement and the Authorization. However, it must be assumed that these
references were meant to have some legal significance and, therefore, they
cannot be interpreted as leading necessarily to the same result as would be
reached without such references. The legal significance could only be that
the parties to the Agreement, including Tradex, accepted future applica-
tions of the Land Law and that the investment was subject to future appli-
cations of the Land Law, in other words: subject to future privatizations. If
this was a legal limitation on Tradex’ investment from the very beginning,
then it could be argued that the actual application of the Land Law at a
later stage did not infringe the investment and thus did not constitute an
expropriation.

131. In view of these considerations, should the Tribunal find, in the
subsequent Section of this Award on “Expropriation”, that an expropri-
ation of Tradex’ rights has in fact been made by the Albanian State, it
would have to examine whether such rights were indeed acquired by
Tradex or were covered by the reference to the Land Law and thus from
the very beginning of the investment subject to possible privatization
measures.

232 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

5. Expropriation
a) Preliminary Observations

132. First it should be recalled that the question whether there was an
expropriation of Tradex’ investment by Albania, is already relevant for the
jurisdiction of this Tribunal according to Art. 8 (2) of the 1993 Law and
that the Tribunal, in its Decision on Jurisdiction of 24 December 1996,
did not come to a conclusion in this regard but rather joined that question
to the consideration of the merits of the Case.

133. According to Art. 4 of the 1993 Law, foreign investment shall not
be expropriated

1) directly
2) indirectly
3) or by any measure of tantamount effect.

134. Thereby, the Law covers a wide range of takings and makes it clear
that not only government measures expressly denominated as “expropria-
tions” or directly taking away all or part of the investment are prohibited,
but also other measures that indirectly or by their effect lead to the foreign
investor losing acquired rights of the kind mentioned under the definition
of “foreign investment” in Art. 1 (3) of the 1993 Law. The Parties have
extensively argued whether an expropriation has occurred in this Case (in
particular see: T II 5; T HI 15-27; AI 3, 22 seq., 25; A II 4; A HI 3, 10; Tr
215-219, 222 seq., 226 seq.). In its examination of the facts of the Case,
the Tribunal will, therefore, deal with every incident alleged by Tradex as
having the effect of a taking.

135. An as similarly broad interpretation as in Art. 4 is given to “expro-
priation” in international law (e.g. see: In the Amoca Case: “a compulsory
transfer of property rights”, Iran-US Claims Tribunal Reports 15 (1997),
p. 220; in the Otis Case: “necessary...to prove, firstly that its property
rights had been interfered with to such an extent that its use of those
rights or the enjoyment of their benefits was substantially affected and
that it suffered a loss as a result...”, Iran-US Claims Tribunal, 84 I.L.R.
section 28), in evaluating particular incidents, the Tribunal may also get
guidance from sources of international law in its interpretation of Art. 4 of
the 1993 Law.

CASES 233

136. Therefore, though a broad range of takings may be considered in
this context, there is always a second condition for such a taking to qualify
as an expropriation: the attributability to the State. This is not mentioned
directly, but also established in international law (e.g. see: Otis Case, as
above, sections 28, 29 and 47; Protiva Case, Yearbook Commercial Arbi-
tration 21 (1996) section 53). It is uncontested between the Parties that
attributability to the State is, in principle, a condition of expropriation,
but they disagree as to whether certain incidents of interference, in fact,
can be attributed to the Albanian State.

137. Thus, the Tribunal now has to examine each of the incidents alleged
by Tradex as expropriations with regard to two questions:

1) Is there a taking of rights acquired by Tradex as part of its
investment?

2) If so, is that taking attributable to the Republic of Albania?
b) Privatization Process prior to August 1992

138. The privatization process in Albania started by Law No. 7501 of 19
July 1991 (A I Exh. 7) which provided for the distribution of the land of
the state farming cooperatives. This 1991 Land Law provided for (Art. 7)
and Decision No. 230 of the Council of Ministers of 27 July 1991 (A III
Exh. 14) implemented the establishment of land commissions at the
national, district and village levels. The criteria to be used by these com-
missions were authorized by Art. 24 of the 1991 Land Law and specified
by Decision 255 of the Council of Ministers dated 2 August 1991 (A II
Exh. 18). Regulations on the registration and transfer processes for the
land were set out in Decision No. 256 of the Council of Ministers also
dated 2 August 1991 (A II Exh. 15).

139. This privatization of the state farming cooperatives did not directly
effect the land used by the Joint Venture “Tradeks Torovice”, because that
land was owned by Tradex’ partner in the Joint Venture “Torovitsa” and
“Torovitsa” was not a state farming cooperative, but was a state farm. The
privatization process of the state farming cooperatives outlined above can
only be seen as a legal background, which was in place at the time of the
establishment of the Joint Venture in early 1992, to the privatization of
state farms which was to follow.

234 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

140. Tradex alleges (T V 13) that the Democratic Party in Albania
entered the elections of April/May 1992 with a policy to also privatize the
state farms, and that after the Party had won the elections, it could imple-
ment this policy using the legal framework for previous privatizations out-
lined above.

141. But Tradex does not allege—and there is indeed no indication in
the files of this Case—that any measures occurred prior to August 1992
which could be considered as expropriations.

c) Decision No. 364 of 22 August 1992

142. The first measure which Tradex alleges to be an expropriation—or a
first step in a longer expropriation process—is the Decision No. 364 of 22
August 1992 of the Council of Ministers (T 11). That Decision first trans-
ferred the Mali Kolaj village, until then under the jurisdiction of the Pre-
fecture of Shkoder, to the Prefecture of Lezhe, but then ruled:

“2. The rural area of 140 ha of Mali Kolaj village remains to
the prefecture of Shkoder.” (sic in the English translation
provided to the Tribunal.)

143. The Parties have submitted very different interpretations and
explanations of that ruling (T V 14 seq.; T in Tr 203 seq.; AI 17, 18, 20;
A TI 12; A III 6, 10; A in Tr 235 seq.). In particular, Tradex has claimed
that this meant “that 140 ha from Torovitsa land should be distributed to
the villagers of Mali Kolaj village” and “was the base of all expropriation”
(T V 14). To the contrary, Albania considers the ruling as “purely admin-
istrative decision which has no effect on any property rights” and also
claims that the 140 ha were not land used by the Joint Venture (A I 18; A
III 6 seq.).

144. The Tribunal on one hand considers the exchange of written com-
munications between the Executive Committee of the Prefecture, the
Ministry of Agriculture and Food, and the Community of Balldren-Lezhe
between 20 May and 12 July 1992 (T 8, 9, 10, 11, 17 and 18) as a clear
indication that the administrative decision regarding the 140 ha had the
intention to enable the distribution of that land to the villagers at a future
date. But, on the other hand, the Tribunal sees no indication, in these doc-
uments or otherwise in the file, that in fact, by Decision No. 364, either

CASES 235

Torovitsa lost its ownership in any land or the Joint Venture lost the right
and the factual possibility to use its land. In fact, the witness statement by
Mr. Tusha (A II Exh. 12), to which Tradex particularly referred in this
context (Tr 203), on one hand calls this decision “the basis” for “subse-
quent decisions” to “begin” the distribution of land, but on the other
hand expressly mentions that this decision “does not affect the title on
property” (emphasis added by Tribunal).

145. Therefore, that Decision cannot be qualified as an expropriation.
d) Alleged Invasion August/September 1992

146. From the beginning of this arbitration Tradex has alleged that vil-
lagers occupied the 140 ha (which were the object of the Decision No. 364
mentioned above) in August and September 1992 (T I 3). It is not quite
clear to the Tribunal whether this incident is still alleged at the end of the
procedure, because, in its Post-Hearing Memorial (T V 15), Tradex does
not reference that period of August/September, but, on the other hand,
does mention that Decision 364 “led the villagers of Mali Kolaj to take
possession by force”. The Tribunal does not see sufficient evidence that
Tradex has fulfilled its burden of proof in this regard, because the testi-
mony of witnesses does not provide a clear picture, there is no contempo-
raneous evidence of an August/September invasion, it is undisputed that
neither Tradex nor the Joint Venture took formal steps complaining about
the alleged invasion, and the first document mentioning any kind of inva-
sion are the Minutes of 4 December 1992 (T 75) which, however, only
mention an incident of 4 December. Also, Mr. Azas, in his subsequent let-
ters to the Albanian Government, did not mention any invasion in
August/September 1992 (T 12-T 18; Tr 42, 43).

147. In any case, no evidence has been provided to prove the second
condition for an expropriation, namely the attributability to the Govern-
ment. Tradex alleges “that the incident of the Mali Kolaj villagers has been
provoked by a state act”. But the Tribunal sees no evidence in the text of
Decision 364 authorizing such an invasion and no evidence has been pro-
vided that other behaviour of the Albanian authorities encouraged villag-
ers to invade the land. Tradex has also not shown that it contacted the
authorities after these alleged invasions so that a failure to act by the
authorities could be considered under the aspect of attributability to the
State.

236 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

148. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that no expropriation has been
proved in connection with the alleged invasions in August/September
1992.

e) Decision 452 of 17 October 1992

149. Tradex alleges (T V 15-17) that “the formal expropriation of Toro-
vitsa farm” took place by Decision 452 dated 17 October 1992 by the
Council of Ministers (Text in A II Exh. 16) and that this decision was not
depending on an implementation procedure or a formal title, or registra-
tion at the Cadaster office, but rather was a self-executing law (T V 16).
According to Tradex an additional act was only necessary for the distribu-
tion of the expropriated land.

150. Albania, on the other hand, claims (A II 18 seq.) that Decision 452
only provided that the order and procedure for the privatization and
restructuring of the state farms would be determined by the Central
Agency for Restructuring and Privatisation of State Farms which had been
created by Decision 300 dated 30 July 1992 of the Council of Ministers.
According to Albania (A II 19), neither Decision 452 provided nor was it
the intention of the Agency to privatize all agricultural enterprises and it
was expressly intended that joint ventures that had been created by that
time—October 1992—would not be subject to the privatization or redis-
tribution of land.

151. Indeed, an examination of the text of Decision 452 shows that it
contains no wording indicating an expropriation by that Decision itself,
but rather wording authorizing such privatization:

“1. ... be distributed”

“2. ... to be distributed”

“4. Land ... will be given ...”.
152. Particularly, section 8 of the Decision provides:

“8. Central Agency for Restructuring and Privatisation is
assigned to determine the agricultural enterprises or
their components to be distributed, time and order of
distribution and issuing of relevant instructions.”

CASES 237

153. From this provision it can be seen that not all agricultural enter-
prises are to be privatized, but that rather the Agency will select them or
their components for privatization, as well as the time and order for each
such privatization. There is no indication in the text of the Decision that
land of the Torovitsa Joint Venture will be selected for such privatiza-
tion.

154. The Tribunal, therefore, does not consider Decision 452 to be an
expropriation of part of Tradex’ investment.

f) Berisha Speech of 27 October 1992

155. Tradex (e.g. T V 15) gives great importance to the speech of Mr.
Sali Berisha (text in T 69) of 27 October 1992 which was widely reported
in the press and television, as an indication that the government intended
to fulfill its pre-election promises and policies.

156. Indeed, shortly after Decision 452 of 17 October 1992, that speech
of 27 October 1992 emphasized to the general public that the government
intended to in fact implement its privatization program also regarding
agricultural enterprises. But the Berisha speech was neither a legislative or
executive act nor did it change the situation found above in Section e) cre-
ated by Decision 452.

157. Therefore, the Berisha speech cannot be considered to be an expro-
priation, by itself or together with Decision 452.

g) Alleged Occupation October/November 1992

158. Tradex further alleges that, upon proclamation of Decision 452,
the villagers of the other villages situated around Torovitsa rushed to
the Torovitsa farm and occupied it (T V 15). During the Hearing this
was confirmed by the direct testimony of Mr. Lapardhaja that from
October till December 1992 300 hectares of land were taken by the vil-
lagers (Tr 54).

159. The Tribunal notes, however, that this testimony is, to some extent,
not confirmed by other testimony of the same witness. First, Mr. Lapar-
dhaja did not mention this occupation in his several and extensive written
witness statements provided before the Hearing (T 45, 46, 48, 49, 50).

238 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Secondly, in cross-examination during the Hearing, the witness could not
identify the allegedly occupied 300 ha of land (Tr 83).

160. The testimony of Mr. Azas is also not clear in this regard. On one
hand he said that 300 hectares were occupied “in the autumn of 1992,
October, November, December” (Tr 37). On the other hand, in cross-
examination, he said: “No, no. In October it was too early. We did not
believe they will expropriate.” (Tr 45).

161. If, indeed, 300 hectares were taken by the villagers up to the end of
1992, it is also difficult to understand, why Mr. Azas, in his seven letters
to the Government between 31 October 1992 and 12 July 1993 (T 12-
18) complaining and asking for help never mentioned these alleged occu-
pations by the villagers. When asked about this in cross-examination, he
said that he did not remember why this was not mentioned in his letter of
12 December 1992 which did mention the incident of 4 December 1992
(Tr 42).

162. Mr. Lohja, the witness presented by Albania, denied that 300 hec-
tares were occupied by villagers in November 1992 (Tr 168).

163. Furthermore, the only contemporaneous document about occupa-
tion of land of the Joint Venture, the Minutes of 4 December 1992 (T 75)
do not mention the alleged occupations in October and November, but
only an occupation on 4 December 1992, though it would have been nor-
mal to also mention occupations that allegedly occurred the two months
before and therefore were a much more serious deprivation.

164. Taking into account the above considerations, the Tribunal con-
cludes that Tradex has not fulfilled its burden of proof regarding these
alleged occupations in October and November 1992.

165. Subsidiarily, even if the villagers felt encouraged to such occupa-
tions by Decision 452 and the Berisha speech, that would not be a suffi-
cient basis to attribute such occupations to the State of Albania, and no
other evidence has been provided as a basis for such an attributability. (See
e.g. the ICSID Decision in the Amco Asia Case in which the Tribunal
considered a much more direct and active involvement by the state in a
private taking by army and police still not as sufficient for an attribution
to the state; ICSID Reports 1, p. 377, at 455.)

CASES 239

h) Alleged Occupation and Destruction of Crops by Animals
on 4 December 1992

166. The only alleged occupation confirmed by a contemporaneous doc-
ument is the one of 4 December 1992. The Minutes of Meeting of that
day (T 75) have the following wording:

“We report that today the 4th December 1992 we caught the
animals of the village Mali-Kolaj in the sown field with clo-
ver, cotton and maize. The parcels No. 1, 2, 3 shown with
clover and parcel 13 with cotton and maize.

1. The parcel No. 3 distroyed completely.

2. The parcel No. 13, 4 ha cotton and 9 ha maize
destroyed completely.

with the explanation that “today the land is ours because it
was given to us by the Prefecture and the Commune of Ball-
dren”.

‘We prepared these minutes to demand idemnity.

The Supervisor The agronomist
Pal Luli Gjok Prela”

167. The Tribunal interprets this document, though it expressly only
mentions “animals”, to the effect that villagers either came on the land
with their animals or at least let the animals on the land and then gave the
cited explanation “today the land is ours because it was given to us by the
Prefecture and the Commune of Balldren”.

168. Tradex (T V 18) claims that these Minutes refer to damage done by
the alleged invasions either in “August/September” or in “November/
December” 1992. The Minutes clearly say that “today”, i.e. on 4 Decem-
ber 1992 the animals were caught. Even if the Minutes—and the uncon-
tested English translation—are made in unprecise language, the meaning
of “today” is clear and it is highly unprobable that minutes expressly “pre-
pared...to demand idemnity” (last phrase of the Minutes) would have cho-
sen “today”, if they intended to refer to an occupation that started much
earlier in November.

240 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

169. But, as these Minutes are a contemporaneous document, the Tribu-
nal is inclined to accept these Minutes as proof for the occupation on 4
December. But even if it also accepted that, indeed, the villagers said what
is cited in the Minutes, attribution to the Albanian State would still have
to be shown and proved. The cited explanation of the villagers may show
what they believed, perhaps on the basis of Decision 452 and the Berisha
speech, but it does not show that, in fact the Albanian State authorized the
occupation. As seen above, neither Decision 452 nor the Berisha speech
actually transfer property in or the right to use the land to the villagers.
And Tradex has neither provided any evidence that any state authorities
permitted the occupation, nor at least, that after being called by the Joint
Venture or Tradex for protection, refused to grant protection.

170. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that, in any case, the incident of
4 December 1992 cannot be considered as an expropriation due to lack of
attributability to the Republic of Albania.

i) Alleged Occupation by Villagers in December 1992

171. The testimony of Mr. Lapardhaja during the Hearing indicates that
a new situation arose in December 1992, because, while the villagers alleg-
edly had occupied land before on their own, from December “the villagers
began working together with the chairmen of the communes and the
Titles Office” (Tr 54).

172. Tradex claims (T V 17) that their occupations are confirmed by the
testimony of Mr. Azas. But Mr. Azas stated that his last visit to Torovitsa
was on 4 December 1992 (Tr 20) and that, thereafter, he stayed in Tirana.
Thus it is difficult to see how he can confirm occupations after the one on
4 December which has been dealt with above in Section h).

173. On the other hand, Mr. Lohja, in his testimony (Tr 167, 168) has
confirmed one incident in December which seems to be the one on 4
December because he also mentions animals entering the fields, but Mr.
Lohja goes on to say that the animals were removed and that no such inci-
dent occurred again (Tr 168).

174. The Tribunal also notes that the letters which allegedly Mr. Azas
wrote in and right after December 1992, namely the letters dated 12
December, 21 December and 21 January 1992 (T 12, T 14, T 15), though

CASES 241

mentioning that “we cannot go to the farm, because we encounter many
obstacles from several persons” (letter 21.12.1992, T 14), none of these
letters mentions any occupation by villagers though it could have been
expected that such an occupation would be included in the complaints to
the Albanian government.

175. In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that Tradex has not fulfilled its
burden of proof that such occupations occurred after 4 December 1992
nor that they were attributable to the Republic of Albania.

J) Dissolution of the Joint Venture in April 1993

176. Tradex further claims that the dissolution of the Joint Venture,
though effected by consent between Tradex and its partner in the Joint
Venture, was forced upon Tradex and constitutes an expropriation (see e.g.
TV 11 seq.).

177. As expropriation by definition is a “compulsory” transfer of prop-
erty rights (see e.g. Amoca Case, cited above, section 135), an agreement
reached in consent with the foreign investor and signed by it as in the
Dissolution Agreement dated 21 April 1992 (T 19) can hardly be seen as
an act of expropriation in itself. This is even more so as, again with full
consent of Tradex, the Agreement mandated “all necessary measures” for
the “liquidation of the joint venture” and, in conformity therewith, the
liquidators appointed by Tradex and the Ministry of Agriculture and
Food presented a “Liquidators Report” and “Minutes of Liquidators
Meeting” (T 20) completing the liquidation on 16 December 1993, iden-
tifying certain assets valued at Leke 20,842,420.- to be returned to Tradex
which then indeed were given back to and accepted by Tradex without
objection.

178. The Parties have discussed broadly and disagree considerably why
the Joint Venture failed and whether Mr. Ujka in fact wrote certain letters
(A I Exh. 12 and 13) in this context and what relevance these letters have
(see e.g.: T IL 13; T V 8, 11, 13 seq.; AT 13; AIT 15 seq.).

179. The Tribunal feels it is only relevant in the context of this Award
whether, in spite of Tradex’ consent to the dissolution and to its imple-
mentation, it has been shown—and, in view of Albania’s objection
proved—that the dissolution was forced upon Tradex.

242 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

180. The Dissolution Agreement is helpful in this examination insofar as
it expressly mentions “which problems made impossible the continuation
of operation of the joint venture, namely:

(1) The complete inexistence of security of the production
of the J.V. and of the life of the managerial personnel of
the J.V.

(2) The destruction of the irrigation system of the farm by
the inhabitants of the region.

(3) The take-over of lands of the farm by inhabitants of the
region with permission of the State.”

181. While the first two reasons obviously cannot be identified as expro-
priation measures, the third reason, also obviously could be such an expro-
priation measure.

182. The mere fact that this third reason is mentioned in the Dissolu-
tion Agreement provides, by itself, not yet proof that such a take-over
took place and that there was a permission of the State. This is particu-
larly so as not the representatives of the Republic of Albania, but “only”
the representatives of the two partners in the Joint Venture, i.e. Tradex
and Torovitsa N.B., signed the Agreement. Tradex has argued in this con-
text (T V 3) that Mr. Ujka was a civil servant in the Cadaster Office of
Lezhe and was the representative of the Albanian State in the Torovitsa
N.B. and the respective state farm. But Mr. Ujka’s position as a civil ser-
vant does not by itself indicate that when he signed under the words “For
Torovitsa N.B.” beyond that designated representation his signature also
represented the Albanian State. Furthermore, in his oral testimony, Mr.
Ujka explained that the take-overs never happened and he only accepted
the respective third reason in the text of the Agreement because M. Azas
convinced him that such a reference was in his own interest, that Tradex
had started negotiations with the Ministry of Agriculture to be given land
in another area, and that Mr. Azas could not come to Torovitsa “because
of the pressure on the part of the workers and we cannot continue our
operation here in Torovitsa” (Tr 160). Furthermore, in answer to more
specific questions, Mr. Ujka denied that villagers had taken any land in
August 1992, that in any way the local police was involved, that in Octo-
ber and November 1992 additional 300 hectares were taken over by vil-

 

CASES 243

lagers until the incident mentioned above occurred on 4 December 1992
(Tr 161).

183. Even if there is some contradiction between what Mr. Ujka signed
in the Dissolution Agreement and his testimony, the Tribunal finds that
the mere mentioning of the third reason in the Dissolution Agreement by
itself is not sufficient for Tradex to fulfill its burden of proof both for the
taking and the permission of the State. This is at least so if, as seen in the
above Sections of this Award, none of the incidents alleged by Tradex can
be considered as a proven taking attributable to the Albanian State.

k) Issuance of Titles to Mr. Pellumbi and Others

184. Tradex has submitted written witness statements by Mr. Pellumbi (T
44 and T 77), a villager of Torovitsa temporarily staying in Greece. In his
statements, Mr. Pellumbi says that he was given a piece of land of 12,000.-
square meters in the privatization process about the end of 1992 and, from
his memory, he lists some 200 families in the same region to whom,
according to him, about the end of 1992 and in the beginning of 1993 the
whole farm was distributed by title deeds (T 44 page 2 seq.). None of the
title deeds have been produced to the Tribunal except a title deed for Mr.
Pellumbi dated much later, namely of 20 September 1993 (A I Exh. 16),
and Mr. Pellumbi did not come to the Hearing to present oral testimony.
Albania had requested his appearance and objects to the acceptance of his
written statements because he was not made available for cross-examina-
tion. Tradex has indicated that Mr. Pellumbi did not appear in person
because he was afraid to be exposed to undue pressure by Albania.

185. Be that as it may, the Tribunal finds that in view of the fact that Tra-
dex has the burden of proof, the written statements of a single witness,
who then—for whatever reason—is not available at the Hearing for cross-
examination by the other Party and for questions by the members of the
Tribunal, is not sufficient to prove that in fact land was distributed and
title deeds issued in late 1992 and early 1993.

186. On the other hand, the only title deed produced to the Tribunal
dates from September 1993, a time when the Joint Venture had already
been dissolved by the Agreement dated 21 April 1993 and, therefore, by
its timing cannot be proof of an expropriation measure.

244 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

1) Decisions and Measures after the Dissolution Agreement of
21 April 1993

187. A number of decisions and measures occurred after 21 April 1993
when the Joint Venture was agreed to be dissolved.

188. The first was a decision of 5 May 1993 of the Ministry of Agricul-
ture and Food (A I Exh. 14) approving the liquidator of the Joint Venture.
As the liquidation was mandated in the Dissolution Agreement itself and
then performed without objections by Tradex, the approval of the Minis-
try of a procedure agreed to by Tradex cannot be an expropriation.

189. The next measure is the Protocol dated 10 May 1993 of the Divi-
sion of Privatisation of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food (A I Exh. 15)
“in application of Decision of the Council of Ministers No. 452 of 17
October 1992” to dissolve the “Agricultural enterprise Torovice” and dis-
tribute 920 ha of land to 2.800 workers and citizens of the enterprise each
of them receiving 3.200 square meters of land. On that basis, as seems
uncontested between the Parties, thereafter a Land Commission distrib-
uted the land to the villagers, these were registered in the cadastre and
received title deeds such as the one granted to Mr. Pellumbi on 20 Sep-
tember 1993.

190. The Tribunal does not have to examine these measures starting with
the Protocol of 10 May 1993. They could probably easily qualify as an
expropriation if the land had still been used by the Joint Venture. But, as
the parties to the Joint Venture, including Tradex, on 21 April 1992 had
concluded the Dissolution Agreement, the use of the land had been dis-
continued and thus the privatization of the land no longer could effect the
Joint Venture and Tradex’ investment. This conclusion is not changed by
the fact that the liquidation of the Joint Venture still took until December
1993, because—as seen above—the ownership in the land did not belong
to the Joint Venture and, therefore, was not part of the assets to be liqui-
dated.

m) Combined Evaluation of the Decisions and Events as Expropriation
191. While the above examination in Sections b) to 1) of this Award has

come to the conclusion that none of the single decisions and events alleged
by Tradex to constitute an expropriation can indeed be qualified by the

CASES 245

Tribunal as expropriation, it might still be possible that, and the Tribunal,
therefore, has to examine and evaluate hereafter whether the combination
of the decisions and events can be qualified as expropriation of Tradex’
foreign investment in a long, step-by-step process by Albania.

192. Tradex has claimed (Tr 205-207 and T V II seq.) that such a qualifi-
cation must be made.

193. It is uncontested between the Parties that there was a long privatiza-
tion process in Albania which started with the Land Law No. 7501 of 19
July 1991 (A I Exh. 7). That Law provided for the distribution of the land
of state farming cooperatives which was the land that had been in private
ownership until 1945. In this context, it should be recalled that Torovitsa
N.B., Tradex’ partner in the Joint Venture which owned the land to be
used by the Joint Venture, was not such a cooperative and thus the Land
Law of 1991 did not apply to it. Art. 7 of the Land Law was implemented
by Decision No. 230 of the Council of Ministers of 27 July 1991 estab-
lishing land commissions at the national, district and village levels (A IT
Exh. 14). Further criteria were specified by Decision No. 255 of the
Council of Ministers dated 2 August 1991 (A II Exh. 18) and regulations
on the registration and transfer processes for land set out in Decision No.
256 of the same day (A II Exh. 15).

194. This was the legal framework in place at the time when Tradex con-
cluded the Joint Venture Agreement on 10 January 1992 (T 1) with Toro-
vitsa N.B., a state farm to which, it may be repeated, that legal framework
was not applicable.

195. It seems uncontested between the Parties that before the elections of
April/May 1992 the Democratic Party announced that, should it win the
elections and form the new government, it would expand the privatization
program to the state farms (see e.g. T V 13). After the Democratic Party in
fact had won the elections, appropriate steps were taken to implement that
promise.

196. Regarding the land of Torovitsa which is relevant in this arbitration,
though Albania stresses the purely administrative character of that deci-
sion (e.g. see AIT 17, 18; A IIT 6, 10), the Tribunal accepts Tradex’ explana-
tion (e.g. see T V 13, 14) that Decision 364 of 22 August 1992 (T 11)
transferring the Mali Kolaj village to the Prefecture of Lezhe, but retaining

246 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

its rural area of 140 ha in the Prefecture of Skhoder was the preliminary
administrative decision on the basis of which the distribution of the 140
ha of land to the villagers took place at a later stage in the process of the
privatization of that area. It seems plausible, as Tradex explains (T V 13,
14), that 140 ha which were far away from the village of Mali Kolaj and
therefore not well fit to be used by the villagers after privatization, were to
be replaced by an area of 140 ha of Torovitsa which was close to the village
and therefore well fit to be used by the villagers. No other convincing
explanation for this administrative decision to change the jurisdiction has
been presented to the Tribunal. However, as seen above in Section 5S. c) of
this Award, that administrative decision did not deprive the Joint Venture
from the use of those 140 ha and therefore cannot be qualified as an
expropriation. The conceivable intention of Decision 364 to prepare for a
later privatization does not change that conclusion.

197. As seen above, after that Decision 364, none of the decisions taken
or alleged invasions by villagers examined in detail in the above Sections
5. d) to 5. k) can be qualified as an expropriation. The remaining question
for the Tribunal is whether these events, in their combination, can never-
theless be qualified as an expropriation. Again, this would require that
Tradex fulfills its burden of proof in this regard, namely that it proves a
taking and its attributability to the Albanian State.

198. Regarding the condition that a taking has to be proved, this would
require that, compared to the beginning of the relevant period, August
1992, at the end of the period Tradex would have less of an investment. If
one accepts, in spite of the dispute between the Parties regarding the suc-
cess of the Joint Venture up to August 1992, that the Joint Venture had all
the land of Torovitsa N.B. available for the use of the Joint Venture, Tra-
dex would have to meet the_burden to prove that less was available at the
time of the dissolution of the Joint Venture in April 1993. Now, the above
examination in Sections c), e), f) has shown that none of the acts of the
state authorities deprived Tradex of any of its rights, and the examination
in Sections d), g), h) and i) has shown that Tradex could not prove that it
lost use of land due to alleged invasions of villagers, and furthermore that
such alleged invasions were attributable to the State of Albania.

199. The conclusion, therefore, is that at the end of the relevant period
there is not sufficient evidence or proof that Tradex had less land available
than in August 1992.

CASES 247

200. This conclusion is not changed by the undisputed fact that the Joint
Venture, in the later part of that period did not actually agriculturally use
all of the land and the Joint Venture was in difficulties and that the Parties
have very different opinions why this was so (see in particular: The alleged
Azas’ letters, T 12-18; the alleged Ujka's letters, A I Exh. 12, 13; T II 13;
T V8, 11, 13, 14; AI 13, 20; A II 14-16; A III 9), because what is rele-
vant in the context of this Award is only whether expropriation measures
were the cause of these difficulties, which Tradex has not proved. As the
International Court of Justice pointed out in the Elsi Case, it must be
proved “that the ultimate result was the consequence of the acts or omis-
sions” of the state authorities (I.C.J. Reports 1989, section 119). Or, as
the Iran-US Claims Tribunal found in the Otis Case, “a multiplicity of
factors affected Claimant's enjoyment of its property rights... However,
the Tribunal is not convinced that the Claimant has established that the
infringement of these rights was caused by conduct attributable to the
Government of Iran. The acts of interference determined by the Tribunal
as being attributable to Iran are not sufficient in the circumstances of this
Case, either individually or collectively, to warrant a finding that a depri-
vation or taking of the Claimant's participation in Iran Elevator had
occurred.” (I.L.R. 84, section 47). Taking these standards into account,
the Tribunal in this Case finds that Tradex has not proved that the failure
of the Joint Venture was due to expropriation measures by the State of
Albania.

201. The Tribunal finds some confirmation of this conclusion in the
undisputed fact that Tradex ordered a feasibility study in January 1993 on
expanding the Joint Venture and requesting loans from Greek banks and
the European Community. Had Tradex considered that its investment had
been expropriated by the Albanian State and the Joint Venture was failing
for that reason, it is hard to understand why it then invested further
money in such a feasibility study. In fact, during cross-examination, when
asked whether he mentioned any acts of expropriation in his applications
to the Greek banks and to the European Union, Mr. Azas said:

“T think no. We did not say we have the problem because, as I
told you, we did not believe serious problems at this time.”
(Tr 45, 46)

202. If this was so in January 1993 and as Tradex does not allege any
further expropriation measures after January 1993, even Tradex’ own

248 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

behaviour seems to confirm that it had not been deprived of its invest-
ment until the Joint Venture was dissolved in April 1993 in agreement
with Tradex.

203. In view of all these considerations, the Tribunal concludes that Tra-
dex has also not fulfilled its burden of proof that a general combined eval-
uation of the decisions and events starting August 1992 must be qualified
as an expropriation.

n) General Conclusion

204. At the end of its examination in this Section 5 of the Award, there-
fore, the Tribunal concludes that Tradex has not been able to prove that an
expropriation occurred regarding its foreign investment in the Joint Ven-
ture. And the Tribunal further concludes that the evidence presented by
Tradex is not sufficient to support its allegation of an expropriation in
such a way that the burden of proof would have shifted to Albania either
regarding a taking or regarding the attribution of a taking to the Republic
of Albania.

205. In view of this conclusion, if no expropriation occurred there is no
jurisdiction according to Art. 8 of the 1993 Law and no compensation is
due to Tradex according to Art. 4 of the 1993 Law. There is, therefore, no
need for the Tribunal to enter into an examination of the quantum of such
compensation.

6. Costs of the Proceeding

206. For its decision regarding the costs of the proceeding, the Tribunal
first takes into account that Tradex prevailed in the procedure concluded
by the Decision on Jurisdiction of 24 December 1996, and that now,
Albania prevailed on the merits. Furthermore, though, taking the dispute
as a whole, Tradex failed in its claim, it may be taken into account that, by
no means, this claim can be considered as frivolous in view of the many
difficult aspects of fact and law involved and dealt with in this Award.

207. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that, in view of all the circum-
stances of this dispute, each Party should bear its own expenses and the
costs of its own legal representation, and that the costs of the arbitration,

CASES 249

covered by equal advance deposits by both Parties, should be borne by the
Parties equally in shares of 50 %.

G. Decisions

208. For the reasons stated in the preceding sections of this Award the
Tribunal decides:

a) The claim by Tradex is denied.

b) Each Party shall bear its own expenses and the costs of its own
legal representation in this Case.

c) The costs of the arbitration, covered by equal advance deposits
by both Parties, shall be born by the Parties equally in shares of

50 %.
Fred EF Fielding Andrea Giardina
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel
President of the Tribunal

