DECISION ON JURISDICTION

in the Arbitration ARB/94/2 of the

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)

Tradex Hellas S.A. (Greece)

represented by Mr. E. Koronis
Counsel: Prof. L. Georgakopoulos

vs.

Republic of Albania
represented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food

which was represented first by Ms. Rezarta Gaba
and later by Mr. Sali Metani
Counsel: Prof. James Crawford
Mr. Philippe Sands
by the Arbitral Tribunal
consisting of
Prof. Dr. Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel, President

Mr. Fred Fielding, Arbitrator
Prof. Andrea Giardina, Arbitrator

Date of Decision: December 24, 1996

161

162 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

TABLE OF CONTENTS
A. Procedure 2"
B. Facts and Contentions 6
C. Legal Framework 14
D. Reasons for the Decision 28
1. The Bilateral Investment Treaty 28
2. Dispute only between Tradex and T.B. Torovitsa? 31
3. Tradex no “foreign investor”? 33
4. No good faith effort to settle amicably? 34
5. No “expropriation”? 39
6. No “retroactive” application of 1993 Law? 41
7. Conclusion on Jurisdiction 60
8. Further Procedure 60
E. Decision 61

* ‘The pages in the above table of contents refer to the page numbering in the original
decision.

CASES 163

A. Procedure

On November 2, 1994, the International Centre for Settlement of Invest-
ment Disputes (ICSID) received from Tradex Hellas $.A. (Tradex), a com-
pany incorporated in Greece, a Request for Arbitration against the
Republic of Albania (Albania). The Request asserted a claim for compen-
sation for an alleged expropriation in Albania. Details of the Request and
the Claim are described in a later section of this decision.

In the absence of agreement upon the number of arbitrators and the
method of their appointment more than 60 days after the registration of
the Request, Tradex Hellas chose the formula provided for in Art. 37 (2)
(b) of the ICSID Convention, i.e. a tribunal consisting of three arbitra-
tors, one appointed by Tradex, one appointed by the Republic of Albania
and the third, who would be the President of the Tribunal, appointed by
agreement of the Parties. By letter dated 06 June 1995, Tradex appointed
as arbitrator in this case Mr. Fred F Fielding, a US national. Mr. Fielding
subsequently accepted his appointment.

Though ICSID in various ways communicated the Request for
Arbitration and subsequent correspondence to Albania, no appointment
of a second arbitrator was received from Albania, and no agreement was
reached between the Parties with respect to the appointment of the third
arbitrator. As Art. 38 of the ICSID Convention and Art. 4 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules provide that, if the tribunal has not been constituted
within 90 days after the notice of registration of the Arbitration Request,
the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council shall, at the request
of either party and after consulting both parties as far as possible, appoint
the arbitrator(s) not yet appointed and designate an arbitrator to be Presi-
dent of the tribunal, Tradex requested ICSID to appoint the other two
arbitrators.

In December 1995, after notifying the Parties, the Chairman of the Admi-
nistrative Council of ICSID appointed Prof. Andrea Giardina, an Italian
citizen, as the second arbitrator, and Prof. Dr. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, a
German citizen, as the third arbitrator and President of the tribunal. Both
accepted the appointment.

By a decision of 26 December 1995, the Council of Ministers of Albania
accepted the appointments of Prof. Giardina and Prof. Bockstiegel as arbi-

164 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

trators and charged the Ministry of Agriculture and Food with represent-
ing the Republic of Albania in the proceedings.

The Tribunal scheduled a first session with the Parties for February 27,
1996, in Washington. After consultation with the Parties and with their
agreement, the session in Washington was cancelled and instead the first
session of the Tribunal with the Parties was scheduled to take place in
Frankfurt (Germany) on April 10, 1996.

At that session, in addition to other procedural details discussed and
agreed, it was agreed that subsequent meetings of the Tribunal with the
Parties would take place in London. Also at the session, counsel for Alba-
nia confirmed that Albania would shortly be sending to the Centre writ-
ten objections to jurisdiction in accordance with Arbitration Rule 41 (1).
Counsel for Albania gave a summary presentation of the grounds on
which such objections would be based. Counsel for Tradex responded.
Thereafter the proceedings on the merits were suspended in accordance
with Arbitration Rule 41 (3). Dates for written submissions by the Par-
ties were agreed upon and it was also provisionally agreed that an oral
hearing on jurisdiction would take place in London on September 10,
1996.

After the session in Frankfurt, written submissions by Albania were
received dated 15 April 1996, 10 June 1996, and 09 August 1996, and
written submissions by Tradex were received dated 31 May 1996 and 30
July 1996. Starting with Albania’s submission dated 10 June 1996, Prof.
James Crawford acted as additional counsel for Albania.

At the hearing in London on September 10, 1996, after an introduction
by the President of the Tribunal regarding procedural matters, both Par-
ties made presentations regarding jurisdiction, responded to the other
Party's presentation in several rounds and answered questions by members
of the Tribunal regarding certain factual or legal aspects related to juris-
diction. Also during the Hearing, Tradex asked whether Albania, in view
of its objections to ICSID jurisdiction, was ready to accept this case under
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules as provided for in the Albanian Invest-
ment Protection Law of 1992. Counsel for Albania responded that they
were not authorized to express any commitment of Albania regarding
UNCITRAL arbitration.

CASES 165

By a letter dated 25 September 1996 addressed to Albania represented by
the Minister for Agriculture and Food, Counsel for Tradex asked for a bin-
ding answer by Albania regarding acceptance of UNCITRAL arbitration
in this controversy and added that, if no answer was received within 30
days, he would interpret this to the effect that Albania “has not preferred
the arbitration of UNCITRAL”.

By a letter dated 8 November 1996 to ICSID, Counsel for Tradex con-
firmed that no answer had been received from Albania.

On 5 December 1996 ICSID provided the Tribunal with a copy it had
received of a letter dated 2 December 1996 from Counsel for Albania to
Counsel for Tradex containing the following wording:

“T am instructed by the Minister to respond to your letter of
25 September 1996.

As indicated during the hearing held in London on 10 Sep-
tember 1996, the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of
Albania considers that the dispute settlement rules applic-
able to the facts raised in Tradex’s Request for ICSID
arbitration, if any, are those set forth in Law No. 7594 of 4
August 1992.

Article 15 of the 1992 Law is therefore applicable. It provides
for UNCITRAL arbitration and sets forth certain conditions
and exclusions for such arbitration to be effective. Whether
those conditions or exclusions have been satisfied or are appli-
cable in respect of the matter brought by Tradex to ICSID
raises questions of fact and law which would need to be con-
sidered further by the Ministry of Agriculture and eventually
by any arbitral Tribunal that might be constituted pursuant to
the 1992 Law. In the first place it will be a matter for Tradex
whether to decide to make an application for arbitration
under UNCITRAL rules in reliance on the 1992 Law.”

B. Facts and Contentions

Hereafter, the Tribunal will give a short summary of the facts and conten-
tions in this case insofar as it is considered appropriate in the context of

166 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

this decision only dealing with jurisdiction. Regarding further details, ref-
erence is made to the various written briefs and documents submitted by
the Parties as well as to the oral presentations by the Parties and the docu-
ments submitted with these oral presentations.

Tradex entered into negotiations in 1991 with Albania in order to
undertake an engineering, industrial, and agricultural investment in
Albania. Negotiations were completed and Albania appointed a state
owned company, “T.B. Torovitsa”, to enter into a joint venture with Tra-
dex for realizing the investment on the basis of a proportional participa-
tion of 67 to 33. The land would be contributed by T.B. Torovitsa to the
joint venture.

On January 10, 1992, Tradex and T.B. Torovitsa signed an agreement
(‘the Agreement”) which established a joint venture between them. T.B.
Torovitsa was the owner of 1170 ha farm land in T.B. Torovitsa, Lezha,
Albania, and the object of the joint venture was the commercial and agri-
cultural use of this land connected with “the development of the agri-
cultural engineering, the cultivation of agricultural plants/ crops, fruits
and vegetables in the fields, development of stock raising / animal prod-
ucts, and the necessary activities pertaining to the processing of milk,
meat, and any activities relative to the land and to products yielded by it
for the domestic market or exportation” (Art. 2 of the Agreement). The
investment was planned for a duration of 10 years, renewable by either
Party for another period of 10 years.

On January 21, 1992, the Agreement was approved by an act of the Alba-
nian Ministry of Foreign Economic Affairs called Authorization No. 26.
The registrations of the joint venture with competent courts and adminis-
trative authorities were completed by March 7 1992.

Upon the authorization and the completion of formalities concerning the
establishment of the joint venture, Tradex commenced the investment
according to schedules contained in the Agreement in order to use the
farm during the first crop raising period in spring and summer 1992. The
investment included various payments totalling US $ 786,343 T.B. Toro-
vitsa contributed further payments and the capital thus established was
used to finance the cattle production, the field cultivation, the payment of
700 personnel. A feasibility study for a fodder plant and the plan for a fro-
zen vegetables factory were approved by the European Union and finan-

CASES 167

cing of Ecu 4,800,000 was secured partially by Tradex and partially by the
European Union and several banks.

Tradex claims that the following measures made the development of the
joint venture impossible and left the participation and investment in the
joint venture valueless so that these acts must be considered as acts of
expropriation:

a) On August 22, 1992, a most significant part of the farm was for-
mally expropriated and transferred to villages by Albania,
namely ha 140 amounting to 15% of the total farm and its most
fertile area.

b

Crop production, cattle, and seed supplies were stolen by the
villagers at an almost steady rate of 15% between March and
October 1992 and work of the management of the joint venture
was often impossible because of threats and acts of violence.

°

Beginning December 1992, the entrance of Tradex’s personnel
to the farm was completely impossible because of the seizure and
occupation of the farm by villagers.

d

By letters in late 1992 and early 1993, Tradex requested in vain
the intervention by Albania as a last effort to save the invest-
ment, but Tradex was obliged to hand over the 140 ha men-
tioned together with cultivations, cattle, and supplies.

Under the circumstances, Tradex and T.B. Torovitsa found it necessary to
dissolve the joint venture; the dissolution was agreed on April 21, 1993 “as
of 30.4.1993”. The Minutes of the Liquidators Meeting on March 2,
1994, resolved “that the liquidation was completed on 16.12.1993”.

Tradex evaluates the market value of its investment according to recog-
nized valuation methods and experience to US $ 2.2 Mill., less the value of
the machinery and equipment returned to Tradex as their share of the liq-
uidation proceeds of US $ 176,093. Thus, it estimates the net market
value of its loss at US $ 2,023,907 while it estimates its “real damages” to
be much higher.

On that basis, Tradex in this arbitration requests that Albania be obliged
and condemned to pay:

168 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

a

The market value of Tradex’s expropriated investment amount-
ing to US $ 2,023,907;

b

interest on that amount mentioned at current banking interest
rates, from December 1, 1992, until payment, and

°

fees and legal expenses of Tradex, to be calculated later.

Albania considers Tradex’s claim as unjustified. But Albania has not
responded to the merits of Tradex’s claim, as Albania objected to the juris-
diction of this Tribunal and, therefore, the procedure on the merits was
suspended and the present procedure only deals with jurisdiction in this
case. Albania claims that it has not, under Art. 25 (1) of the ICSID Con-
vention and Albanian Law No. 7764 of November 2, 1993 (the “1993
Law”), expressed its consent to the matter raised by Tradex in its Request
to be subject to ICSID jurisdiction, and that accordingly the Tribunal
does not have jurisdiction. In support of this submission, Albania invokes
the five arguments which can be summarized as follows:

— The facts presented by Tradex make it obvious that this is a
“dispute” between Tradex and T.B. Torovitsa and not between
Tradex and Albania;

— The 1993 Law does not apply retroactively and is therefore not
applicable to this “dispute”;

— Even if the 1993 Law does apply retroactively, Tradex was not a
“foreign investor” within the meaning of the 1993 Law when the
law came into force and cannot therefore rely on its provisions;

— Even if there is a “dispute” between Tradex and Albania and the
1993 Law is applicable, the “dispute” does not relate to an
“expropriation” within the meaning of the 1993 Law; and

— Tradex made no good faith effort to resolve the “dispute” amica-
bly before resorting to arbitration, as required by the 1993 Law
and general principles of international law.

For the purposes of this jurisdictional phase of the procedure, Albania
relies only upon the factual and evidentiary material provided by Tradex
as, in Albania’s view, these support Albania’s arguments on jurisdiction.
But Albania reserves the right to challenge the presentations by Tradex and
to introduce additional factual and evidentiary material as necessary at a

CASES 169

subsequent stage in these proceedings. Albania also expressly confirms its
commitment to the full protection of foreign investment in Albania, to
the ICSID system, and to its international legal obligations.

Regarding the factual background, Albania points out the following addi-
tional aspects: Under Albanian law, T.B. Torovitsa is a separate legal entity
will full capacity to sue and be sued. The capital provided by Tradex com-
prised machinery, chemicals, seeds, and irrigation investments while the
capital provided by T.B. Torovitsa comprised buildings, machinery, life
stock, and finished products as well as other assets. None of the joint ven-
ture’s capital comprised land. The 1992 Agreement noted that T.B. Toro-
vitsa was the owner of 1170 ha of land, that the area of land would not
change “during the term of the agreement”, and that the joint venture
“shall respect the supplementary needs which will be created for the land”
(Art. 15). In particular, Albania refers to Art. 16 of the Agreement which
provides that disputes between the Parties shall be resolved by arbitration
of the International Chamber of Commerce and that Swiss law shall be
applicable. Furthermore Albania points out that the authorization for the
joint venture dated January 21, 1992 expressly provided that the joint
venture should conform with Albanian legislation concerning land.

As far as the liquidation of the joint venture is concerned, Albania indi-
cates that the Dissolution Agreement dated April 21, 1993, led to the dis-
solution completed on December 16, 1993 according to the liquidators’
report. At the state of liquidation, the liquidators’ report valued the joint
venture’s net worth at lac 6,175,599.05 to be distributed in the propor-
tions 67 % to Tradex and 33 % to T.B. Torovitsa in accordance with Art. 5
of the 1992 Agreement. The liquidators’ report proposed that Tradex
receive a total of lac 20,842,420 comprising lac 8,804,675 in fixed assets
and lac 12,037,745 to be paid by T.B. Torovitsa in installments on the
basis of the progress in the liquidation and not later than December 31,
1994. A final partners’ meeting was held on March 2, 1994 which resolved
to approve the balance sheets drawn up by the liquidators and approved
the distribution of the net worth of the joint venture in accordance with
the liquidators’ report. Tradex did not reserve its rights against T.B. Toro-
vitsa or Albania at that final meeting.

The Tribunal will deal with further contentions by both Parties later in
this decision in the context of its reasons insofar as it considers such con-
tention relevant.

170 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

C. Legal Framework

The Tribunal will now briefly review the major aspects of the legal frame-
work which are relevant to this decision on jurisdiction.

First, reference must be made to the ICSID Convention which Albania
ratified on October 15, 1991 and which entered into force for Albania on
November 14, 1991. In this context, however, it should be pointed out
that neither of the Parties alleges a specific consent to ICSID arbitration in
a contract between Tradex and Albania. According to Tradex, Albania con-
sented to ICSID arbitration both in Albania’s law No. 7764 of November
2, 1993 (the “1993 Law”) and in the bilateral investment treaty between
Greece and Albania of August 1, 1991. On the other hand, Albania claims
that no consent to ICSID arbitration was affected in these two instru-
ments for the present case.

Starting in 1990, Albania has enacted several laws relevant for foreign
investments:

Albanian Law No. 7406 of July 31, 1990, on the protection of foreign
investments provided in particular that foreign investments in Albania
would not be subject to expropriation and any other similar measures,
except for specific cases made for public purposes, and always against the
payment of “damages”.

This law was replaced by Albanian Law No. 7512 of August 10, 1991,
which provided in particular that foreign investments would not be sub-
ject to expropriation or similar measures with exception of particular
cases and at any rate against payment of full “compensations”.

This law was further replaced by Albanian Law No. 7496 of August 4,
1992, which provided in particular:

Art. 9 “Foreign investments in Albania enjoy complete pro-
tection and guarantee. Foreign investments cannot be nation-
alized, expropriated, or be object of another measure equal to
them including the special cases in the interest of public use
and always with a legal procedure, with compensation and
without discrimination. Compensation must be given
immediately, be real and suitable.

CASES 171

Art. 15 “Disagreements between the foreign investor provided
with authorization according to law and the Council of Min-
isters, Ministry or the Local power organs in connection to:

a) any question that has to do with discrimination or other
question linked with compensation for reason foreseen in
Art. 9 and 10 of this Law.

b

Legitimacy or the continuation of legitimacy of authoriza-
tion will be presented for settling to an international
arbitration in accordance to rules of Arbitration Commit-
tee of UNO for the International Rights in Trade, that are
in force in the time of delivery of authorization, excluding
the cases when between the person that releases the autho-
tization and the foreign investor that takes the authoriza-
tion, had been agreed otherwise and this is written in the
authorization. Any decision of this arbitration is of a cut
form and obliged for all sides.”

In spite of certain aspects of the English translation of this law, both Par-
ties agree that this is a submission to the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

Most relevant to the present case is Albanian Law No. 7764 of November
2, 1993 (the “1993 Law”) which came into force on January 1, 1994, and
which, in particular, contains the following provisions:

“Article 1
Decisions

For the purpose of this Act

1. “Territory” means the territory under the sovereignty of
the Republic of Albania, including the territorial waters,
as well as the maritime area and the continental shelf over
which the Republic Albania, in accordance with interna-
tional law, exercises its sovereign and legal rights.

2. “Foreign investor” means:

a) any natural person who is a citizen of a foreign coun-
try, or

b) any natural person who is a citizen of the Republic of

172

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Albania with a permanent domicile in a foreign coun-
try, or

c) any legal person that is incorporated or constituted
under the law of a foreign country that directly or
indirectly seeks to make or is making an investment in
the territory of the Republic of Albania under its laws
or has made an investment under the laws regarding
the period of time from July 31, 1990 and further on.

3. “Foreign investment” means every kind of investment in
the territory of the Republic of Albania owned directly or
indirectly by a foreign investor, consisting of:

a) moveable and immoveable, tangible and intangible
property and any other property rights;

b) a company, shares in stock of a company and any form
of participation in a company;

c) loans, claim to money or claim to performance having
economic value; (handwritten addition: “and related
with an investment”)

d) intellectual property, including literary and _ artistic
works, sound recordings, inventions, industrial designs,
semiconductor mask works, know how, trademarks, ser-
vice marks and trade names; and

e) any right conferred by law or contract, and any license
or permit pursuant to law.

4. “Foreign investment dispute” means any controversy or
claim arising out of or relating to a foreign investment.

5. “Return” means an amount derived from or associated
with an investment, including profit, dividend, interest,
capital gain, royalty payment, management fee, technical
assistance fee or other fee, or returns in kind.”

“Article 4
Expropriation and Nationalization

Foreign investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized

CASES

either directly or indirectly or subject to any measure of tan-
tamount effect, except for a public purpose determined on
law; in a non-discriminatory manner; upon payment of
prompt, adequate and effective compensation and in accor-
dance with due process of law.

“Article 5
Compensation for Expropriation and Nationalization

1. Compensation shall be equivalent to the fair market value
of the expropriated investment immediately before the
expropriatory action was taken or become known, which-
ever is earlier.

2. Compensation shall be paid without delay and include
interest at a commercially reasonable rate from the date of
the expropriation, be fully transferable and convertible at
the market rate of exchange on the date of the expropria-
tion.

3. In cases in which a foreign investor asserts that all or part
of its foreign investment has been expropriated or consid-
ers the compensation therefor to be unsatisfactory, the
foreign investor shall have the right to prompt review by
the appropriate judicial or administrative bodies in accor-
dance with the provisions of Article 8 of this Act.”

“Article 8
Dispute Settlement

1. If a foreign investment dispute arises between a foreign
investor and either an Albanian private party or an Alba-
nian state enterprise, and it cannot be settled amicably,
then the foreign investor may choose to submit the dis-
pute for resolution to any applicable, previously agreed
upon dispute-settlement procedure. If no dispute settle-
ment procedure has been agreed upon, then the foreign
investor may submit the dispute for resolution to a com-
petent court or administrative tribunal of the Republic of
Albania in accordance with its laws.

174 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

2. If a foreign investment dispute arises between a foreign
investor and the Republic of Albania and it cannot be set-
tled amicably, then the foreign investor may choose to
submit the dispute for resolution to a competent court or
administrative tribunal of the Republic of Albania in
accordance with its laws. In addition, if the dispute arises
out of or relates to expropriation, compensation for
expropriation, or discrimination and also for the transfers
in accordance with Article 7, then the foreign investor
may submit the dispute for resolution and the Republic of
Albania hereby consents to the submission thereof, to the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Dis-
putes (“Centre”) established by the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
National of Other States, done at Washington, March 18,
1965 (“ICSID Convention”).

3. Any arbitral award rendered in accordance with this arti-
cle shall be final and binding on the parties to the dispute.
The Republic of Albania shall carry out without delay the
provisions of any such award and provide for its enforce-
ment in its territory.”

“Article 9
Status of this Act

1. Law No. 7594 of August 4, 1992, and any other provi-
sions within laws or decisions of the Government of
Albania that conflict with this Act are hereby abrogated.

2. In the event that the provisions of the Act are not in confor-
mity with any other international agreement or treaty rati-
fied by the Parliament, to which the Republic of Albania or
the Government of Albania is a party, the latter shall prevail
to the extent they provide greater rights or protection to the
foreign investor than those provided in this Act.”

In addition, Tradex claims that the jurisdiction of this Tribunal is also based
on the Bilateral Agreement between Greece and Albania for the Encourage-

CASES 175

ment and Reciprocal Protection of Investments signed on August 1, 1991,
and notified to be in force as of January 4, 1995 (the “Bilateral Treaty”). In
particular, this Bilateral Treaty contains the following provisions:

“Article 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Agreement:

1. “Investment” means every kind of asset and in particular,
though not exclusively, includes:

a) movable and immovable property and any other prop-
erty rights such as mortgages, liens or pledges,

b

shares in and stock and debentures of a company and
any other form of participation in a company,

c

loans, claims to money or to any performance under
contract having a financial value,

d

intellectual and industrial property rights, including
rights with respect to copyrights, trademarks, trade
names, patents, technological processes, know-how,
and goodwill,

e

rights conferred by law or under contract with a Con-
tracting Party, including the right to search for, culti-
vate, extract or exploit natural resources.

2. “Returns” means the amounts yielded by an investment
and in particular, though not exclusively, includes profits,
interest, capital gains, dividends, royalties and other fees.

3. “Investor” shall comprise with regard to either Con-
tracting Party:

a) natural persons having the nationality of that Con-
tracting Party in accordance with its law,

b) legal persons constituted in accordance with the law of
that Contracting Party and having their seat within its
territory.

176

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

4. “Territory” means in respect of either Contracting Party
the territory under its sovereignty as well as the territorial
sea and submarine areas, over which the Contracting
Party exercises, in conformity with international law, sov-
ereign rights or jurisdiction.”

“Article 4
Expropriation

1. Investments by investors of either Contracting Party shall
enjoy full protection and security in the territory of the
other Contracting Party.

2. Investments by investors of either Contracting Party shall
not be expropriated, nationalized or subjected to any other
measure the effects of which would be tantamount to expro-
priation or nationalization in the territory of the other Con-
tracting Party except for the public benefit and against
prompt, adequate and effective compensation. Such com-
pensation shall be equivalent to the market value of the
expropriated investment before the date on which the actual
or threatened expropriation, nationalization or comparable
measure has become publicly known. The compensation
shall be paid without delay and shall carry the current bank
interest until the time of payment; it shall be effectively real-
izable and freely transferable. Provision shall have been
made in an appropriate manner at or prior to the time of
expropriation, nationalization or comparable measure for
the determination and payment of such compensation. The
legality of any such expropriation, nationalization or com-
parable measure and the amount of compensation shall be
subject to review by due process of law.

3. Investors of either Contracting Party shall enjoy most-
favored nation treatment in the territory of the other
Contracting party in respect of the matters provided for
in this Article.”

“Article 8
Application

This Agreement shall also apply to investments made prior to

CASES

its entry into force by investors of either Contracting Party in
the territory of the other Contracting Party consistent with
the latter's legislation.”

“Article 10
Settlement of Disputes between an Investor and a Host State

. Any dispute between either Contracting Party and an
investor of the other Contracting Party concerning invest-
ments or the expropriation or nationalization of an invest-
ment shall, as far as possible, be settled by the disputing
parties in an amicable way.

N

. If such disputes cannot be settled within six months from
the date either party requested amicable settlement, the
investor or the Contracting Party concerned may submit
the dispute either to the competent court of the Contract-
ing Party, or to an international arbitration tribunal. Each
Contracting Party herewith declares its acceptance of such
an arbitration procedure. In the latter case, the provisions
of article 9, para 3-9, shall be applied mutatis mutandis.
Nevertheless, the President of the Court of the Inter-
national Arbitration of the International Chamber of
Commerce in Paris shall be invited to make the necessary
appointments whereas the arbitration shall determine its
procedure by applying the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules, as then in force. The award shall be binding and
enforced in accordance with domestic law.

3. During arbitration or the enforcement of an award the
Contracting Party involved in the dispute shall not raise
the objection that the investor of the other Contracting
Party has received compensation under an insurance con-
tract in respect of all or part of the damage.

&

. Incase both Contracting Parties have become members of
the Convention of 18 March 1965 on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of the
Other States, disputes between either Contracting Party
and the investor of the other Contracting Party under the
first paragraph of this Article shall be submitted for settle-

177

178 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

ment by conciliation or arbitration to the International
Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes.”

“Article 13
Entry into Foree—Duration—Termination

1. This Agreement shall enter into force thirty days after the
date on which the Contracting Parties have informed each
other, through diplomatic channels, of its ratification or
approval according to their respective legislation.

2. Unless notice of termination has been given by either Con-
tracting Party at least six months before the date of expiry of
its validity, this Agreement shall be extended tacitly for the
period of 10 years, each Contracting Party reserving the right
to terminate the Agreement upon notice of at least six months
before the date of expiry of the current period of validity.

3. In respect of investments made prior to the date of the
termination of this Agreement the foregoing Articles shall
continue to be effective for a further period of 10 years
from that date.”

The Tribunal will return to particular aspects of this legal framework and
the respective interpretations by both Parties later in the context of its
Reasons for the decision.

D. Reasons for the Decision

As shortly indicated above, Albania has raised four objections to jurisdic-
tion based on the 1993 Law and, when Tradex also relied on the Bilateral
Treaty, has objected to jurisdiction on that basis as well. The Tribunal will
now examine each of these objections after a brief summary of the posi-
tion each Party has taken respectively. To facilitate the presentation, how-
ever, the Tribunal will take up the objections in different order to that
used by the Parties.

1. The Bilateral Investment Treaty

The Tribunal will first deal with Tradex’s claim that its jurisdiction is based
on the Bilateral Investment Treaty between Albania and Greece. To this

CASES 179

claim, Albania objects by pointing out that the Treaty was not in force at
any relevant time to provide for jurisdiction in this procedure.

The Treaty was signed on August 1, 1991, but according to its Art. 13
came into force only on January 4, 1995, as notified in the Official
Gazette of the Government of Greece of February 14, 1995.

Its Art. 4 (2) provides that

“Investments by investors of either Contracting Party shall not be
expropriated, ...”

Its Art. 8 provides that the Treaty

“shall also apply to the investments made prior to its entry into
force.”

And Art. 10 (4) provides that, in case both states have become members
between a Contracting Party and an investor, a dispute

“shall be submitted”
to ICSID arbitration.

The Tribunal notes that, in the present procedure, the Request for Arbitra-
tion is dated October 17, 1994, and was received by ICSID on November
2, 1994, i.e. well before the entry into force of the Bilateral Treaty on Jan-
uary 4, 1995. It is, therefore, clear that at the time of its filing the Request
for Arbitration Tradex could not rely on a jurisdiction provided by the
Bilateral Treaty. The only question is whether, nevertheless, the later entry
into force of the Bilateral Treaty could, with delay, still be a sufficient
ground to justify jurisdiction from there on for this procedure. Such a
conclusion would be unusual insofar as both in national and international
procedural law jurisdiction must mostly be established at the time of filing
the claim. To divert from this usual result, here one might arguably rely on
the provision in Art. 8 that the Treaty also applies to investments made
prior to its entry into force. But this could as well be interpreted to the
effect that such application to prior investments can only take place if the
claim is filed after the entry into force. Indeed, this latter interpretation
seems to be the appropriate one in view of the wording of both Articles 4
(2) and 10 (4) of the treaty which say that investments “shall” not be

180 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

expropriated and that disputes “shall” be submitted to ICSID arbitration.
From these provisions it seems clear that the Contracting Parties had the
intention to only submit to ICSID jurisdiction regarding alleged expro-
priation and requests for arbitration occurring in the future, even if they
concerned investments made earlier.

As both the alleged expropriation and the Request for Arbitration in this
procedure occurred before the entry into force of the Bilateral Treaty, that
Treaty cannot establish jurisdiction in this case.

2. Dispute only between Tradex and TB. Torovitsa?

Regarding a possible jurisdiction based on the 1993 Law, first of all Alba-
nia claims that, to the extent that a “dispute” has arisen, it is “patently
one” between Tradex and its joint venture partner Torovitsa. No evidence
was provided that Albania either directly or indirectly expropriated the
investment or played any role in commercial difficulties which led to the
liquidation of the joint venture. Insofar as Tradex wanted to raise claims in
that context, it should have done so against T.B. Torovitsa. But in any
case, according to Albania, the proper forum would have been arbitration
under the rules of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) to
which Art. 16 of the joint venture agreement referred.

Tradex, on the other hand, stresses that it does not allege, in this proce-
dure, a dispute with or an interference by T.B. Torovitsa, but that the
Albanian State—not T.B. Torovitsa—proceeded to expropriation and
equivalent measures for which compensation is due. This claim could not
be brought before ICC arbitration on the basis of Art. 16 of the agreement
with T.B. Torovitsa.

The Tribunal agrees with both parties that any claim raised against TB.
Torovitsa related to obligations arising from the joint venture agreement
would be outside its jurisdiction. But this, and the fact that T.B. Torovitsa
is a state-owned company, does not exclude that another kind of claim is
raised by Tradex against the Republic of Albania on the basis of Albania’s
consent to ICSID Arbitration and alleging that Albania itself has taken
acts of expropriation against Tradex’s investment.

This is the case here where Tradex does not claim that any acts of T.B.
Torovitsa should be regarded as acts of expropriation, but claims that

CASES 181

acts or failure to act by the state of Albania itself have to be considered as
an expropriation. This is the kind of dispute covered by the consent by
Albania to ICSID arbitration in Art. 8 of the 1993 Law and this con-
clusion is not changed by the fact that the alleged expropriation is claimed
by Tradex to have affected its investment in the joint venture.

Therefore, there is a dispute with the Republic of Albania without preju-
dice obviously as to whether other conditions for jurisdiction are fulfilled
and whether the claim is justified on the merits.

3. Tradex no “foreign investor”?

Albania argues that, even if the 1993 Law would be applicable “retroac-
tively’—which will be discussed later in this decision—Tradex is not a “for-
eign investor” within the meaning of the 1993 Law. On the date of entry
into force of the 1993 Law, i.e. January 1, 1994, as the liquidation of the
joint venture had been completed on December 16, 1993, according to
Albania, Tradex could not be considered to still hold an investment at the
time relevant for Albania’s consent to ICSID arbitration by the 1993 Law.

Tradex, on the other hand, considers the 1993 Law applicable.

The Tribunal feels it can get sufficient guidance in this matter by the
wording of the 1993 Law. Art. 1 (Definitions) of the Law expressly says, in
its paragraph 2:

“Foreign investor” means:
a) ... or
b) ... or

c) any legal person that is incorporated or constituted under
the law of a foreign country that ... has made an invest-
ment under the laws regarding the period of time from
July 31, 1990 and further on.”

Tradex fulfills these conditions. It is incorporated in Greece. Its invest-
ment was made “under the laws” as confirmed by the official authorization
of January 21, 1992 by the Republic of Albania. Finally, its investment
was made after July 31, 1990.

182 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

The clear and detailed wording under the headings “Definitions” and
“Foreign investor” does not give room for further conditions, particularly
does it not require that the investment still exists at the time the law comes
into force or the dispute arises to qualify Tradex as a “foreign investor”
within the meaning of the 1993 Law.

This conclusion is without prejudice to the question of whether the con-
sent to ICSID arbitration in Art. 8 is applicable which will be dealt with
later in this decision.

4. No good faith effort to settle amicably?

Even if the 1993 Law were applicable, Albania claims that, according to
Art. 8 of the Law, ICSID arbitration can only be started after failure of a
good faith effort to settle the dispute amicable, and that Tradex did not
make such an effort.

Tradex claims that Art. 8 does not require such an effort and that, in any
case, it made such an effort as shown by the various letters to the Govern-
ment of Albania copies of which it has submitted in this procedure.

The Tribunal notes that Art. 8 (2), in its first sentence, granting access to
“a competent court or administrative tribunal of the Republic of Albania”,
expressly mentions the condition for the investment dispute:

“Tf ... it cannot be settled amicably, ... .”

The second sentence of Art. 8 (2), which is relevant here granting access to
ICSID arbitration, does not mention amicable settlement again and starts
as follows:

“In addition, if the dispute arises out of or relates to expropri-
ation, ... , then the foreign investor may submit the dispute
for resolution and the Republic of Albania hereby consents
to the submission therefor, to the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes ... ”

Reasons can be put forward, as the Parties did, both for the view that the
condition regarding amicable settlement in the first sentence should also
apply to the second sentence as well as for the view that the lack of this con-

CASES 183

dition in the second sentence shows it not to be a requirement for the start-
ing of an ICSID procedure. The Tribunal, however, does not need to decide
this matter, because, in its view, even assuming that a good faith effort for
amicable settlement is also required before an ICSID procedure, it considers
that Tradex has shown sufficiently such an effort having been made.

Tradex has submitted copies of five letters in this procedure which are rel-
evant in this context.

The first letter of October 31, 1992 to the Ministry of Agriculture
reported “serious problems” on the farm of the joint venture such as
destructions, stealings, disobedience and threats by the workers and sug-
gested the transfer of the investment to another farm.

The second letter of December 12, 1992 reported further to the first letter
to the same Ministry, and in particular that the community of Mali-Kolej
detached 15 hectares of land without notice or any other decision commu-
nicated and continued:

“6. We enclose an itemized memorandum of evaluation of
the positive damage, which runs to 195.851$ while the
loss of future income is in the order of 717.615 $.

7. After that we kindly request your interference to both
following directions:

a. Help to the normalization of our proceedings.
b. Help to the arrangements of our compensation.”

The third letter of December 12, 1992 to the same Ministry gave an eval-
uation of the equipment, products, and livestock Tradex held in the joint
venture, reported that Tradex, from the beginning of December 1992
could not go to the farm due to “obstacles from several persons,” raised the
risk of further damage, and then contained:

“... we consider that as necessary, to bring to your notice the
problem taking into account the law Nr. 7496/4.8.1992 con-
cerning “Law on Foreign Investments” as it is provided for in
the article Nr. 9 which appoints: ‘The foreign investment in
Albania stand under full protection and guarantee.’

184 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

For all the abovementioned we hope for your sincere sup-
port.”

Tradex’s fourth letter to the Ministry of Agriculture, dated January 21,
1993 referred to the former letters, mentioned that attempts to contact the
Ministry otherwise had been unsuccessful and that the situation had
reached a “deadlock” and then continued:

“.. only you could give as soon as possible the right solution.
We would not like to put in force the terms of the contract
concerning commitments.”

The fifth letter was a memorandum dated February 25, 1993 sent to the
“Sector of Privatization” at the Ministry of Agriculture, enclosing copies
of the first four letters and giving an update and, in particular containing
the following wording:

“... we feel the need to apply to you through this Memoran-
dum to thinking out a solution.”

It suggested “to organize a meeting to find an attainable solution as soon
as possible.”

The Tribunal notes that all five letters are addressed to the Ministry, that
the letters contain references to the 1992 Investment Law, to non-com-
mercial difficulties and interference from “outside” the joint venture, to
legal obligations, and to the amounts of possible damages, as well as a sug-
gestion to organize a meeting for finding a solution. The Tribunal further
notes that none of the letters was answered or resulted in any relevant
action by Albania.

The Tribunal finds these letters to be a sufficient good faith effort to reach
an amicable settlement within the meaning of Art. 8 of the 1993 Law
without prejudice as to whether the non-action by Albania can be consid-
ered to be an expropriation, a question which will be addressed hereafter.

5. No “expropriation”?

Albania further claims that there is no jurisdiction of this Tribunal,
because the submission to ICSID arbitration in Art. 8 (2) of the 1993 Law

CASES 185

requires a dispute arising out of or relating to “expropriation”, and that
the conduct of Albania alleged by Tradex in this case cannot be considered
as expropriation. Albania points out that a full examination of the alleged
expropriation can only take place in the procedure on the merits of this
case, but that in this jurisdictional phase of the procedure Tradex has to
provide at least prima facie evidence to show that an expropriation
occurred, as required by Art. 8 (2), and that Tradex has failed to do so.

Tradex, on the other hand, claims that the conduct of the Albanian gov-
ernment and particularly the lack of protection requested which led to the
liquidation of the joint venture on which it relies, fulfill the requirements
of Art. 8 (2) and will be supported by full evidence proving expropriation
in the procedure on the merits.

The Tribunal notes that the question of whether the alleged conduct of
Albania can be considered an expropriation is on one hand relevant under
Art. 8 (2) for the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and is on the other hand the
decisive issue relevant under Articles 4 and 5 of the 1993 Law or Articles 9
and 10 of the 1992 Law to decide on the merits of Tradex’s claim. At least
it cannot be excluded that under certain circumstances it would be consid-
ered an expropriation if a state permits the deprivation of land use from a
joint venture based on foreign investment or fails to grant protection
against interference if a legal duty for protection can be found to exist. But
the Tribunal feels a further examination of this matter in the context of
establishing jurisdiction according to Art. 8 (2) would be so closely related
to the further examination of the merits in this case that this jurisdictional
examination should be joined to the merits.

Therefore, the Tribunal decides, as it is authorized by Art. 41 (4) 2nd sen-
tence of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, that this objection should be joined
to the merits of the dispute, should the Tribunal find that the other objec-
tions to jurisdiction raised in this case cannot be accepted and thus this
procedure is continued on the merits.

6. No “retroactive” application of 1993 Law?

Both Parties have argued extensively regarding Albania’s objection to juris-
diction to the effect that the 1993 Law could not be applied “retroactively”.
To avoid repetition, the Tribunal will deal with these arguments within the
scope of its own reasoning insofar as its considers them relevant.

186 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

First of all the Tribunal sees only a limited relevance of a general discus-
sion of possible retroactive application of national laws and international
instruments in the context of this procedure. On one hand already there
does not seem to be a common terminology as to what is “retroactive”
application, and also the solutions found in substantive and procedural
national and international law in this regard seem to make it very difficult,
if at all possible, to agree on a common denominator as to where “retroa-
ctive” application is permissible and where not. What is at stake here is no
more and no less than the question of whether the submission by Albania
in Art. 8 of the 1993 Law to ICSID arbitration justifies jurisdiction under
Art. 25 of the ICSID Convention in this case, irrespective of whether this
should be considered a “retroactive” application. The Tribunal will, there-
fore, concentrate on the criteria established by Art. 8 and Art. 25. This
does not exclude that, in interpreting these criteria, it could be found use-
ful to take into account also provisions found in other Articles of the 1993
Law, in other laws, and in international instruments as well as in decisions
of national courts or international tribunals.

This analysis has to be done, insofar as it is relevant, in the context of the spe-
cific circumstances of this case. Thus it has to be recalled in particular that:
Tradex made its investments starting in 1992;

the conduct of Albania alleged to be an expropriation
occurred in 1992 and 1993;

the Albanian investment laws in force during that period
were those of August 10, 1991 and August 4, 1992;

the liquidation of the joint venture was completed on
December 16, 1993;

Tradex’s five letters to the Ministry of Agriculture were dated
between October 31, 1992 and February 25, 1993;

the 1993 Law entered into force on January 1, 1994; and
the Request for Arbitration was received by ICSID on
November 2, 1994.

Starting with Art. 25 of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal notes that,
although consent by written agreement is the usual method of submission

CASES 187

to ICSID jurisdiction, it can now be considered as established and not
requiring further reasoning that such consent can also be effected unilater-
ally by a Contracting State in its national laws the consent becoming effec-
tive at the latest if and when the foreign investor files its claim with ICSID
making use of the respective national law. Therefore, the 1993 Law
together with Tradex’s Request for Arbitration must be considered as suffi-
cient consent—if the submission in the 1993 Law is applicable as is exam-
ined hereafter.

The conclusion reached by the Tribunal is supported by the similar con-
clusion reached by another ICSID arbitral tribunal in the case Southern
Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, Decisions
on jurisdiction dated November 27, 1985 (3 ICSID Reports, at 112 et
seq.) and April 14, 1988 (3 ICSID Reports, at 131 et seq.), where the con-
sent of Egypt to ICSID arbitration and, consequently, the jurisdiction of
the arbitral tribunal was based on Art. 8 of the Egyptian law n. 43 of
1974. That Tribunal considered that such piece of legislation constituted,
on the side of Egypt, the “consent in writing” required by Art. 25 of the
‘Washington Convention. The Tribunal based its conclusion on the inter-
pretation offered in the Report to the Executive Directors, accompanying
the Convention, which explains that “a host State might in its investment
promotion legislation offer to submit disputes ... to the jurisdiction of the
Centre, and the investor might give its consent by accepting the offer in
writing (ICSID Docments concerning the Origin and the Formulation of
the Convention, Vol. II, P2, at 1069).

In the present case the formulation of Art. 8 of the Albanian Investment
Law of 1993 is surely more clear than the corresponding Art. 8 of the
Egyptian law mentioned above. Art.8, par. 2, of the 1993 Albanian Law
states unambiguously that “The Republic of Albania hereby consents to
the submission thereof to the International Center for Settlement of
Investment Disputes”.

It is conclusively to be added that this point appears uncontested by the
Republic of Albania which challenges the jurisdiction of this Tribunal not
on the ground of its lack of acceptance of ICSID jurisdiction through Art.
8 (2) of the 1993 Law, but on the ground of its evaluation of the effect in
time of such acceptance, which the Republic of Albania considers
restricted to the disputes arisen after the entry into force of the 1993 Law.

188 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Regarding the application of Art. 8 (2) of the 1993 Law, its first two crite-
ria mentioned have already been found above to be fulfilled: There is a
“foreign investment dispute ... between a foreign investor and the Repub-
lic of Albania”. And, assumed that it is a condition, Tradex has made a
good faith effort for an amicable settlement. Art. 8 (2), in its second sen-
tence, which contains the submission to ICSID arbitration, requires fur-
ther that the dispute arises out of or relates to “expropriation ...”. This
criteria was dealt with above in this decision to the effect that it would be
joined to the merits, should jurisdiction be otherwise established.

Regarding the “retroactivity”-issue the first question is when the dispute
“arose” in this case. If the time of the Request for Arbitration is decisive in
this regard, as Tradex’s Request was filed in November 1994 after the com-
ing into force of the 1993 Law, jurisdiction would be established. As seen
above, for application of the Bilateral Treaty, the Tribunal came to the
conclusion that the date of filing the Request for Arbitration was con-
sidered to be the relevant date. And it might well be argued that a dispute
is only identified sufficiently for an arbitration, once the Request for Arbi-
tration is filed. But the wording and criteria used by the Treaty, i.e. “shall
be submitted” to ICSID arbitration, differs considerably from Art. 8
where the criteria is when “the dispute arises”. It might perhaps still be
argued that the unilateral submission to ICSID arbitration by the 1993
Law only turns into the consent required by Art. 25 of the ICSID Con-
vention by the filing of the Request for Arbitration by the investor who
thereby notifies that he wants to use this option, but Art. 8 gives no indi-
cation that the time of this consent should be considered to be the date
when “the dispute arises”.

In its contention that it did make a good faith effort to settle the dispute
amicably, Tradex itself pointed out that already its 5 letters of late 1992
and early 1993 raise the claim against Albania. And, as seen above, the Tri-
bunal agrees with this. As a consequence, in interpreting the same Art. 8
(2) regarding both aspects, the dispute must be considered to have “arisen”
at that time, because one obviously cannot make an effort to settle amica-
bly a dispute which has not yet arisen.

The term “arise” indicates that the beginning of the dispute is relevant and
the term “dispute” is rather general and would usually be understood not
to be restricted to a legal procedure. Thus the complaints raised in the five
letters by Tradex to the Ministry in 1992 and 1993 would already have to

CASES 189

be considered as the “arising” of the dispute. Furthermore, irrespective of
whether a good faith effort for amicable settlement is required also before
submission to ICSID under the second sentence of Art. 8 (2), it cannot be
disregarded that already the first sentence uses the identical wording “dis-
pute arises” and there it is obviously meant to refer to a time before the
start of actual legal proceedings, because otherwise the requirement for an
effort to settle amicably would not make sense. Therefore, it must be con-
cluded that the “dispute arises” within the meaning of Art. 8 not at the
time of the Request for Arbitration to ICSID, but already when substan-
tive complaints were communicated by Tradex in its letters to the Ministry
in 1992 and 1993 before the coming into force of the 1993 Law.

It must therefore now be examined whether such an earlier dispute is cov-
ered by the submission to ICSID in Art. 8.

The time element which is subject of the arguments of the Parties on
“retroactivity” is first of all related to the wording in Art. 8 (2) 2nd sen-
tence: “In addition, if the dispute arises out of ... , then the foreign inves-
tor may submit ...” (emphasis added). The term “arises” would seem to
indicate a time in the present or in the future after the coming into force
of the 1993 Law, as the legislator has not chosen wording such as “has
arisen”. On the other hand, the term “if”, by which it is introduced could
be understood either as a conditional or a time element, while, had the
legislator chosen the term “when” instead, clearly only a time element
would have been introduced. In particular, the combination of the terms
“arises out of or relates to” speaks in favour of a conditional element. Par-
ticularly, as the two criteria are connected by the term “or”, this combina-
tion indicates that the words “arises out of —similar and supplemental to
“relates to”—are meant to describe a substantive relationship between the
dispute on one hand and the alleged “expropriation” etc. on the other
hand. It is a combination of terms found frequently in arbitration clauses
describing the required relationship between the contract and the dispute
to establish jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. An illustration is the
Model Arbitration Clause recommended by UNCITRAL which starts:
“Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or relating to this con-
tract, ... shall be settled by arbitration ...”. Considering these various argu-
ments together, the Tribunal concludes that the wording speaks in favour
of an interpretation as a conditional element and that, based on the mere
wording of Art. 8, the dispute must not have arisen after the entry into
force of the 1993 Law.

190 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Thus, the evaluation of the wording of Art. 8 leads the Tribunal to the pre-
liminary conclusion that a dispute which started before the coming into
force of the 1993 Law can be covered by the submission to ICSID juris-
diction. Now the Tribunal will have to examine whether this preliminary
result based on the wording of Art. 8 is affected by further considerations
for the interpretation of the 1993 Law. Such an additional examination
seems particularly appropriate here as the above evaluation of the wording
of Art. 8 is based on its translation into English, which, though it is not
challenged by either Party and neither Party has relied on the text in the
Albanian language, may not in all nuances be identical with the text in the
Albanian language.

An express reference to acts predating the effective date of the 1993 Law
is found in Art. 1 (2) c of the 1993 Law by which a “foreign investor”
qualifies for application of the Law, if he “has made an investment ...
from July 31, 1990 and further on”. While, as described above, thereby
Tradex clearly qualifies as a “foreign investor”, this does not necessarily
also require that any dispute arising after July 31, 1990 can also be sub-
mitted to ICSID arbitration under Art. 8. For, contrary to terms “or has
made” in Art. 1 (2) c, as seen above, Art. 8 (2) twice uses the term “arises”
and one might have expected the terms “or has arisen” had the legislator
wanted to include earlier disputes there as well. It is important to note,
however, that the date mentioned in Art. 1 (2) d, i.e. July 31, 1990 is iden-
tical with the date at which the first Albanian Decree on Foreign Invest-
ment came into force. Thus it seems to have been the intention of the
legislator that all investments made thereafter under the Albanian invest-
ment laws of 1990, 1991, and 1992 and governed by such laws should
now qualify for the new protection of the 1993 Law after its coming into
force. However, as far as disputes regarding such earlier investments are
concerned, excluding earlier disputes in Art. 8 would not be in contradic-
tion to the inclusion of earlier investments under Art. 1, because it would
be an understandable interpretation that, if a dispute started after the
entry into force of the 1993 Law regarding a foreign investment made ear-
lier, this should now fall under ICSID jurisdiction, while disputes starting
before such entry into force, for which the preceding investment laws pro-
vided other jurisdictions for dispute settlement, should remain in that
jurisdiction. It would, therefore, seem to the Tribunal that consideration
of Art. 1 of the 1993 Law does not necessitate an interpretation of Art. 8
(2) 2 to the effect that all earlier disputes must also fall under ICSID juris-
diction. But on the other hand, the reference to earlier investments in Art.

CASES 191

1 could more convincingly be interpreted as an argument in favour of a
similar application of Art. 8 so that not only the new substantive protec-
tion of the 1993 Law, but also the new procedural protection of that law,
i.e. ICSID jurisdiction, should now apply. This latter interpretation seems
more plausible to the Tribunal, because it would save both the investor
and Albania the need to engage two procedures and tribunals possibly
regarding the same investment should one dispute start before and another
start after the coming into force of the 1993 Law.

Art. 2 (2) of the 1993 Law provides that “foreign investment” shall receive
fair and equitable treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security” and
Art. 4 provides that foreign investments “shall not be expropriated ...”.
The continuous use of the term “shall” includes an element of a legal
undertaking as well as a time element and it does not seem possible to the
Tribunal to interpret it as a retroactive commitment by Albania for con-
duct in the past before the entry into force of the 1993 Law. However, the
difference in the wording in Art. 8 is obvious in that it does not indicate
such a time element referring only to future disputes. On the other hand,
the prospective application of Art. 2 discussed above is easily reconcilable
with the application of Art. 8 to earlier disputes, because it occurs fre-
quently that courts and arbitral tribunals have to apply certain substantive
tules of law which were in force during the relevant period though they
have been replaced by new rules as from a certain date. Accepting ICSID
jurisdiction for the present dispute under Art. 8, therefore, by no means
implies that the substantive protection rules of the 1993 Law would be
applicable in the consideration of the merits of this case.

Art. 9 (1) of the 1993 Law provides that “Law No. 7594 of August 4,
1992, and any other provisions within laws or decisions of the Govern-
ment of Albania that conflict with this Act are hereby abrogated”. Regard-
ing Tradex’s investments, as these were made in 1992, the 1992 Law
provided for UNCITRAL arbitration for claims regarding compensation
for expropriation. As both, the 1992 Law and the 1993 Law, due to its
Art. 1 (2) c, apply to earlier investments before January 1, 1994, a conflict
within the meaning of Art. 9 of the 1993 Law could be seen if an expro-
priation dispute could be submitted both to ICSID and UNCITRAL arbi-
tration, at least if one would not conclude that both options should be
open to an investor. If the submission to ICSID arbitration in Art. 8
would only apply to disputes that have arisen after the entry into force of
the 1993 Law, there would also be no conflict, because such earlier dis-

192 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

putes could only be submitted to UNCITRAL arbitration on the basis of
the 1992 Law. But again, it is more plausible to the Tribunal to interpret
the legislative intention of Art. 9 to the effect that after the coming into
force of the 1993 law the submission of a foreign investment dispute to
ICSID arbitration should cover also disputes that started earlier, rather
than both the investor and Albania having possibly to engage in two paral-
lel arbitration procedures, under the UNCITRAL Rules and under the
ICSID Rules, regarding the same investment.

The interpretation of Art. 8 and Art. 9 of the 1993 Albanian Law adopted
by the Tribunal appears confirmed by the developments in the Albanian
investment laws of 1990, 1992 and 1993. Clearly, there has been a contin-
uous evolution of such investment laws to assure a constantly better pro-
tection of the investments; this explains why an investment made in 1990
does not remain submitted to the rules in force at the moment in which it
was made, but is subsequently submitted to the new rules. The succession
in time of dispute settlement mechanisms is to be evaluated in such a con-
text of progressive evolution. It is consistent with this evolution that the
new dispute settlement mechanisms, which are more advanced and effi-
cient, as the recourse to ICSID provided by Art. 8 of the 1993 Law, can be
used also in relation to investments made and for disputes arisen before
the entry into force of such law, the only negative condition being that
previous procedures to settle the dispute have not yet been operated. This
solution is moreover confirmed by Art. 9 of the 1993 Law abrogating all
incompatible rules existing in previous legislation.

In regarding its conclusion on this issue of “retroactivity”, the Tribunal also
gave consideration to further arguments raised by the Parties, as follows:

Tradex has pointed out that, when the substantive law is retroactive, the law
of procedural remedies must be retroactive as well, unless otherwise pro-
vided. While this may be generally correct, as Tradex itself mentions, a law
can provide otherwise. Indeed, the above interpretation of the 1993 Law
comes to the conclusion that the limited “retroactivity” provided by Art. 1
(2) speaks in favour of a similar retroactivity of Art. 8.

Tradex has further pointed out that it is a general principle of interna-
tional and national transitional law in procedural matters that new provi-
sions cover disputes as well regarding earlier acts and that courts are
entitled and obliged to apply new procedural law also to events prior to its

CASES 193

coming into force. In that context, Tradex has referred to procedural law
and jurisprudence in certain countries such as Germany, to the Brussels
Convention on Jurisdiction and Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and
Commercial Matters, and to bilateral conventions on judicial assistance.
The Tribunal does not have to enter into a discussion of these general
principles, which might perhaps be of relevance if new procedural rules
were enacted regarding ICSID Tribunals. But at stake here is the ques-
tion of submission to ICSID jurisdiction which must be established
before any procedural rules can be applied. While jurisdiction of courts
does not depend on submission by the parties, but is decided by law,
jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal exists only if and insofar as the parties
have expressed their submission to it. This submission must, therefore,
be interpreted and found to exist in every given case, and that examina-
tion is exactly what has been done above in the interpretation of Art. 8.
A comparable situation in court procedure might be if a party relies on a
forum clause in a contract, but that is a comparison not used by Tradex,
and the Tribunal sees no reason to go into it as well.

Albania has pointed out that, should the jurisdiction of this Tribunal be
accepted regarding alleged expropriations before the coming into force of
the 1993 Law, this would mean that either the Tribunal would be called
upon to apply the 1992 Law in force at that time, or that the substantive
rules of the 1993 Law should also apply retroactively, and that neither
conclusion could be correct. The Tribunal agrees that, in principle, the
substantive rules of the 1992 Law are related to the submission to UNCI-
TRAL arbitration in that law, and that those of the 1993 Law must be
seen in relation to the submission to ICSID arbitration in that law. But
still, in view of the specific provisions regarding earlier investments in Art.
1 (2) c and regarding earlier laws in Art. 9, the Tribunal gives more weight
to the specific interpretation of Art. 8 (2) which the Tribunal has adopted
above.

Albania has further pointed out that it is a well established principle of
Albanian law that legislation will not apply retroactively unless expressly
provided for (with certain exceptions in penal law not relevant here) and
that there is no case in which an Albanian law has been applied
retroactively. And Albania has added that this presumption for non-retro-
activity in Albanian law is consistent with principles of general interna-
tional law, supported by international jurisprudence, and by analogy to
the protection of investment property rights in human rights law.

194 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Although such a presumption may indeed be found, the Tribunal considers
that it need not enter into a detailed examination of the existence and extent
of such a presumption. Its examination of the 1993 Law was based on the
consideration that ICSID jurisdiction could only be established by an
express submission by Albania. Then the Tribunal dealt specifically with
the question of whether the express submission to ICSID arbitration in
Art. 8 (2) covered the alleged earlier expropriations in this case, irrespective
of whether this should be considered a “retroactive” application or not.

Albania has also argued that a submission to arbitration must be presumed
to be only meant for future disputes unless otherwise expressed. The Tri-
bunal is not convinced that such a presumption can be established in
international arbitration. Submissions to arbitration, both in arbitration
between states and in international commercial arbitration, are found in
practice both regarding disputes that have already arisen and regarding
future disputes. In a number of national legal systems, the traditional
approach was even that a valid and binding submission to arbitration
could only be expressed, after a dispute had arisen. Without the guidance
of such an alleged presumption, therefore, the Tribunal has to interpret
the specific submission in Art. 8 (2) relevant here as to whether it applies
to the dispute in this case. As seen above, the Tribunal finds that this inter-
pretation confirms ICSID jurisdiction in this case.

Finally, some more general considerations may also be taken into account.
In several instances Albania has expressly pointed out to the Tribunal that
it confirms its commitment to the full protection of foreign investment in
Albania, to the ICSID system, and to its international legal obligations.
The 1993 Law, its contents and particularly the changes it introduced
compared to the preceding investment laws, is an illustration of this con-
firmation expressed by Albania. It would, therefore, seem appropriate to at
least take into account, though not as a decisive factor by itself but rather
as a confirming factor, that in case of doubt the 1993 Law should rather be
interpreted in favour of investor protection and in favour of ICSID juris-
diction in particular. Furthermore, a finding that ICSID jurisdiction does
not exist in the present case would obviously lead to the question of
whether the UNCITRAL Rules jurisdiction of the 1992 Law would then
be available to the investor Tradex. In that respect, in response to a specific
question raised by counsel for Tradex first in the oral hearing and later in
his letter of September 25, 1996, Albania has chosen not to express any

CASES 195

binding answer. Although there is, of course, no legal duty of Albania to
express itself in this ICSID procedure as to whether it would accept or also
object to jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal under the UNCITRAL Rules
should Tradex commence such a procedure, by choosing not to express
itself on this question, Albania leaves the option open that again it would
contest jurisdiction in such a procedure. It would seem to the Tribunal
that the availability of at least one of these two procedural means is a
major aspect of the protection of foreign investors. Interpreting, as done
above by the Tribunal, the submission to ICSID jurisdiction in Art. 8 of
the 1993 Law to cover also this dispute for which UNCITRAL jurisdic-
tion has not been accepted by Albania, would, therefore, also be consistent
with the express statements by Albania in favour of investors’ protection
and ICSID arbitration and the legislative pattern in its foreign investment
laws in favour of investors’ protection. Furthermore, it would save not
only Tradex, but also Albania, the additional considerable efforts and costs
that would be necessary for a new procedure under the UNCITRAL Rules
regarding the same dispute. These general considerations, therefore,
though not decisive, support the conclusion reached above by the Tribunal
on the application of Art. 8 of the 1993 Law.

Regarding this objection to jurisdiction, therefore, at the end of its own
considerations and of the examination of further arguments put forward
by the Parties, the Tribunal finds, irrespective of whether this should be
considered a “retroactive” application or not, that the conditions for
submission to ICSID arbitration in Art. 8 (2) of the 1993 Law are ful-
filled.

7. Conclusion on Jurisdiction

The Tribunal therefore concludes that its jurisdiction is established on the
basis of the 1993 Law, except that the issue is joined to the merits whether
or not an “expropriation” has been shown as required by the 1993 Law.

8. Further Procedure

Regarding the following procedure on the merits, the Tribunal feels both
parties should first be heard, in particular as to which periods of time they
require to file their submissions. Thereafter, a procedural order will be
issued.

196 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

E. Decision

1. The Tribunal has jurisdiction subject to the following: The issue as to
whether or not an “expropriation” has been shown as required by the
1993 Law is joined to the merits of this case.

2. After consultation with both Parties a procedural order will be issued

regarding the further procedure.

Fred Fielding Andrea Giardina
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel
President of the Tribunal

