INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

IN THE PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A.
v.
Republic of Panama

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

DECISION ON THE ADMISSIBILITY OF RESPONDENT’S PRELIMINARY
OBJECTION TO THE JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBUNAL
UNDER RULE 41(5) OF THE ARBITRATION RULES

 

Members of the Tribunal
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President of the Tribunal
Prof. Christoph Schreuer, Arbitrator

Prof. Jan Paulsson, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Date of the Decision: March 17, 2015

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A.

»
Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

Decision on the Admissibility of Respondent's Preliminary Objection to Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
Under Rule 41(5) of the Arbitration Rules

Background

Late on February 18, 2015 and just a few hours before the start of the First Session of the
Tribunal on February 19, Respondent filed "Panama's Objection pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 41(5)" (the "Objection"). The parties exchanged preliminary comments
on the timing of the Objection. The Tribunal invited Claimants' observations on the
Objection on February 20, 2015 and Claimants filed their observations on February 24,
2015. At the invitation of the Tribunal and in response to Claimants' observations,

Respondent commented on February 27, 2015.

The Tribunal invited another round of submissions from Claimants and Respondent; they

were received on March 4, 2015 and March 9, 2015, respectively.

The Parties’ Arguments

In their February 24 letter, Claimants seek a preliminary ruling that Respondent's 41(5)
submission be dismissed and its contents struck from the record on the ground that it was
filed late. Claimants note that Rule 41(5) requires that preliminary objections be raised

within 30 days of the date of the constitution of the Tribunal, which February 19, 2014.

As to the arguments made by Respondent during the First Session in support of the
Objection's timeliness, Claimants say that Rule 41(5) requires that a preliminary objection
comply with two temporal conditions: it should be received within 30 days of the
Tribunal's constitution and be filed before the First Session. They argue first: "The evident
purpose of the second condition is that if a tribunal intends to hold its first session before
30 days following its constitution, a party must file any Preliminary Objection before that
session. Any other interpretation of Rule 41(5) would render the '30 day' condition

ineffective."!

Claimants’ letter dated February 24, 2015, p. 2.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A.

»
Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)
Decision on the Admissibility of Respondent's Preliminary Objection to Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
Under Rule 41(5) of the Arbitration Rules

 

5. Second, the suspension of the proceeding is not a valid excuse for the late submission of
the Objection since the deadline for filing the Objection expired more than five weeks

earlier.

6. Third, there is no support in Rule 41(5) for Respondent's contention that it did not need to
file its Objection until it paid the initial advance on costs. Claimants' assert that
Respondent may not toll the time limits set forth in the Rules by refusing to pay their initial

advance on costs.

7. Claimants conclude by stating that it would be more appropriate to address Respondent's

Objection at the time discussed and foreseen in Draft Procedural Order No. 1.

8. In its letter of February 27, 2015, Respondent disputes Claimants' understanding of Rule
41(5). According to Respondent, Claimants read the phrase "at the earlier of" into the Rule
and ignore the purpose and intent of Rule 41(5). Respondent argues that Rule 41(5) fits
well with Rule 41(2), which authorizes the Tribunal at any stage of the proceedings and at
its own initiative to consider whether the dispute is within the jurisdiction of the Centre.
Respondent refers to Professor Schreuer's explanation that "This authority is designed to

avoid awards that exceed the tribunal's powers ... if the parties fail to make jurisdictional
12

 

objections or file these outside time limits.

9. According to Respondent, Rule 41(5) provides the most economical and efficient
procedure for disposing of or narrowing Claimants' case. Respondent fails to understand
why Claimants would not be amenable to a procedure that will save them costs since
Panama has the right to file objections to jurisdiction under rule 41(1) and plans to do so if

the Tribunal deems the Objection untimely.

10. Respondent further argues that the Tribunal has discretion under Rule 26 to extend

deadlines in special circumstances. Respondent adduces as special circumstance the

? Quoted in p. 4, emphasis added by Respondent.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A.

»
Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

Decision on the Admissibility of Respondent’ s Preliminary Objection to Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
Under Rule 41(5) of the Arbitration Rules

financial frailty of Claimants and the thinness of their case. Respondent pleads that "the

balance of harm or injury should the Tribunal decline to address the 41(5) Objection on

timeliness grounds would be against Panama, which would be forced to defend against

claims manifestly lacking a legal basis."

11. Respondent contends that Claimants' request is futile because Claimants recognize that
they will ultimately need to address Respondent's objections; in fact, if the Tribunal would
grant Claimants' petition, it would only force Respondent to resubmit its objections and

increase costs.

12. Respondent concludes by petitioning that the Tribunal dismiss Claimants’ requests or in the
alternative that "the Tribunal treat Panama's Rule 41(5) submission as its preliminary
notice of jurisdictional objections and its request for bifurcation of these proceedings,
without prejudice to any further jurisdictional objections Panama may, in accordance with

Rule 41(1), raise after Claimants file their Memorial. m4

13. In their letter of March 4 2015, Claimants reiterate that the expression "and in any event"
between the two temporal conditions of Rule 41(5) requires compliance with both. In fact,
the word "and" by itself would be sufficient, "in any event’ immediately after ‘and’

nS

reinforces the point. Furthermore, they say, the "intent-and-purpose" arguments of

Respondent do not support its interpretation of Rule 41(5).

14. Claimants point out that Respondent has provided no explanation as to why it failed to
comply with the 30-day deadline. Claimants invoke Draft Procedural Order No. | and take
the view that it defined an efficient process to deal with the jurisdictional issues.

Claimants also point out that Respondent "failed to cite any authority where an ICSID

tribunal allowed a belated 41(5) submission over the claimants’ objections."®

3Id.p.7.

Id. p. 10.

> Claimants’ letter of March 4, 2015, p. 2.
Id. p. 3.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A.

»
Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

20.

Decision on the Admissibility of Respondent's Preliminary Objection to Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
Under Rule 41(5) of the Arbitration Rules

Claimants argue that through the "thinness" argument Respondent in effect invites the
Tribunal to breach due process, prejudice the merits and decide that Claimants’ claims are
"thin". Against the efficiency argument, Claimants argue that, if under Rule 41(5) the
Tribunal would decide that the objections of Respondent are manifestly lacking in merit,
then this finding would be without prejudice to the same objections being raised by

Respondent as jurisdictional and merits arguments.

According to Claimants, it would not be wasteful for the Tribunal to address Respondent's
objections under Rule 41(5) during the jurisdictional phase because Respondent and the
Tribunal would by then benefit from Claimants’ Merits Memorial, Respondent may bring
all jurisdictional objections at one point in the process, and the Tribunal's decision would

be dispositive.

Claimants conclude that a bifurcated jurisdictional phase exclusively based on the Request
for Arbitration would reach dispositive conclusions before Claimants have not yet

presented their full case.

Claimants request that the Tribunal reject Respondent's Objection, that Respondent's
submissions and attached documents be struck from the record, and that the Tribunal

proceed to finalize Procedural Order No. 1.

Respondent's letter of March 9, 2015 again disputes Claimants’ arguments on the plain
meaning of Rule 41(5). Respondent finds support for its position in the rationale of this
tule as explained in the Working Paper of the Secretariat Suggested Changes to the ICSID
Rules and Regulations (the "Working Paper"): "Rule 41(5) was designed so that the
Tribunal could ‘at an early stage of the proceeding be asked on an expedited basis to

dismiss all or part of claim on the merits.'"7

Respondent points out that Claimants do not address in a meaningful manner the Tribunal's

duty to consider jurisdictional questions at any time of the proceeding and also at its own

7 Respondent's letter of March 9, 2015, p. 3. Emphasis added by Respondent.

Il.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A.

»
Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

21.

22.

23.

Decision on the Admissibility of Respondent's Preliminary Objection to Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
Under Rule 41(5) of the Arbitration Rules

initiative. According to Respondent, Claimants' approach ignores the purpose of Rule
41(5) "as a means of testing the merits of claims as presented by the claimants themselves
in the respective requests for arbitration, before the parties have to incur the expense and

distraction of trying to flesh out and then defend claims manifestly without legal merit."*

According to Respondent, the efficiency issue is one of timing since both parties concede
that the Tribunal needs to address the jurisdictional issues raised by Respondent.
Furthermore, Claimants’ argument is premised on an erroneous understanding of Rule
41(5), namely, that rulings under Rule 41(5) are not dispositive. Respondent explains that
the purpose of the rule is to narrow or dispose of the claims at an early stage through the
process provided by this rule, and that, if Respondent would prevail in each one of the
issues raised by the Objection, the decision of the Tribunal would be dispositive of these

issues without prejudice to the merits of the dispute.

To conclude, Respondent requests that the Tribunal accepts its Rule 41(5) Objection, that
it sets out an schedule to resolve it or, in the alternative, that the Tribunal treat the

Objection as a preliminary notice of jurisdictional objections and request for bifurcation.

Analysis of the Tribunal

The arguments of the parties raise three main issues: First, the meaning of the temporal
conditions of Rule 41(5) and whether the Objection complies with them. Second, if this is
not the case, whether the Tribunal should use its discretion under Rule 41(2) to consider
the Objection at its own initiative. Third, if the Tribunal decides that both of these issues in
the negative, whether it should then strike the Objection from the record or deem it to be a

notification of jurisdictional objections and a request for bifurcation.

SI. p. 3. Emphasis in the original.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A.

»
Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)
Decision on the Admissibility of Respondent's Preliminary Objection to Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
Under Rule 41(5) of the Arbitration Rules

(a) C lic of the Objection with the Temporal Conditions of Rule 41(5)

 

For ease of reference the Tribunal reproduces below the disputed part of Rule 41(5):

"Unless the parties have agreed to another expedited procedure for making preliminary
objections, a party may, no later than 30 days after the constitution of the Tribunal, and in
any event before the first session of the Tribunal, file an objection that a claim is
manifestly without merit [...]."

Respondent understands this clause to mean that a party has two options: either to file an
objection within the 30 days after the constitution of the Tribunal or before the first session
of the Tribunal whenever such session will take place. On the other hand, Claimants read
this sentence to mean that an objection needs to be filed within 30 days of the constitution
of the Tribunal and, in the event that the first session takes place before the 30 days, no

later than the first session.

The Tribunal first notes that the two phrases are linked by the conjunctive preposition
"and". It is used to connect words, phrases, sentences; adding one thing to another without
modifying either. Does "in any event" when added to "and" convert the conjunctive
preposition "and" in a disjunctive preposition "or"? This would be the effect attributed by
Respondent to "in any event". The Tribunal does not see how the expression "in any
event" can by its terms convert two cumulative conditions into alternatives. If this had been
the intent of the drafters of Rule 41(5), they would plainly have used the more

straightforward "or".

The sense of the clause becomes clearer if analyzed in context. The expression "and in any
event" is part of a sentence that provides for an expedited procedure unless the parties had
agreed otherwise. The interpretation alleged by Respondent permits an extension of the
time limit in function of the first session, which may take place before 30 days or at a later
date within 60 days from the constitution of a tribunal or even later if agreed by the parties.
The sense of expediency in that case is lost. For this reason, if there were any doubt as to

the plain meaning of the clause, the more expedient of the two options should be chosen.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A.

»
Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

Decision on the Admissibility of Respondent's Preliminary Objection to Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
Under Rule 41(5) of the Arbitration Rules

Turning now to the purpose and intent of the clause, the Respondent's interpretation seems
to the Tribunal to be at cross-purposes with the intent of its introduction in the 2006
version of the Arbitration Rules. The purpose of the rule as shown by ICSID's Working
Paper on which Respondent relies is precisely to avoid the situation now faced by the
Tribunal. Even after discounting the period during which proceedings were suspended, the
filing of the Objection on February 18, 2015, hours before the First Session, could hardly

be considered "expedient."

The Tribunal concludes that the disputed sentence in Rule 41(5) means that the two
temporal conditions are cumulative; a preliminary objection needs to be filed within thirty
days from the constitution of the Tribunal and before the First Session of the Tribunal. °

The Request met the second condition but not the first.

(b) Should the Tribunal use its discretion under Rule 41(2)?

Respondent has recalled that, under Rule 41(2), the Tribunal may at its own initiative
consider whether a claim is within the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the

Tribunal.

Claimants oppose the notion that the Tribunal should now consider the Objection on
grounds of efficiency and due process since the Tribunal does not have at its disposal the

Claimants’ full articulation of their claim, but only the Request for Arbitration.

The Tribunal notes an element of misunderstanding in the arguments made by Claimants.
They read the last sentence of Rule 41(5) as if a decision of the Tribunal rejecting the
Objection would not be dispositive. This is not the Tribunal's understanding of Rule 41(5).

In relevant part it reads as follows: "The decision of the Tribunal shall be without prejudice

° This interpretation of Rule 41(5) is confirmed by the doctrine: "Whereas the filing of an objection to jurisdiction is

to be made within the time limit for the filing of the counter-

 

nemorial, the summary procedure must be initiated

 

within 30 days of the tribunal's constitution and before its first session." Comment on the Summary procedure of
Rule 41(5) in C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention. A Commentary. Second Edition (2010), p. 543.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A.

»
Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)
Decision on the Admissibility of Respondent's Preliminary Objection to Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
Under Rule 41(5) of the Arbitration Rules

 

to the right of a party to file an objection pursuant to paragraph (1) or to object, in the
course of the proceeding, that a claim lacks legal merit." As the Tribunal understands it, a
decision pursuant 41(5) rejecting an objection would be dispositive, but would not deprive
Respondent of its right to raise objections under Rule 41(1) that are distinct from the
objections already decided under Rule 41(5). This understanding is underscored by the
purpose of Rule 41(5), which is to expedite the proceeding. To have two bites at the same
apple, as Claimants have put it, would not be expedient but wasteful. Having clarified this

point, the Tribunal turns to the argument of due process.

33. Rule 41(5) defines the process to be followed when a preliminary objection is made. As
pointed out by Respondent, if it were not possible to respect due process because the
objections are heard on the basis of a request for arbitration, then there would never be an

opportunity to apply Rule 41(5).

34. These clarifications notwithstanding, the Tribunal is concerned about the efficiency of the
proceeding. Respondent has reserved its right to raise other objections to the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal besides the Objection, as it is entitled to do under Rule 41(1). The question
here is not whether a preliminary objection will be addressed, but when it will be
addressed. The Tribunal is concerned to add at its own initiative a new phase to the
proceedings by considering the Objection at this stage when Respondent without any
convincing explanation filed it late and intends to resubmit it together with additional
objections. Evidently the Tribunal needs to deal with any objection Respondent may raise,
and Rule 41(3) gives the Tribunal flexibility’ as to when to consider them. The
circumstances in which the Objection has been filed and the procedural opportunities that
exist for the Tribunal to consider Respondent's objections at a later stage of the proceeding
do not justify the Tribunal's exercise of discretion under Rule 41(2) in the sense suggested

by Respondent.

'° Modified in 2006 "to introduce some flexibility and make the suspension of the proceeding on the merits of the
case, on the raising of a preliminary objection to jurisdiction, discretionary for the tribunal." Working Paper, p. 8.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A.

»
Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

35.

36.

37.

Decision on the Admissibility of Respondent's Preliminary Objection to Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
Under Rule 41(5) of the Arbitration Rules

(c) Should the Tribunal strike from the record the Objection or should the Tribunal
deem it to be a notification of jurisdictional objections and a request for

bifurcation?

Claimants have requested that the Objection and attached documentation be struck from
the record. For its part, Respondent petitions that the Tribunal consider the Objection as a

notification of jurisdictional objections and a request for bifurcation.

From the perspective of the Tribunal, the proceeding will be most efficient if Respondent
and the Tribunal have the benefit of Claimants’ full Memorial and the Tribunal has an
overview of all Respondent's objections before it decides on any possible bifurcation of the
proceedings. As discussed at the First Session, if the Tribunal were to decide to bifurcate

the proceeding, it would be inclined to limit pleadings to only one round.

The Tribunal has reached the conclusion that the Objection did not meet one of the
conditions under Rule 41(5). Nonetheless it would be of no consequence to strike it from
the record since Respondent intends to file the Objection again. Therefore, the Tribunal is
prepared to accept the Objection as a notification of jurisdictional objections, without any
further procedural consequences until the Respondent either makes supplementary
jurisdictional objections or gives notice that no more will be forthcoming; this would
exhaust all such objections of Respondent, which are of course to be filed as per Rule

41(1) at the latest on the due date of the Counter-Memorial.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A.

Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)
Decision on the Admissibility of Respondent's Preliminary Objection to Jurisdiction of the Tribunal
Under Rule 41(5) of the Arbitration Rules

 

DECISION

38. For the foregoing reasons the Tribunal has decided:

1) That the two temporal conditions set forth in Rule 41(5) are cumulative and the
Objection does not meet the 30-day limit from the constitution of the Tribunal for
filing a preliminary objection under Rule 41(5).

2) To deem the Objection as a provisional notification of jurisdictional objections to be
supplemented with any further objections of Respondent as soon as feasible after
receipt of Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits and no later than the due date of the

Counter-Memorial, as required by Rule 41(1).

3) To defer its decision on bifurcation until it has received the Memorial on the Merits

and Respondent's jurisdictional objections are complete.

4) To issue Procedural Order No. | in accordance with this decision.

[signed]

On behalf of the Tribunal
Andrés Rigo Sureda
President of the Tribunal
Date: March 17, 2015

