INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A.
v.
Republic of Panama

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT’S REQUEST FOR PROVISIONAL MEASURES
RELATING TO SECURITY FOR COSTS

 

Members of the Tribunal
Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda, President of the Tribunal
Prof. Christoph Schreuer, Arbitrator
Prof. Jan Paulsson, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Mercedes Cordido-Freytes de Kurowski

Date of the Decision: January 21, 2016

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A. v. Republic of Panama

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures Relating to Security for Costs.

I. Introduction

1.

5.

On December 18, 2015, the Republic of Panama (“Panama” or “Respondent’”) filed
simultaneously “Panama's Jurisdictional Objections and Memorial on Jurisdiction” (the
“Memorial on Jurisdiction”) and the “Request for Provisional Measures relating to
Security for Costs” (the “Request”).

On December 22, 2015, the Tribunal invited Transglobal Green Energy, LLC (“TGGE”
or “Transglobal’’) and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A. (“Claimants”) to comment on the
Request no later than January 6, 2016.

On January 4, 2016, Claimants requested the Tribunal “how much time [it] may have to
respond to these issues in an organized and appropriate manner”.

On January 6, 2016, the Tribunal extended the time limit for Claimants to reply until
January 13, 2016.

On January 13, 2013, Claimants replied and opposed the Request (the “Response”’).

IL. Respondent’s Arguments

6.

Respondent recalls that the Tribunal denied its previous request for shifting the costs of
this arbitration! on the basis of the limited nature of the record before the Tribunal at that
time. Respondent argues that, now that the Tribunal has received the Memorial on the
Merits, it is in a better position to evaluate the Claimants’ financial condition and the
weakness of Claimants’ case.

Respondent acknowledges that the standard for recommending provisional measures is
high and that few tribunals have required security for costs, but “[t]he Tribunal should not
be so focused on the decisions of other tribunals facing circumstances distinct from this
one that it loses sight of the particular facts and circumstances before it.”?

According to Respondent, the evidence before the Tribunal confirms that Claimants never
owned or held a qualifying investment, lack any meaningful assets, their financial

1 Decision on Respondent’s Request for Shifting the Costs of the Arbitration, dated March 4, 2015 ("Decision on
Shifting Costs").
? Request, para. 5.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A. v. Republic of Panama

(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures Relating to Security for Costs.

situation is not in any way attributable to Panama, and have not been able to replace
counsel or secure third party funding.

Respondent complains that Claimants prosecute their case in an abusive manner by not
providing English translations of some exhibits as mandated in Procedural Order No. 1,
and the translations provided are slanted in Claimants’ favor. Respondent further notes
that the Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits is not accompanied by any witness statement
or report on quantum by an independent expert. According to Respondent, “This chaotic
style of litigation has greatly increased the cost and burden on Panama to ascertain the
essence of Claimants’ complaints, and to address them appropriately”?.

. Respondent submits that when these facts are considered together they constitute a

sufficient basis for the Tribunal to recommend provisional measures for security for costs.

. Respondent recalls that Panama was unable to enforce a cost award in the case of Nations

Energy Corp. et al v. Panama and states that if it were “left without the ability to collect
an award of costs and legal fees from a financially irresponsible claimant for the second
time, could force Panama to rethink its participation in the ICSID system generally.”*

. Respondent argues that the Tribunal has the authority to recommend provisional measures

under Article 47 of the Convention and Arbitration Rule 39 and that the term
“recommend” in Article 47 of the Convention is functionally equivalent to “order”.
Respondent further argues that provisional measures may be granted even if parties
contest the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

. According to Respondent, the Request meets the requirements for provisional measures:

there is a legal right to be preserved, and the measures requested are urgent and necessary.
Respondent explains that it has the right to claim reimbursement of the costs it incurs in
the course of the arbitration, and the measure is urgent because it cannot await the outcome
of an award on the merits. Given the funds left in this arbitration account, the “granting of
provisional measures at this juncture would protect Panama against the considerable
additional legal costs of a hearing or further written submissions.”°

. Respondent further explains that the measures are necessary because the evidence before

the Tribunal confirms the lack of funds of Claimants. Transglobal Panama is a special
purpose vehicle with no assets, and TGGE is a limited liability corporation the balance
sheet of which states: “To date, the company has been supported financially by its

8.

3 Id., para.

*Id., para.
5 Id., para.

13. Emphasis in the original.
26.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A. v. Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures Relating to Security for Costs.

members who have contributed all necessary capital and therefore the Company has no
debt.”°

15. Respondent argues that it “should not be forced to pursue and pay for post-award litigation
to pierce the veil of a financially-challenged limited liability corporation when this
Tribunal can protect Panama now with a security for costs order.” It is also Respondent’s
contention that, “[o]n balance, Panama runs a far greater risk of suffering potential harm
in the absence of provisional measures than do Claimants in the event the Tribunal
recommends security for costs.”*

a

. As relief, Respondent requests that the Tribunal order Claimants to:

“a) Post a bond, payable to the order of the Republic of Panama, in the amount of
US$2,500,000 issued by a creditworthy bank or insurance company in the Republic
of Panama or in the United States to cover an award of costs, legal fees and/or
expenses of Respondent; and that

b) it renew such a bond as necessary so that it be effective from the date of the
Tribunal's decision on the request for Provisional Measures, until drawn by
Respondents [sic], or until Claimants pay to Panama any arbitral costs, legal fees
and/or expenses awarded to Respondent in this case.”?

17. In a footnote to the amount of the bond, Respondent explains that “Panama offers this
figure as a good faith estimate of the procedural costs and legal fees that it expects it will
accrue as part of defending this case. This sum may require periodic increases depending
on developments in the proceeding.”

III. Claimants’ Arguments

18. Claimants recall that ICSID tribunals have held that security for costs requests should be
granted only in exceptional circumstances. According to Claimants, it is not unusual for
tribunals to be faced with claimants who are corporate investment vehicles with few assets
created for the purpose of the investment. Furthermore, if security for costs would be
granted every time there is the risk of an unpaid costs award, access to justice might
frustrated notwithstanding potentially meritorious claims.

° Quoted in para. 30 of the Request.
7 Request, para. 30.

8 Id., para. 31.

9 Id., para. 32.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A. v. Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures Relating to Security for Costs.

19. Claimants distinguish themselves from RSM and the exceptional circumstances on which
the RSM tribunal justified to grant the request for security for costs, namely, a history of
unpaid adverse costs awards, admitted lack of financial capacity, and admitted but
undisclosed third-party funder.

2

S

. Claimants argue that none of these circumstances are applicable to them. Claimants affirm
that Transglobal has never had an ICSID proceeding discontinued or failed to pay an
ICSID costs award. Claimants point out that their failure to pay their share of the initial
advance payment is mirrored by Panama's own failure to pay by the deadline set by the
Tribunal.

2

. According to Claimants, Transglobal has not admitted that it lacks the financial capacity
to prosecute this arbitration or satisfy an adverse costs award. Claimants explain that they
are project companies and “[t]heir owners contribute capital and the subsequent
investments are reflected as losses on a balance sheet until the project is successfully
developed.”' Claimants further explain that, when in late 2011 Transglobal presented its
balance sheet to ASEP"', Transglobal demonstrated that it could arrange the financing that
it needed to acquire the power plant that Ideal had developed and ASEP never disputed it.

2)

Nv

. Claimants confirm that they do not currently have third party funding and conclude by
affirming their opposition to the Request.

IV. Analysis of the Tribunal
1. The Legal Framework

23. The authority of the Tribunal to recommend provisional measures is based on Article 47
of the Convention and Arbitration Rule 39(1), which are reproduced here for ease of
reference. Article 47 provides:

“Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that the
circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which should be
taken to preserve the respective rights of either party.”

24. Arbitration Rule 39(1) reads as follows:

“At any time after the institution of the proceeding, a party may request that
provisional measures for the preservation of its rights be recommended by the
Tribunal. The request shall specify the rights to be preserved, the measures the

© Response, para. 13.
“The National Public Services Authority of Panama.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A. v. Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures Relating to Security for Costs.

recommendation of which is requested, and the circumstances that require such
measures.”

25. Based on a long line of decisions of ICSID tribunals starting with the Maffezini tribunal'?,
Respondent has argued that the term “to recommend” provisional measures in Article 47
is the functional equivalent of “to order” and, hence, provisional measures recommended
by the Tribunal are binding. Claimants have not disputed this interpretation. The Tribunal
will limit itself to add that the Spanish version of the Arbitration Rules uses the verb
“dictar”, a term equivalent “to order”: “[...] y las circunstancias que hacen necesario el
dictado de tales medidas.” Furthermore, the measure requested by Respondent is related
to the allocation of costs of the proceeding; the Tribunal has authority to mandate cost
allocation under Article 61(2) of the Convention.

2. The Jurisdiction of the Tribunal

26. Respondent has argued that the Tribunal’s authority to recommend provisional measures
is unaffected by objections to its jurisdiction. Claimants have not contested this authority.
The Tribunal is satisfied that it has prima facie jurisdiction to recommend provisional
measures the urgency and need of which may require a decision before the Tribunal
decides on objections to its jurisdiction. Arbitration Rule 39(2) mandates the Tribunal to
give priority to the consideration of a provisional measures request. Furthermore, ICSID
tribunals have consistently held that they have jurisdiction to decide on provisional
measures in such circumstances since Holiday Inns and Others v. Morocco", the first
ICSID case.

3. Requirements of a Request for Provisional Measures

27. As provided by Article 47 of the Convention, a request for provisional measures must
concern the rights to be preserved, include the measures to be taken by the Tribunal and
explain the circumstances that require them.

28. Respondent has argued that the rights to be preserved include substantive rights -the rights
in dispute- and procedural rights. Tribunals differ on whether Article 47 covers only “the
rights in dispute”!* or may be read to include “rights relating to the dispute.” '!> The

 

2 Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Procedural Order No. 2 on Provisional
Measures dated October 28, 1999, para. 9 ("Maffezini Procedural Order”).

8 Holiday Inns S.A. and others v. Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/72/1), Decision of July 2, 1972, P. Lalive, “The
First “World Bank” Arbitration — Some Legal Problems”, B.Y..L., 1980, p. 123 at, p. 136.

4 Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1), Decision on Provisional
Measures dated December 9, 1983, p:
'5 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24), Order dated September 6, 2005,
para. 40.

 

 

   

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A. v. Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures Relating to Security for Costs.

Tribunal concurs in that a wider reading of the parties’ rights is justified in light of the
unspecified nature of the rights to be preserved in Article 47. Procedural rights may
include the right to the status quo, the right to the non-aggravation of the dispute and the
right not to prejudice the execution of the award.'®

29. Article 47 of the Convention leaves open the circumstances that may require provisional
measures. Tribunals have determined that they must be urgent and necessary. These terms
have been understood in the sense that the measures requested are required to preserve the
tights, but their need makes it peremptory for the Tribunal to recommend them before the
decision on objections to jurisdiction or the award on the merits.

4. Does the Request meet these requirements?

30. The Tribunal is satisfied that the Request meets the requirements of specifying the right
to be preserved -the right to claim reimbursement of its arbitration costs- and the measures
to be recommended. The issue for the Tribunal is whether the circumstances meet the
necessity and urgency requirements inherent to the extraordinary nature of the provisional
measures.

31. In the Request before the Tribunal the extraordinary quality of the remedy requested is
combined with the exceptional nature of the petitioned measure. Indeed, seldom tribunals
order a party to provide security for costs and, as a provisional measure, only one instance
has been brought to the attention of the Tribunal: the majority decision on provisional
measures in the case of RSM v. Saint Lucia!’.

32. Respondent already brought this decision to the consideration of the Tribunal as part of
its arguments in support of the Request for Shifting Costs. In rejecting that request, the
Tribunal distinguished the circumstances that prompted the RSM tribunal to grant the
request from the circumstances in this case. Given the extraordinary nature of provisional
measures and that the standard applicable to security for costs is less flexible'®, has there
been a change in circumstances to justify that the Tribunal grants now the Request?

33. The distinction made by the Tribunal in its Decision on Shifting Costs between the
circumstances of Claimants and those occurring in the case of RSM continues to be valid.
The changes argued by Respondent are related to the availability of funds in the arbitration

16 Id., para. 38. See also Burlington Resources, Inc. and others v. Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal de
Petréleos del Ecuador (PetroEcuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5), Procedural Order No. 1, paras. 60-62.

17 RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10), Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for
Security for Costs dated August 13, 2014.

'8 As noted by the Tribunal in its Decision on Shifting Costs, “[b]oth parties agree that the standard applicable to the
Request is more flexible than in the case of a request for security for costs”, para. 41.

 

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A. v. Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures Relating to Security for Costs.

account to finance a potential cost award against Claimants, and what Respondent has
termed the chaotic nature of the litigation conducted by Claimants.

34. The Tribunal is not persuaded by the argument related to how the litigation is conducted
by Claimants. Claimants may or may not be assisted by counsel. Assistance by counsel is
not a requirement to prosecute a claim before an ICSID tribunal. Admittedly it may
facilitate the task of the parties and the Tribunal if competent counsel assists the parties,
but the incidences pointed out by Respondent, even if taken together, would not support
a finding of exceptional circumstances that in turn would justify an order for security for
costs. In this respect, the Tribunal notes the willingness of Claimants to discuss with
counsel to Respondent the issues related to documentation set forth in the Request.'?

35. As pointed out by Respondent, the record available now to the Tribunal is more
substantive than it was at the time of the Decision on Shifting Costs. Claimants have
addressed Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction in their Memorial on the Merits and
now in the Response. However, as requested by Respondent, the Tribunal has decided to
bifurcate the proceeding, hence to order security for the estimated costs of the whole
proceeding is not justified. Furthermore, as envisioned by the Tribunal in Procedural
Order No. 1, only one round of submissions is contemplated. It follows that the Tribunal
will be in a position to decide on the objections to jurisdiction without a significant
increase in the proceeding costs. Therefore, the measure requested is of doubtful need and
urgency.

 

36. The Tribunal is not oblivious to the concerns of Respondent when faced with claims
prosecuted not by the investors who have actually provided the funds, but by corporate
entities through which those investors have chosen to channel their investment. At the
same time, the Tribunal is mindful of the potential consequences of a decision favorable
to granting security for costs on the procedural rights of the Claimants even before the
Tribunal decides on its own jurisdiction.

37. On balance and given the decision of the Tribunal to bifurcate the proceeding, the Tribunal
is of the view that the potential limitation on the procedural rights of Claimants outweighs
the relatively minor increase in arbitration costs. If requested, the Tribunal would be
willing to reconsider this matter in light of its understanding of the case if the Tribunal in
due course upholds jurisdiction.

19 Exhibit C-62.

Transglobal Green Energy, LLC and Transglobal Green Panama, S.A. v. Republic of Panama
(ICSID Case No. ARB/13/28)

 

Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures Relating to Security for Costs.
V. Decision

For the above reasons, the Tribunal has decided to reject the Request.

[signed] [signed]
Prof. Christoph Schreuer Prof. Jan Paulsson
Arbitrator Arbitrator
[signed]

Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda
President of the Tribunal

