 

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

 

In the Matter of the Arbitration between

TSA SPECTRUM DE ARGENTINA S.A.
Claimant

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/5

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal:

Judge Hans Danelius, President
Professor Georges Abi-Saab, Arbitrator
Mr. Grant D. Aldonas, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal: Ms. Natali Sequeira

 

Representing the Claimant: Representing the Respondent:

Mr. R. Doak Bishop, Mr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino

Mr. Craig S. Miles Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina
Mr. Roberto Aguirre Luzi Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién

Ms. Silvia Marchili Posadas 1641 (1121), Buenos Aires

Mr. Ben Love Argentina

King & Spalding L.L.P.

1100 Louisiana St., Suite 4000,

Houston, Texas 77002, USA

 

 

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: December 19, 2008

 

VI.

VIL.

VIII.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SUMMARY OF THE FACTS 2
A. The Concession 2
B. Criminal investigations 5
THE ICSID CONVENTION AND THE BIT .........ccsccsessessesssessesseeseeseeseeseesessesnsenseneeneeseenees 5
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 11
CLAIMS AND JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES. ........:ccsccssessesssesseseseeseeseesessessnesseseneeneeneenees 13
FIRST ISSUE OF JURISDICTION 15
A. — The parties’ ar; 15

1. The Argentine Republic 15

2. TSA 17
B. The Arbitral Tribunal’s findings ..0...0.0.c ccc ceeeeeee cece ceeeeeeeeeeeneeneeeeeeesenenenees 19
SECOND ISSUE OF JURISDICTIO. 23
A. — The parties’ ar; 23

1. The Argentine Republic 23

2. TSA 26
B. The Arbitral Tribunal’s findingS ..0...0.0.c ccc eee eeeeeeeeeeee cece tees eeeeneeneeeeeeeeenenenees 30
THIRD ISSUE OF JURISDICTION. 34
A. — The parties’ ar; 34

1. The Argentine Republic 34

2. TSA 36
B. The Arbitral Tribunal’s findingS ..0...0.0.c ccc eee eeeeeeeeeeee cece tees eeeeneeneeeeeeeeenenenees 39
FOURTH ISSUE OF JURISDICTION ..........ccecescessessessesseeseeeeseeseeseeseesessessesanssnseneeneeeeenee! AT
A. — The parties’ ar; 47

1. The Argentine Republic 47

2. TSA 49
B. The Arbitral Tribunal’s findings ..0...0.0.0 ccc eee ceeeeeeeeeecseeeeeeeeeeeeeneseseeeeeenenenees 50
COSTS 51
AWARD 52

 

SUMMARY OF THE FACTS

A. THE CONCESSION

Thales Spectrum de Argentina S.A. (formerly known as “Thomson Spectrum de
Argentina S.A.” and hereinafter called “TSA”) is a company incorporated in Argentina.
TSA is a wholly owned subsidiary of TSI Spectrum International N.V, (hereinafter called

“TSI’), a company registered in the Netherlands.

According to Decree 1073/1992, dated 30 June 1992, the Undersecretary of
Communications and the National Commission of Telecommunications of the Argentine
Republic (hereinafter called “CNC”) were instructed to commence a tender for the
privatisation of the administration, management and control of the radio spectrum and to

prepare bidding conditions for such a tender.

On 5 November 1995, the Argentine Government published bidding conditions which
were finally approved on 25 January 1996 by Resolution No. 144/1996 of the Ministry of

Economy, Services and Public Works.

On 30 December 1996, the Government published an updated version of the bidding
conditions. Pursuant to this version, bidders had to submit three envelopes, consisting of

the following:

(a) First envelope: information on the bidder, including documentation proving the

bidder’s or its controlling company’s capital.
(b) Second envelope: the proposal of technical improvement.
(c) Third envelope: the economic offer.

By 14 March 1997, TSA and one other bidder had submitted their bids.

In May 1997, the Evaluation and Pre-Awarding Commission pre-awarded the Concession

to TSA.

On 11 June 1997, CNC, by Resolution No. 716/97, approved the decision of the

Evaluation and Pre-Awarding Commission and awarded the Concession to TSA.

A Concession Contract setting out the conditions for the Concession and the obligations
of the parties was signed on 11 June 1997 by TSA and CNC. The Contract was to be in
force for a period of fifteen years, but the term could be prolonged for a further period of
five years if the Concessionaire complied with its obligations under the contract and met
certain criteria of the Contract Follow-Up Commission. Under the Contract, TSA was to
provide radio spectrum administration, monitoring and control services to CNC which, in
turn, was obliged to create a unified database. The objectives were to carry out spectrum
management and planning and attribution policy, to assign frequencies and grant licenses
and concessions, to approve equipment standards, specifications and authorisations, as
well as to extend debt certificates for the judicial enforcement of matured debts. TSA and
CNC were entitled to receive a specific percentage of the monthly tariffs collected as
payment for services and use of spectrum. The Contract contained in Article 29 the

following clause about settlement of disputes (original text):

 

“ARTICULO 29.- JURISDICCION

Toda cuestién a que dé lugar la aplicacién o interpretacién de las normas
que rigen el CONCURSO o sobre cualquier cuesti6n vinculada directa 0
indirectamente con el objeto y efectos del CONCURSO, sera sometida a
la jurisdiccién de los Tribunales Nacionales de Primera Instancia en lo
Contencioso Administrativo de la Capital Federal, renunciando a
cualquier otro fuero o jurisdiccién que pudiera corresponder. También en
el caso de que el oferente o uno de sus integrantes sea una sociedad

extranjera.

Sin perjuicio de ello, las partes podran someter las desavenencias que
deriven de este contrato para que sean resueltas definitivamente en la
ciudad de Buenos Aires de acuerdo con el Reglamento de Conciliacién y

Arbitraje de la Camara de Comercio Internacional por uno o mas 4rbitros

vl
nombrados conforme a este Reglamento.

9. By Resolution No. 242/04 of 26 January 2004, CNC declared the Concession Contract
terminated and decided that CNC would operate the installations and assets that were the
object of the Contract. The reasons given were in brief that TSA had breached the
Contract in regard to the provision of an integrated information system and had unduly

enriched itself.

10. In a letter of 25 March 2004 to CNC, TSA, with reference to the bilateral investment
treaties with the Netherlands, France and Germany, requested amicable negotiations
under the terms of these treaties. TSA also requested the reversal of Resolution No.

242/04.

11. On 14 May 2004, CNC adopted Resolution No. 1231/04 by which these requests were

rejected.

12. In a letter, dated 4 June 2004 but filed on 17 June 2004, TSA, with reference to the
bilateral investment treaties with the Netherlands, France and Germany, requested the

Secretary of Communications to overturn Resolution No. 1231/04.

13. In a letter of 10 December 2004 to the President of the Argentine Republic, TSA stated
that, since more than 30 days had passed without an express reply from the Secretary of
Communications, TSA’s request should be considered rejected according to Argentine
law. TSA therefore notified the Argentine Republic of TSA’s consent to the exclusive
jurisdiction of ICSID in order that the investment dispute be resolved through binding

arbitration. TSA also notified its decision to interrupt, in compliance with Article 10(4) of

* Claimant's Memorial on the Merits (Exhibit 4) and Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction (Exhibit A RA-2). English Translation of Exhibit 4:
provided by the Claimant: “All issues arising out of the application or the interpretation of the rules governing the BIDDING PROCESS or any
other issue directly or indirectly related to the object and the purpose of the BIDDING PROCESS, will be subject to the jurisdiction of the
National Courts on Administrative Law Matters of the City of Buenos Aires, thus relinquishing any other forum or jurisdiction that might be
applicable. This also applies in case the offeror or one of its members is a foreign company. Notwithstanding, the parties will also be entitled to
submit the disputes resulting from this contract before one or more arbitrators appointed in accordance with the Rules of Arbitration and
Conciliation of the International Chamber of Commerce in the city of Buenos Aires, so that they are definitely settled". English Translation of
Article 29 provided by the Respondent (Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, para, 12): “All the issues arising from the application or
interpretation of the standards governing the BIDDING PROCESS or any other issue directly or indirectly related to the object and effects of the
BIDDING PROCESS, will be subject to the jurisdiction of the National Federal Lower Court on Administrative Law Matters, thus relinquishing
any other forum or jurisdiction that might be applicable. If the bidder or one of its members is a foreign company, all discrepancies deriving from
this contract will be definitely settled in the City of Buenos Aires in compliance with the Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration of the International
Chamber of Commerce by one or more arbitrators in compliance with these Rules”.

 

 

 

   

 

IL.

the bilateral investment treaty between the Netherlands and the Argentine Republic, the

administrative procedures instituted before CNC and the Secretary of Communications.

On 23 May 2005, the Ministry of Federal Planning, Public Investment and Services
rejected TSA’s appeal against Resolution No. 242/04.

B. CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS

Following an anonymous report on alleged irregularities in the bidding process which
resulted in the Concession being granted to TSA, a criminal accusation was filed on 16
July 2001 by the Anticorruption Office against persons belonging to the public

administration or connected with TSA.

On 1 October 2004, the Federal Court in Criminal and Correctional Affairs for the City of
Buenos Aires No. 7 partially acquitted some of the persons charged, given that the

investigated events had not taken place.

On 15 November 2005, the Federal Court of Appeals in Criminal and Correctional

Affairs, Court II, reversed the partial acquittal and ordered further investigations.

On 26 February 2008, a federal judge ordered the prosecution without detention of a
number of persons on charges of fraud by unfaithful administration aggravated by the
infliction of damage to the state. The judge also decided to prosecute two persons
connected to TSA — Mr. Jorge Justo Neuss and Mr. Jean Nicolas d’Ancezune — for
complicity in such acts. The judge ordered the attachment of assets of the indicted
persons, in the case of Mr. Neuss and Mr. d’Ancezune up to the amount of 200 million
pesos each. As regards bribery, the judge noted that the investigation was incomplete and

deferred the decision to be taken in this regard.

THE ICSID CONVENTION AND THE BIT

The Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals
of Other States (hereinafter called the “ICSID Convention”), under which the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (hereinafter referred to as

“ICSID”) was set up, provides in Article 25(1) and (2) and Article 26 as follows:

“Article 25

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (...) and a
national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute

consent in writing to submit to the Centre. (...)
(2) ‘National of another Contracting State’ means:

(a) any natural person who had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties
consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration as well as

on the date on which the request was registered (...); and

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties
consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any
juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting State party
to the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign control, the
parties have agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting

State for the purposes of this Convention.
Article 26

Consent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention shall, unless
otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to the exclusion
of any other remedy. A Contracting State may require the exhaustion of
local administrative or judicial remedies as a condition of its consent to

arbitration under this Convention.”
The Argentine Republic and the Netherlands are parties to the ICSID Convention.

The Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the
Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Argentine Republic (hereinafter called the “BIT”)
was signed on 20 October 1992 and entered into force on 1 October 1994. It contains,

inter alia, the following provisions:

“Article 1
For the purposes of the present Agreement:

(a) The term ‘investments’ shall comprise every kind of asset invested by
an investor of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other
Contracting Party, in accordance with the laws and regulations of the

latter Contracting Party, and shall include (...)

(b) the term ‘investor’ shall comprise with regard to either Contracting

Party:

i. natural persons having the nationality of that Contracting Party in

accordance with its law;

ii. without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph (iii) hereafter, legal
persons constituted under the law of that Contracting Party and actually
doing business under the laws in force in any part of the territory of that
Contracting Party in which a place of effective management is situated;

and

iii. legal persons, wherever located, controlled, directly or indirectly, by

nationals of that Contracting Party.

 

Article 3

1) Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and equitable treatment to
investments of investors of the other Contracting Party and shall not
impair, by unreasonable or discriminatory measures, the operation,
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal thereof by those

investors.

2) More particularly, each Contracting Party shall accord to such
investments the same security and protection as it accords either to those
of its own investors or to those of investors of any third State, whichever

is more favourable to the investor concerned.

3) If a Contracting Party has accorded special advantages to investors of
any third State by virtue of agreements establishing customs unions,
economic unions, integration areas or similar institutions, or on the basis
of interim agreements leading to such unions or institutions, that
Contracting Party shall not be obliged to accord such advantages to

investors of the other Contracting Party.

4) If the provisions of law of either Contracting Party or obligations
under international law existing at present or established hereafter
between the Contracting Party in addition to the present Agreement
contain a regulation, whether general or specific, entitling investments by
investors of the other Contracting Party to a treatment more favourable
than is provided for by the present Agreement, such regulation shall to

the extent that is more favourable prevail over the present Agreement.
Article 4

1) Investments which are subject to a special agreement between one of
the Contracting Parties and an investor of the other Contracting Party
shall be ruled by the provisions of this Agreement and by those of such

special agreement.

2) Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it may have
entered into with regard to investment of investors of the other

Contracting Party.
Article 5

With respect to taxes, fees, charges and to fiscal deductions and
exemptions, each Contracting Party shall accord to investors of the other
Contracting Party who are engaged in any economic activity in its
territory, treatment not less favourable than that accorded to its own
investors or to those of any third State, whichever is more favourable to
the investors concerned. For this purpose, however, there shall not be
taken into account any special fiscal advantages accorded by that Party

under an agreement for the avoidance of double taxation, by virtue of its

participation in a customs union, economic union, integration area or

similar institution, or on the basis of reciprocity with a third State.

 

Article 7

Neither of the Contracting Parties shall take any direct or indirect
measure of nationalization or expropriation or any other measure having
a similar nature or similar effect against investments made in its territory
by investors of the other Contracting Party, unless the following

conditions are complied with:

Article 10

1) Disputes between one Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party regarding issues covered by this agreement shall, if

possible, be settled amicably.

2) If such disputes cannot be settled according to the provisions of
paragraph (1) of this Article within a period of three months from the
date on which either party to the dispute requested amicable settlement,
either party may submit the dispute to the administrative or judicial
organs of the Contracting Party in the territory of which the investment

has been made.

3) If within a period of eighteen months from submission of the dispute
to the competent organs mentioned in paragraph (2) above, these organs
have not given a final decision or if the decision of the aforementioned
organs has been given but the parties are still in dispute, then the investor
concerned may resort to international arbitration or conciliation. Each
Contracting Party hereby consents to the submission of a dispute as

referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article to international arbitration.

4) At the moment the dispute is submitted to arbitration each party to the

22.

dispute shall adopt all necessary measures to interrupt the procedures

instituted at the organs as mentioned in paragraph (2) of this Article.

5) Where the dispute is referred to international arbitration or

conciliation, the investor concerned may submit the dispute either to:

(a) The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(hereinafter referred to as I.C.S.I.D.) created by the “Convention on
the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals
of Other States” opened for signature at Washington on 18th March
1965 (hereinafter referred to as the Convention), once both
Contracting Parties have become a party to the Convention; until
such time as the latter condition shall be fulfilled, the Additional
Facility for the administration of proceedings by the secretariat of the

LC.S.LD. shall be used;

(b) An ad hoc arbitration tribunal to be established under the
arbitration rules of the United Nations Commission on International

Trade Law.

6) A legal person which is incorporated or constituted under the law in
force in the territory of one Contracting Party and which, before a
dispute arises, is controlled by nationals of the other Contracting Party
shall, in accordance with article 25(2)(b) of the Convention be treated for
the purposes of the Convention as a national of the other Contracting

Party.

7) The arbitration tribunal addressed in accordance with paragraph (5) of
this Article shall decide on the basis of the law of the Contracting Party
which is a party to the dispute (including its rules on the conflict of law),
the provisions of the present Agreement, special Agreements concluded
in relation to the investment concerned as well as such rules of

international law as may be applicable.

 

A Protocol to the BIT provides as follows:

Til.

23.

24.

25.

“On the signing of the Agreement between the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and the Argentine Republic on the encouragement and
reciprocal protection of investments, the undersigned representatives
have agreed on the following provisions which constitute an integral part

of the Agreement:

B. With reference to Article 1, paragraph b) (iii) the Contracting Party in
the territory of which the investments are undertaken may require proof
of the control invoked by the investors of the other Contracting Party,
The following facts, inter alia, shall be accepted as evidence of the

control:
i. being an affiliate of a legal person of the other Contracting Party;

ii. having a direct or indirect participation in the capital of a company
higher than 49% or the direct or indirect possession of the necessary
votes to obtain a predominant position in assemblies or company

organs.”

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 20 December 2004, TSA filed a request for arbitration with ICSID. The request was
registered on 8 April 2005 under ICSID Case No. ARB/0S/05.

On 19 July 2005, the parties requested that the Arbitral Tribunal in this case be
constituted in accordance with Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. Accordingly,
the Tribunal was to consist of three arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each party and
the third, who should be the President of the Tribunal, appointed by agreement of the

parties.

The Claimant appointed Mr. Grant D. Aldonas, a national of the United States of America
and the Respondent appointed Professor Georges Abi-Saab, a national of the Arab
Republic of Egypt. The Acting Chairman of the Administrative Council appointed Justice

Hans Danelius, a national of Sweden, as President of the Tribunal. By letter of 12 June

11

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

2006, the Centre informed the parties that the Arbitral Tribunal was deemed to be
constituted and the proceedings to have begun. On the same date Ms. Gabriela Alvarez
Avila was appointed Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal. She was subsequently succeeded

in this capacity by Ms. Natalf Sequeira.

The Arbitral Tribunal held a first session with the parties on 31 August 2006 in
Washington D.C.

On 29 January 2007, TSA filed its Memorial on the Merits.

On 17 May 2007, the Argentine Republic submitted a Memorial on Objections to the
Jurisdiction of the Centre and the Competence of the Tribunal. On 6 August 2007, TSA

submitted a Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction.

Further briefs on the issue of jurisdiction were submitted on 26 December 2007 by the

Argentine Republic and on 30 January 2008 by TSA.

On 15 October 2007, the Arbitral Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 in which it
requested TSA to submit, no later than 20 November 2007, information asked for by the
Argentine Republic as to the chain of ownership and control of TSA Spectrum de
Argentina S.A., including specifications of the legal or physical persons having the
effective control of the company. TSA’s request for an order to exclude certain

documents from consideration was rejected.

By letter of 20 November 2007, TSA, in response to Procedural Order No.1, submitted a
Witness Statement. On 29 November 2007, the Argentine Republic objected that this was

not sufficient compliance with the Procedural Order and requested further documents.

On 6 December 2007, the Arbitral Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, in which it
requested TSA to submit, no later than 8 January 2008, copies or extracts of shares
registries, or equivalent official documents, covering the period from 1997 until the
present time, regarding certain companies, as well as further information about the
character and contents of a fiduciary encumbrance upon the shares of TSA Spectrum de

Argentina S.A. which had been referred to by TSA.

33.

34,

35.

Iv.

36.

37.

On 31 January 2008, after an extension of the time-limit, TSA submitted further

documentation about its ownership chain.

On 5-7 May 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal held a hearing on the issue of jurisdiction in
Washington D.C. at which TSA was represented by Mr. Doak R. Bishop, Mr. Craig S.
Miles, Mr. Roberto Aguirre Luzi and Ms. Silvia Marchili (King & Spalding LLP) and Mr.
Juan Pablo Martini (Cassagne Abogados). The Argentine Republic was represented by
Mr. Adolfo Gustavo Scrinzi, Mr. Gabriel Bottini, Ms. Silvina Gonzalez Napolitano, Ms.
Mariana Lozza, Ms. Verénica Lavista, Mr. Nicolas Duhalde (Procuracién del Tesoro de
la Nacion Argentina) and Mr. Ignacio Torterola (Embassy of the Argentine Republic).
The Arbitral Tribunal also heard testimonies by Mr. Horacio R. Della Rocca, Mr. Javier

M. Guerrico, Mr. Jean Nicolas d’ Ancezune and Professor Eduardo Aguirre Obarrio.

In a letter of 26 June 2008, TSA referred to a recent decision in an ICSID case which in
TSA’s opinion had some resemblance with the present case. The Argentine Republic
commented on the letter on 14 July 2008. There was some further correspondence in

August and September 2008.

CLAIMS AND JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES

TSA claims that the Argentine Republic, in violation of the BIT, international law and

Argentine law, has:

(a) expropriated TSA’s investment;
(b) failed to treat TSA’s investment fairly and equitably;

(c) impaired by unreasonable measures the management, operation, maintenance, use,
enjoyment, expansion or disposal of TSA’s investment; and

(d) failed to protect TSA’s investment.

The Argentine Republic contests TSA’s claims and raises four separate objections to the

Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Argentina requests the Arbitral Tribunal to declare, in

accordance with Rule 41(4) of the Arbitration Rules, the lack of jurisdiction of the Centre

and determine in conformity with Rule 41(5) of the Arbitration Rules the lack of

13

38.

39.

40.

competence of the Tribunal to hear this case and thus to reject the Request for Arbitration

with costs against TSA according to Rule 47(1)(j) of the Arbitration Rules.

TSA requests:

(a) a declaration that the dispute is within the jurisdiction of the ICSID Convention

and within the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal;

(b) an order dismissing all of Argentina’s objections to the admissibility of the dispute
and dismissing all of Argentina’s objections to the jurisdiction of the ICSID

Convention and the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal;

(c) an order that Argentina pay the costs for the proceedings, including the Tribunal’s
fees and expenses, and the costs of TSA’s representation, subject to interest until

the day of payment.

The Argentine Republic’s objections are, in brief:

(a) that TSA relinquished in the Concession Contract any international arbitration
based on the BIT;

(b) that TSA initiated ICSID arbitration without respecting the pre-conditions for such
arbitration in the BIT;

(c) that TSA is not a legal person enjoying protection as an investor under the BIT;

and

(d) that TSA’s Concession was not obtained in accordance with Argentine law and is
therefore not protected under the BIT.

TSA finds the Argentine Republic’s four objections ill-founded and makes the general

remark that the Arbitral Tribunal’s inquiry at the jurisdictional stage is rather limited

under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. In TSA’s opinion, the Arbitral Tribunal may

look to the BIT in order to determine if its jurisdictional requirements are satisfied and to

TSA’s pleadings in order to determine if the alleged facts, assumed for jurisdictional

purposes to be true, could constitute a violation of the BIT.

41.

42.

43.

The Arbitral Tribunal has examined the parties’ written and oral submissions in their
entirety as well as the written and oral evidence on which they have relied. In the
following sections of this Award, the Arbitral Tribunal will deal with each of the
Argentine Republic’s four objections separately and will, in respect of each objection,
make a short summary of the parties’ main arguments and then set out the reasons on

which the Tribunal bases its decision regarding the jurisdictional objection concerned.

FIRST ISSUE OF JURISDICTION
A. THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

1. The Argentine Republic

The Concession Contract which is the object of TSA’s claim contains a clause in Article
29 which provides that the competent forum for settling disputes regarding the application
or interpretation of the Contract is either the National Federal Court on Administrative
Law Matters or an arbitral forum in Buenos Aires which shall apply the Rules of
Conciliation and Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce (hereinafter
called “ICC’”). The clause is particularly comprehensive, since it refers to all
discrepancies deriving from the Contract. The impact of Article 29 is that TSA has

relinquished any other forum and jurisdiction.

TSA’s claim is manifestly contractual, although TSA tries to conceal the true nature of the
dispute by framing it under the provisions of the BIT. But it cannot be ignored that the
parties agreed on a jurisdictional clause which provided for arbitration under international
rules, but not under ICSID rules. This distinguishes the present case from other cases in
which the jurisdiction agreed upon in a contract was that of the courts and tribunals of the
host state, and not international arbitration. It is also worth noting that in some other cases
the person filing for international arbitration was not a party to the contract, as a
consequence of which the tribunals considered that it could be found that the claimant

was not bound by the jurisdictional clause contained in the contract.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

TSA cannot intend to have the Concession Contract regulations applied partially. This is
not a choice process in which TSA can choose those parts of the Concession Contract that

best suit it (cf. SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines”).

The relinquishment of ICSID jurisdiction is consistent with Article 4(1) of the BIT which
acknowledges that investments subject to a special agreement — such as the Concession
Contract — shall be ruled not only by the provisions of the BIT but also by those of the
special agreement. Thus, even accepting, arguendo, that the BIT is the essential basis of
all TSA’s claims, the contractual jurisdictional clause shall apply to the exclusion of any

other jurisdiction, as Article 4(1) of the BIT contains a renvoi clause referring us thereto.

Neither can it be argued that the jurisdictional clause in the Concession Contract was
executed by a person other than the one filing for arbitration under the BIT. Indeed TSA
is the same person that signed the Contract, and the Contract provides for the exclusive
jurisdiction of an arbitration tribunal set up under the ICC Rules, which TSA later ignores

by invoking the jurisdiction of an ICSID arbitral tribunal.

The jurisdiction agreed by TSA and Argentina in the Concession Contract must prevail
as: (i) it derives from a special agreement that has priority over the general rule; (ii) the
special agreement was entered into after the BIT had become effective; (iii) the special
agreement was entered into with a specific and, at the same time, broad, scope for dispute
resolution purposes; (iv) it was connected with all such matters as are related to the
Concession Contract; (v) the jurisdiction in the special agreement was expressly

consented to by TSA; and (vi) the BIT expressly refers to the special agreement.

Consequently, TSA should have resorted to Argentine tribunals or to arbitration under the
ICC Rules, and since it did not do so, the Arbitral Tribunal should declare its lack of
jurisdiction on the basis of Article 29 of the Concession Contract and Article 4(1) of the

BIT.

? ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 29 January 2004, para. 154.

49.

50.

Sl.

Pursuant to Article 26 of the ICSID Convention, the Arbitral Tribunal also lacks
jurisdiction to hear this arbitration proceeding, since that Article provides that consent of
the parties to arbitration shall, “unless otherwise stated”, be deemed consent to such
arbitration to the exclusion of any other remedy. The meaning of the phrase “unless
otherwise stated” supports the criterion explained by Argentina as far as the existence of a

special agreement recognised by Article 4(1) of the BIT is concerned.

2. TSA

The forum selection clause in the Concession Contract does not operate to divest the
Arbitral Tribunal of ICSID jurisdiction. TSA is not asserting a breach of contract claims
but violations of the BIT. The forum selection clause in the Concession Contract does not
preclude TSA’s right to bring treaty claims, and Article 4(1) of the BIT does not
effectively displace the forum selection clause in the BIT with that of the Concession

Contract.

Although Argentina breached the Concession Contract in many respects, this is not the
dispute that TSA has put before the Arbitral Tribunal. Instead, TSA claims that Argentina
violated the BIT when it expropriated TSA’s investment, when it failed to treat TSA’s
investment fairly and equitably, when it impaired by unreasonable measures TSA’s
management, operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment, expansion, or disposal of its
investment, when it failed to protect TSA’s investment, and when it failed to observe
obligations entered into with regard to TSA and its investments. There is case-law
showing that the mere fact that certain elements of an investment dispute also involve
breaches of contract does not suffice to transform a dispute into a non-international
contract claim or to divest ICSID jurisdiction (e.g. Compajita de Aguas del Aconquija S.A.
& Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, called Vivendi I’, Azurix Corp. v. Argentine
Republic’, LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International, Inc. v.
Argentine Republic’, Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic’, SGS Société Générale de

5 ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002, paras. 112-113.
ion on Jurisdiction, 8 December 2003, para. 76.

 

 

® ICSID Case No. ARB/04/1, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 25 August 2006, para. 85.

52.

53.

54.

{IcsID Case No. ARB/O1/13, Decisi

Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan’, Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentine
Republic’, Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt’, Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and
Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco’, Eureko B.V. v. Republic of Poland'', Suez,
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Interagua Servicios Integrales de

Agua S.A. v. Argentine Republic'”).

TSA has presented to the Arbitral Tribunal facts that, on their face, could constitute a
violation of the BIT, and this is the proper test for jurisdiction. Moreover, TSA argues that
these facts constitute violations of the BIT, and Argentina contests these conclusions.
Thus, TSA has fulfilled the jurisdictional requirement under Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention to bring a “legal dispute” based on the BIT, and it will be for the Arbitral

Tribunal to decide, on the merits, whether the facts indeed result in violations of the BIT.

Article 29 of the Concession Contract, in its first paragraph, refers foreign companies to
the same dispute resolution procedures as local companies, i.e. the National Lower Courts
on Administrative Law Matters of the City of Buenos Aires. Under the clause in the
second paragraph of the same Article, the parties have the option of submitting disputes
relating to the bidding process to either the Federal Lower Courts on Administrative Law
Matters of the City of Buenos Aires or arbitration under the ICC Rules. Article 29 refers
to issues relating to the bidding process, not issues arising under the BIT. Thus, Article 29
refers a very limited class of disputes to the local courts, not to arbitration. Under Article

29, arbitration is simply an option, not a requirement.

Even if ICC arbitration were a requirement, it would make no difference. When tribunals
have held that a forum selection clause in an underlying contract does not divest a tribunal
of jurisdiction to hear treaty claims, they have done so on the following bases: (i) the

forum selection clause could not constitute a waiver of ICSID jurisdiction over BIT

 

n on Objections to Jurisdiction, 6 August 2003, p:

 

S ICSID Case No. ARB 97/6, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 December 1998, 40 ILM (2001) at 463, 466, 469 and 470.

° ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Dec

 

on on Annulment, 5 February 2002, para. 31.

‘© ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision on Jurisdiction, 23 July 2001, para. 62.
'' UNCITRAL Arbitration, Partial Award, 19 August 2005, para. 112.
" ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on Jurisdiction, 16 May 2006, paras.43-45.

55.

56.

57.

58.

claims; and, more importantly, (ii) the claims in question were based on the BIT, not the

underlying contract.

Even if the Concession Contract had provided for mandatory arbitration, this would not
exclude Argentina’s consent to ICSID arbitration under the BIT without explicit language
to that effect. Thus the fact that arbitration was an option under Article 29 of the
Concession Contract is of no significance. Nor is it relevant that the parties concluded the
forum selection clause in the Concession Contract after the entry into force of the BIT.
Moreover, TSA and Argentina technically consented to ICSID arbitration after they

signed the Concession Contract.

B. THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS

According to Article 10(3) of the BIT, an investor from one of the Contracting States
may, on certain conditions, resort to international arbitration in order to settle a dispute
with the other Contracting State regarding issues covered by the BIT. TSA alleges that its
rights under the BIT have been breached in several respects, and this is disputed by the

Argentine Republic.

The question the Arbitral Tribunal has to consider is whether TSA, according to the terms
of the Concession Contract, has undertaken not to avail itself of the right to dispute

settlement it might otherwise have according to the BIT.

Similar questions of the relations between contractual obligations and obligations under
bilateral investment treaties have arisen in a number of previous ICSID arbitrations. As
pointed out in Vivendi II, it is clear that a particular investment dispute may at the same
time involve both issues of the interpretation and application of a treaty and questions of
contract. In such cases, the questions as to whether there has been a breach of the treaty
and whether there has been a breach of the contract are different questions, and each of
them is to be examined separately. As stated in the Vivendi II case, “where ‘the
fundamental basis of the claim’ is a treaty laying down an independent standard by which
the conduct of the parties is to be judged, the existence of an exclusive jurisdiction clause

in a contract between the claimant and the respondent state (...) cannot operate as a bar to

19

the application of the treaty standard”'*. Thus, if the contract contains a specific clause on
dispute settlement, this does not exclude recourse to the settlement procedure in the treaty,
unless there is a clear indication in the contract itself or elsewhere that the parties to the
contract intended in such manner to limit the application of the treaty (see also SGS
Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan", Eureko B.V. v.
Republic of Poland'’). The Arbitral Tribunal notes that in the case of SGS Société
Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, referred to by the Argentine
Republic, the main question was whether the claimant had presented an independent
treaty claim different from a claim that could be based on the contract, and that the
approach taken in that case does not exclude that contractual claims and treaty claims can

in some circumstances be based on the same or similar facts.

59. The Concession Contract contains the following provision in Article 29:

 

“ARTICULO 29.- JURISDICCION

Toda cuestién a que dé lugar la aplicacién o interpretacién de las normas
que rigen el CONCURSO o sobre cualquier cuesti6n vinculada directa 0
indirectamente con el objeto y efectos del CONCURSO, sera sometida a
la jurisdiccién de los Tribunales Nacionales de Primera Instancia en lo
Contencioso Administrativo de la Capital Federal, renunciando a
cualquier otro fuero o jurisdiccién que pudiera corresponder. También en
el caso de que el oferente o uno de sus integrantes sea una sociedad

extranjera.

Sin perjuicio de ello, las partes podran someter las desavenencias que
deriven de este contrato para que sean resueltas definitivamente en la
ciudad de Buenos Aires de acuerdo con el Reglamento de Conciliacién y

Arbitraje de la Camara de Comercio Internacional por uno o mas 4rbitros

'S See supra note 3, at para. 101.
4 See supra note 7, at paras. 146 and 147.
'S See supra note 11, at paras.112 and 113.

   

20

916
nombrados conforme a este Reglamento.

 

60. The Arbitral Tribunal considers that, while the Concession Contract deals with spec
contractual rights and obligations, the BIT concerns rights and obligations of a different
and more fundamental nature. Consequently, not all breaches of CNC’s obligations in the
Concession Contract would qualify as breaches of the BIT. On the other hand, some acts
or failures by CNC or other State agencies may involve questions of the implementation
of the Concession Contract as well as the observance of Argentina’s obligations under the
BIT.

61. In the present case, it is clear that, while some of the acts or failures referred to by TSA
may also have concerned CNC’s obligations under the Concession Contract, a tribunal
acting on the basis of Article 29 second paragraph of that Contract would not have been
competent to examine the observance by Argentina of its more fundamental obligations
under the BIT. In respect of alleged violations of such obligations, TSA’s only remedies

were those provided for in the BIT.

62. The Arbitral Tribunal considers that the wording of Article 29 of the Concession Contract
is not such as to exclude recourse to a remedy under the BIT in cases where a dispute
arises about acts which might constitute breaches of both the Concession Contract and the
BIT. Nor can it be assumed without convincing evidence that TSA, by concluding the
Concession Contract, intended to relinquish any right to a remedy under the BIT, in
particular for serious acts such as the alleged expropriation of TSA’s contractual rights.
No evidence of relinquishment has been presented in the present proceedings. Moreover,

if Argentina had intended that the Concession Contract should have the far-reaching

"© Claimant's Memorial on the Merits (Exhibit 4) and Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction (Exhibit A RA-2). English Translation of Exhibit 4
provided by the Claimant: “All issues arising out of the application or the interpretation of the rules governing the BIDDING PROCESS or any
other issue directly or indirectly related to the object and the purpose of the BIDDING PROCESS, will be subject to the jurisdiction of the
National Courts on Administrative Law Matters of the City of Buenos Aires, thus relinquishing any other forum or jurisdiction that might be
applicable. This also applies in case the offeror or one of its members is a foreign company. Notwithstanding, the parties will also be entitled to
submit the disputes resulting from this contract before one or more arbitrators appointed in accordance with the Rules of Arbitration and
Conciliation of the International Chamber of Commerce in the city of Buenos Aires, so that they are definitely settled". English Translation of
Article 29 provided by the Respondent (Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction, para. 12): “All the issues arising from the application or
interpretation of the standards governing the BIDDING PROCESS or any other issue directly or indirectly related to the object and effects of the
BIDDING PROCESS, will be subject to the jurisdiction of the National Federal Lower Court on Administrative Law Matters, thus relinquishing
any other forum or jurisdiction that might be applicable. If the bidder or one of its members is a foreign company, all discrepancies deriving from
this contract will be definitely settled in the City of Buenos Aires in compliance with the Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration of the International
Chamber of Commerce by one or more arbitrators in compliance with these Rules”.

 

 

 

21

63.

64.

65.

66.

effect of excluding application of the remedies under the BIT, it must have been
incumbent on Argentina to indicate this in a clear manner in the Contract or in connection
with the conclusion of the Contract. There is no evidence that Argentina did so or

informed TSA that such was Argentina’s understanding of Article 29 of the Contract.

Furthermore, in a more general manner, the Arbitral Tribunal observes that Argentina’s
interpretation, if generally applied, would make it possible for governments to avoid their
treaty obligations as regards important matters such as expropriation by the simple
expedient of inserting clauses in their contracts that vitiated the right to international
arbitration, thereby effectively rendering the arbitration provisions of a_ bilateral
investment treaty a nullity. This would seem inconsistent with a state’s basic obligation

under international law to implement its treaty obligations in good faith.

The Argentine Republic has also referred to the phrase “unless otherwise stated” in
Article 26 of the ICSID Convention. However, since the rights and obligations under the
Concession Contract are different from those derived from the BIT, the exception from

consent in Article 26 has no application in the present case.

Thus, it remained open for TSA — provided that all other formal conditions were satisfied
— to seek a remedy in the BIT for expropriation of its investment or for any alleged failure
by Argentina to give adequate security and protection to the investment in accordance

with the BIT.

The Arbitral Tribunal therefore concludes that, notwithstanding Article 29 of the
Concession Contract and Article 26 of the ICSID Convention, the dispute settlement rules
in the BIT remained at the disposal of TSA, provided that the BIT was not for other

reasons inapplicable to TSA.

22

VI.

67.

68.

69.

70.

SECOND ISSUE OF JURISDICTION
A. THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

1. The Argentine Republic

Argentina and the Netherlands agreed in Article 10 of the BIT that, should it not be
possible to resolve amicably a dispute between an investor and a Contracting Party, it
should first be subject to the administrative or judicial agencies of the country of
investment. Only if eighteen months later no final decision had been made, or if the
decision had been given but the dispute prevailed, could the claim be filed with an

international tribunal. TSA did not comply with these requirements.

CNC’s Resolution No. 1231/04 of 14 May 2004 was not a final decision for the purpose
of Article 10(3) of the BIT, since such decision was likely to be appealed. Indeed TSA
filed an appeal which made the proceedings be referred to the Secretariat of
Communications on 18 May 2004. Although there was no final decision, TSA submitted
the case to ICSID on 20 December 2004 when only nine months had elapsed from 29
March 2004, the date when the petition for reconsideration of Resolution No. 242/04 was
filed.

Article 10(3) of the BIT expressly provides for two cumulative requirements necessary
for investors protected under the BIT to be authorised to resort to arbitration: (a) an
eighteen-month term as from the submission of the dispute to the competent
administrative or judicial bodies of the host state; and (b) absence of a final decision, or if
a final decision has been issued, a remaining dispute between the parties. TSA has failed

to meet such requirements.

It cannot be concluded that at any time in this case there was a sign of the obvious futility
of the local remedies available. TSA had the guarantees provided by the local remedies,
and still decided to skip them in order to resort to ICSID’s jurisdiction. The parties to the
BIT agreed upon a clear and precise procedure to be followed in order to file international
arbitration proceedings. Such procedure does not allow investors arbitrarily and at their

own discretion to decide not to comply with it. If investors choose not to comply with the

23

71.

72.

provisions agreed upon by the states, tribunals cannot grant them the protection afforded
by said rules, since that would be against the common intention of the States Parties. The
fact that a new submission of an arbitration claim would cause the investor to incur
additional, maybe unnecessary, costs is not something which a decision on jurisdiction

should depend on. This has been the decision of, and the risk taken by, the investor.

The most favoured nation clauses (hereinafter called “MFN clauses”) in the BIT are not
applicable. The MFN clause in Article 5 of the BIT relates exclusively to taxes, fees,
charges and fiscal deductions and exemptions. The MEN clause in Article 3(2) relates to
the protection and security standard and does not include dispute resolution. The intention
of Argentina and the Netherlands was to add such protection to substantive issues and not
to dispute resolution issues. This also appears from the wording of Article 3(2) which
differs from the wording of MEN clauses in some other bilateral investment treaties which
extend the protection to all matters governed by the treaty. Had it been the intention of the
Argentine Republic and the Netherlands to include stipulations applicable to dispute
resolution within the scope of the MEN clause, they would have included a phrase that
allowed for such construction, or a general phrase referring to the whole BIT. Not only
did they refrain from doing so, but they also limited the scope of application of the MFN
clause to some particular events expressly stipulated, one of them being protection and
security in Article 3(2). Argentina thus took a deliberate decision when negotiating the
BIT with the Netherlands, which was executed by both Governments on 20 October 1992.
By that time, Argentina had already executed other bilateral investment treaties in which
there was no requirement to previously resort to the domestic jurisdiction within a specific

period before opting for arbitration.

Article 3(4) of the BIT is of no relevance for solving the issue, given that it only refers to
two events which are not related to the MEN clause: (a) where there are national laws of
one of the parties granting investments of the other Contracting Party a more favourable
treatment than that set out in the BIT, and (b) where there are existing or subsequently
established international law obligations between the Contracting Parties and in addition
to the BIT granting a more favourable treatment to investments made by investors from

the other Contracting Party.

24

73.

74.

75.

76.

The bilateral investment treaty between Argentina and the USA is also of no relevance in
this context. It was not concluded in connection with the conclusion of the BIT with the
Netherlands. The Argentina-US treaty was executed on 14 November 1991 and the
Argentina-Netherlands BIT almost a year later, on 20 October 1992. Therefore, it could
not be considered an instrument concluded in connection with the conclusion of the
Argentina-Netherlands BIT. Neither does the Argentina-US bilateral treaty qualify as a
relevant rule of international law applicable in the relations between the parties in the
terms of Article 31(3)(c) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, as it was not
entered into by and between the same parties as the ones in the treaty to be interpreted, i.e.

the Argentina-Netherlands BIT.

The integration principle can under no circumstances back up the inclusion of procedural
rules included in other international treaties with third states to the Argentina-Netherlands
BIT, for instance in the case of the Argentina-US treaty. The distinction between
conditional and unconditional clauses is not useful either, since the MEN clause in Article

3(2) is limited by its own wording.

TSA has not submitted any evidence that nullifies the authentic interpretation of the BIT
made by the Argentine Republic. TSA is not a party to the BIT. Therefore only Argentina
and the Netherlands can make an authentic interpretation of the BIT. TSA’s position
cannot prevail over the express wording of the BIT, the Argentine Republic’s official
position or the case-law in regard to other bilateral investment treaties. Moreover, if
Article 3(2) comprised any issue included in the BIT, it would be difficult to understand
the raison d’étre of other clauses providing for MFN treatment in specific matters. The
only possible explanation is that Article 3(2) is limited to certain issues and does not
comprise all articles of the BIT, thus the need to include other comprehensive clauses

regarding other particular situations.

An extension of the MEN clause to dispute settlement would also be inconsistent with

previous ICSID case-law (Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Hashemite

25

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

"7 ICSID Case No. ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 November 2004,
'S ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction, 8 February 2005, par
226.

Kingdom of Jordan", Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria'*) and with the
ejusdem generis principle. Article 3(2) makes reference to the protection and security
standard which does not include the chapter on solution of disputes or the requirements
for access to an international tribunal provided for in the chapter of the BIT on dispute

resolution.

The Arbitral Tribunal should therefore decline its jurisdiction based on the failure to

comply with the requirement set forth in Article 10 of the BIT.

2. TSA

TSA duly notified the treaty dispute to the Argentine Government which refused to
comply with the BIT. Furthermore, Article 10 of the BIT does not bar the Arbitral
Tribunal’s jurisdiction over TSA’s claim, and even if it did, TSA may invoke the MFN
clause in Article 3(2) of the BIT to displace the requirements of Article 10 with more

favourable provisions from other bilateral investment treaties.

First, TSA complied with Article 10 by submitting this treaty dispute to the competent
“administrative organs” of Argentina, requesting them to undo the measures taken by the

Argentine Government in violation of the BIT. This request was rejected.

Second, Article 10 is a procedural rule that does not bar the Arbitral Tribunal’s

jurisdiction over the substance of TSA’s claim.

Third, the MFN clause in Article 3(2) of the BIT may be invoked to displace the

requirements of Article 10.

On 29 March 2004, TSA notified Argentina, through a communication to CNC, of an
investment dispute under the BIT. In the same communication, TSA also requested that

CNC resolve this dispute by undoing the termination of the Concession Contract, among

   

s. 114, 116 and 117.
. 193, 198, 199, 207, 219, 223 and

26

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

other measures, and expressed its willingness to consult and negotiate with the Argentine

Government to resolve the dispute amicably.

On 14 May 2004, CNC rejected TSA’s request to settle the dispute amicably and undo the
measures taken by the Government in violation of the BIT. Furthermore, CNC denied the

existence of any dispute under the BIT.

Although this decision was final under Argentine administrative procedure, TSA had an
option to seek a revision of that final act by either the judiciary or CNC’s superior, the
Secretary of Communications. TSA opted to submit its request for revision to the
Secretary of Communications, on 17 June 2004, to overturn CNC’s decision and undo the

measures taken by the Government in violation of the BIT.

On 23 May 2005, the Ministry of Federal Planning, Public Investment and Services
rejected TSA’s request to revise CNC’s decision. However, long before the Ministry
rejected the request, TSA was entitled to proceed as if its administrative appeal had been

rejected under the Argentine law doctrine of silencio denegatorio.

Even assuming that the administrative law decisions were not final, there were no further

effective local remedies available to TSA.

The Ministry of Federal Planning, Public Investment and Services notified TSA of its
negative decision on 27 June 2005. At that stage, the time required to receive a court
decision would have well exceeded the three months left until September 2005 when the
eighteen-month period provided for in the BIT expired. In addition, TSA’s investment
had then already been expropriated and TSA’s directors were the subject of unfounded

criminal accusations.

Thus, (i) TSA had already received a final decision under Argentine administrative law;
(ii) the Argentine judiciary lacks independence and is vulnerable to political pressure; (iii)
in this particular case, the Argentine judiciary and executive targeted TSA and its
employees as objects for harassment; (iv) even if there was a chance for a favourable and
unbiased solution, it would have been technically impossible because of the length of time

a review of CNC’s decision terminating the Concession Contract would have required.

27

89.

90.

91.

92.

It should be noted that according to Article 10(2) a party may submit a dispute to the
administrative or judicial organs of the host state. The party thus has a choice between
administrative and judicial organs but does not have to submit the dispute to both. In this

case, TSA submitted its appeal to the relevant administrative organ, not once but twice.

Under Argentine law an appeal is considered denied if not decided within 30 days by the
administrative authority. The final appeal, submitted to the Secretary of Communications,
did not prompt a decision for nearly a year, but should be considered to have been
rejected well before that time. The decision eventually issued was thus superfluous, even
when it also rejected TSA’s request, because under Argentine law it had already been
implicitly rejected. The administrative remedies were thus exhausted. TSA observed the
requirements of the waiting period in Article 10(3), since it had effectively received a

final decision within the eighteen-month period and the parties were still in dispute.

TSA also asks the Arbitral Tribunal to follow the case-law (Nicaragua v. United States of
America’, Consorzio Groupement L.E.S.I. — DIPENTA v. People’s Democratic Republic
of Algeria®, Ethyl Corporation v. Canada*', Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic”, Wena
Hotels v. Arab Republic of Egypt®, SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic
Republic of Pakistan™*) in categorizing the waiting period in Article 10(3) as a procedural
stipulation rather than a jurisdictional requirement. Such a procedural stipulation cannot
render TSA’s claim inadmissible. To dismiss TSA’s claim over a matter of form would be

inimical to the structure and goals of the ICSID system.

Given the finality of the decisions of CNC and the Secretary of Communications, TSA
had no obligation under Article 10 to pursue further domestic remedies. In any case, such

further remedies would not have given TSA relief. To suggest that TSA had further legal

'° Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America), 1CJ
Judgment (Jurisdiction and Admissibility), 26 November 1984, ICJ Reports 427-429.

29 ICSID Case No. ARB/03/08, 10 January 2005, Award, Questions of Law, para. 32.

*! UNCITRAL, NAFTA, Award on Jurisdiction, 24 June 1998, para. 77.

2 UNCITRAL, Final Award, 3 September 2001, para. 187-191.

?3 See supra note 9, at para. 101-103.

4 See supra note 7, at para. 184.

28

93.

94.

95.

recourse in an environment of judicial harassment through criminal proceedings against

TSA would be a flight of fancy.

TSA also invokes, if necessary, the MFN clause in Article 3(2) of the BIT to import the
more favourable dispute resolution provision found in Article VII of the Argentina-US

bilateral investment treaty, which provides for a six-month notice period.

First, ICSID case-law emphatically affirms the application of the MFN standard to import
shorter waiting periods. Second, there is no evidence that the parties intended to limit the
MEN coverage in the BIT to substantive issues. Third, the difference in wording between
Article 3(2) and other MEN clauses is without consequence in this case. Because the BIT
expresses the parties’ intention to promote economic co-operation through the protection
in its territory of investment, a construction of the BIT that furthers these goals should
prevail over one that defeats or detracts from them. Fourth, TSA’s interpretation of the
MEN clause does not violate the ejusdem generis principle. There is no language in
Article 3(2) that would limit MFN treatment to substantive issues. Article 3(2) refers to

“protection” of which dispute resolution is one of the most important aspects.

In fact, leading ICSID cases have extended MFN coverage to import shorter waiting
periods and bypass local courts (Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain”, Siemens
A.G. v. Argentine Republic**, Camuzzi International S.A. v. Argentine Republic’’, Gas
Natural SDG, S.A. v. Argentine Republic’, Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de
Barcelona and Interagua Servicios Integrales de Agua S.A. v. Argentine Republic”,
National Grid ple v. Argentine Republic*’). All the claimants in these cases were faced
with stipulated waiting periods, and some were faced with the obligation to pursue
domestic remedies within that stipulated time. However, none of the tribunals denied the
claimants’ requests to bypass the stipulated waiting periods and proceed directly to

arbitration without first pursuing domestic remedies.

?5 ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 25 January 2000, para. 54.

26 ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction, 3 August 2004, para

102-103.

 

27 ICSID Case No. ARB/03/7, Decision on Objections on Jurisdiction, 10 June 2005, para. 34.

?8 ICSID Case No. ARB/03/10, Decision on Preliminary Questions on Jurisdiction, paras. 29-31 and 49.
° See supra note 12, at paras. 63, 65 and 224.

* UNCITRAL, Decision on Jurisdiction, 20 June 2006, para. 88.

29

96.

97.

98.

99.

The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties requires that interpretation should take
account of “any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the
parties”. The BIT expresses an acknowledgement by its parties of the relevance of general
international law. The following two “relevant rules of international law” can be relied on
in this case: (i) the principle of integration, i.e. that provisions of a treaty must be
interpreted, not in isolation, but as a whole; and (ii) the principle of interpretation, which
requires a construction that gives effect to each provision of a treaty, disfavouring
interpretations that would render ineffective or lessen the effectiveness of, any specific
provision. Together, these principles make it clear that the BIT, by its express terms and
by the construction most consistent with customary international law, incorporates any
standards of procedure or substance concerning the protection of investments that are
more favourable to the foreign investor. The only limitations on the MFN coverage of the
BIT are in Article 3(3). Those limitations are express, and thus comprehensive. Most
importantly, procedural issues are not included in the list of exceptions in Article 3(3) and

should therefore be covered by the MEN protection.

In any case, the burden falls on Argentina to show that the parties intended otherwise.
Even in the case of ambiguity, there can be no presumption that MFN coverage does not
extend to dispute settlement provisions. In light of the object and purpose of the BIT, the

Arbitral Tribunal is obligated to resolve such ambiguities in favour of the investor.

B. THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that, according to Article 10(2) of the BIT, a party may
submit a dispute to the administrative or judicial organs of the investment state.
According to Article 10(3) of the BIT, a party may proceed to international arbitration,
once there is a final decision or eighteen months have elapsed since the dispute was

submitted to the said administrative or judicial organs.

Article 10(3) of the BIT gives rise to various questions of interpretation, and the Arbitral
Tribunal cannot find that the written or oral evidence in this case provides any answers to
those questions and will therefore base its conclusions on an examination of the text of

this provision as read in the context of the BIT in its entirety.

30

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

The Arbitral Tribunal first has to examine whether there was in the present case a final

decision within the meaning of Article 10(3) of the BIT.

There is no information in the case which clarifies how the Netherlands and the Argentine
Republic intended the term “final decision” in Article 10(3) to be interpreted. However,
since the term appears in an international treaty and not in a purely national context, it is
appropriate to give it an autonomous meaning and thus interpret it independently of any
meaning the same term may have in the national laws of the two Contracting States. It
may be assumed that the purpose of the requirement of a final decision was to limit as far
as possible the number of disputes that should be the subject of international settlement.
The provision thus imposes a requirement of exhaustion of domestic remedies, but with a
time limitation. If a final decision has not been obtained after eighteen months, no further

use of domestic remedies is required.

Against this background, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that in this context a decision
should be considered final when there is no legal remedy which would give a party a

reasonable chance of having the decision changed.

It follows that it is not decisive whether, as alleged by TSA, CNC’s Resolution No.
1231/04 of 14 May 2004 was a final decision according to Argentinian administrative
law. Instead it is significant that TSA itself sought a remedy against that Resolution by
submitting a request to the Secretary of Communications. It may be assumed that TSA,
when resorting to this remedy, believed that there was a reasonable chance that
Resolution No. 242/04 terminating the Concession Contract would be repealed or
amended, or that some other relief might be obtained. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore
considers that Resolution No. 1231/04 was not a final decision within the meaning of

Article 10(3) of the BIT.

However, TSA did not wait for a reply to his appeal. Such a reply did not reach TSA until
June 2005, when the decision of the Ministry for Federal Planning, Public Investment and
Services was communicated to TSA. Long before that, on 20 December 2004, TSA

instituted ICSID proceedings. This gives rise to the following questions:

31

105.

106.

107.

108.

(a) whether TSA, before proceeding to ICSID arbitration, should have waited for a

reply to his appeal to the Secretary of Communications, and

(b) whether TSA, either before or after June 2005, should have lodged an appeal with
an Argentinian court before instituting ICSID proceedings.

TSA attaches weight to the fact that, according to Argentinian administrative law, the

appeal to the Secretary of Communications could be considered rejected if there was no

reply to it within 30 days, i.e. in July 2004. This was the rule relied on by TSA when it

announced, in its letter of 10 December 2004 to the President of the Argentine Republic,

that it had given its consent to the jurisdiction of ICSID in order to have the dispute

resolved by arbitration.

The Arbitral Tribunal is not convinced that the Argentinian rule that a request may be
considered rejected by silence is decisive in the present case. As stated above, the concept
of “final decision” in Article 10(3) of the BIT should be given an autonomous
interpretation, the relevant criterion being whether there is a reasonable chance of having
a decision changed within the domestic legal system. In this respect, it should be noted
that the Secretary of Communications and/or the Ministry of Planning, Public Investment
and Services continued the examination of TSA’s appeal after the 30-day period had
elapsed, which means that, despite the 30-day rule in domestic administrative law, TSA
continued to stand a reasonable chance of having its appeal granted during the whole

period up to 23 May 2005 when the Ministry rendered its decision.

It follows that, on 20 December 2004, when TSA requested ICSID arbitration, there was
not yet a “final decision” within the meaning of Article 10(3) of the BIT. Nor had the
eighteen-month period provided for in that Article elapsed. TSA’s institution of
arbitration proceedings was therefore premature. The question arises what consequences
this should have in the light of subsequent developments, in particular the rejection of the

appeal on 23 May 2005.

When TSA’s appeal was rejected on 23 May 2005, fourteen months of the eighteen-
month period had elapsed. The decision was notified to TSA about one month later, on 27

June 2005, when fifteen months had elapsed and only three months remained until the

32

109.

110.

111.

112.

expiry of the eighteen-month period. The question arises whether TSA, after receiving the
Ministry’s negative decision, should have used further remedies before lodging its request

with ICSID.

The Argentine Republic has argued that it would have been possible for TSA to ask the
Argentinian courts for judicial review. TSA has denied that it was obliged to do so and
argued that Article 10(2) requires recourse to either administrative or judicial remedies
and does not oblige an investor to use both categories of remedies. TSA has also argued
that recourse to the Argentinian courts would have been meaningless and that in any case
a court decision could not have been obtained before the end of the eighteen-month

period.

The Arbitral Tribunal has some doubts as to whether Article 10(2) should be understood
to give an investor a choice between administrative and judicial remedies. The provision
has some resemblance with Article 26 of the ICSID Convention which provides that a
Contracting State may require the exhaustion of local administrative or judicial remedies
as a condition of its consent to arbitration under the Convention. However, the purpose of
Article 10(2) would seem to be that domestic remedies should be exhausted to the extent
that this might produce results within an eighteen-month period, and this purpose is best
served if the investor is required successively to avail himself of all remedies, whether
administrative or judicial, which give him a fair chance of obtaining satisfaction at the

national level within the said time frame.

In the present case, however, since only three months out of the eighteen months
remained after the decision of the Ministry for Federal Planning, Public Investment and
Services had been notified to TSA, it is most unlikely that a decision by a court giving
TSA satisfaction could have been obtained before the expiry of the eighteen months. The
eighteen-month period would thus have elapsed without any resolution of the dispute,
after which ICSID arbitration could have been instituted in full conformity with Article

10(3) of the BIT.

In these circumstances, and despite the fact that ICSID proceedings were initiated

prematurely, the Arbitral Tribunal considers that it would be highly formalistic now to

33

113.

VIL.

114.

115.

116.

reject the case on the ground of failure to observe the formalities in Article 10(3) of the
BIT, since a rejection on such ground would in no way prevent TSA from immediately

instituting new ICSID proceedings on the same matter.

The Arbitral Tribunal therefore concludes that the case should not be rejected for lack of
jurisdiction on the basis of the Argentine Republic’s second objection and, having regard
to this finding, does not find it necessary, to examine whether the MEN clauses in the BIT

could also be a valid defence to Argentina’s objection.

THIRD ISSUE OF JURISDICTION
A. THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

1. The Argentine Republic

The ICSID Convention is the outer limit of ICSID’s jurisdiction. Article 25(2)(b) of the
Convention permits the extension of the jurisdiction to local companies which, because of
foreign control, the parties have agreed should be treated as nationals of another
Contracting State for the purposes of the ICSID Convention. The “control” required is an

objective requirement that shall not be replaced by an agreement.

According to Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, the critical date for analysing
who controls a local company is the date on which the parties agree to ICSID’s
jurisdiction. TSA consented to submit the dispute to ICSID on 13 December 2004, and
this date shall be considered the moment to evaluate who the parent corporation of the
local corporation is. Reference is made in this respect to the case of Vacuum Salt Products

Ltd v. Republic of Ghana 1

Article 10(6) of the BIT accepts ICSID jurisdiction in those cases where the Argentine
companies were controlled by nationals of the other Contracting Party. “Controlled”
means being actually under the control of the other company. In this case there is no local

company actually controlled by a Dutch company. Given the circumstances of the present

3! ICSID Case No. ARB/92/1, Award, 16 February 1994, para. 29.

34

117.

118.

119.

case, the corporate veil must be pierced as the Dutch company that claims to have control
over the local company is not controlling but is a mere vehicle to control the Argentine
company through other companies. Reference is made in this respect to the case Aguas

del Tunari S.A. v. Bolivia”.

In the Barcelona Traction case, the International Court of Justice stated that, in
international law, it is allowed to pierce the corporate veil, for instance to prevent the
misuse of the privileges of legal personality or to prevent the evasion of legal

requirements or obligations*’.

In the Tokios Tokelés case™, the possibility of piercing the corporate veil of a Dutch
company was analysed, but the tribunal did not allow this to be done, since it found none
of the grounds indicated in the Barcelona Traction case to be present. This case differs
from the present one, since there was no ostensible attempt to conceal the true controller
of the company, taking advantage of the rights that a Dutch controlling shareholder could
have in an Argentine company. Alternatively, the comments made by Professor Weil in
his dissent should be applied. According to these comments, only a genuinely foreign

investment should be protected by the ICSID mechanism.

The Protocol to the BIT provides that certain facts, inter alia, shall be accepted as
evidence of the control but does not state that those facts “prove” the control, only that
they can be accepted as evidence of the control. In a case such as the present one, the facts
relied on by TSA are not sufficient to prove the existence of such control by investors of
the other Contracting Party. Plainly, TSI is a corporate vehicle without any real control
over TSA. In this respect, Argentina attaches weight to the following circumstances: (i)
the lack of Dutch citizens in the establishment of TSA and in its board of directors; the
presence of French citizens until 2002 and of Argentine citizens from 2002; (ii) the

difference between the corporate capital of the “controlling” and the “controlled”

* ICSID Case No. ARB/02/3, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 21 October 2005, para. 255.

* Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Co. Ltd (Belgium v. Spain), ICJ 1970, 3, 5 February 1970, para. 58.

* Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18) Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004, paras. 54-56,
and Dissenting Opinion of President Prosper Weil, para. 23.

35

120.

121.

122.

123.

124.

125.

corporation; (iii) the corporate seat registered for TSI at the same address as 225 other

corporations; (iv) doubts about TSI’s corporate activities.

The fact that there are some 225 companies registered at the same head office as TSI
means that the head office does not actually exist. TSI was created on 15 August 1996
with the purpose to invest in a concession for the Argentine radio-electric spectrum which
was granted on 11 June 1997. On 20 August 1996, i.e. five days after the establishment of
TSI, TSA was created. TSI is a vehicle company used by the true controllers of TSA to

carry out their investment.

TSA has not furnished any proof that TSI actually controls TSA. According to the ICSID
Convention and the BIT there must be effective control in order to extend ICSID
jurisdiction through Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. Company stockholding is

not enough but must be accompanied by effective control.

Control over TSA was exercised until July 2002 by Thales, a French company. Then
Thales sold its majority stockholding. There are two possibilities. Either the controlling
company is another foreign company from another jurisdiction, in which case it cannot
invoke the Argentina-Netherlands BIT. Or even more serious, the controlling company is

an Argentine company or natural person. If so, the company is not under foreign control.

The Argentine Republic thus requests that the Arbitral Tribunal declare that no foreign
investor exists in light of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and Articles 1 b) (iii)
and 10(6) of the BIT, since TSA is not controlled by TSI.

2. TSA

Contrary to Argentina’s assertions, TSA is controlled by TSI in the terms of Article
25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and Articles 1 b) (iii) and 10(6) of the BIT. TSI owns
100% of TSA’s shares and therefore meets the “control” criterion in the Protocol to the

BIT.

TSA’s case falls squarely within Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. TSA meets all

the requirements of that provision for the following reasons:

36

126.

127.

128.

(a) TSA has the nationality of “the Contracting State party to the dispute”, i.e.

Argentina, given that it is incorporated in Argentina and has been so since 1996.

(b) TSA had that nationality on the date on which the parties consented to submit such
dispute to arbitration, Indeed, TSA has been an Argentinian corporation since the

beginning of the Concession up to the present.

(c) Argentina and the Netherlands have agreed that TSA should be treated as a
national of another Contracting State for the purposes of Article 25(2)(b) of the
ICSID Convention, through both Article 1 b) (iii) and Article 10(6) of the BIT.

(d) Argentina and the Netherlands have agreed to treat TSA as a national of the
Netherlands because of “foreign control’, as stated in Articles 1 b) (iii) and 10(6)
of the BIT.

Undoubtedly, Articles 1 b) (iii) and 10(6) of the BIT are an agreement as to “foreign

control”. In the light of Article 1 b) (iii), TSA need only fulfil one basic requirement: it

should be controlled, directly or indirectly, by a national of the Netherlands, regardless of
where it is located. The meaning of the term “controlled” was clarified in the Protocol to
the BIT, and TSA satisfies the requirements indicated there, since TSA is an affiliate of

TSI and the latter has a participation in the capital of TSA higher than 49% with direct

possession of the necessary votes to obtain a predominant position in company organs.

TSA also meets the requirements in Article 10(6), given that it was incorporated in

Argentina before the dispute arose, and it has been controlled by a Dutch company since

the date of its incorporation.

There is no necessity to look for the nationality of the “ultimate controller”, since there is

no such requirement in the BIT.

Although not necessary for the ruling on this issue, TSA provides information on the
chain of ownership of TSA and TSI at different points in time. In brief, this information

indicates the following:

37

129.

130.

131.

(a) Time of signature of Concession Contract (11 June 1997): At that time the

ultimate owner of TSA and TSI was the French company Thomson CSF S.A.

(b) Date before the dispute arose (5 January 2002): On that date the ultimate owners
of TSA and TSI were the German-Argentinian citizen Jorge Justo Neuss, the

French Thales Group and the French citizen Jean Nicolas d’ Ancezune.

(c) Time of termination of the Concession (26 January 2004): At that time Jorge Justo
Neuss and the Thales Group were ultimate owners with certain rights accorded to

Jean Nicolas d’ Ancezune.

(d) Time of notice of the dispute (16 December 2004): At that time Jorge Justo Neuss

was the ultimate owner with certain rights accorded to Jean Nicolas d’ Ancezune.

According to Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, the relevant date as regards the
nationality of the juridical person is the date on which the parties consented to submit the
dispute to arbitration. According to Article 10(6) of the BIT, the critical date for the
purposes of “foreign control” is the date before the dispute arose. In the present case, TSA
has always been incorporated in Argentina, and before the date on which the dispute
arose, i.e. on S January 2002, TSA was under foreign control, since TSI owned 100% of

its shares.

Consequently, TSA’s case falls within the provisions of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention and Articles 1 b)(iii) and 10(6) of the BIT and the Protocol regarding foreign

control.

Argentina’s arguments with respect to the existence of “control” not only disregard the
literal meaning of the BIT but are also not applicable to the present case, as evidenced by
ICSID precedents (Aguas del Tunari S.A. v. Republic of Bolivia®>, Autopista
Concesionada de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela*®, AMCO Asia

Corporation, Pan American Development Limited, PT Amco Indonesia v. Republic of

% See supra note 32, at paras. 296 and 301.
* ICSID Case No. ARB/00/5, Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 September 2001, paras. 67, 79, 86 and 112.

38

Indonesia*’, ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC & ADMC Management Limited v. Republic
of Hungary”, Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine*). In a recent case — Rompetrol Group N.V. v.
Romania® — the fact that there was a Romanian majority shareholding in a Dutch
company was not considered an obstacle to bringing proceedings against Romania under

the rules of the ICSID Convention and the Dutch-Romanian bilateral investment treaty.

132. Alternatively, even if the Tribunal (i) decides to analyse the nationality of all of the
companies that directly or indirectly own TSA’s shares, and (ii) interprets the terms
“foreign control” on the date before the dispute arose as meaning “effective foreign
control” or as requiring the last controlling company in the ownership chain to be foreign,

TSA would still fulfil the “foreign control” requirement.

B. THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS

133. The Arbitral Tribunal will start its examination on this point by analyzing Article 25(2)(b)
of the ICSID Convention and then proceed to a consideration of its application in the
circumstances of the present case and taking into account the contents of the BIT between

Argentina and the Netherlands.
L Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention

134. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention defines the ambit of ICSID’s jurisdiction. In other
words, it defines the extent, hence also the objective limits, of this jurisdiction (including
the jurisdiction of tribunals established therein) which cannot be extended or derogated

from even by agreement of the Parties.

135. In respect of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, which is the provision of

particular interest in the present case, Aron Broches has stated as follows:

“The purpose of that provision, as well as of Article 25(1), is to indicate

*” ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Jurisdiction, 25 September 1983, para. 14.

8 ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16, Award, 2 October 2006, paras. 335, 337, 342, 343 and 357.

® See supra note 34, at paras 22, 36 and 46.

* ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3, Decision on Preliminary Objections on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 18 April 2008,
paras. 81-85, 93 and 110.

 

39

the outer limits within which disputes may be submitted to conciliation
or arbitration under the auspices of the Centre with the consent of the

parties thereto.” !

136. The objective character of these limits has been noted by several ICSID Tribunals
(Vacuum Salt Products Ltd v. Republic of Ghana®, and Rompetrol Group N.V. v.
Romania: “reflects objective ‘outer limits’ beyond which party consent would be
ineffective”“’).

137. ICSID and the Convention establishing it have for sole purpose and function, as their very
title indicates, “the settlement of investment disputes between States and nationals of

other States”.

138. Article 25(2)(b) defines the juridical persons that can have access to ICSID as “nationals

of another Contracting State”, classifying them in two categories :

(i) “any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State other than
the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit

such dispute to conciliation or arbitration”, and

(ii) “any juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting State party to
the dispute on that date and which, because of foreign control, the parties have
agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting State for the

purposes of this Convention”.

139. The second clause of Article 25(2)(b) introduces a significant exception to one of the
major premises of the Convention (which also reflects a general principle of international
law), i.e. that it deals exclusively with disputes between parties of diverse nationalities, to
the exclusion of those between a State and its own national investors. The ratio legis of
this exception is the wording “because of foreign control”. Foreign control is thus the

objective factor on which turns the applicability of this provision. It justifies the extension

+! Broches, Academy of International Law, Recueil des cours, vol. 136 [1973 II].
* See supra note 31, at paras. 36-38.
* See supra note 40, at para. 80.

40

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

of the ambit of ICSID, but sets the objective limits of the exception at the same time. As
was stated in Vacuum Salt Products Ltd v. Republic of Ghana, “[t]he reference in Article
25(2)(b) to ‘foreign control’ necessarily sets an objective Convention limit beyond which

ICSID jurisdiction cannot exist”.

A significant difference between the two clauses of Article 25(2)(b) is that the first uses a
formal legal criterion, that of nationality, whilst the second uses a material or objective
criterion, that of “foreign control” in order to pierce the corporate veil and reach for the

reality behind the cover of nationality.

Once the Parties have agreed to the use of the latter criterion for juridical persons having
the nationality of the host State, they are bound by this criterion as a condition for ICSID

jurisdiction and cannot extend that jurisdiction by other agreements.
In this respect, Professor Schreuer, after surveying the case-law, states:

“These cases, especially Vacuum Salt, make it abundantly clear that
foreign control at the time of consent is an objective requirement which

must be examined by the tribunal in order to establish jurisdiction”. “

The question as to whether, or to what extent, the corporate veil should be pierced or
lifted in the application of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention presents itself in a
different light and can lead to different solutions, depending on whether the case falls

under the first or the second clause of this provision.

The first clause of Article 25(2)(b) mentions only the “nationality” of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute. In other words, it uses as a criterion the formal
legal concept of nationality, which for legal persons is determined by one of the two
generally accepted criteria of the place of incorporation or the seat (siége social) of the
corporation. There is no reference here to “control”, whether foreign or other, nor any

mention of “piercing” or looking beyond this nationality.

“ Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, p. 312, para. 548.

41

145.

146.

147.

148.

This text may be interpreted in a strict constructionist manner to mean that a tribunal has
to go always by the formal nationality. On the other hand, such a strict literal
interpretation may appear to go against common sense in some circumstances, especially
when the formal nationality covers a corporate entity controlled directly or indirectly by

persons of the same nationality as the host State.

In the two cases of Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine and Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania, the
Tribunals adopted the strict constructionist interpretation in spite of the control of the
foreign companies by nationals of the host States. However, this interpretation has not
been generally accepted and was also criticised by the dissenting President of the Tokios

Tokelés Tribunal.

The situation is different, however, when it comes to the second clause of Article 25(2)(b)
of the Convention. Here, the text itself allows the parties to agree to lift the corporate veil,
but only “because of foreign control”, which justifies, but at the same time conditions, this
exception. Although the text refers to juridical persons holding the nationality of the host
State that the parties have agreed should be treated as nationals of another contracting
State “because of foreign control”, the existence and materiality of this foreign control
have to be objectively proven in order for them to establish ICSID jurisdiction by their
agreement. It would not be consistent with the text, if the tribunal, when establishing
whether there is foreign control, would be directed to pierce the veil of the corporate
entity national of the host State and to stop short at the second corporate layer it meets,
rather than pursuing its objective identification of foreign control up to its real source,

using the same criterion with which it started.

However, in cases falling within the second clause of Article 25(2)(b), ICSID tribunals
have not been constant in dealing with this issue of whether or not to pierce the second
corporate layer after the one bearing the nationality of the host State, in identifying
foreign control. In AMCO and others v. Republic of Indonesia, Autopista Concesionada
de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Aguas del Tunari v. Republic

of Bolivia, the Tribunals refused to lift the veil beyond the first layer or rung of the

42

corporate ladder (bearing the nationality of the host State). On the other hand, the
Tribunals in Société Ouest Africaine des Bétons Industriels (SOABI) v. Senegal and,
most recently, African Holding Company of America and Société Africaine de
Construction au Congo S.A.R.L. v. Republic of Congo" did not hesitate to pierce the
successive corporate layers in identifying foreign control and the nationality of those

holding it.

149. _ It is to be noted that in all these cases what was at issue was not the objective existence of
foreign control, which was not contested by the host State, but the nationality of this

foreign control.

150. In only one other case, Vacuum Salt Products Ltd v. Republic of Ghana, was the question
of the existence and reality of “foreign control” raised, i.e. the question whether the
company, formally national of the host State, was indeed under “foreign control” or
whether it remained, directly or indirectly, in the hands of nationals of the host State and

thus fell outside the objective bounds of ICSID’s jurisdiction under Article 25(2)(b).

151. Indeed, in that case, the Claimant deduced from a jurisdictional clause referring to ICSID
in the contract that the parties - Vacuum Salt Products Ltd., which was incorporated
under Ghanaian law, and the Government of Ghana — had agreed to treat the Company
“as a foreign national’, i.e. that they had recognised the existence of “foreign control”
under the second clause of Article 25(2)(b). The Tribunal considered that such an
agreement only “raises a rebuttable presumption that the ‘foreign control’ criterion of the
second clause of Article 25(2)(b) has been satisfied on the date of consent’, Thereupon,
the Tribunal proceeded to a thorough examination of the facts of the case, to reach the
conclusion that the presumption was rebutted, i.e. that the criterion of foreign control was

not satisfied, and dismissed the case for lack of jurisdiction.

+5 ICSID Case No. ARB/82/1, Decision on Jurisdiction, 19 July 1984.
#6 ICSID Case No. ARB/05/21, Award, 29 July 2008.
#7 See supra note 31, at para. 38.

43

152.

153.

154.

155.

Writers and commentators are also divided on the issue of piercing the corporate veil
under Article 25(2)(b) in general. But a majority appear to favour piercing the veil and

going for the real control and nationality of controllers**.

The reasons for piercing of the corporate veil up to the real source of control is a fortiori
more compelling under the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) when ultimate control is
alleged to be in the hands of nationals of the host State, whose formal nationality is also
that of the Claimant corporation. Thus, Professor Schreuer concludes his analysis with the
following rhetorical question: “Is it sufficient for nationals of non-Contracting States or
even of the host State to set up a company of convenience in a Contracting State to create
the semblance of appropriate foreign control?” And his answer is that “the better approach
would appear to be a realistic look at the true controller thereby blocking access to the
Centre for juridical persons that are controlled directly or indirectly by nationals of non-

Contracting States or nationals of the host State”.

This is also why in the one case under the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) where
national control was alleged (Vacuum Salt Products Ltd. v. Republic of Ghana), the
Tribunal found the presumption of jurisdiction rebutted and declined jurisdiction. And in
no other such case up to date has an ICSID Tribunal, after setting aside the nationality of
the host State, stopped short at the second corporate layer or rung, refusing to pursue

control to its real source.
II. The Circumstances of the Case

TSA bases “foreign control” mainly on the interpretation of Article 1(b)(iii) of the BIT

between the Netherlands and Argentina, and its Protocol which provides under B:

“S E.g. G.R. Delaune, “How to Draft an ICSID Arbitration Clause” ([CSID Rev -FILJ vol. 7 (1992)), p. 168 at 178;
A. Broches, “Denying ICSID’s Jurisdiction : The ICSID Award in Vacuum Salt Products Ltd”, Journal of
International Arbitration, vol. 13 (1996), p. 21 (Broches also presided the SOABI Tribunal); M. Hirsch, The
Arbitration Mechanism of the ICSID (1993), p. 104; Ch. Schreuer, “Access to ICSID Disputes Settlement for Locally
Incorporated Companies”, in Friedleweiss, Deuters & de Waart (eds.) International Economic Law with a Human
Face (1998), p. 497; Ch. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention : A Commentary, (Commentary, op.cit., pp. 317-318,
paras. 562-563); M. Burgstaller, “Nationality of Corporate Investors and International Claims against the Investor's
own State”, Journal of World Investment and Trade, vol. 7, no 2 (Dec. 2006), p. 857.

* Schreuer, Commentary, op.cit., p. 318 [para. 563].

44

“B. With reference to Article 1, paragraph b) (iii) the Contracting Party
in the territory of which the investments are undertaken may require
proof of the control invoked by the investors of the other Contracting
Party. The following facts, inter alia, shall be accepted as evidence of the

control:
i. being an affiliate of a legal person of the other Contracting Party;

ii. having a direct or indirect participation in the capital of a company
higher than 49% or the direct or indirect possession of the necessary
votes to obtain a predominant position in assemblies or company

organs.”

156. However, the provisions of the BIT cannot provide ICSID jurisdiction unless the
conditions of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention are satisfied. In this sense, the

Vacuum Salt Products Ltd v. Republic of Ghana Tribunal stated:

“(...) the parties’ agreement to treat Claimant as a foreign national
‘because of foreign control’ does not ipso jure confer jurisdiction. The
reference in Article 25(2)(b) to ‘foreign control’ necessarily sets an
objective Convention limit beyond which ICSID jurisdiction cannot exist
and parties therefore lack power to invoke same no matter how devoutly

they may have desired to do so.”*”

157. | What is decisive is therefore whether the circumstances are such that TSA, although it is
an Argentinian juridical person, can base jurisdiction on the second clause of Article

25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

158. TSA argues in this respect that the shares of TSA are wholly held by TSI, which is
incorporated under the law of the Netherlands and is domiciled there. It thus satisfies the
criterion of the Protocol and also Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention since the parties have
agreed in the BIT that TSA, because of TSI’s incorporation in the Netherlands and its

100% participation in TSA’s capital, should be treated as a national of the Netherlands.

°° See supra note 31, at para. 36.

45

159.

160.

161.

162.

The Argentine Republic argues that TSA does not fulfil the conditions in Article 25(2)(b)
of the ICSID Convention for being treated as a national of the Netherlands, since it
appears from the information provided by TSA that at all possible critical dates (the
request of arbitration, the consent to jurisdiction, the origin of the dispute), TSI was
controlled by an Argentinian national, Mr. Jorge Justo Neuss, who held, directly or
indirectly, a majority of its shares, starting with 51%, increasing over time to near totality.
Therefore, TSA was not under foreign control and cannot be “treated as a national of

another Contracting State”. The case must therefore be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.

The Tribunal has found above that in the application of the second part of Article 25(2)(b)
it is necessary to pierce the corporate veil and establish whether or not the domestic
company was objectively under foreign control. It also appears from the text of Article
25(2)(b) that the relevant date is the date on which the parties consented to submit the
dispute to arbitration. In a letter of 10 December 2004 to the President of the Argentine
Republic, TSA consented to ICSID arbitration on the basis of the BIT which means that

on that date both parties had consented to arbitration.

TSA has submitted a chart showing that at the time of the notice of the dispute, on 16
December 2004, thus close to the date of consent, TSA, via other companies, was wholly
owned by TH Operations International NV (THOP) and that the owner of THOP’s shares
was Mr. Jorge Justo Neuss, a German-Argentinian citizen. TSA contends, however, that
Mr. Jean-Nicolas d’Ancezune, a French citizen, has rights to 75% of THOP’s shares
through a “fiduciary encumbrance” agreed to by Mr. Neuss, who continues all the same to
hold the shares on his behalf. In spite of questions put to TSA (and to Mr. d’Ancezune
during his witness statement) about the arrangements made with Mr. d’ Ancezune and the
nature of the “fiduciary encumbrance”, only scant information — and no corroborating
evidence — was provided. TSA’s contention in this regard thus remains vague and
unproven, and there is no evidence that TSA was, at the time of consent, under the real

control of Mr. d’ Ancezune who, moreover, is not a Dutch but a French citizen.

The only conclusion that can be drawn from the information and evidence available to the
Tribunal is thus that the ultimate owner of TSA on and around the date of consent was the
Argentinian citizen Mr. Jorge Justo Neuss. It therefore follows that, whatever

46

Vil.

163.

164.

165.

interpretation is given to the BIT between Argentina and the Netherlands, including the
Protocol to the BIT, TSA cannot be treated, for the purposes of Article 25(2)(b) of the
ICSID Convention, as a national of the Netherlands because of absence of “foreign
control” and that the Arbitral Tribunal therefore lacks jurisdiction to examine TSA’s

claims.

FOURTH ISSUE OF JURISDICTION

A. THE PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

1. The Argentine Republic

The Arbitral Tribunal’s competence is outlined by Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention
in which the term “investment” is not defined. The BIT is the instrument in which the
parties gave their consent and determined what kind of investment could be submitted to
the ICSID jurisdiction. Article 1(a) of the BIT requires that an asset, in order to be
protected, must have been invested in accordance with the laws and regulations of the
relevant Contracting Party. An investment made in violation of such laws and regulations

shall not be considered an investment for the purposes of the BIT.

An investment made by illegal means such as corruption cannot be considered to have
been made in accordance with the laws and regulations of the host state. TSA is being
investigated in Argentina for corruption in regard to the awarding of the Concession
Contract in June 1997. A criminal accusation was filed on 16 July 2001 by the
Anticorruption Office. There was a partial acquittal but it was annulled by the Court of
Appeals on 15 November 2005. On 26 February 2008, several public officials as well as
Mr. Jorge Justo Neuss and Mr. Jean Nicolas d’Ancezune were charged with criminal

offences in connection with the awarding of the Concession to TSA.

There have been extensive press reports on corruption in connection with the Concession,
and a certain Mr. Lionel Queudot has made accusations against TSA. It is possible to note
the existence of bribery and/or corruption involving company officials and Argentine

public officers. Argentina considers the existence of events proven which confirm the

47

166.

167.

168.

corruption in which TSI and TSA have been involved. Consequently, they have breached
the obligation for the investment to be executed according to the laws and regulations of
the Argentine Republic. There is convincing and clear evidence of irregularities, not only
at the time of granting the Concession in favour of TSA, but also during its subsequent
operation. These irregularities are not merely based on news articles but they mostly find
their support in the evidence that has been filed during the proceedings in which TSA is

accused of the criminal offences.

The payment of bribes to local public officials guaranteed TSA tailor-made bidding terms
and conditions for the privatisation of the management, control and administration of the
radio-electric spectrum and, then, the irregular performance thereof. Once the Concession
Contract had been concluded, TSA continued enjoying the impunity that bribery ensured.
In the face of its inability to honour the commitments it had undertaken, TSA had to
trigger a process for the modification of the conditions of the Concession which, since the
very beginning, it knew it would not be able to fulfil. A written testimony by Mr. Lionel
Queudot to the Argentine Embassy in Berne bears evidence of the corruption that

occurred.

Although the criminal investigation started in July 2001, the complexity of the facts, the
large amount of evidence, the diversity of agents and players involved, and the existence
of some factors alien to domestic courts have prevented the issuance of a final decision to
date. Nevertheless, the Arbitral Tribunal is not unable to determine that TSA’s investment

was not made in accordance with Argentine law.

TSA made its investment in violation of the general principles of law, since the
investment resulted from the commission of crimes such as fraud and bribery.
Consequently, the Arbitral Tribunal has competence and also an obligation to prevent

TSA from benefiting from the rights granted by the BIT. Reference is made in this respect

48

to the ICSID cases of World Duty Free Company Limited v. Republic of Kenya® ' Tokios
Tokelés v. Ukraine® and Inceysa Vallisoletana, SL v. Republic of El Salvador®>.

2. TSA

169. TSA denies the accusation of bribery. In any case, it is the Arbitral Tribunal, and not the
Argentine courts, that must decide Argentina’s accusation of bribery. Argentina bears the

burden of proving bribery and has failed to meet the burden of proof.

170. Based on an anonymous accusation against members of TSA’s management, a criminal
investigation was initiated. There was a partial acquittal which was reversed upon appeal.
There is now a new unfounded accusation against Mr. Neuss and Mr. d’Ancezune. The
charges have been analysed and criticised by Professor Aguirre Obarrio. Reference is

made to his expert opinion.

171. TSA neither bribed an Argentine official nor received tailor-made bidding conditions or
performance advantages, and Argentina has not presented any evidence showing that they
did so. The evidence used against TSA consists of reports by auditing agencies which are
part of the Argentine Government and highly politicised. There is also a regrettable lack
of independence of the Argentine judicial branch. TSA and its management have been

harassed for many years by Argentina despite the absence of any evidence of bribery.

172. An accusation of bribery requires the most rigorous level of proof, and no such proof has
been adduced by Argentina. There have been media articles based on unreliable
uncorroborated statements by Mr. Lionel Queudot who had been acting as a fiduciary of
TSA and who had a strong motive to take revenge on TSA and its shareholders.
Moreover, the allegation that Mr. Queudot had twice effected transfers of about USD 10
million was not supported by any record. If Mr. Queudot was involved in bribing the
Argentine Government, he would have been subject to prosecution or investigation. In

any case, his allegations do not meet accepted standards of evidence in arbitration.

5! ICSID Case No. ARB/00/7, Award, 4 October 2006, para. 157.
» See supra note 34, at para. 84.
> ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award, 2 August 2006, paras. 236, 240, 243, 246.

49

173.

174.

175.

176.

Argentina does not deny that the Arbitral Tribunal is the sole organ competent to rule on
Argentina’s bribery allegations in this arbitration. Rather, Argentina focuses its argument
on the proposition that the Arbitral Tribunal must decline jurisdiction in this case if it
finds that TSA’s investment was made in violation of Argentine law. TSA, on the other
hand, submits that the legality of an investment is a question for the merits. Moreover,
TSA notes the extreme reticence that arbitral tribunals display in granting jurisdictional
objections on grounds of claimed illegality or corruption. Indeed, even tribunals that have
declined jurisdiction on account of corruption or illegality have done so only after
receiving clear and convincing proof. No such evidence has been presented in the present

case.

B. THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that investigations about criminal offences in connection with
the Concession granted to TSA have been initiated in Argentina. These proceedings are
being pursued but have not been terminated. There is an indictment against two persons
connected with TSA — Mr. Neuss and Mr. d’Ancezune — for complicity in misuse of
public office, but no judgment has been rendered, and the issue of bribery is still being

investigated.

The Arbitral Tribunal cannot find it established, on the basis of available materials, that
the Concession was illegally obtained and that, for this reason, it is not protected under

the BIT. On the other hand, investigations and proceedings in Argentina are still going on.

If there had been no other jurisdictional obstacle in the present case, the Tribunal would
have decided to join the fourth jurisdictional objection to the merits of the case. However,
since the Tribunal has already found that the case should be dismissed on another
jurisdictional ground, the questions raised under the fourth jurisdictional objection are not

decisive for the outcome of the case.

50

Ix.

1

x

178.

179.

180.

7.

COSTS

Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

“In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the

parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in

 

connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom
those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal
and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid.

Such decision shall form part of the award.”

Arbitration Rule 47(1)(j) requires that the Award contain “any decision of the Tribunal

regarding the cost of the proceeding”.

It does not appear that “the parties otherwise agree” within the meaning of Article 61(2)

of the ICSID Convention.

Each party has claimed that all costs should be borne by the other party. However, the
Tribunal finds the circumstances to be such that each party shall bear its own expenses in
connection with the proceedings and that the fees and expenses of the members of the

Tribunal shall be shared equally by them.

Sl

AWARD

For the reasons set forth above, a majority of the Arbitral Tribunal decides:

A. To accept the third objection to the jurisdiction of the International Centre for

Settlement of Investment Disputes raised by the Respondent;

B. To declare that the Centre does not have jurisdiction over the dispute and that this

Arbitral Tribunal is not competent to resolve it;
C. To dismiss the Claimant's claims; and

D. To order that each party shall bear in full its own costs and expenses and pay one
half of the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charges of

the Centre.

Done in English and Spanish, both versions being equally authentic.

 

[signed] [signed]
Mr. Grant D. Aldonas Professor Georges Abi-Saab
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: Date:
Subject to the attached dissenting opinion Subject to the attached concurring opinion
[signed]

Judge Hans Danelius
President of the Tribunal
Date:

52

