INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the matter between

Tulip Real Estate Investment and Development Netherlands B.V.
(Claimant)

and

Republic of Turkey
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/11/28)

 

DECISION ON BIFURCATED JURISDICTIONAL ISSUE

 

Members of the Tribunal
Dr. Gavan Griffith QC (President)
Mr. Michael Evan Jaffe
Prof. Dr. Rolf Knieper

Secretary of the Tribunal

Ms. Martina Polasek

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent
Stuart H. Newberger Robert C. Sentner

George D. Ruttinger Harry P. Trueheart

Meriam Alrashid Nixon Peabody LLP
Crowell &Moring LLP

M. Rasim Kuseyri
Ferdi Karoglu

Simge Sertoglu Akyuz
Kuseyri Hukuk Biirosu

Michael E Schneider
Matthias Scherer
Laura Halonen
Lalive

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 5 March 2013

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1) Partie: 3
2) Procedural History 3
3) Facts Relevant to Decision on the Article 8(2) Jurisdictional Issue ...........ssscssssssessesseseeseeeeseeeee 7
(1) Introduction
(2) The Dispute
4) Scope of this Decision
5) Preliminary Matters to Analysis.
(1) Introduction
(2) The rules governing the Tribunal’s jurisdiction...
(3) The relevance of previous ICSID and ICJ decisions or awards
(4) The onus of establishing jurisdiction .......
6) Position of the Parties on Article 8(2) .........csccscssscsecsscsscsscscscssesscsscesessessceseesceseeseeseassaseaseasee 12
7) Analysis 14
(1) Nature of Article 8(2) 15
(2) Requirements of Article 8(2) 20
(a) The Dispute and Notice Requirement... .20
(b) Consultation and Negotiation Requirement 123
(c) One-year Requirement 24
(d) Satisfaction of Article 8(2) requirements after filing the Request 124
(3) Compliance with Article 8(2) 25
(a) Introduction 25
(b) Did Claimant provide adequate notice of the investment dispute? ..... 25
(i) Does notice to Emlak constitute notice to Respondent?.... 25
(ii) Key pieces of evidence produced...... 27
(iii) When was notice provided that there was an investment dispute?..... 32
(c) Did Claimant seek to engage in consultations and negotiations with Respondent?.............34
(d) Had one year elapsed from the date the dispute arose and the commencement of these
proceedings? 35
8) Futility, Waiver and Pr 35
9) Costs 36
10) Decision on Bi Jurisdicti Issue. 37

 

1) Parties

1. The claimant is Tulip Real Estate and Development Netherlands B.V. (“Tulip” or
“Claimant”), a company constituted in accordance with the laws of The Netherlands.
Claimant is a wholly owned subsidiary of the van Herk group, a Dutch investment
company.

2. Claimant is represented by Mr. Stuart H. Newberger and Mr. George D. Ruttinger of
Crowell & Moring LLP, 1001 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington D.C. 20004
USA and Ms. Meriam Alrashid of Crowell & Moring LLP, 11 Pilgrim Street,
London, EC4V 6RN, United Kingdom.

3. The respondent is the Republic of Turkey (“Republic of Turkey” or “Respondent’”).

4. Respondent is represented by Mr. Michael E Schneider, Mr. Matthias Scherer and Ms.
Laura Halonen of Lalive, 35 rue de la Mairie, CH-1207 Geneva, Switzerland; Mr.
Robert C. Sentner and Mr. Harry P. Trueheart of Nixon Peabody LLP, 437 Madison
Avenue, New York NY 10022 USA; and Mr. M. Rasim Kuseyri, Mr. Ferdi Karoglu
and Ms. Simge Sertoglu Akyuz of Kuseyri Hukuk Biirosu, Via Tower, Nergiz Sok.
No. 7/49, Sogutozu 06520, Yenimahalle/Ankara, Turkey.

2) Procedural History

5. On 11 October 2011 the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
received a Request for Arbitration (the “Request’”), dated the same, from Claimant
against Respondent. On 12 October 2011, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of
the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration
Proceedings, acknowledged receipt of the Request and transmitted a copy to

Respondent.

6. The dispute is brought under the Agreement on Reciprocal Encouragement and
Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic

of Turkey dated 27 March 1986 (the “BIT”).

7. On 28 October 2011, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request and
notified the Parties, pursuant to Article 36 of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States (the “Convention”)
and in accordance with Institution Rules 6 and 7. The case was registered as ICSID

Case No. ARB/11/28. In the same letter the Secretary-General invited the Parties to

inform the Centre of any agreed provisions as to the number of arbitrators and the

method of their appointment as soon as possible.

On 16 November 2011, Respondent proposed, pursuant to Rule 2(1)(b) of the ICSID

Arbitration Rules, a procedure for constituting the Tribunal.

On 1 December 2011, Claimant appointed Michael Evan Jaffe, a national of the

United States, as arbitrator in accordance with Article 37 of the Convention.

. By letter dated 1 December 2011, the Centre informed the Parties that it understood

that no agreement had been reached on the method of constituting the Arbitral
Tribunal and that it would act on the appointment as soon as the method was

established.

. By letter dated 27 December 2011, Claimant informed ICSID that it opted for the

formula provided for in Article 37(2)(b) for the constitution of the Tribunal: that it
consist of three arbitrators, with each party appointing an arbitrator, and the third, the

President of the Tribunal, to be appointed by agreement of the Parties.

. On 28 December 2011, ICSID’s Secretary-General informed the Parties that, in

accordance with Article 37(2)(b) and Rule 2(3) of the Rules, the Tribunal shall consist
of three arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each party and the third, who shall be
the President of the Tribunal, appointed by agreement of the Parties. The Secretary-
General also invited Claimant, in accordance with Rules 3(1)(a)(i) and (ii), to propose
the name of a person who shall be the President of the Tribunal and invited
Respondent to concur in this proposal or to propose another person as the President,

and to appoint another arbitrator.

. On 10 January 2012, ICSID informed the Parties that Michael Evan Jaffe accepted his

appointment as arbitrator.

. On 25 January 2012, Respondent appointed Professor Rolf Knieper, a national of

Germany, and informed the Centre that the Parties were cooperating to agree upon the

President of the Tribunal.

. On 30 January 2012, ICSID informed the Parties that Professor Rolf Knieper accepted

his appointment as arbitrator.

. On 23 March 2012, Respondent informed ICSID that the Parties had reached an

agreement on the appointment of Dr. Gavan Griffith, QC, a national of Australia, as

20.

21

the President of the Tribunal. On 26 March 2012, Claimant confirmed that the Parties

agreed to appoint Dr. Griffith as President of the Tribunal.

. On 28 March 2012, ICSID’s Secretary-General notified the Parties that the Tribunal

was deemed to be constituted in accordance with Article 37(2)(b) and under Rule 6.
The Tribunal is thus composed by (i) Michael Evan Jaffe (appointed by Claimant), (ii)
Professor Rolf Knieper (appointed by Respondent) and (iii) Dr. Gavan Griffith
(appointed by agreement of the Parties). The Centre also informed the Parties and the
Tribunal that Ms. Martina Polasek, ICSID, would serve as the Secretary to the
Tribunal.

. On 30 April 2012, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1), the Tribunal held the

first session in Paris, France.

. On 22 May 2012, after consultation with the Parties, Procedural Order No. 1 was

issued by the President of the Tribunal, recording the Parties’ agreement and the
Tribunal’s decisions on a number of procedural matters. Among other things, it was
agreed that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be the Rules in force as of April

2006 and that the place of proceedings would be Paris, France.

On 15 August 2012, pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1, Claimant submitted its
Memorial on Jurisdiction, Merits and Damages together with witness statements of
Mr. Meyer Benitah (“Benitah 1‘ W/S”), Mr. Erik Esveld (“Esveld W/S”) and Mr.
Huseyin Burak Erten (“Erten W/S”) and an expert report of Dr. José Alberro
(“Alberro E/R”).

. On 12 October 2012, Respondent filed a Request for Bifurcation in accordance with

the timetable established in Procedural Order No. 1, para 13. In its Bifurcation
Application, Respondent applied to have three objections to jurisdiction heard as
preliminary questions, namely:

(1) Claimant’s claims are contract claims not treaty claims;

(2) It is premature to decide any treaty claims and they are therefore

inadmissible; and

(3) The mandatory negotiation period set out in Article 8(2) of the BIT was
not respected, taking the dispute outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction or

making it inadmissible. !

22. On 16 October 2012, the Tribunal invited Claimant to provide its observations to the

Bifurcation Application by 26 October 2012.
23. On 26 October 2012, Claimant filed its Reply to the Bifurcation Application.

24. On 2 November 2012, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Respondent’s Request for
Bifurcation under Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention which determined to deal
only with Respondent’s third objection, concerning compliance with Article 8(2) as a
preliminary question. The Tribunal also rejected Respondent’s application to suspend
the proceedings on the merits and made procedural directions for the disposition of
the bifurcated issue.

25. On 21 November 2012, Claimant filed its Memorial on Article 8(2) (“C Memorial”),
together with a witness statement of Mr. Meyer Benitah dated 19 November 2012 and
an expert opinion of Prof Rudolf Dolzer dated 20 November 2012.

26. On 14 December 2012, Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on Compliance with
Article 8(2) of the BIT.

27. On 27 December 2012, Claimant filed its Reply on Compliance with Article 8(2).

28. On 31 December 2012, the Tribunal alerted the Parties of the recent Decision on
Jurisdiction dated 21 December 2012 made by the Tribunal in Teinver S.A.,
Transportes de Cercanias S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1) and invited the Parties to address this decision
at the hearing to be held in Paris.

29. On 4 January 2013, Respondent wrote to the Tribunal, identifying the issues that it
considered to be ripe for determination by the Tribunal and suggesting that no further
evidence was required. Respondent also informed the Tribunal that it did not request
to cross-examine Mr. Benitah or Prof Dolzer.

30. On 10 January 2013, the Tribunal confirmed the hearing and proposed a preliminary

timetable for oral arguments leading to the hearing in Paris on 28 January 2013.

' Bifurcation Application, para. 66.

31.

32.

In attendance on behalf of Claimant were: Mr. Stuart Newberger, Mr. John Laird and
Ms. Meriam Alrashid of Crowell and Moring LLP. Attending as Claimant’s
representatives were Mr. Meyer Benitah and Mr. Burak Erten.

In attendance on behalf of the Respondent were: Mr. M. Rasim Kuseyri and Ms.
Simge Sertoglu Akyuz of Kuseyri Law Office; Mr. Robert C. Sentner and Mr. Craig
R. Tractenberg of Nixon Peabody LLP and Mr. Michael E. Schneider, Mr. Joachim
Knoll, Ms. Laura Halonen, Mr. Cristophe Guibert de Bruet and Mr. Alptug Tokeser of
Lalive. Attending as Respondent’s representatives were: Mr. Sami Arslan Askin
(Head Legal Counsel of Prime Ministry) and Mr. Guray Ozsu (Legal Counsel of

Prime Ministry).

3) Facts Relevant to Decision on the Article 8(2) Jurisdictional Issue

(1) Introduction

33.

34,

35.

For the purposes of this Decision on the Article 8(2) Jurisdictional Issue, the Tribunal
will limit itself to summarising the facts pertinent to this jurisdictional phase as
currently pleaded. This summary is not to be taken as prejudging in any way the
issues of fact or law to be resolved at a subsequent phase of this arbitration.

This dispute arises out of investments of Claimant in several residential and
commercial construction projects in Istanbul and Ankara, Turkey, in particular, the
Ispartakule III project in Istanbul. The Ispartakule III project was allegedly promoted
to foreign investors by Emlak Konut Gayrimenkul Yatirim Ortakligi A.S. (“Emlak’).
Turkey’s Housing Development Administration (“TOKT’), which is part of Turkey’s
Prime Ministry, and, at the times material to this decision, held a significant
shareholding in Emlak. The exact percentage of this shareholding appears to have
evolved since the commencement of the Ispartakule III project. It is unclear to the
Tribunal the exact percentage of TOKI’s current shareholding in Emlak, although it is
common ground that TOKI is the majority or controlling shareholder in Emlak.” It is
equally uncontested that at the time when the dispute arose both Emlak and TOKI

were directed by the same person, Mr. Erdogan Bayraktar.

Claimant conducted its investments in Turkey by way of several special investment
vehicles, including companies referred to as “Tulip I,” “Tulip If’ and “Tulip JV.”

Emlak and Tulip JV signed the Contract for Revenue-Sharing in Exchange for Sale of

? Respondent says that it currently stands at 75% (Transcript, 74:5-6). Other evidence indicates the shareholding
at various times has been 39%, 50% and 99%.

Parcels for the Ispartakule III Project on 3 August 2006, and Tulip I took poss

 

of the land from Emlak on behalf of Tulip JV a few days later.

(2) The Dispute

36. The dispute concerns allegations by Claimant that actions taken by Respondent

deprived Claimant of the entire value of its real estate development projects. In

summary, it is claimed -

(1) Respondent failed to disclose pending zoning litigation in tender documents

presented by Emlak and TOKI to Claimant, which litigation resulted in a
delay of two years, i.e., to September 2008, in the commencement of

construction, while Tulip JV waited for a construction permit.

(2) In January 2007, the government official who was head of both TOKI and

Emlak informed Claimant’s investors that he would terminate the Contract if
the investors did not oust the Turkish professionals who were part of Tulip
JV and effectively hand over control of the project to a Turkish national

recommended by the government official.

(3) Once construction commenced, Respondent’s agencies Emlak and TOKI

(4

(65

)

)

harassed Claimant by, inter alia, delaying approvals, which should have been
mere formalities; denying time extensions to cover delays for approvals,
which should have been mere formalities; denying time extensions to cover
delays for which Emlak and TOKI themselves were responsible; and,

threatening to terminate the Contract for vague and unjustifiable reasons.

Respondent terminated the Contract in May 2010 - calling it a “termination
for delay” — as a pretext for Respondent to take the project away from
Claimant and seize all its assets associated with the Ispartakule III project as

the delay could only be attributed to Respondent.

Respondent forcibly seized the construction site with the aid of police and
private security forces and summarily seized the performance bond that had

been posted by Claimant.

(6) Respondent re-tendered the project while Claimant’s court actions to nullify

the termination of the Contract were still pending. What is more, according

to Claimant, the award of the new contract for the project was on less
favourable terms to Respondent than under the contract with Claimant.
37. Claimant argues that these constitute breaches by Respondent of its obligations under
the BIT, including -

(1) to ensure the fair and equitable treatment (“FET”) of Claimant’s investment

(Article 3(1));
(2) to provide treatment that is not arbitrary or discriminatory;

(3) to accord at all times to Claimant’s investment full protection and security
(Article 3(2));

(4) to observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments

(Article 3(2));
(5) to refrain from unlawful expropriation without compensation (Article 5); and

(6) to protect foreign investors.

4) Scope of this Decision

38. As noted above, in its Decision on Bifurcation, the Tribunal determined to hear as a
preliminary question only Respondent’s third objection to jurisdiction, namely that
Claimant has failed to respect the mandatory negotiation period set out in the Article 8(2)
objection and otherwise directed Respondent’s first and second objections to be heard

with the merits in a subsequent phase.

5) Preliminary Matters to Analysis

(1) Introduction

39. The Tribunal finds it convenient to begin its analysis by reciting the relevant rules
governing the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and provisions of the BIT (section 2); considering
the relevance of previous decisions (section 3); identifying the onus of establishing

jurisdiction (section 4) and dealing with non-contentious matters (section 5).

(2) The rules governing the Tribunal’s jurisdiction

40. The Tribunal’s jurisdiction arises under the provisions of the ICSID Convention and the

BIT.

Al. The relevant provision of the ICSID Convention is Article 25(1) -

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment between a Contracting State (or any constituent
subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that
State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the
dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have
given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

42. The relevant provision of the BIT that provides for ICSID arbitration is Article 8 -

1)

2)

3)

For the purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is defined as a
dispute involving:

(a) the interpretation or application of any investment authorization
granted by a Contracting Party's foreign investment authority to
an investor of the other Contracting Party; or

(b) a breach of any right conferred or created by this Agreement with
respect to an investment.

In the event of an investment dispute between a Contracting Party and
an investor of the other Contracting Party, the parties to the dispute
shall initially seek to resolve the dispute by consultations and
negotiations in good faith. If such consultations or negotiations are
unsuccessful, the dispute may be settled through the use of non-binding,
third party procedures upon which such investor and the Contracting
Party mutually agree. If the dispute cannot be resolved through the
foregoing procedures the investor concerned may choose to submit the
dispute to the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes (‘Centre’) for settlement by arbitration, at any time after one
year from the date upon which the dispute arose provided that in case
the investor concerned has brought the dispute before the courts of
justice of the Contracting Country that is a party to the dispute, and
there has not been rendered a final award.

(a) Each Contracting Party hereby consents to the submission of an
Investment dispute to the Centre for settlement by arbitration.

(b) Arbitration of such disputes shall be done in accordance with
the provisions of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States and the
‘Arbitration Rules’ of the Centre.

43. In the ordinary course, the principles for construction of relevant provisions of the ICSID

Convention and the BIT are as provided under the Vienna Convention on the Law of

Treaties (“Vienna Convention”). Although Turkey has not acceded to the Vienna

Convention, the Parties nonetheless agreed that the Tribunal may proceed on the basis

10

44.

4S.

46.

47.

that the principles stated in the Vienna Convention may be applied in construing the BIT,
either as a matter of consent, or, in any event, as reflecting the accepted principles of
customary international law. Although it may not be for the Parties to so agree, as it here
appears to the Tribunal that issues of possible differences between that treaty and of
customary international law do not lead to material differences of construction in
interpreting and enforcing the BIT, the Tribunal has regard to the terms of the Vienna
Convention, particularly Articles 31 and 32.

One further background matter that the Tribunal refers to is that consent is the
cornerstone of all international treaty commitments and that here the provisions of the
BIT qualify the state sovereignty of Turkey. Here, Article 8 is a specific and qualified
derogation to Turkey’s sovereign immunity and the Tribunal accepts that in its
interpretation and application there is an inertia against too expansive a construction of

the reach of the BIT.

(3) The relevance of previous ICSID and ICJ decisions or awards

Each Party refers the Tribunal to previous ICSID and investment treaty awards, and
statements made in ICJ judgments. Although not bound by such citations, the Tribunal
accepts that, as a matter of comity, it should have regard to earlier decisions of courts
(particularly the ICJ) and of other international dispute tribunals engaged in the
interpretation of the terms of a BITS

At the hearings, the issue of the “hierarchy” of authority that should be attached to
decisions of particular international courts and tribunals was raised: Respondent submits
that the judgments of the ICJ are at the apex;* whilst Claimant submits that decisions of
previous ICSID tribunals are more relevant as they specifically concern investment treaty
law, and the construction of BITs, as compared to general principles of international
law.®

In this regard, the Tribunal does not find it necessary to engage in an hierarchical
analysis of precedent. On one hand, the Tribunal accords deference to relevant
statements by the ICJ of general principles as to the construction of the terms of a treaty

as those principles may apply to the construction of the BIT. On the other hand, as there

3 See e.g., AES Corporation v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/17, Decision on Jurisdiction of 13
July 2005, paras, 30-32; Saipem S.p.A v. the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07,

Decision on Juri

iction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures of 21 March 2007, para. 67.

 

* Transcript, 21:16-17.
> Transcript, 119:21-24.

is no precedential order in regard to previous decisions on the construction of bilateral

investment treaties, the relevant enquiry remains for the Tribunal to interpret and apply

the terms of the BIT itself. Prior decisions may inform that enquiry, but it is for this

Tribunal to make its own interpretation of Article 8(2), informed by the rigor and

persuasiveness of relevant analysis and statements by decisions of earlier tribunals.

(4) The onus of establishing jurisdiction

48. As a party bears the burden of proving the facts it asserts, it is for Claimant to satisfy the

burden of proof required at the jurisdictional phase.° Here, the Parties agree that whilst

the Article 8(2) Objection was raised by Respondent, the onus remains on Claimant

to

establish that the requirements of Article 8(2) have been satisfied, and that the Tribunal

has jurisdiction.’

(5) Non-contentious matters for the purposes of this Decision

49. For the purposes of this phase of the arbitration only, it is assumed that Claimant has

made an investment in Turkey and that the claims advanced by Claimant in its Request

are an “investment dispute” within the Br.§

6) Position of the Parties on Article 8(2)

50. The following summarizes the Parties’ positions with respect to the Article 8(2)

Objection.

(1) Claimant’s position

51. In its written and oral submissions, Claimant has put forward the following arguments -

(1) Claimant and its representatives provided ample notice of the dispute and

engaged in repeated good faith efforts to resolve the dispute with Turkish

authorities well over a year prior to seeking arbitration.”

° Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction of 22
April 2005, para. 79; Saipem S.p.A v. Peopl
on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures of 21 March 2007, para. 83.
"Transcript, 3:5-23.

* Transcript, 49:24-25; 51:15-16; Transcript, 6:1-22.

° © Memorial, para. 33.

 

's Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Decision

(2) Article 8(2) of the BIT does not create a jurisdictional hurdle to filing an
ICSID claim, nor does it impact the admissibility of a claim. It is argued that
the weight of previous arbitral decisions favors avoiding the formalistic
conclusion that certain “pre-arbitration procedures” must be complied with
before an investor can seek arbitration, particularly where negotiation would

be futile. '°

(3) The fact that the timeframe of Article 8(2) has already passed in this case
since the filing of the Request can give the Tribunal comfort in deciding that

Article 8(2) does not create a jurisdictional hurdle.

(4) Respondent has in any case waived its chance to rely on Article 8(2) as its
own behavior and attitude demonstrates that it had no interest in settling the

dispute. "

(5) Respondent has waived its chance to rely on Article 8(2) by waiting until its
submission of its Request for Bifurcation, over a year into the present

proceedings. R
(6) Respondent’s objection does not support procedural economy.
52. Claimant requests that the Tribunal determines that -
(1) Claimant has complied with Article 8(2);
(2) Claimant’s claims under the BIT are admissible pursuant to Article 8(2);

(3) Respondent’s jurisdictional objections with respect to Article 8(2) be

dismissed;

(4) The procedural timetable set forth in its First Procedural Order, and reiterated

in its Decision on Bifurcation, be confirmed; and

(5) Claimant be awarded its legal fees and costs incurred in the preparation of its

Memorial on Article 8(2).'°

'© © Memorial, para. 44.

"© Memorial paras 62-63. As examples of Respondent's behavior, Claimant refers to Respondent's alleged
actions of Emlak forcefully and illegally entering the project site, occupying Tulip’s offices, announcing a new
tender on the project and signing a new contract with another company.

> Memorial para. 66.

© Memorial para. 73.

(2) Respondent’s position
53. In summary, Respondent’s contentions in answer are -

(1) Article 8(2) is a binding obligation and not merely a “procedural device.”
Article 8(2) provides for a mandatory negotiation period as a condition for

Respondent’s consent to the Tribunal’ s jurisdiction. '*

(2

Claimant did not notify Respondent about the investment dispute or seek to
engage in negotiations with respect to that dispute before filing its Request.
Respondent only first became aware of Claimant’s treaty claims upon the
commencement of the present arbitration. It is argued that in no
communications with Respondent by or on behalf of Claimant was reference

made to treaty claims. 8

(3) In the absence of a notified BIT dispute and settlement efforts there is no

consent and the Tribunal has no jurisdiction. 16

(4) The requirements of Article 8(2) cannot be dispensed with on grounds of

“procedural economy” or “futility”. u

(65

An invitation to negotiations once arbitration has been commenced does not

comply with the requirements of Article 8(2). 1s

54. Respondent requests orders to dismiss the entire claims for lack of jurisdiction or as

inadmissible, together with the award of costs. 9

7) Analysis

55. In its plain meaning, Article 8(1) relevantly defines an investment dispute as a dispute
involving a breach of any right conferred or created by the BIT with respect to an
investment. Article 8(2) provides that the parties to an “investment dispute” shall initially

seek to resolve the dispute by consultations and negotiations in good faith. If the dispute

' R Counter-Memorial, para. 15.

'S R Counter-Memorial, paras. 57-60; 70-163.
‘© R Counter-Memorial, paras. 164-168.

” R Counter-Memorial, paras. 169-181.

'8 R Counter-Memorial, paras. 182-190

'° R Counter-Memorial, para. 193.

cannot be resolved, the investor may submit the dispute to arbitration at any time after

one year from the date upon which the dispute arose.”

(1) Nature of Article 8(2)
56. A requirement for prior notice of a dispute to be given and negotiations to follow for a
period before filing a claim along the lines of Article 8(2) is not an uncommon provision

in investment treaties.

57. In this context, it is clear enough that there is no overriding jurisprudence constante
concerning the construction and application of such provisions.”! Indeed, the
jurisprudence is very much non constante. Lines of decisions that have decided that such
consultation and negotiation provisions are not of a jurisdictional nature, and do not have
to be strictly followed,” are matched by a lesser number of decisions that have held that
compliance with such requirements for notice and negotiation enure as a pre-condition to
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, and must be strictly complied with.?* Additionally, there
is a body of decisional authority that examines, with contrary conclusions, whether non-
compliance may be ignored where negotiations would be futile or where there is no

realistic likelihood of meaningful negotiation.”*

? Article 8(2) is extracted in full at para. 42.

*! This was acknowledged by Respondent. Transcript, 22:17-22.

* Ethyl Corporation v. Government of Canada, NAFTA/UNCITRAL (Award dated 24 June 1998); Maffezini v.
Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Decision on Jurisdiction dated 25 January 2000; Ronald S
Lauder v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Arbitration, 3 September 2001, Final Award; Link-Trading v.
Department for Customs Control of Republic of Moldova, UNCITRAL (Award on Jurisdiction dated 16
February 2001); SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSD Case No.
ARB/01/13 (Decision on Objection to Jurisdiction dated 6 August 2003); Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaretve
Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, CSID Case No. ARB/03/29 (Decision on Jurisdiction dated 14
November 2005); Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22
(Award dated 24 July 2008); Occidental Petroleum Corporation, Occidental Exploration and Production
Company v. The Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/11 (Decision on Jurisdiction, 9 September
2008); Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan, Stockholm Chamber of Commerce Case No. V
(064/2008) (Partial Award on Jurisdiction and Liability dated 2 September 2009); Alps Finance and Trade AG
v. Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL (Award dated 5 March 2011).

3 Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/5 (Decision on Jurisdiction dated
2 June 2010); Murphy Exploration and Production Company Int'l v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No.
ARB/08/4 (Award on Jurisdiction dated 15 December 2010); Case Concerning Armed Activities on the
Territory of the Congo (DRC v. Rwanda), Jurisdiction of the Court and Admis bility of the Application,
Judgment of 3 February 2006; Case Concerning Application of the ional C ion on the Elimi

of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation), Decision on Preliminary Objections,
Judgment, 1 April 2011; Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, (14 Jan 2004).

*4 Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercantas S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1 (Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 December 2012); Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v.
Republic of Tajikistan, Stockholm Chamber of Commerce Case No. V (064/2008) (Partial Award on
Jurisdiction and Liability dated 2 2009); Occi Petroleum Corporation, Occidental Exy

 

  

 

5

5

6!

8. Within this controversy, Claimant submits that Article 8(2) is not intended to raise a
jurisdictional hurdle to filing an ICSID claim, nor does it impact the admissibility of a

. 2
claim.”°

2°

Claimant contends that Respondent rests its contrary position upon Burlington v.
Ecuador and Murphy v. Ecuador as the only two principal decisions that go against the
grain of arbitral precedent.”° Claimant also relies on the “expert opinion” of Prof Dolzer,
confirming published statements by himself and also by Prof Christoph Schreuer to
support his conclusions that a “review of the jurisprudence by all investment tribunals
speaks in favor of the more flexible approach.”?” Prof Dolzer was not called for
examination upon his report and the hearings proceeded upon the basis that the report

was received as submission in legal argument made by Claimant.

S

Respondent’s answer is that Article 8(2) is mandatory and equivalent to a requirement, in
common law terminology, of a condition precedent with the consequences that in the

absence of compliance there is no consent by Turkey to arbitration.**

Tribunal’s Analysis

6

1. In Case Concerning Application of the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v Russian Federation)” the ICJ addressed
the function of a ‘compromissory’ provision of this sort in terms -

[I]t is not unusual in compromissory clauses conferring jurisdiction on the
Court and other international jurisdictions to refer to resort to negotiations.
Such resort fulfills three distinct functions. In the first place, it gives notice to
the respondent State that a dispute exists and delimits the scope of the dispute
and its subject-matter... In the second place, it encourages the Parties to
attempt to settle their dispute by mutual agreement, thus avoiding recourse to
binding third-party adjudication. In the third place, prior resort to
negotiations or other methods of peaceful dispute settlement performs an
important function in indicating the limit of consent given by States.

 

and Production Company v. The Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/11 (Decision on Jurisdiction, 9
September 2008); Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22
(Award dated 24 July 2008); Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaretve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29 (Decision on Jurisdiction dated 14 November 2005); Link-Trading v. Department

Re

25

for Customs Control of Republic of Moldova, UNCITRAL (Award on Jurisdiction dated 16 February 2001);

onald S Lauder v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Arbitration, 3 September 2001, Final Award.
C Memorial, para. 35.

°6 © Memorial, para. 36.

21
28
29

Dolzer E/O, para. 22.
R Counter-Memorial, para. 1.
ICJ, Case Concerning Application of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial

Discrimination (Georgia v Russian Federation), Decision on Preliminary Objections, Judgment, ICJ reports
2011.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

The Tribunal adds a fourth aspect, namely, that it sees that such a requirement also fulfils
the policy function of conferring upon the State Party an opportunity to address a
potential claimant’s complaint before it becomes a respondent in an international
investment dispute.

In Armed Activities (DRC v. Rwanda) the ICJ also said 0

[The Court’s] jurisdiction is based on the consent of the parties and is
confined to the extent accepted by them... When that consent is expressed in
a compromissory clause in an international agreement, any conditions to
which such consent is subject must be regarded as constituting the limits
thereon.

Statements to the like effect are made in other investment tribunal decisions interpreting
a BIT in similar terms.
In Enron v. Argentine Republic”! after finding that the six-month negotiation period had

been complied with, the tribunal stated:

The Tribunal wishes to note in this matter, however, that the conclusion
reached is not because the six-month negotiation period could be a procedural
and not a jurisdictional requirement as has been argued by the Claimants and
affirmed by other tribunals. Such requirement is in the view of the Tribunal
very much a jurisdictional one. A failure to comply with that requirement
would result in a determination of lack of jurisdiction.

Likewise, the tribunal in Murphy v. Ecuador*® found that the six-month waiting period in
the relevant Treaty between the Republic of Ecuador and the United States of America

had not been complied with and made the following findings:

The Tribunal also does not accept the consequences Claimant seeks to derive
between “procedural” and “jurisdictional” requirements. According to
[Claimant], “procedural requirements” are of an inferior category than the
“jurisdictional requirements” and, consequently, its non-compliance has no
legal consequences. It is evident that in legal practice this does not occur, and
that non-compliance with a purely procedural requirement, such as, for
example, the time to appeal a judgment, can have serious consequences for
the defaulting party.

°° 1CJ, Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002), (Democratic Republic of the
Congo v. Rwanda), Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Judgment, ICJ Reports 2006, at para. 88.

*' Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3, Decision
on Jurisdiction, (14 Jan 2004), para. 88.

*» Murphy Exploration and Production Company Int'l v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/4
(Award on Jurisdiction dated 15 December 2010), paras 140 -156.

* Murphy Exploration and Production Company Int'l v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/4
(Award on Jurisdiction dated 15 December 2010), para 142.

Claimant’s interpretation of Article VI of the BIT simply ignores the existence
of provisions mandating the parties to have consultations and negotiations to
resolve their disputes (paragraph 2) and preventing them from resorting to
ICSID before six months have elapsed from the date on which the dispute
arose (paragraph 3). 4

It is contrary to the fundamental rules of interpretation to state that while
[Article VI] constitutes a “procedural rule that must be satisfied by the
claimant”, non-compliance does not have any consequence whatsoever. Such
a way of interpreting the obligation simply ignores the “object and the
purpose” of the rule, which is contrary to Article 31(1) of the aforementioned
Vienna Convention.

Similarly, the SGS v. Pakistan tribunal held that “...Tribunals have generally
tended to treat consultation periods as directory and procedural rather than
as mandatory and jurisdictional in nature.” This Tribunal cannot agree with
that statement which implies that, even though there is an explicit treaty
requirement, the investor may decide whether or not to comply with it as it
deems fit. [footnote omitted]

This Tribunal finds the requirement that the parties should seek to resolve
their dispute through consultation and negotiation for a six-month period does
not constitute, as Claimant and some arbitral tribunals have stated, “a
procedural rule” or a directory and procedural” rule which can or cannot be
satisfied by the concerned party. To the contrary, it constitutes a fundamental
requirement that Claimant must comply with, compulsorily, before submitting
a request for arbitration under the ICSID rules.

67. In Burlington Resources v. Ecuador*® the tribunal found that the claimant’s full
protection and security claim was inadmissible in accordance with Article VI [the six-
month waiting provision] of relevant Treaty between the Republic of Ecuador and the

United States of America and made the following findings:

Article VI does not require the investor to spell out its legal case in detail
during the initial negotiation process; Article VI does not even require the
investor to invoke specific Treaty provisions at that stage. Rather, Article VI
simply requires the investor to inform the host State that it faces allegations of
Treaty breach which could eventually engage the host State's international
responsibility before an international tribunal. In other words, it requires the
investor to apprize the host State of the likely consequences that would follow
should the negotiation process break down.*

 

 

“Murphy Exploration and Production Company Int'l v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/4
(Award on Jurisdiction dated 15 December 2010), para 145.

*Murphy Exploration and Production Company Int'l v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/4
(Award on Jurisdiction dated 15 December 2010), paras 147-149.

*SBurlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/5 (Decision on Jurisdiction dated
2 June 2010), para. 340.

*” Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CS1D Case No. ARB/08/5 (Decision on Jurisdiction dated
2 June 2010), para. 338.

18

Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that Burlington's full protection and
security claim for Block 23 is inadmissible in accordance with Article VI of
the Treaty. It adds that in ICSID arbitration the inadmissibility of claims has
the same consequence as the failure to meet the requirements for jurisdiction
under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention or the BIT, such consequence being
that the Tribunal cannot exercise jurisdiction over the dispute.**

68. Lastly, in the recent decision of the tribunal in Teinver v. Argentine Republic,” the

Tribunal held that:

The Tribunal agrees with Claimants that Article X(1) can fairly be interpreted
as a general “best efforts” obligation for the parties to attempt to amicably
settle their dispute. However, it would be an overly literal interpretation of
Article X(2)’s “cannot be settled within six months” language to read it as
simply requiring that the Parties wait for six months after the dispute began
before they proceed to the next step in the dispute settlement process. The
natural reading of Articles X(1) and (2) together is that the Parties are
obligated to make their best efforts to amicably settle their dispute, and that
they are required to do so for six months before proceeding to the next step.

 

69. The Tribunal concurs with each of these statements of principle.
70. In the Tribunal’s opinion the ordinary meaning of the terms in Article 8(2) is clear. It

provides in plain language that the parties shall -

(1) First seek to resolve the dispute by consultations and negotiations in good
faith; and

(2) Second, if these procedures are unsuccessful, then, at any time after one year
from the date upon which the dispute arose, the investor may choose to

submit the dispute to arbitration.

71. The language is mandatory in form. The explicit requirements that the parties must seek
to engage in consultations and negotiations with respect to the dispute as arising under
the BIT and that there be a one-year waiting period from the date the dispute arose are
accepted by the Tribunal as pre-conditions to submitting the dispute to arbitration. In this
regard, the date the dispute arises is the date of first notification of a claim arising under
the BIT by one party to the other. In the opinion of the Tribunal, this interpretation

accords with the plain object and purpose of the provision.

*8 Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/5 (Decision on Jurisdiction dated
2 June 2010), para. 340.

* Teinver S.A., Transportes de Cercantas S.A. and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur S.A. v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/09/1 (Decision on Jurisdiction, 24 December 2012), para. 108.

Conclusion

72. Accordingly, the Tribunal rejects Claimant’s contention that Article 8(2) is merely

7

7:

3.

#

procedural. The explicit requirements to give notice of the dispute as arising under the
BIT and to seek consultations and negotiations until one year has elapsed from the date
of notification of the dispute is not to be watered down to a mere statement of aspiration.
The Tribunal finds compliance is an essential element of Turkey’s prospective consent to
qualify its sovereignty to permit unknown future investors of the other contracting State
to claim relief under the terms of the BIT against it in an international forum. The
Tribunal finds that the fulfillment of the requirements in Article 8(2) is a pre-condition to

the jurisdiction of this Tribunal.

(2) Requirements of Article 8(2)
The Tribunal turns to consider compliance in this dispute with the three requirements in

Article 8(2), namely -

(a) That there be an “investment dispute” under the BIT that Claimant must have

provided notice to Respondent;

(b) That efforts to engage in consultation and negotiation to resolve the dispute

have been undertaken; and

(c) That proceedings may not be commenced until one year after notification of a

dispute.

(a) The Dispute and Notice Requirement

Respondent contends that Claimant did not notify Respondent of the existence of an
investment dispute under the BIT until it filed the Request.“” Respondent says that
Article 8(2) requires that a dispute be identified as an “investment dispute” under Article
8(1), and that this dispute be notified to Respondent 12 months prior to the Request.*! It
contends that it is of particular importance that the notification of a dispute be clear and

unambiguous, particularly where, as here, the investor was engaged in two disputes, with

+ Transcript, 238:23-239:9.
4" R Counter-Memorial, para. 2.

20

one against Emlak pending before the courts of Turkey in relation to the Ispartakule III
project (the “Contract Dispute”) and the other dispute arising under the BIT.”

75. Claimant argues that the investment dispute was notified to Turkey at the latest 15
months and potentially as early as 16 January 2007, when a meeting took place with
representatives of TOKI prior to the filing of the Request, and at the latest, when it sent a
letter to the President of Turkey dated 8 July 2010.** Claimant submits that numerous
correspondences and communications between it and Respondent also made it clear to
Turkey that an investment dispute existed well before a year prior to when the Request
was filed.“

76. As to form of notice, Claimant contends that the BIT contains no requirement as to the
form and that there are no “magic words” that a claimant must employ to notify the State
of the dispute and that it wishes to begin settlement negotiations regarding an investment
dispute.**

77. Claimant invokes the statements of the tribunal in Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain,“
where it said “[w]hile a dispute may have emerged, it does not necessarily have to
coincide with the presentation of a formal claim.”*” Claimant argues that the Maffezini
tribunal held that the fact that the legal instrument of consent to international arbitration
has not been specifically invoked does not mean that a dispute covered by the terms of
that treaty has not arisen.

78. Claimant also cites the tribunal in Link-Trading v. Department for Customs Control of
Republic of Moldova,** where it stated that the “formal complaint ... represented the

949)

culmination, not the inception, of [a] dispute” and also the tribunal in Burlington

Resources v. Ecuador, extracted at para 67 above.°?

* R Counter-Memorial, para. 32.

4 © Memorial, para. 5.

# C Memorial, para. 5.

4 © Reply, para. 21.

“© Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7 (Decision on Jurisdiction dated 25 January 2000).
+” Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7 (Decision on Jurisdiction dated 25 January 2000),
para. 97.

*8 Link-Trading v. Department for Customs Control of Republic of Moldova, UNCITRAL (Award on
Jurisdiction dated 16 February 2001).

* Link-Trading v. Department for Customs Control of Republic of Moldova, UNCITRAL (Award on
Jurisdiction dated 16 February 2001), para. 8.6.3.

*° Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/5, (Decision on Jurisdiction
dated 2 June 2010), para. 338.

 

21

79. In response, Respondent refers to statements of the ICJ in the Headquarters Agreement
Advisory Opinion,* that -

[W]here one party to a treaty protests against the behaviour or a decision of
another party, and claims that such behaviour or decision constitutes a breach
of the treaty, the mere fact that the party accused does not advance any
argument to justify its conduct under international law does not prevent the
opposing attitudes of the parties from giving rise to a dispute concerning the
interpretation or application of the treaty.

80. Respondent also relies on statements by the tribunal in Murphy v. Ecuador where it held
that “without the prior allegation of a Treaty breach, it is not possible for a dispute to
arise which could then be submitted to arbitration under Article VI of the BIT.”**

81.

Respondent further cites the decision on jurisdiction in Burlington Resources v.

Ecuador™ where the tribunal said:

.. as long as no allegation of Treaty breach is made, no dispute will have
arisen giving access to arbitration under Article VI. This requirement
makes sense as it gives the state an opportunity to remedy a possible Treaty
breach and thereby avoid arbitration proceedings under BIT, which would
not be possible without knowledge of an allegation of Treaty breach.
Because a dispute under Article VI(3)(a) only arises once an allegation of
Treaty breach is made, the six-month waiting period only begins to run at
that point in time.

82. On this issue of form of notice, it is apparent to the Tribunal that the Parties generally
agreed on the standard to be applied. At the hearing, Claimant submitted that the
Tribunal should apply a test that it is the subject matter that determines when the dispute

arose.*° Similarly, Respondent submitted that the form of notice is:

. notagq ion of specific ding; itis a of the sub ce of the
complaint that is being made. If it's being made clear that what is
complained about here, and what therefore is brought into existence, is the
investment dispute, as defined as a breach of a right conferred or created

by this BIT, then that's fine..."

*'ICJ, Applicability of the Obligation to Arbitrate under Section 21 of the United Nations Headquarters
Agreement of 26 June 1947, Advisory Opinion, ICJ Reports 1988.

*ICJ, Applicability of the Obligation to Arbitrate under Section 21 of the United Nations Headquarters
Agreement of 26 June 1947, Advisory Opinion, ICJ Reports 1988, at para. 38,

“Murphy Exploration and Production Company International v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No.
ARB/08/4, (Award on Jurisdiction dated 15 December 2010), para. 104.

™ Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/5, (Decision on Jurisdiction
dated 2 June 2010.

°5 Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/5, (Decision on Jurisdiction
dated 2 June 2010, paras. 335-336.

°© Transcript, 125:9-11.

1 Transcript, 27:21-28:2.

 

22

Conclusion

83. The Tribunal accepts that Article 8(2) does not impose a formal notice requirement, and

84.

&

finds that the applicable legal standard is as stated by the tribunal in Burlington
Resources v. Ecuador. In this regard, Article 8(2) does not require the investor to spell
out its legal case in detail during the initial negotiation process. Nor does Article 8(2)
require the investor, on the giving of notice of a dispute arising, to invoke specific BIT
provisions at that stage. Rather, what Article 8(2) requires is that the investor sufficiently
informs the State party of allegations of breaches of the treaty made by a national of the
other Contracting State that may later be invoked to engage the host State's international

responsibility before an international tribunal.

(b) Consultation and Negotiation Requirement

The second requirement in Article 8(2) is that the parties seek to engage in consultations
and negotiations in good faith. Respondent relies on decisions by the ICJ in Armed
Activities (DRC v. Rwanda) case** and Case Concerning Application of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v
Russian Federation)” to emphasize that negotiations must be referable to the treaty
dispute. In the latter case, the ICJ said:

... to meet the precondition of negotiation in the compromissory clause of a
treaty, these negotiations must relate to the subject-matter of the treaty
containing the compromissory clause. In other words, the subject-matter of
the negotiations must relate to the subject-matter of the dispute which, in
turn, must concern the substantive obligations contained in the treaty in
question.

85. The Tribunal understands that Claimant essentially agrees with Respondent’s position

that the relevant enquiry is to consider whether the subject matter of the negotiations

concerned the same subject matter as the eventual treaty claim.

*8 1CJ, Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002), (Democratic Republic of the
Congo v. Rwanda), Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Judgment, ICJ Reports 2006, at para. 80.

°° 1CJ, Case Concerning Application of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (Georgia v Russian Federation), Decision on Preliminary Objections, Judgment, ICJ reports
2011.

© ICJ, Case Concerning Application of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (Georgia v Russian Federation), Decision on Preliminary Objections, Judgment, ICJ reports
2011, at para. 161,

23

. Claimant also says that if the Tribunal follows this subject matter approach, as compared
to what Claimant calls the "strict formalities" approach, then the subject matter of this
“ICSID proceeding was exactly what was being presented by the Dutch investor to the
Government of Turkey in the summer of 2010."! This is to identify the controversy as
to characterization for determination by the Tribunal.

. The Tribunal agrees with the above statement of the ICJ and considers that the subject
matter of the consultations and negotiations to be engaged must relate to the subject
matter of the investment dispute brought before this Tribunal under the BIT. It is not
necessary for the parties to make express reference to the treaty in their consultations or

negotiations.

(c) One-year Requirement

. The Tribunal’s position is that the one-year waiting period under Article 8(2) starts
running once notice is provided to Respondent that an investment dispute exists within

the meaning of Article 8(1).

(d) Satisfaction of Article 8(2) requirements after filing the Request

. Claimant also argues that, in any event, as of October 2011, when the Request was filed,
an investment dispute existed and that more than a year has since passed without the
dispute being resolved. In these circumstances, it is intended that any procedural
requirements in Article 8(2) should be regarded as abrogated, or compliance
unnecessary, either through what Claimant has called the application of the “futility
doctrine” or for some other reason.

. In reply, Respondent maintains that the several requirements of Article 8(2) are specific
pre-conditions to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and they must be completely complied with
before the Request is filed.”

. The Tribunal concurs with Respondent’s position. It would be to rewrite the BIT and to
confound its plain meaning to accept that a party may file its Request without notice and
then perfect the breach after the arbitration commenced. In the absence of a waiver (and,

possibly, circumstances giving rise to estoppel), which do not arise here, the Tribunal

©! Transcript, 127:12-17.
© Transcript, 230: 12-25; C Memorial, para. 60.
 R Counter-Memorial, para 40.

24

does not have jurisdiction if the notice requirements are not satisfied before the
arbitration is commenced. Absent a waiver, actions, or inactions, of the Parties after the

commencement of arbitration will not perfect a defective commencement.

Conclusion

92.

The Tribunal concludes that under Article 8(2) Claimant must first prove that it provided
such notice to Respondent that can be reasonably be characterized as notice to the
recipient of a claim arising under the BIT. The investor does not have to spell out its case
beyond informing the host State that it contends that the alleged conduct constitutes a
violation of a treaty. The subject matter of the negotiations that Claimant must seek to
engage in must relate to the subject matter of the dispute, namely a claim arising under
substantive obligations contained in the BIT, and at least one year must have elapsed
since notice of the dispute was given to Respondent before a dispute may be submitted to

arbitration.

(3) Compliance with Article 8(2)

93.

94.

95.

(a) Introduction

The Tribunal moves to analyse evidence presented by Claimant and to determine
whether Claimant has satisfied the requirements of Article 8(2) to this legal standard. It
considers whether and when Claimant provided adequate notice of the investment
dispute and negotiations with Respondent for at least one year from the date of first

notification before the Request was filed.

(b) Did Claimant provide adequate notice of the investment dispute?

The first, and here decisive, question for the Tribunal’s determination is whether
Claimant provided adequate notice to Respondent that an investment dispute had arisen

concerning alleged breaches of the terms of the BIT.

(i) Does notice to Emlak constitute notice to Respondent?

The Tribunal first considers whether notice provided to Emlak constitutes notice to

Respondent for the purposes of this Decision. Claimant relies on a number of documents

25

and conversations between Tulip I (the Turkish incorporated company) and Emlak.
Claimant contends that for current purposes Emlak was Respondent, and argues that
any correspondence addressed to Emlak should be ascribed as notice to TOKI and
therefore the Republic of Turkey as TOK is part of the Turkish Prime Ministry.

96. Claimant refers the Tribunal to the following evidence in this regard:

(1) Emlak, at different times describes itself as “Subsidiary of Prime Minister’s
Office, Housing Development Administration of Turkey,”® “A partnership
of the Housing Development Administration, Prime Ministry of the Republic

9966

of Turkey’ and “Emlak Konut, with its controlling shareholder TOKI, is

the largest REIC in Turkey by market value...;""

(2) Mr. Bayraktar was both the Chairman of Emlak and TOKT;
(3) Emlak was a majority-owned subsidiary of TOKI; and

(4) Mr. Benitah statements that he and the Dutch Investor understood that
partnering with Emlak was effectively partnering with the Turkish

Government.

97. In reply, Respondent identifies Emlak as a private law entity, distinct from the
Government of Turkey,” as the party to the Contract under Turkish law. Hence it
follows that communications addressed to Emlak do not constitute communications to

Respondent.
Conclusion

98. As an issue to be canvassed on the merits, Claimant does not claim that Emlak
constitutes the State, but rather that its acts are attributable to Respondent within Article
8 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility. That remains a live controversy, including
as the subject matter of Claimant's requests for production of documents and the question
whether information known to Emlak, and actions taken by Emlak, can be attributed to
the Respondent. On the evidence currently before it, the Tribunal is not sufficiently

satisfied that Emlak is to be equated to the State. Whilst not constituting a decision on

Transcript, 153:4-154:17.

° CE-73.

°° CE-219.

°7 CE-214.

°S Benitah 1“ W/S, paras. 22-30.
© R Counter-Memorial, para. 140.

26

99.

the merits of the issue, the Tribunal concludes that for the purposes of this application, it
has not been established that acts by or notice to Emlak are attributable to the State.

That being said, and given all of Mr. Bayraktar’s dual responsibilities and the
acknowledged close relationship between Emlak and TOKI and the fact that TOKI is
part of the Republic of Turkey, the Tribunal cannot ignore the fact that Mr. Bayraktar
was both the Chairman of Emlak and TOKI and that TOKI was the controlling
shareholder of Emlak. As a background issue, it is not unreasonable to infer that, at the
least, Respondent, as a State party to the BIT, should have been aware of the
circumstances of the on-going disagreement between Tulip I and Emlak with respect to
the Ispartakule III. Especially is that so as the on-going disagreement was discussed in
January 2007 at a meeting between representatives of TOKI and Claimant. To this
extent, prior knowledge of Mr. Bayraktar himself may be a relevant to the assessment of
later evidence pointing to requisite notice of the dispute having been given to the

Government itself as distinct from notice to Mr. Bayraktar.

(ii) Key pieces of evidence produced

100. Meeting of 16 January 2007 between TOKI and Claimant: Claimant says that a meeting

101.

took place on 16 January 2007 in Ankara, where Mr. Bayraktar spoke on behalf of
TOKI, and Mr. Benitah spoke on behalf of the Claimant. Claimant relies on the evidence
of Mr. Benitah who describes this meeting as “...clearly a meeting between a Turkish
government official and foreign investors to discuss a dispute regarding our
investment...””° Claimant argues that this is evidence of notice to Respondent of a
dispute with Dutch investors and an attempt to find reasonable solutions through
negotiations directly with high-ranking officials of the Turkish State.”!

Respondent does not deny this meeting took place or refute the statements of Mr.
Benitah. Respondent’s position is that negotiations prior to the termination of the
Contract in May 2010 concerned the then on-going Ispartakule III Project and not any
claim for damages for breaches of international law made in this arbitration.””
Respondent refers to Claimant’s statement that “[t]he dispute between Tulip and the
Government of Turkey arose when the Contract was purportedly terminated as of 18

May 2010.”

” Benitah 2" W/S, para 10.
7 © Memorial, para 12.
” R Counter-Memorial, para 77.

27

102. Dutch Consul Letter to Emlak dated 3 August 2009: By letter dated 3 August 2009, Paul
Korff de Gidts, Deputy Consul General of the Netherlands and Head of Commercial and
Economic Department in Istanbul wrote to Dr. Feyzullah Yetgin, General Manager of
Emlak.”* This letter, sent on behalf of Tulip I representatives, made a number of points.
First, Mr. Korff de Gidts noted Tulip I’s representatives request for “fair treatment as an
internationally owned corporation. A discrepancy in treatment was observed compared
with other local companies.” Second, it summarized Tulip I’s requests made in previous
correspondence to Emlak. Third, it states: “[a]s it is the duty of the Netherlands
economic missions worldwide to assist Dutch origin companies in solving their trade and
investment related disputes, I kindly bring Tulip REIC’s position on this incident to your
attention...” (emphasis added).

103. Post-terminati ications and i Tulip and Emlak: Claimant
contends that after the May 2010 termination of the Contract, numerous letters were sent
and a number of meetings occurred on behalf of Claimant with Mr. Haluk Sur (a member
of the Board of Emlak), and other officials representing the Turkish State.” It is argued
that during these meetings further efforts to communicate the grounds for a complaint
and a desire to resolve the matter through negotiation were expressed.

104. Dutch Consul letter to Emlak dated 27 May 2010: Paul Korff de Gidts wrote another
letter, dated 27 May 2010, this time to Mr. Murat Kurum, General Manager of Emlak.”>
This letter, sent on behalf of Tulip representatives, makes a number of additional points.
First, Mr. Korff de Gidts notes that the letter is sent by Tulip REIC in coordination with
their Dutch partners Van Herk Groep, Panagro B.V. Second, it advises that Tulip REIC
would like to continue the project and proposes options for its continuation. Third, it
reiterates that “[a]s it is the duty of the Netherlands economic missions worldwide to
assist Dutch origin companies in solving their trade and investment related disputes, I

kindly bring Tulip REIC’s position on this incident to your attention...” (emphasis
added).

105. Tulip I letter to Emlak dated I June 2010: By letter dated 1 June 2010, Tulip I wrote to
Emlak regarding “Notice of Annulment.””° In that letter Tulip I explains in detail why it
thinks the grounds for annulment are unjust and a violation of the Law. At paragraph
3.4.2 Tulip I says “Due to the Fact that Our Company Has Foreign Partners, the

® CE-225.

™C Memorial, para 17; Benitah 1“ W/S, para.99; Benitah 2"! W/S, para. 16.

* CE-224.

7° CE-222.

28

Annulment Will Inevitably Have Negative National and International
Consequences:”...“It is manifestly evident that the Van HERK Group will pursue the
matter in national and international courts as well as with political offices.” (emphasis
added).

106. Tulip I letter to Prime Minister’s Office dated 25 June 2010: By letter dated 25 June
2010, Tulip I wrote to the Republic of Turkey, Prime Ministry.”” In this letter Tulip I
notes that it is a company with a foreign partner. It then goes on to detail the conduct of
Emlak stating that “[w]e are certain that the Prime Minister, knowing the situation,
would not condone this type of illegal behavior, and that is why we are bringing this
matter to your attention.”

107. Tulip I letter to President of the Republic of Turkey dated 8 July 2010: By letter dated 8
July 2010, Tulip I wrote to The Honorable Abdullah Giil, President of the Republic of
Turkey.”* In this letter Tulip I notes that it is a company in a partnership with foreign
capital investors. It goes on to list the alleged illegal actions taken against Tulip I and
makes a number of assertions and pleas. The relevant paragraphs of the letter for the
present purpose are extracted below. At paragraph 11, the letter states:

We are now in the process of drawing up our complaints with regard to
the practices of the EMLAK GYO management over the course of the
project,... The absurd attitudes of EMLAK GYO is forcing us to take
even more serious legal precautions. This situation was explained to
them through a letter written to the company last year in July 2009 by
the Consulate-General of the Netherlands, in which it was requested that
the company ‘refrain from actions perpetuating unfair competition’.

108. At paragraph 15 it states:
The gravity of the matter in terms of foreign capital investors, and
particularly the fact that the Netherlands Embassy is engaged in the
affair, is boundless. Moreover, the application of the Van Herk Group to
the ICSID in France is a lawsuit that is almost sure to be won because of
EMLAK GYO’s unquestionably unfair actions.
109. Claimant asserts that the language of this letter could not be clearer. Claimant says that
this letter was from a Dutch investor, well known to Respondent, notifying the Head of

State that an international investment dispute has arisen with the Turkish Government. It

is said that for the avoidance of doubt, ICSID was specifically cited in the written notice

” CE-200.
"8 CE-226.

29

as the potential forum for vindicating Claimant’s investment rights as a Dutch
company.”

110. As noted in para 121(4) below, this contention of clarity is somewhat clouded by the
fact that para 16 commences, “We have no requests in the name of Foreign Capital
interests.”

111. Respondent contends that the entire letter contains a long list of complaints against only
Emlak, not TOKI or the Government. Respondent says that this is a different dispute
from the BIT dispute before the Tribunal. It is material that the letter was not written by
the Dutch investor, but a Turkish company and does not notify the President of a
possible investment dispute under the Bir.

112.Tulip I letter to Prime Minister of the Republic of Turkey dated 23 July 2010: By letter
dated 23 July 2010, Mr. Adrianus van Herk of Tulip Real Estate and Development BV
and CEO of Van Herk Groep wrote to the Prime Minister of the Republic of Turkey,
with the letter sent through the Embassy of Turkey in The Hague.*! In that letter, Mr. van
Herk asks for the attention of the Prime Minister to be directed to Tulip’s complaints as
“TOKI, as 99% shareholder of Emlak Konut GYO, are directly under the Prime Minister
Office.” In relevant part, the letter states:

That is the reason of forwarding attached letter for your kind attention
through the Embassy of Turkey in The Hague due to the fact that we are
Dutch investors domiciled in the Netherlands and main shareholder and
financier of TULIP.

We are very frustrated commercially, facing serious reputational
consequences, as well very substantial profit losses to all parties
involved due to breach of laws of Turkey by TOKI and Emlak Konut
GYO with the full consent of the president of TOKI, Mr. Erdogan
Bayaktar, and the Chairman of Emlak Konut GYO. This behavior is very
shocking to us as they should be an example of respecting the laws of
Turkey and not breaching them. We are treated illegally, unfairly and
improperly in accordance to any ethical and decent way of conducting
our business.

113. Letter from Turkish Presidency to Murat Mertoglu dated 6 September 2010: By letter

dated 6 September 2010, the General Secretariat of the Turkish Presidency wrote to Mr.

Murat Mertoglu, Vice-Chairman of a Tulip entity and co-signatory of the letter to the

” © Memorial, para. 23.
®° R Counter-Memorial, paras. 108-114.
*! CE-213.

30

Prime Minister, and delivered it to Tulip’s Ankara office.* Respondent says that this
letter was a reply to the letters to the President of 8 July 2010 and to the Prime Minister
of 25 June 2010 and called for a reply for Claimant in refutation. The letter states that the
General Secretariat of the Presidency does not conduct the type of investigations that the
Turkish company had requested; such requests are, if necessary, relayed to the
authorities concerned. The letter then continues:
However, since it was understood that your referenced letter (a) is delivered to
the concerned authorities in the form of distributed letter and Emlak Konut
Gayrimenkul Yatirm Ortakltgt Anonim Sirketi is a corporation subject to
private law provisions, there are no procedures that can be implemented by
the Presidency regarding their transactions and the practices specified in your
letters.

114. Respondent says that this response confirms that the letters sent to the Government by
Tulip I were not understood as raising any claims against the Government, but merely
complain and make requests for action against Emlak. Respondent argues that if
Claimant or its Turkish subsidiary had intended to notify the Prime Minister and the
President of an investment dispute, seeking consultations and negotiations, they must
have concluded from the reply of the Presidency that they were misunderstood:
Claimant’s reaction should have been to write to the Presidency explaining that the true
objective of their letters was not, as the Presidency had understood, investigation and
assistance; but that they or their group sought the resolution of a BIT dispute.**

115. Respondent presented evidence that the letter was received and signed for at one of
Tulip’s Turkish addresses. In his witness statement, Mr. Benitah says that the letter to the
President did not receive a response.*4 At the hearing, Claimant maintained that the letter
of 6 September 2010 was unknown to Claimant until it received Respondent’s Counter-
Memorial.*

116. The Tribunal accepts that the letter of 6 September 2010 was sent by the Presidency and
received and signed for by Mr. Hayri Hisarciklioglu at Tulip's Ankara offices. **
However, it also accepts that Claimant itself was unaware of this letter until raised in
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial. Unfortunate as it is, it appears that Claimant was not

aware of Respondent’s apparent misunderstanding of Tulip I’s letters to the Prime

© RE2.

83 R Counter-Memorial, para. 125.
* Benitah 2™ W/S, para. 28.

§5 Transcript, 142:9-14.
‘Transcript, 206:15-18; RE-3.

31

Minister and Presidency, and because of that, this apparent misunderstanding went

uncorrected.

(iii) When was notice provided that there was an investment dispute?

117. As articulated above, the finding of the Tribunal is that Article 8(2) requires the investor
to inform the host State that it faces allegations of treaty breaches that could eventually
engage the host State's international responsibility before an international tribunal. It
requires the investor to apprize the host State of the likely consequence of Treaty claims
being filed should the negotiation process break down.

118. As the Tribunal enquires whether, on the evidence presented, Claimant satisfied this
requirement of providing notice of the dispute to Respondent, on any view, the language
used in the correspondence relied upon by Claimant is imperfect.

119. It is barely tenable to suggest that correspondence sent by the Dutch Consular or Tulip I
to Emlak informed Respondent itself of the existence of a dispute arising under the BIT.
These letters are addressed to Emlak, and only indirectly refer to possible consequences
arising under the BIT. Nevertheless, these letters did inform the Chairman of Emlak,
who was also the Chairman of TOKI, of the deteriorating relationship between Tulip I
(which had foreign investors) and Emlak and the 27 May 2010 letter advises that the
Dutch government was involved to assist Dutch origin companies in solving “...
investment related disputes ...” (emphasis added).

120. Of a stronger characterization is the 8 July 2010 letter to the President of Turkey. Whilst
somewhat obscure in its drafting (which may, in part, be due to it being translated from

Turkish) the letter makes a number of significant points -

(1) First, it informs the President that the “attitudes of EMLAK GYO” are forcing
Tulip I to take “even more serious legal precautions.” It is unclear what the
“more serious legal precautions” entail, but some light may be shed by
reference to the following sentence, which refers to the letter from 2009 of
the Consulate-General of the Netherlands. The Tribunal assumes the
reference to July 2009 actually refers to the 3 August 2009 letter considered
above. In this regard, by reference to “fair treatment as an internationally
owned corporation,” the Tribunal considers that the Consul’s 3 August 2009
letter invoke a provision of the BIT, namely Article 3. Therefore, the “more

serious legal precautions” quite possibly refers to claims in an international

32

forum for alleged violations of the BIT, although, this, on its own, is

inconclusive.

(2) Second, it refers to foreign capital investors and the fact that the Netherlands’
Embassy is engaged. The Tribunal considers that these statements put the

recipient on notice that this is no longer merely a domestic matter.

(3) Third, reference is made to the application of the “Van Herk Group to the

ICSID in France.”

(4) Fourth, and as noted above, somewhat in derogation of the first 3 points, the
letter says that Tulip I has “No requests in the name of Foreign Capital
interests.” The meaning of this sentence is not entirely clear to the Tribunal.
It seems to detract from the preceding threat of the potential for ICSID
proceedings. An alternative interpretation is that Tulip I is merely saying
there are no requests in the name of foreign capital interests at present, but
should the matter not be resolved, the ICSID proceedings on behalf of

foreign interests may follow.
Conclusion

121. Doing the best it can with these confusing correspondences, the Tribunal concludes that,
as a whole, following as it did the prior communications, and also in the context of the
deteriorating relationship between Tulip I and Emlak, this letter of 8 July 2010 to the
Head of State of Turkey supports the finding that Claimant just satisfies the requirement
of providing notice of the dispute arising under the BIT to Respondent. Claimant clearly
did not employ the most perfect forms when it notified Respondent of the dispute.
However, what is required by Article 8(2) is to apprize the host State of the dispute as
arising under the BIT and that the likely consequences if negotiation processes break
down are proceedings before an international tribunal pursuant to the BIT.

122. In all the circumstances, the Tribunal accepts, albeit with difficulty and hesitation, that
no later than 8 July 2010 Claimant informed Respondent it faced allegations of breaches
of the terms of the BIT that could eventually engage its international responsibility
before an ICSID tribunal. In the result, Claimant overcomes, but only just, the very
powerful case to the contrary made by Respondent.

123. Accordingly, the Tribunal determines that no later than 8 July 2010 notice of the dispute

arising under the BIT was given in compliance with Article 8(2).

33

124.

12.

n

12

12

128.

an

n

(c) Did Claimant seek to engage in consultations and negotiations with Respondent?

Article 8(2) secondly requires that the parties seek to resolve the investment dispute by
consultations and negotiations in good faith. It establishes a best effort standard and

does not require a result.

. As the Tribunal has determined that the investment dispute arose, at the latest, by 8 July

2010, the enquiry is whether from that date negotiations were sought with Turkey on the
subject matter of the investment dispute.

The letter from the Dutch Consul General in Istanbul, 27 May 2010 reads, “...Tulip
REIC would like to continue the project as the pilot partner under the same contract or
alternatively, purchase the land by the contract value and proceed with the project
independently.” While the proposal may not have been acceptable, indeed even realistic,
there can be little doubt that it is an effort to seek an amicable resolution. In that sense it
evidences an interest in engaging in consultations and negotiations in general to resolve
disputes concerning the Ispartakule III Project.

In the last paragraph of the 8 July 2010 letter from Tulip I to the President of Turkey,
Tulip I makes numerous requests to the President to intervene in the dispute. In the
context of the preceding paragraphs, which loosely indicate that ICSID proceedings
may be commenced if the dispute is not resolved, the Tribunal accepts that this letter
seeks to engage with the President to resolve the dispute arising under the BIT. Based
on the findings of this Tribunal above, these overtures concern the subject matter of the
investment dispute brought before this Tribunal under the BIT.

Further, in the letter dated 23 July 2010 from Mr. Adrianus van Herk to the Prime
Minister of the Republic of Turkey, after bringing circumstances of the dispute to the
attention of the Prime Minister, Mr. van Herk offers Mr. Murat Mertoglu to be at the
disposition of the Prime Minister, “any time, any day, to provide full disclosure on the

issue and all legal facts.” 87

Conclusion

129.

Based on the above, the Tribunal finds that after giving notice of the dispute arising,
Claimant sufficiently sought amicably to resolve the investment dispute through
consultations and negotiations. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that this negotiation

requirement of Article 8(2) is satisfied.

* CE-213.

34

(d) Had one year elapsed from the date the dispute arose and the commencement

of these proceedings?

130. As the Tribunal has determined that notice of the investment dispute was given by no
later than 8 July 2010, one year is found to have elapsed when the Request was filed on

11 October 2011.
Conclusion

131. Based on the determinations above, the Tribunal finds that Article 8(2) of the BIT has
been complied with and the Tribunal has jurisdiction to proceed to hear the next phase

of this arbitration.

8) Futility, Waiver and Procedural Economy
132. Claimant submits that even if Article 8(2) was not strictly complied with, this Tribunal

maintains jurisdiction either because -

(1) The provision could be dispensed with on the basis of its futility in the

circumstance of the case;
(2) Respondent waived compliance with Article 8(2); or
(3) By reason of procedural economy.**

133. Respondent contends that none of these arguments or alleged principles may override
the requirements of Article 8(2), which concerns the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.®

134. The Tribunal accepts that there are differing views with respect to the existence and
operation of principles of futility and procedural efficiency. As has been noted, there are
no grounds in this case to contend for waiver.

135. As a matter of approach, the Tribunal notes again that jurisdiction under a BIT
constitutes a qualified waiver of State sovereignty. As such, a State is entitled to
stipulate conditions for compliance before claims may be issued as arising under a BIT.
In the Tribunal’s opinion, explicit provisions for notice and negotiations, as in Article
8(2), are required strictly to be complied with and not to be ignored. Nonetheless, as the

decision here is that the notice and negotiation requirements were met, it becomes

88 C Memorial, para 72.
®° R Counter-Memorial, para 169 et seq.

35

unnecessary for the Tribunal to determine the alternative constructions canvassed by the

Claimant noted in para 132 above.””

9) Costs

136. Each Party has requested to be awarded its full professional costs, expenses and
disbursements in relation to this part of the proceedings.

137. Claimant contended that Respondent’s Article 8(2) Objection was frivolous and was
pursued in bad faith.

138. The Tribunal disagrees. The requirements for notice and other steps under Article 8(2)
were plain enough and Claimant well had it within its means to make the application
now addressed in this decision entirely avoidable.

13

©

In the Tribunal's view, the ambiguity inherent in the evidence presented by Claimant to
support a finding of compliance with Article 8(2) effectively invited the Rule 41(1)
application. Respondent was entirely reasonable to call Claimant to its proofs.

14

S

Indeed, the Tribunal remains at a loss to understand why explicit notice was not given,
especially as Claimant was advised that it should delay proceedings until the expiry of
the one-year period under Article 8(2).

14

. Respondent's filed submissions in reply ably express how close to the margin Claimant
sailed: in nautical metaphor, the Tribunal finds the notice given complies at a level of
satisfaction to be just above the Plimsoll Line. It recalls the Duke of Wellington’s
comment after Waterloo, that it was "a damned near-run thing."

142. In the particular circumstances, the Tribunal regards it as appropriate to determine that

in any ultimate costs orders, Claimant should not have its costs of this application. As

regards Respondent’s request for costs, the Tribunal reserves leave to Respondent to
contend upon finality that, although unsuccessful on this application, Respondent should

have its costs of this application.

°° In this regard, the Tribunal notes that the bar to the acceptance of a permissive approach embraced by some
tribunals to situations of with treaty i as a condition, is that, no
more than for the ICJ, this Tribunal is without capacity to dispense with inconvenient terms of a treaty. Neither
the Vienna Convention nor principles of customary international law enable the terms of State consent to
jurisdiction to be redefined as merely directory or subject to unexpressed qualifications.

 

36

Decision on Bifurcated Jurisdictional Issue

For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal declares that:
1 Respondent's Rule 41 (1) application is rejected.
2 Costs issues reserved to final costs orders.

The extant procedural directions are confirmed.

 

Mr. Michael Evan Jaffe Prof. Dr. Rolf Knieper
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Dr Gavan Griffith QC
President of the Tribunal

 

