INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
TULIP REAL ESTATE AND DEVELOPMENT NETHERLANDS B.V.
Applicant
v.

REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/11/28
ANNULMENT PROCEEDING

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
HE. Judge Peter Tomka, President
Ms. Cherie Booth QC
Mr. Christoph Schreuer

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Martina Polasek

Representing Applicant Representing Respondent
Mr. Stuart Newberger, Esq. Mr. Michael E. Schneider
Mr. George D. Ruttinger Dr. Veijo Heiskanen
Mr. Ian A. Laird Mr. Matthias Scherer
Mr. James J. Saulino Mr. Joachim Knoll
Crowell & Moring LLP Mr. Christophe Guibert de Bruet
Washington, DC Ms. Laura Halonen
LALIVE
Prof. Dr. Dr. Rudolf Dolzer Geneva, Switzerland

Heidelberg, Germany

Date of dispatch to the Parties: December 30, 2015

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 1
II. THE AWARD AND THE SEPARATE OPINION
Ill. THE APPLICABLE LEGAL STANDARDS FOR ANNULMENT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. GENERAL OBSERVATION 12
A. The Function of Annulment under the ICSID Convention ............ccccscseeeeeseseeteseeneee 12
B. Discretion to Annul 14
C. Principles Governing Annulment 15
D. The Present Case 15

2. MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS 16
A. Applicant’s Position 16
B. Respondent’s Position 16
C. Committee’s Analysis 17

(i) Manifest Nature of the Excess of Powe? .........:cccccccssesesseeeseseneeseseeeseseeeeeaeeteeeaeaeerees 17

 

(ii) Failure to Apply the Proper Law

3. SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE.

A. Applicant’s Position

B. Respondent’s Position

C. Committee’s Analysis
(i) Fund. | Rule

(ii) Serious Departure.

(iii) The Right to Be Heard

(iv) Equality of the Parties

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(v) The Relevance of Human Rights ...........0.ccccccece eee eeeeeeneneeeeeeeeteteteeeeeneneneeeeieee 27

4. FAILURE TO STATE REASONS 29
A. Applicant’s Position 29
B. Respondent’s Position 30
C. Committee’s Analysis 30
(i) The Standard of Reasoning 31

(ii) Implicit Reason: 33

(iii) Contradictory Reasons 34

(iv) Alternative Remedies 35

IV. GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT INVOKED BY THE APPLICANT .......c.scsssssesseesseeee 36
1. THE TRIBUNAL’S TREATMENT OF EVIDENCE RELATING TO ATTRIBUTION .......0.0cceeeeeees 37

A. Applicant’s Position
(i) Hearing Testimony
(ii) New Documentary Evidence
(iii) Other Defects in the Treatment of Evidence.
(iv) Consequences of the Treatment of Evidence

B. Respondent’s Position
(i) Hearing Testimony
(ii) New Documentary Evidence
(iii) Other Defects in the Treatment of Evidence.
(iv) Consequences of the Treatment of Evidence

C. Committee’s Analysis

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. TRIBUNAL’S DETERMINATION ON THE MERITS DESPITE ALLEGED LACK OF JURISDICTION 51

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. Applicant’s Position 51
B. Respondent’s Position 52
C. Committee’s Analysis 54
3. AWARD’S CONTRADICTORY AND INCOMPLETE REASONS .......:cscscecssseseseseeeeseseeeeeeaeeeeeeaeeeeee 64
A. Applicant’s Position 64
B. Respondent’s Position 65
C. Committee’s Analysis 67
Vv. COSTS 71
A. Applicant’s Position 71
B. Respondent’s Position 71
Cc. Cc ittee’s Analysis 72

 

 

VI. DECISION 74

iii

ABBREVIATIONS

 

App. Exh. C-[number]

Applicant’s Exhibit

 

App. Mem. Annul.

Applicant’s Memorial on Annulment

 

App. Rep. Annul.

Applicant’s Reply on Annulment

 

Applicant/Claimant/Tulip

Tulip Real Estate and Development Netherlands B.V.

 

Application

Application for Annulment, dated August 3, 2014

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Award Award of the Arbitral Tribunal rendered on March 10, 2014

BIT Agreement on Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of
Investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
Republic of Turkey dated March 27, 1986

Committee The ad hoc Committee

Contract Tulip JV and Emlak contract for the development of the Ispartakule
II project

ECHR European Convention of Human Rights

ECtHR European Court of Human Rights

Emlak Emlak Konut Gayrimenkul Yatirim Ortakligi A.S.

FMS FMS Mimarlik Ltd Sti.

IACHR Inter-American Convention on Human Rights

ICCPR International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights

ICJ International Court of Justice

ICSID/the Centre International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

ICSID Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between

Convention/Convention States and Nationals of Other States dated March 18, 1965

ILC International Law Commission

 

ILC Articles/ILC Articles
on State Responsibility

ILC Articles on the Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts

 

ILC
Commentary/Commentary

ILC Commentary to the Articles on State Responsibility

 

Ici

Ilci Insaat A.S.

 

Institution Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and
Arbitration Proceedings

 

 

 

 

Majority The majority of the members of the Tribunal
Mertkan Mertkan Insaat Ltd Sti.
NAFTA North American Free Trade Agreement

 

 

 

 

Respondent/Turkey

The Republic of Turkey

 

Resp. C-Mem. Annul.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Annulment

 

Resp. Exh. R-[number]

Respondent’s Exhibit

 

Resp. Rej. Annul.

Respondent’s Rejoinder on Annulment

 

Separate Opinion

The Separate Opinion of Mr. Michael Evan Jaffe, which forms part
of the Award rendered on March 10, 2014

 

 

 

 

Tribunal Arbitral Tribunal which rendered the award of March 10, 2014,
consisting of Dr. Gavan Griffith, Mr. Michael Evan Jaffe and Prof.
Rolf Knieper

Tulip I Tulip Gayrimenkul Gelistirme ve Yatirim Sanayi ve Ticaret A.S.

Tulip II Tulip Gayrimenkul Yatirim A.S.

UDHR Universal Declaration of Human Rights

 

 

VCLT

 

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

 

 

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On July 3, 2014, Tulip Real Estate and Development Netherlands B.V. (“Applicant” or
“Claimant” or “Tulip”) filed with the Secretary-General of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) an application requesting the annulment of the
award rendered on March 10, 2014 (“Award”) in the case between the Applicant (the
Claimant in the original proceedings) and the Republic of Turkey (“Respondent” or
“Turkey”). The application (“Application”) was filed in accordance with Article 52 of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States (“ICSID Convention”) and Rule 50 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”). Tulip sought annulment of the Award on three of the five

grounds set forth in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention.

On July 14, 2014, the Secretary-General informed the parties that the Application had been
registered on that date and that the Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID would

proceed to appoint an ad hoc committee pursuant to Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention.

By letter of August 26, 2014, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the Arbitration Rules, the
Secretary-General notified the parties that the ad hoc Committee (“Committee”) had been
constituted — composed of H.E. Judge Peter Tomka (a national of Slovakia) as President, and
Ms. Cherie Booth QC (a national of the United Kingdom) and Mr. Christoph Schreuer (a
national of Austria) as Members — and that the annulment proceeding was deemed to have
begun on that date. The parties were also informed that Ms. Martina Polasek, Team

Leader/Legal Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Committee.

The first session of the Committee was held by teleconference on September 29, 2014. In

addition to the Committee and its Secretary, participating in the conference were:

On behalf of the Applicant

Mr. Stuart H. Newberger Crowell & Moring
Mr. Ian A. Laird Crowell & Moring
Mr. James J. Saulino Crowell & Moring

Ms. Derya Tokdemir Crowell & Moring

Ms. Meriam Alrashid Crowell & Moring
Ms. Staci Gellman Crowell & Moring

On behalf of the Respondent

Mr. Michael E. Schneider Lalive

Dr. Veijo Heiskanen Lalive

Mr. Matthias Scherer Lalive

Ms. Laura Halonen Lalive

Mr. Julian Wyatt Lalive

Mr. Alptug Tokeser Lalive

Mr. Manu Thadikkaran Lalive

Mr. Sami Arslan Askin Chief Legal Counsel from the Prime Ministry

Observers

Mr. Iker Cetin Treasury Lawyer from the Ministry of Finance
Mr. Nurettin Sam Chief Legal Counsel from Emlak

On September 30, 2014, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 1, signed by the
President of the Committee. Among other things, the parties agreed that the applicable
arbitration rules would be the ICSID Arbitration Rules in force as of April 10, 2006, that

Paris would be the place of the proceeding and that English would be the procedural language.

On November 21, 2014, the Applicant filed its Memorial on Annulment (“Memorial”),
accompanied by 33 factual exhibits (CE-329 to CE-356, H-946, RE-73, RE-75 and RE-93)
and 87 legal authorities (CLA_A-22 to CLA_A-108).

On February 27, 2015, the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on Annulment (“Counter-
Memorial”), accompanied by 13 factual exhibits (RE-73 and RE-104 to RE-115) and 17 legal
authorities (RLA-01 to RLA-17).

On April 1, 2015, the Applicant filed a Reply on Annulment (“Reply”), accompanied by 25
legal authorities (CLA_A-109 to CLA_A-133).

On May 4, 2015, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder on Annulment (“Rejoinder’),
accompanied by 9 legal authorities (RLA-18 to RLA-26).

On May 14, 2015, the parties submitted a joint proposal concerning the conduct of the hearing

on annulment, which was adopted by the Committee on May 18, 2015.

The hearing on annulment was held at the World Bank facilities in Paris on June 15 and 16,

2015. Present at hearing were:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms

Prof. Dr. Dr. Rudolf Dolzer

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Prof. Frederic G. Sourgens

Mr.

Mr.

Mr. Michael E. Schneider

Dr.
Mr.
Ms
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Attending on behalf of the Applicant

. Stuart H. Newberger
Tan A. Laird

. George D. Ruttinger
. James J. Saulino

. Staci E. Gellman

. Avi Avraham
. Elez Menachem

. Dirk Knottenbelt

. Meyer Benitah

. Erik Esveld

Crowell & Moring

Crowell & Moring

Crowell & Moring

Crowell & Moring

Crowell & Moring

McNair Chambers

Menachem, Avraham & Co.

Menachem, Avraham & Co.

Houthoff Buruma

Washburn University School of Law

Tulip Real Estate and Development Netherlands
B.V.

Tulip Real Estate and Development Netherlands
B.V.

Attending on behalf of the Respondent

Veijo Heiskanen

. Matthias Scherer

. Laura Halonen

. Julian Wyatt

. Alptug Tokeser

. Sami Arslan Askin
. Iker Cetin

. Nurettin Sam

Lalive

Lalive

Lalive

Lalive

Lalive

Lalive

Republic of Turkey, Prime Minister’s Office
Republic of Turkey, Prime Minister’s Office
Emlak Konut Gayrimenkul Yatirim Ortakligi
A.S., Legal Department

Other Attendees

Ms. Claire Hill English-Language Court Reporter
Ms. Laura Edwards Omnia Strategy LLP

There were two rounds of oral arguments. At the end of the hearing, it was agreed that the
parties would have the opportunity to file Cost Submissions by July 15, 2015. These

submissions were duly filed by the parties.

In accordance with Arbitration Rules 38(1) and 53, the proceedings were declared closed on

December 15, 2015.

14.

II. THE AWARD AND THE SEPARATE OPINION

The Award was rendered by a Tribunal composed of Dr. Gavan Griffith (President, appointed
by the parties), Mr. Michael Evan Jaffe (appointed by the Claimant in the original
proceedings) and Prof. Rolf Knieper (appointed by the Respondent). Attached to the Award
was the separate opinion of Mr. Jaffe (“Separate Opinion”) on the question of attribution
under Article 8 of the International Law Commission’s (“ILC”) Articles on the
Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts (“ILC Articles” or “ILC Articles
on State Responsibility”). While Mr. Jaffe partially dissented from the Award, the outcome
of the Award was unanimous in that the Claimant’s claims based on alleged breaches of the
Agreement on Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investments between the
Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Turkey dated March 27, 1986 (“BIT”) were

dismissed.

Sections I and II of the Award introduce the parties to the dispute, and provide an overview
of the procedural history. On November 2, 2012, the Tribunal had bifurcated the proceeding
to address one of the three objections to jurisdiction raised by the Respondent as a preliminary
question. The Award incorporates the Tribunal’s Decision on the Bifurcated Jurisdictional
Issue dated March 5, 2013, in which the Tribunal rejected the third objection to its jurisdiction

and proceeded to the next phase of the proceeding.

Section III provides a factual overview of the dispute. The facts in that section can be

summarized as follows.

The dispute relates to the Claimant’s involvement in a mixed-use real estate development
project in Istanbul, known as Ispartakule III. In 2006, Tulip JV, an unincorporated joint
venture, was awarded a tender to complete the project by a Turkish real estate investment
trust, Emlak Konut Gayrimenkul Yatirim Ortakligi A.S. (“Emlak”). Emlak was at the time
39% owned by TOKI, a State organ responsible for Turkey’s public housing, and TOKI

controlled over 99.9% of Emlak’s shares.

The lead partner in Tulip JV — Tulip Gayrimenkul Gelistirme ve Yatirim Sanayi ve Ticaret

AS. (“Tulip I’) — was established as a local investment vehicle by the Van Herk Group and

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

Mr. Meyer Benitah, a national of the Netherlands. The other members of Tulip JV were three
local Turkish partners: FMS Mimarlik Ltd Sti. (“FMS”), Mertkan Insaat Ltd Sti. (“Mertkan”),
and Ilci Insaat A.S. (“Ilci”). Pursuant to a Joint Venture Agreement dated August 2, 2006,
Tulip I was allocated a 74.8% interest in the joint venture, FMS 25% and Mertkan and Ici
0.1% each.

Tulip JV and Emlak executed a contract for the development of the Ispartakule III project on
August 3, 2006 (“Contract”), and the project site was delivered later that month to Tulip JV.

The key terms of the Contract are set out in paragraphs 75-89 of the Award.

The Claimant was incorporated in the Netherlands in 2007. Shortly thereafter, Tulip
Gayrimenkul Yatirim A.S. (“Tulip II”) was incorporated under Turkish law, and all of the
obligations of Tulip JV under the Contract were assigned to Tulip II. In August 2008, the
Claimant acquired 65% of the shares in Tulip I. In March 2008 and February 2009, the
Claimant also entered into two loan facility agreements with Tulip I and Tulip II in order to

finance the development of the project.

There were a number of issues relating to the development of the project, which are described
in the Award. These included conflicts among the joint venture members (including attempts
to forcibly remove certain members from the joint venture), zoning changes impacting the

project, construction delays and failure to meet certain milestones in the Contract.

On May 18, 2010, Emlak’s Board passed a unanimous resolution to terminate the Contract.
On May 26, 2010, Emlak further drew the full amount of a performance bond (EUR
8,716,981.05) that had been provided by Fortis Bank. Steps taken by the Tulip JV and its
members to revise and continue the project were unsuccessful, and the project was re-

tendered by Emlak.

Following the termination of the Contract, Tulip I and Tulip JV commenced domestic court
proceedings against Emlak in Turkey for improper termination of the Contract. At the time

of the Award, one of the proceedings had been rejected and the other was pending.

In October 2011, the Claimant filed the ICSID case. Paragraph 60 of the Award summarizes

the Claimant’s claims as follows:

25.

26.

27.

The Claimant asserts that the Respondent, acting through various alleged state

actors and/or entities operating under State control, engaged in a pattern of

conduct that interfered with the construction of Ispartakule III in breach of the

BIT and ultimately terminated the Contract in a manner that amounts to wrongful

expropriation that deprived the Claimant and Mr Benitah of the entire value of

their real estate development projects throughout Turkey.!
As a result, the Claimant claimed that the Respondent had: (i) failed to comply with the “fair
and equitable treatment” obligation in Article 3(1) of the BIT; (ii) expropriated the investment
in breach of Article 5 of the BIT; and (iii) failed to “observe any obligation it may have
entered into with regard to investments” and to afford “full protection and security” to the

investment, in breach of Article 3(2) of the BIT.

Section IV of the Award describes the relevant provisions of the BIT, including the dispute
settlement clause in Article 8 of the BIT. It also contains the Tribunal’s determination on the

applicable law:

The Tribunal observes that although the parties have not expressly agreed [on]
the applicable law, the Claimant has presented its claims (and matters concerning
jurisdiction) on the basis of the provisions of the BIT, and the Respondent has
proceeded to present its defence on the same basis. Therefore, the Tribunal
considers that the applicable law consists, for the most part, of the BIT, as
interpreted in accordance with international law, as well as the ICSID
Convention. The Tribunal further observes that, in addition to applying the
provisions of the BIT and the ICSID Convention, aspects of Turkish municipal
law are also invoked, in particular as the Claimant asserts that Emlak is a “state
organ” and entities designated as “state organs” under domestic law will enjoy
that status under international law.”

Section V of the Award, “Jurisdiction and Admissibility,” addresses two questions: (i)
whether the Claimant had an investment under the BIT and the ICSID Convention; and (ii)
whether the claims asserted on behalf of Mr. Benitah (who was not formally a party in the
proceeding) were admissible. The Award summarizes the parties’ arguments with respect to
these questions, and provided the Tribunal’s determination that: i) the Claimant had an
investment for the purposes of Article 1(b) of the BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID

Convention; and ii) Mr. Benitah’s claims were not admissible.

' Claimant’s Memorial in the Original Proceeding, para. 3.
2 Award, para. 171.

28. Section VI of the Award, “Attribution,” addresses the parties’ arguments and the Tribunal’s
conclusion on whether Emlak’s actions were attributable to the Respondent under Articles 4,

5 and 8 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility.
29. The Tribunal described its general approach to the question of attribution as follows:

276. The issue of attribution relates both to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and to the
merits of this dispute. Attribution is relevant in the present context to ascertaining
whether there is a dispute with a Contracting State, here Turkey, for the purposes
of the BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. At the same time, the claims
presented in this investment arbitration (particularly with respect to the conduct
of Emlak) may only succeed if they are attributable to the State. In that sense,
the issue of attribution is also relevant to the merits of the dispute. Finally, purely
contractual conduct per se does not amount to (wrongful) action of the State.

[J

280. As the Tribunal has not accepted bifurcation with respect to questions of
jurisdiction (other than the question of compliance with the Art 8(2) notice
requirement), and has joined those jurisdictional objections to the merits, it now
has the benefit of the Parties’ full pleadings. In those circumstances, and taking
into account that the question of attribution is also relevant to the merits, the
Tribunal may not limit its enquiry to a prima facie standard and must, instead,

make an informed and dispositive ruling on the question of attribution.*

30. The Tribunal unanimously concluded that Emlak’s actions were not attributable to the
Respondent under either Articles 4 or 5 of the ILC Articles. By majority, the Tribunal also
found that the acts of Emlak were not attributable to the State under Article 8 of the ILC

Articles. The Tribunal concluded in that regard:

326. Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that while Emlak was subject to
TOKI’s corporate and managerial control, Emlak’s conduct with respect to the
execution, maintenance and termination of the Contract is not attributable to the
State under Art 8 of the ILC Articles due to an absence of proof that the State
used its control as a vehicle directed towards achieving a particular result in its
sovereign interests.

327. In conclusion, the Tribunal therefore determines by majority that Emlak’s
conduct with respect to the Contract and the Ispartakule III Project is not

> The Tribunal referenced, and adopted, the approach to the issue of attribution taken by the Tribunal in Gustav F W
Hamester GmbH & Co KG v. Republic of Ghana (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/24), Award, June 18, 2010, paras. 143-
145 (“Hamester v. Ghana”).

31.

32.

33.

attributable to the Turkish State and is, on that basis, outside the remit of the
Tribunal.

Section VII of the Award, “Treaty Versus Contract Claims,” addresses the Respondent’s
argument that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction extended only to treaty-based claims and not claims
arising under a contract. The Award summarizes the parties’ arguments and provides the
Tribunal’s determination on this question. The Tribunal concluded that purely contractual
claims are not covered by the BIT. It further found that the claims relating to Emlak’s actions

were contractual in nature, stating that:

361. [T]here is no persuasive evidence before the Tribunal that Emlak went
beyond acting as an ordinary contractual party in pursuit of its commercial best
interests. For example, the Claimant’s claims regarding Emlak’s failure to grant
reasonable extensions of time is, essentially, a claim arising out of the contractual
relationship between Emlak and Tulip JV and Emlak’s exercise of rights in
reference to the Contract. Similarly, the termination of the Contract was, as
discussed above, an exercise of perceived contractual rights consistent with
promoting Emlak’s commercial best interests. Indeed, none of the claims
presented by the Claimant with respect to the conduct of Emlak are amenable to
be characterised by the Tribunal as arising out of the BIT. Accordingly, they fall
outside the scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

The Tribunal held that it had jurisdiction over the independent actions of TOKI, the Supreme
Audit Board, the Prime Ministry and the police, as claims with respect to those actors were
not substantially connected to contractual issues between Emlak and Turkey and were

assertions about the conduct of State organs in the performance of their State functions.

Section VIII of the Award, “The Claimant’s Claims,” sets out the parties’ positions and the
Tribunal’s rulings on the merits of the dispute with regard to the questions outlined by the

Tribunal in paragraphs 367-368 of the Award:

367. Nevertheless, the Tribunal will turn to consider whether the claims
presented by the Claimant in respect of Emlak could amount to any violations of
the BIT if the Tribunal were to assume that they could be characterised as treaty
claims attributable to the Respondent.

368. The Tribunal will also consider the Claimant’s claims asserted by the
Claimant with respect to State actors such as TOKI, the Prime Ministry, the
Supreme Audit Board and the Turkish police which are, in any event, properly
within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and admissible before it.

34. The Award continued:

369. In deciding on the different claims put forward by the Claimant, the Tribunal
has examined the evidence put before it and has concentrated on assessing the
extent to which, if any, the evidence supports a finding of a violation of the BIT.
It has found unanimously that no such violation occurred. To the extent that any
question is not discussed, it is because the Tribunal considers that the resolution
of the question would not affect its decision, even if the question were resolved
in favour of the Claimant.
35. Even assuming that Emlak’s conduct could be attributed to the government of Turkey, the
Tribunal thus unanimously concluded that the challenged actions, including those of TOKI,
the Supreme Audit Board, the Prime Ministry and the police, did not constitute breaches of

the BIT.

36. Section IX of the Award, “Costs,” sets out the Tribunal’s determination on the allocation of
the parties’ legal fees and expenses, and the costs of arbitration. The Tribunal ordered the
Claimant to pay to the Respondent USD 750,000 to reimburse advances paid to ICSID and

other costs associated with the proceedings.
37. Finally, Section X of the Award is the dispositif:

The Tribunal determines as follows:

1. The Claimant has made an investment into Turkey within the terms of the
BIT and the ICSID Convention.

2. The claims of Mr Benitah are inadmissible.

3. By majority, the acts of Emlak are not attributable to Turkey.

4. Unanimously, and in any event, the acts of Emlak do not constitute

breaches of the BIT.

5. Also unanimously, the acts of TOKI, the Supreme Audit Board, the
Turkish police and Turkish government officials are attributable to Turkey
but do not constitute breaches of the BIT.

Accordingly, the Claimant’s claims are dismissed.

Costs:

The Claimant is ordered to pay the Respondent USD 750,000, constituted by:

10

(a) USD 450,000 in part reimbursement of the advances paid by the
Respondent to ICSID; and

(b) USD 300,000 for its other costs.

38. Mr. Jaffe’s Separate Opinion expressed his view on Article 8 of the ILC Articles. He found
that Emlak’s decision to terminate the Contract was taken at the direction of TOKI. The

Separate Opinion concluded as follows:

11. [B]ecause there is at least a credible basis for finding that Emlak’s
termination decision was taken under the direction and control of TOKI, an organ
of the Turkish State, I would treat the attribution question under Art 8 as
provisionally addressed in favor of attribution and focus on the question of
whether there was state action amounting to a violation of the BIT. On that
question, I join my colleagues in concluding that the proof offered was not
sufficient to find a violation of the BIT.

39.

40.

Al.

Ill. THE APPLICABLE LEGAL STANDARDS FOR ANNUL!

 

1. General Observation
A. The Function of Annulment under the ICSID Convention

Under the ICSID Convention, annulment provides relief for egregious violations of certain

basic principles. Article 52(1) of the Convention circumscribes the reasons for annulment.

In any review process, two potentially conflicting principles are at work: the principle of
finality and the principle of correctness. Finality serves the purpose of efficiency in terms of
an expeditious and economical settlement of disputes. Correctness is an elusive goal that
takes time and effort, and may involve several layers of control, a phenomenon that is familiar
from proceedings in domestic courts. In arbitration, the principle of finality typically takes

precedence over the principle of correctness.

Article 52 of the ICSID Convention follows the model of a limited review. It represents a
control mechanism that ensures that a decision has remained within the framework of the
parties’ agreement to arbitrate and is the result of a process that was in accord with basic
requirements of fair procedure. The main function of annulment is to provide a limited form
of review of awards in order to safeguard the integrity of ICSID proceedings. The ad hoc

Committee in CDC v. Seychelles described this review in the following terms:

This mechanism protecting against errors that threaten the fundamental fairness
of the arbitral process (but not against incorrect decisions) arises from the ICSID
Convention’s drafters’ desire that Awards be final and binding, which is an
expression of “customary law based on the concepts of pacta sunt servanda and
res judicata,” and is in keeping with the object and purpose of the Convention.
Parties use ICSID arbitration (at least in part) because they wish a more efficient
way of resolving disputes than is possible in a national court system with its
various levels of trial and appeal, or even in non-ICSID Convention arbitrations
(which may be subject to national courts’ review under local laws and whose
enforcement may also be subject to defenses available under, for example, the
New York Convention). Procedural protections are, however, all the more
necessary in order to ensure that the resulting award is truly an “award,” i.e., a
result arrived at fairly, under due process and with transparency, and hence in the
basic justice of which parties will have faith.*

* CDC Group ple v. Republic of Seychelles (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005,
para. 36 (“CDC v. Seychelles”). Footnotes omitted.

42. Annulment is fundamentally different from appeal. The result of a successful application for
annulment is the invalidation of the original decision. The result of a successful appeal is its
modification. A decision-maker exercising the power to annul only has the choice between
leaving the original decision intact or annulling it in whole or in part. An appeals body may
substitute its own decision for the decision that it has found to be deficient. Under the ICSID
Convention, an ad hoc committee only has the power to annul the award. The ad hoc
committee may not amend or replace the award by its own decision on the merits. Article

53(1) of the Convention explicitly rules out any appeal.

43. Annulment is concerned only with the legitimacy of the process of a decision: it is not
concerned with its substantive correctness. Appeal is concerned with both. Annulment is
possible on a very limited number of grounds. In the case of the ICSID Convention, these
are listed exhaustively in Article 52(1). Appeal is possible on a much broader variety of

reasons including those going to the merits of the decision.>

44. ICSID ad hoc committees have adamantly stressed the distinction between annulment and
appeal. They have stated consistently that their functions are limited and that they do not

have the powers of a court of appeal.° A decision to annul has to be based on one of the five

> The distinction between annulment and appeal has been aptly described by D. Caron, Reputation and Reality in the
ICSID 1 Process: U ing the Distinction Between A 1 it and Appeal, 7 ICSID Review—
Foreign Investment Law Journal (1992) 21.

© See e.g.: Klockner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others v. United Republic of Cameroon and Société Camerounaise
des Engrais (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2), Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, paras. 3, 83, 118, 128, 177
(“Kléckner v. Cameroon”); Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1),
Decision on Annulment, May 16, 1986, paras. 43, 110 (“Amco I v. Indonesia”); Maritime International Nominees
Establishment v. Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4), Decision on Annulment, December 22, 1989,
paras. 5.08, 6.55 (“MINE v. Guinea”); Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4),
Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, para. 18 (“Wena v. Egypt”); Compafia de Aguas del Aconquija, S.A. &
Compagnie Générale des Eaux v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment, July 3,
2002, para. 62 (“Vivendi v. Argentina”); CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005, paras. 35, 36;
Repsol YPF Ecuador, S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/10),
Decision on Annulment, January 8, 2007, para. 38 (“Repsol v. Petroecuador”); MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile
S.A. v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2), Decision on Annulment, March 21, 2007, para. 52 (“MTD v.
Chile”); CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/OI/8), Decision on
Annulment, September 25, 2007, paras. 43, 44 (“CMS v. Argentina”); Hussein Nuaman Soufraki vy. United Arab
Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7), Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007, paras. 20, 24 (“Soufraki v. UAE”).

13

reasons listed in Article 52(1).’ Ad hoc committees cannot review an award’s findings for

errors of fact or law.

B. Discretion to Annul

45. Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention provides in part that “[t]he Committee shall have the
authority to annul the award [...].”” Under the ordinary meaning of this provision, an ad hoc
committee has some discretion and is not under an obligation to annul even if it finds that
there is a ground for annulment listed in Article 52(1).? Decisions on applications for
annulment confirm that, even if a ground listed in Article 52(1) exists, annulment will ensue

only if the flaw has had a serious adverse impact on one of the parties.

46. The ad hoc Committee in Wena v. Egypt stressed that a ground for annulment must have had
an effect on the outcome of the award and must have led to a substantially different result in
order to actually lead to annulment.!° The ad hoc Committee in Vivendi v. Argentina
cautioned that it “must guard against the annulment of awards for trivial cause.”!! It stressed

the discretion of committees and the practical significance of any error.'”

47. It follows that, even in the presence of one of the grounds listed in Article 52(1) of the ICSID
Convention, annulment does not follow automatically. An ad hoc Committee must decide
whether the fault is grave enough to warrant annulment, especially whether it has made a

material impact on one of the parties.

? Klockner v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, para. 3; Wena v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment,
February 5, 2002, para. 17; Vivendi v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, para. 62.

® Klockner v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, paras. 61, 128; Amco I v. Indonesia, Decision on
Annulment, May 16, 1986, para. 23; CDC v. Seychelles Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005, para. 45; CMS v.
Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 25, 2007, paras. 85, 136.

° For the discussion of this principle in early ICSID cases see: Kléckner v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, May
3, 1985, paras. 151, 179; Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia, Decision on Annulment,
December 3, 1992, para. 1.20 (“Amco II v. Indonesia”); MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, December 22,
1989, paras. 4.09-4.10.

"© See Wena v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, paras. 58, 105.

"' Vivendi v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, para. 63.

2 [bid., para. 66. In the same sense: Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007, paras. 24, 27; CDC v.
Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005, para. 37.

  
 

 

 

14

C. Principles Governing Annulment

48. The Background Paper on Annulment For the Administrative Council of ICSID!? lists the

following six broad principles that ad hoc committees have affirmed:

(1) the grounds listed in Article 52(1) are the only grounds on which an award may be
annulled;

(2) annulment is an exceptional and narrowly circumscribed remedy and the role of an
ad hoc Committee is limited;

(3) ad hoc Committees are not courts of appeal, annulment is not a remedy against an
incorrect decision, and an ad hoc Committee cannot substitute the Tribunal’s
determination on the merits for its own;

(4) ad hoc Committees should exercise their discretion not to defeat the object and
purpose of the remedy or erode the binding force and finality of awards;

(5) Article 52 should be interpreted in accordance with its object and purpose, neither
narrowly nor broadly;

(6) an ad hoc Committee’s authority to annul is circumscribed by the Article 52 grounds
specified in the application for annulment, but an ad hoc Committee has discretion with

respect to the extent of an annulment, i.e., either partial or full.

D. The Present Case

49. Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention lists the following five grounds on which an award

may be annulled:

(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

(c) that there was corruption on the part of a member of the Tribunal;

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure;

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

In the present case, the Applicant seeks annulment based on grounds (b), (d) and (e).

3 Background Paper on Annulment For the Administrative Council of ICSID, August 10, 2012, 27 ICSID Review —
FILJ (2012) 443, 470.

50.

51.

52.

53.

The parties in the case-at-hand agree that annulment is an extraordinary remedy that can only
be granted in matters of fundamental importance and cannot amount to an appeal of an ICSID
award. However, they diverge as to the interpretation of the three grounds raised by the

Applicant under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention.

2. Manifest Excess of Powers
A. Applicant’s Position

The Applicant points out that a tribunal exceeds its powers in three situations. First, if it
exercises jurisdiction it does not possess. Second, if it fails to exercise jurisdiction with which
it is vested. Third, if it acts outside the terms of reference set by the parties, such as when it
fails to apply the applicable law to the dispute or otherwise fails to make a tenable

determination of jurisdiction or merits.'+

The Applicant identifies three positions in practice with respect to the requirement that an
excess of powers must be manifest: (1) this can refer to the seriousness of the excess of
powers; (2) it can refer to the obviousness or ease with which the excess of powers is
perceived; and (3) it can refer to the tenability of the tribunal’s exercise of its powers.!>
Specifically, the exercise by a tribunal of jurisdiction, after it finds it does not have

jurisdiction, is manifestly an excess of powers.!°

B. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent agrees with the Applicant’s legal test for “manifest excess of powers.” It
points to the Tribunal’s power under Article 41(1) of the Convention to determine its own
competence.!’ Based on the jurisprudence of other ad hoc committees, the Respondent
argues that the term “manifest” means that the excess of powers must be both apparent or
obvious, and at the same time, substantial or serious. In the Respondent’s view, there is a

heavy burden on the Applicant to establish manifest excess of powers.!*

 

pplication, paras. 128, 129; App. Mem. Annul., para. 211.

'S App. Mem. Annul., para. 212.

'6 App. Mem. Annul., para. 214; App. Rep. Annul., paras. 163-164.
"7 Resp. C-Mem. Annul., para. 34.

'8 Resp. Rej. Annul., para. 21; Transcript, Day 1, pp. 153-155.

16

54. With respect to the argument that the Tribunal failed to apply the ILC Articles on State
Responsibility, the Respondent points out that this is a question of evaluation of evidence
rather than a matter of excess of powers. Moreover, even if the Tribunal had failed to apply

the ILC Articles, this would at most amount to a failure to apply the proper rule of the

applicable law, rather than the proper law (international law).!°

C. Committee’s Analysis

55. Anexcess of powers occurs when a tribunal deviates from the parties’ agreement to arbitrate.
This would be the case if a tribunal makes a decision on the merits although it does not have
jurisdiction or if it exceeds its jurisdiction. Failure to exercise an existing jurisdiction also
constitutes an excess of powers. Failure to apply the proper law may also amount to an excess

of powers.

(i) Manifest Nature of the Excess of Powers

56. The requirement that an excess of powers must be “manifest” in order to constitute a ground
for annulment means that the excess must be obvious, clear or easily recognizable.?? Some
ad hoc committees have interpreted the term “manifest” to mean that the excess must also be

serious or material to the outcome of the case.”!

° Resp. C-Mem. Annul., para. 100.

2 Wena v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, para. 25; CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on Annulment,
June 29, 2005, para. 41; Patrick Mitchell v, Democratic Republic of the Congo (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7), Decision
on Annulment, November 1, 2006, para. 20, FN 2 (“Mitchell v. DRC’); Repsol v. Petroecuador, Decision on
Annulment, January 8, 2007, para. 36; Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Decision
on Annulment, September 1, 2009, para. 68 (“Azurix v. Argentina”); M.C.I. Power Group, L.C. and New Turbine, Inc.
v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/6), Decision on Annulment, October 19, 2009, para. 49 (“M.C.1.
Power y. Ecuador”); Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of
Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16), Decision on Annulment, March 25, 2010, paras. 78, 96 (“Rumeli v.
Kazakhstan”); Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/19), Decision on
Annulment, June 14, 2010, para. 55; Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic (ICSID ARB/02/16),
Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2010, para. 213 (“Sempra v. Argentina”); AES Summit Generation Limited v.
Republic of Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/22), Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2012, para. 31 (“AES Summit
v. Hungary”); Caratube International Oil Company LLP and Devincci Salah Hourani v. Republic of Kazakhstan
(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/12), Decision on Annulment, February 21, 2014, para. 84 (“Caratube v. Kazakhstan”);
Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1), Decision on Annulment, January
7, 2015, para. 186 (“Daimler v. Argentina”).

2! Vivendi v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, para. 115; Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment,
June 5, 2007, para. 40; Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/17), Decision on Annulment,
January 24, 2014, paras. 127-128 (“Impregilo v. Argentina”); El Paso International Energy Company y. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15), Decision on Annulment, September 22, 2014, para. 142 (“El Paso v.
Argentina”).

 

57. As pointed out in paragraph 47 above, it follows from Article 52(3) that an ad hoc committee
must decide whether a fault is grave enough to warrant annulment, especially whether it has
made a material difference to the position of one of the parties. Therefore, it is unnecessary
to interpret the term “manifest” in Article 52(1)(b) as adding a requirement that the excess

must be serious or material.”

(ii) Failure to Apply the Proper Law

58. The provisions on applicable law are an essential element of the parties’ agreement to
arbitrate. The application of a law other than that agreed to by the parties may constitute an
excess of powers and can be a ground for annulment. An error in the application of the proper
law, even if it leads to an incorrect decision, is not a ground for annulment. Therefore, the
misapplication of a particular rule, which is part of the correctly identified applicable law,

does not amount to an excess of powers.”

59. Some ad hoc committees have admitted the possibility that “[mlisinterpretation or
misapplication of the proper law may, in particular cases, be so gross or egregious as

substantially to amount to failure to apply the proper law.”*+ However, in none of these cases

» The ad hoc Committee in Kilig v. Turkmenistan commented upon the discussion surrounding the meaning of
“manifest” in the following terms: “The Committee concurs in that it is unnecessary to consider the two approaches
as alternatives. The term ‘manifest’ would by itself seem to correspond to ‘obvious’ or ‘evident,’ but it follows from
the very nature of annulment as an exceptional measure that it should not be resorted to unless the tribunal’s excess
had serious consequences for a party.” Kilig insaat Ithalat Ihracat Sanayi ve Ticaret Anonim Sirketi v. Turkmenistan
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/01), Decision on Annulment, July 14, 2015, para. 53 (“Kzlig v. Turkmenistan”).

2 Klockner v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, paras. 60-61; Amco I v. Indonesia, Decision on
Annulment, May 16, 1986, paras. 21-28; MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, December 22, 1989, paras. 5.02-
5.04; Wena yv. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, paras. 26-53; CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on
Annulment, June 29, 2005, para. 46; MTD v. Chile, Decision on Annulment, March 21, 2007, paras. 44-48, 58-77;
Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007, paras. 85-102; CMS v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment,
September 25, 2007, paras. 128-136; Azurix v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 1, 2009, paras. 46-48,
131-177, 314-329; Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. 1 Ltd. v. Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/28), Decision on Annulment, March 1, 2011, para. 212 (“Duke Energy v. Peru”); Continental Casualty
Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9), Decision on Annulment, September 16, 2011, paras.
91-94 (“Continental Casualty v. Argentina”); Malicorp Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No.
ARB/08/18), Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2013, paras. 154-155; Impregilo v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment,
January 24, 2014, paras. 129-132.

24 Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007, para. 86; Sempra v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment,
June 29, 2010, paras. 164, 205-209; M.C.I. Power v. Ecuador, Decision on Annulment, October 19, 2009, paras. 43,
51; AES Summit v. Hungary, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2012, paras. 33, 34; Caratube v. Kazakhstan, Decision
on Annulment, February 21, 2014, para. 81.

 

  

60.

61.

62.

was there an actual finding of a gross misinterpretation amounting to a failure to apply the

proper law.

3. Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure
A. Applicant’s Position

The Applicant submits that “serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure” has two
elements: the departure must (i) concern a fundamental rule of procedure and (ii) be serious.
The Applicant states that fundamental rules of procedure concern principles of natural justice,
which unquestionably include the right to be heard and the principle of equal treatment of the

parties. These principles require not just formal compliance but also substantive adherence.

With regard to the requirement that a violation be “serious,” the Applicant notes that a
violation is serious if it deprives the party of the protection the rule is intended to provide, or
if the tribunal, had it observed the rule of procedure, could have reached a decision that is
substantially different from its actual decision. The Applicant refers to the reasoning adopted
in Pey Casado v. Chile,” which held that the seriousness of the departure must be analysed
in view of the impact that the issue may have had on the award, i.e. an applicant is not required
to prove that the tribunal would necessarily have changed its conclusion if the rule had been

observed.’

The Applicant further submits that an ad hoc committee does not have the discretion to
decline to annul an award once it has found a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure. It relies on the proposition in Pey Casado v. Chile that discretion is exercised in
determining whether the departure was serious.”* Once a serious departure is established, it

requires an annulment ipso facto of the award.”

25 App. Mem. Annul., paras. 36-38.

2 Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2), Decision
on Annulment, December 18, 2012, paras. 77-80 (“Pey Casado v. Chile”).

27 App. Mem. Annul., paras. 64-67.

28 Pey Casado v. Chile, Decision on Annulment, December 18, 2012, paras. 79-80.

2 App. Mem. Annul., paras. 68-69; App. Rep. Annul., para. 88.

19

63.

64.

65.

66.

  

With respect to the right to be heard, the Applicant states that it is not the same as the right
to speak but requires a tribunal to listen.*” Moreover, arbitrators are required to consider all

' This means that it is not sufficient to admit

of the evidence presented by the parties.?
materials into evidence, but requires a tribunal to engage with the materials submitted to it.
A tribunal may not render a decision which exhibits willful blindness to the record. Although
a tribunal need not address every piece of evidence, any implication that a piece of evidence
has been dispensed with as being irrelevant and immaterial may be foreclosed by the
tribunal’s own rulings. This would be the case if a tribunal’s ruling in a procedural order has
indicated that evidence is relevant and material to the dispute. The tribunal’s discretion in

determining the probative weight of evidence does not entitle the tribunal to dispose of the

dispute without exercising that discretion.*”

The Applicant also relies on the principle of equality of the parties. Apart from formal
equality, a tribunal must also ensure equality of arms.** The principle of equality of the
parties requires that a tribunal consider all evidence presented to it equally and that the

evidentiary burdens of proof be applied equally.**

The Applicant urges the Committee to take into account human rights instruments and
decisions in interpreting Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, such as the jurisprudence
on the right to a fair trial interpreting Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights
(“ECHR”). In view of Article 31(3)(c) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
(“VCLT”), the ad hoc Committee should seek guidance from the jurisprudence of the

European Court of Human Rights (“ECtHR”).?°

B. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent agrees with the Applicant that the test for what is a “serious departure from

a fundamental rule of procedure” is two-fold, emphasizing that the standard is thus doubly

s. 28 et seq.; App. Mem. Annul., para. 46.
31-32; App. Mem. Annul., para. 49.

 

* App. Mem. Annul., paras. 51-56; App. Rep. Annul., paras. 95-101, 136.

33 App. Mem. Annul., paras. 58-60.

4 Application, paras. 76 et seq.; App. Mem. Annul., paras. 61-62; App. Rep. Annul., paras. 133-135.
38 App. Mem. Annul., paras. 38-41; App. Rep. Annul., paras. 37- 46.

20

67.

68.

69.

70.

high. The Respondent does not deny that the right to be heard and the principle of equality

of the parties constitute fundamental rules of procedure.*°

With respect to the seriousness of a departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, the
Respondent argues that departure will be serious if it has caused actual, proven prejudice,
either substantive (by causing the tribunal to reach a result substantially different from what
it would have awarded had such a rule been observed) or procedural (by depriving a party of
the benefit or protection which the rule was intended to provide). The Respondent’s position
on the requirement of seriousness is that the applicant must show that the departure was
outcome-determinative. This means the applicant must prove that the departure caused actual

prejudice.*”

The Respondent stresses that ad hoc committees do not have the authority to review an ICSID
tribunal’s evaluation of evidence. There is no right to have any particular piece of evidence
cited or examined in the award. Specifically, there is no rule to the effect that a procedural
order indicating that evidence is relevant and material forecloses the possibility that a tribunal

subsequently finds that same evidence irrelevant or immaterial in the award.°®

In the Respondent’s view, the jurisprudence under the ECHR is irrelevant for ascertaining
the meaning of a fundamental rule of procedure in the sense of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention. Article 6 of the ECHR on the right to a fair trial and Article 52(1)(d) of the
ICSID Convention, dealing with a fundamental rule of procedure, refer to different concepts

in different regimes.*?

C. Committee’s Analysis

Under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, a violation of a rule of procedure is a ground
for annulment if two requirements are met: the rule concerned must be fundamental and the

departure from the rule must be serious. Even a serious violation of a rule of procedure does

 

21

71.

72.

73.

74.

not constitute a ground for annulment unless the particular rule is fundamental. The violation

of even a fundamental rule cannot lead to annulment unless the violation was serious.

(i) Fundamental Rule

The preparatory works to the Convention make it clear that only procedural principles of
special importance qualify as “fundamental rules” and that a simple violation of the
arbitration rules is not, by itself, a ground for annulment. The fundamental rules of procedure
that might furnish a ground for annulment, if violated, would be restricted to the principles
of natural justice.*° In other words, fundamental rules of procedure are principles that are

essential to a fair hearing.*!

There is no disagreement between the parties that the right to be heard and the principle of
equal treatment are fundamental rules of procedure. But the parties disagree on the precise

meaning of these principles.

(ii) Serious Departure

The chief disagreement between the parties concerns the meaning of “serious” in Article
52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. The Applicant argues that it is enough that the departure
from the fundamental rule of procedure had the potential to lead to a different decision. The
Respondent argues that the departure must have caused actual prejudice, which must be

proven.

The ad hoc Committee in MINE v. Guinea pointed out that the term “serious” means that
“the departure must be substantial and be such as to deprive a party of the benefit or protection

which the rule was intended to provide.”*?

*° History of the ICSID Convention: Documents Concerning the Origin and Formulation of the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, Vol. II, (Washington, D.C. 1970)
271, 423, 480, 517. Curiously the Spanish version of the ICSID Convention omits reference to the requirement that
the rule of procedure must be fundamental and merely refers to “una norma de procedimiento.” See also Repsol v.
Petroecuador, Decision on Annulment, January 8, 2007, para. 81.

4! Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8), Decision on Annulment, May
22, 2013, para. 85 (“Libananco v. Turkey”).

® MINE vy. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, December 22, 1989, para. 5.05.

22

75. In some decisions, ad hoc committees have examined the existence of actual material
prejudice.** In Wena v. Egypt, the ad hoc Committee stated that “[i]n order to be a ‘serious’
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, the violation of such a rule must have caused
the Tribunal to reach a result substantially different from what it would have awarded had
such a rule been observed.”“* Similarly, in El Paso v. Argentina, the ad hoc Committee said
that it agreed with what other committees have stated, that “in order to be grounds for
annulment, the departure has to have a material impact on the outcome of the award.”*> These
cases suggest that “serious” means that prejudice, as a consequence of the departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure, must actually be established as a fact.

76. Other ad hoc committees have adopted a more flexible position.*° In Pey Casado v. Chile,

the ad hoc Committee found a potential effect on the award sufficient. The Committee said:

The applicant is not required to show that the result would have been different, that
it would have won the case, if the rule had been respected.*”

 

[T]he Committee does not consider, [...], that an applicant is required to prove that
the tribunal would necessarily have changed its conclusion if the rule had been
observed. This requires a committee to enter into the realm of speculation which it
should not do.*®

8 Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25),
Decision on Annulment, December 23, 2010, paras. 245-246 (“Fraport v. Philippines”); Impregilo v. Argentina,
Decision on Annulment, January 24, 2014, para. 164.

4 Wena Hotels v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, para. 58. Quoted with approval in: CDC v.
Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005, para. 49; Repsol v. Petroecuador, Decision on Annulment, January
8, 2007, para. 81; Azurix v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 1, 2009, paras. 51, 234; Enron Creditors
Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, Decision on
Annulment, July 30, 2010, para. 71; Continental Casualty vy, Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 16, 2011,
para. 96; Libananco v. Turkey, Decision on Annulment, May 22, 2013, para. 87.

“5 El Paso v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 22, 2014, para. 269.

46 See also Caratube v. Kazakhstan, Decision on Annulment, February 21, 2014, para. 99.

+ Pey Casado v. Chile, Decision on Annulment, December 18, 2012, para. 78.

+8 Tbid., para. 80.

77.

78.

79.

80.

In applying this method, the Committee examined whether “the Award might have been
substantially different,” but “the applicant is not required to prove that the end result would

have been different had the rule been observed.”””

This ad hoc Committee considers the approach adopted in Pey Casado reasonable. To
require an applicant to prove that the award would actually have been different, had the rule
of procedure been observed, may impose an unrealistically high burden of proof. Where a
complex decision depends on a number of factors, it is almost impossible to prove with
certainty whether the change of one parameter would have altered the outcome. Therefore,
an applicant must demonstrate that the observance of the rule had the potential of causing the
tribunal to render an award substantially different from what it actually decided. In addition,
in order to be serious, the departure must be more than minimal. It must be substantial. It

must have deprived the affected party of the benefit of the rule in question.

A number of ad hoc committees have pointed out that once an ad hoc committee has
established that a departure from a fundamental rule of procedure is serious, it no longer has
the discretion not to annul. The serious adverse impact upon the affected party, which is a
condition for the exercise of an ad hoc committee’s discretion to annul under Article 52(3),
is implicit in a finding that the departure from a fundamental rule of procedure has been
serious. In Pey Casado v. Chile, the ad hoc Committee said:

In the Committee’s view, it has no discretion not to annul an award if a serious

departure from a fundamental rule is established. The Committee exercises its
discretion when it determines whether or not the departure was serious.”

(iti) The Right to Be Heard

The parties agree that the right to be heard is a fundamental rule of procedure. The ICSID
Arbitration Rules reflect this right throughout.*! The right to be heard affords the parties the

opportunity to present all the arguments and all the evidence that they deem relevant and to

* Ibid., para. 269. The ad hoc Committee in Kilig v. Turkmenistan endorsed the position that a potential effect on the
outcome of the case would be sufficient to make the departure from the fundamental rule of procedure serious. Kilig
v. Turkmenistan, Decision on Annulment, July 14, 2015, para. 70.

59 Pey Casado v. Chile, Decision on Annulment, December 18, 2012, para. 80. To the same effect: CDC v. Seychelles,
Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005, para. 49, fn. 71.

5! See especially ICSID Arbitration Rules 20-21, 31-32, 37, 39-42, 44, 49-50, 54.

24

81.

82.

83.

respond to arguments and evidence submitted by their opponent. In particular, each party
must have the opportunity to address every formal motion before the tribunal and every legal
issue raised by the case. The principal human rights instruments also accept the right to

present one’s case as an essential element of a fair hearing.*?

While the right to be heard is uncontested in principle, its implications are sometimes
disputed. For instance, ad hoc committees have had to deal with the question of whether
there was a violation of a party’s right to be heard if the tribunal had based its decision on a

theory that the parties had not fully discussed.**

The right to be heard refers to the opportunity given to the parties to present their position. It
does not relate to the manner in which tribunals deal with the arguments and evidence
presented to them. In particular, the fact that an award does not explicitly mention an
argument or piece of evidence does not allow the conclusion that a tribunal has not listened
to the argument or evidence in question. A refusal to listen, amounting to a violation of the
right to be heard, can only exist where a tribunal has refused to allow the presentation of an
argument or a piece of evidence. Therefore, absence in an award of a discussion of an
argument or piece of evidence put forward by a party does not mean that a tribunal has

violated the right to be heard.

An indication through a procedural order that a tribunal regards a piece of evidence, that has
yet to be submitted, as relevant and material can only be provisional. Whether the evidence
is indeed relevant and material can only be determined once the tribunal has heard it. A
tribunal that has called for the submission of particular evidence should normally explain
what it thinks of it once it has heard it. Failure to do so may be unwise, but does not amount

to a violation of the right to be heard.

» Article 10 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR); Article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR); Article 6 of the ECHR.

53 Klockner v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, paras. 89-91; Wena Hotels v. Egypt, Decision on
Annulment, February 5, 2002, paras. 66-70; Vivendi v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, paras. 82-
85; Caratube v. Kazakhstan, Decision on Annulment, February 21, 2014, paras. 90-96; El Paso v. Argentina, Decision
on Annulment, September 22, 2014, paras. 278-286.

84.

85.

(iv) Equality of the Parties
Unequal treatment of the parties may be a sign of lack of impartiality and may amount to a
serious violation of a fundamental rule of procedure. However, a finding of this nature would
require clear and incontrovertible substantiation. ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1) states that
the tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility as well as of the probative value of any
evidence. A clear violation of a rule of evidence, such as the reversal of the burden of proof,
may amount to a serious violation of a fundamental rule of procedure.** On the other hand,
the evaluation of evidence is within the discretion of the tribunal. In the words of the ad hoc

Committee in Wena v. Egypt:

[I]rrespective whether the matter is one of substance or procedure, it is in the
Tribunal's discretion to make its opinion about the relevance and evaluation of the
elements of proof presented by each Party. Arbitration Rule 34(1) recalls that the
Tribunal is the judge of the probative value of the evidence produced.”

Therefore, an applicant’s dissatisfaction with the way a tribunal has exercised its discretion
in evaluating evidence cannot be a basis for a finding that there has been unequal treatment
and hence a serious violation of a fundamental rule of procedure necessitating annulment.

The ad hoc Committee in Impregilo v. Argentina explained this principle as follows:

There is no requirement whatsoever for arbitral tribunals to indicate in an award
the reasons why some types of evidence are more credible than others.
Discretionary authority that is reasonable and reasoned is the rule in this regard,
and it is clearly not within the purview of Annulment Committees, which do not
have direct and immediate access to the evidence submitted by both parties, to
determine whether the determinations made in an award were correct. Attempting
to do so would involve a subsequent assessment of the conclusions of arbitral
tribunals, which would destroy the basic principles of the institution of arbitration
and [would be] outside the power of ad hoc Committees.*®

54 Kléckner v. Cameroon, Resubmitted Case: Decision on Annulment, May 17, 1990, para. 6.80; Caratube v.
Kazakhstan, Decision on Annulment, February 21, 2014, para. 97.

55 Wena Hotels v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, para. 65. See also: CDC v. Seychelles, Decision
on Annulment, June 29, 2005, paras. 59-61; Azurix v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 1, 2009, paras.

207-217; Continental Casualty v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 16, 2011, par

97; Pey Casado v.

 

Chile, Decision on Annulment, December 18, 2012, paras. 199, 223; Kilig v. Turkmenistan, Decision on Annulment,
July 14, 2015, para. 154.
56 Impregilo v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, January 24, 2014, para. 176.

26

(v) The Relevance of Human Rights

86. The parties disagree on the relevance of human rights instruments and decisions in
interpreting Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. The influence on international
investment arbitration of human rights and of the multilateral treaties reflecting their current
status has attracted much attention. There is a widespread sentiment that the integration of

the law of human rights into international investment law is an important concern.*”

87. Article 31(3)(c) of the VCLT directs that, in the interpretation of treaties, “any relevant rules
of international law applicable in the relations between the parties” are to be taken into
account.*® The relevant rules of international law cover all sources of international law. The
only requirements of Article 31(3)(c) are that the rules are relevant and that they are

applicable as between the States parties to the treaty to be interpreted.

88. The ILC has discussed Article 31(3)(c) of the VCLT extensively in its Fragmentation
Report.*? In doing so, its Study Group has referred to that provision as a “master key” to the

house of international law.®° It has described the function of that provision as follows:

°7 For extensive treatment see: Human Rights in International Investment Law and Arbitration (F. Francioni, E.-U.
Petersmann, P.-M. Dupuy, eds.), Oxford University Press (2009); M. Hirsch, Interactions between Investment and
Non-investment Obligations, in: The Oxford Handbook of International Investment Law (P. Muchlinski, F. Ortino,
C. Schreuer, eds.), Oxford University Press, 154 (2008); E.-U. Petersmann, Human Rights, Constitutionalism, and
‘Public Reason’ in Investor-State Arbitration, in: International Investment Law for the 21st Century (C. Binder, U.
Kriebaum, A. Reinisch, S. Wittich, eds.), Oxford University Press, 877 (2009); C. Booth, Is there a Place for Human
Rights Considerations in International Arbitration?, 24 ICSID Review—Foreign Investment Law Journal 109 (2009);
U. Kriebaum, Human Rights of the Population of the Host State in International Investment Arbitration, 10 The
Journal of World Investment & Trade 653 (2009); T. Nelson, Human Rights Law and BIT Protection: Areas of
Convergence, 12 The Journal of World Investment & Trade 27 (2011); P. Dumberry & G. Dumas-Aubin, When and
How Allegations of Human Rights Violations Can be Raised in Investor-State Arbitration, 13 The Journal of World
Investment & Trade 349 (2012).

°8 For detailed treatment see C. McLachlan, The Principle of Systemic Integration and Article 31(1)(c) of the Vienna
Convention, 54 Intl & Comparative LQ 279 (2005); R. Gardiner, Treaty Interpretation, 2nd ed., Oxford University
Press, pp. 289-343 (2015); B. Simma & T. Kill, Harmonizing Investment Protection and International Human Rights:
First Steps Towards a Methodology, in: International Investment Law for the 21st Century (C. Binder, U. Kriebaum,
A. Reinisch, S. Wittich, eds.), Oxford University Press, 678 (2009); J.R. Weeramantry, Treaty Interpretation in
Investment Arbitration, Oxford University Press, pp. 88-95 (2012).

°° ILC, Report of a study group on Fragmentation of International Law: Difficulties Arising from the Diversification
and Expansion of International Law, UN Doc A/CN.4/L.682, paras. 410-480 (April 13, 2006).

© Thid., para. 420.

 

 

 

[I]f it is indeed the point of international law to coordinate the relations between
States, then it follows that specific norms must be read against other norms bearing
upon those same facts as the treaty under interpretation.*!

89. The ILC Study Group has rejected any suggestion that tribunals should restrict themselves to
the treaty upon which their jurisdiction is based and which constitutes the treaty under

dispute. It said:

It is sometimes suggested that international tribunals or law-applying (treaty)
bodies are not entitled to apply the law that goes “beyond” the four corners of the
constituting instrument or that when arbitral bodies deliberate the award, they
ought not to take into account rules or principles that are not incorporated in the
treaty under dispute or the relevant compromis. But if, [...], all international law
exists in systemic relationship with other law, no such application can take place
without situating the relevant jurisdiction-endowing instrument in its normative
environment. This means that although a tribunal may only have jurisdiction in
regard to a particular instrument, it must always interpret and apply that instrument
in its relationship to its normative environment - that is to say “other” international
law. This is the principle of systemic integration to which article 31(3)(c) VCLT
gives expression.°”

 

90. Simma and Kill describe the practice of systemic integration in the following terms:

Under customary principles of treaty interpretation, tribunals routinely resort to
tules of international law whose normative validity is grounded in a source outside
of the treaty that is the subject of interpretation.™

91. In investment cases involving parties to the ECHR, some tribunals have relied on the
Convention and its case law.™ In other cases involving non-parties, that case law was used

as authority on a number of points concerning individual rights. In a similar way,

 Tbid., para. 416.

© Tbid., para. 423. Footnotes omitted. Italics original.

© B. Simma & T. Kill, supra note 58, at 681.

Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Award, September 3, 2001, para. 200; ADC Affiliate Limited
and ADC & ADMC Management Linited v. Republic of Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16), Award, October 2,
2006, para. 497; The Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3), Decision on the Participation
of a Counsel, January 14, 2010, para. 20. In Frontier Petroleum v. Czech Republic, the Tribunal indicated that the
ECHR was applicable but had not been pleaded properly by the parties. Frontier Petroleum Services Ltd. v. Czech
Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award, November 12, 2010, para. 338.

5 Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2), Award, October 11, 2002,
para. 143; Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States, Award, May 29, 2003, para. 122
(“Tecmed v. Mexico”); Saipem S.p.A. v. People’s Republic of Bangladesh (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/7), Decision on
Jurisdiction, March 21, 2007, paras. 130, 132; Azurix v. Argentina, Award, July 14, 2006, para. 311; International
Thunderbird Gaming Corporation v. United Mexican States, UNCITRAL, Award, Dissenting Opinion Wilde,
January 26, 2006, para. 27; Société Générale In respect of DR Energy Holdings Limited and Empresa Distribuidora

  

28

investment tribunals have relied on the Inter-American Convention on Human Rights
(IACHR) and on the practice of its Court. In one case, the tribunal was “mindful” of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR).®” One tribunal undertook an extensive
examination of the right to a fair trial in international human rights instruments, especially
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), for purposes of interpreting

a treaty provision on fair and equitable treatment.

92. Provisions in human rights instruments dealing with the right to a fair trial and any judicial
practice thereto are relevant to the interpretation of the concept of a fundamental rule of
procedure as used in Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. This is not to add obligations
extraneous to the ICSID Convention. Rather, resort to authorities stemming from the field

of human rights for this purpose is a legitimate method of treaty interpretation.

4. Failure to State Reasons
A. Applicant’s Position

93. The Applicant concedes that reasons supplied by a tribunal need not be persuasive or correct.
However, it is a tribunal’s duty to supply reasons for all parts of its award. An ad hoc
committee may reconstruct reasoning but may not add pertinent facts that were overlooked

by the tribunal.°?

94. The Applicant complains about an inadequate and incomplete analysis of attribution.” The

Applicant also complains about the failure of the majority of the Tribunal (“Majority”) to

de Electricidad del Este, S.A. v. Dominican Republic (LCIA Case No. UN 7927), Award on Jurisdiction, September
19, 2008, para. 93; Perenco Ecuador Limited v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6), Decision on
Provisional Measures, May 8, 2009, para. 70; Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/1), Decision
on Liability, December 27, 2010, para. 129; El Paso v. Argentina, Award, October 31, 2011, para. 598. In Fireman's
Fund vy. Mexico, the Tribunal questioned whether the case law under the ECHR is a viable source to interpreting
Article 1110 of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Fireman's Fund Insurance Company v. United
Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1), Award, July 17, 2006, fn. 161.

6 IBM World Trade Corp. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/10), Decision on Jurisdiction, December
22, 2003, para. 72; El Paso v. Argentina, Award, October 31, 2011, para. 598.

° Joan Micula, Viorel Micula and others v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/20), Decision on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, September 24, 2008, para. 88.

68 Hesham Talaat M. Al-Warragq v. Republic of Indonesia, UNCITRAL, Final Award, December 15, 2014, paras. 556-

  

 

© App. Mem. Annul., paras. 167-170, 184; App. Rep. Annul., paras. 148-149.
% Application, paras. 92-104; App. Mem. Annul., paras. 171-185.

29

95.

96.

97.

 

address evidence that the Tribunal itself requested be submitted.’! For the Applicant, the
Majority’s treatment of the parties’ evidence is incomprehensible.’* Moreover, the Applicant
finds a contradiction in the Tribunal’s examination of the merits after it had found that the

acts in question were not attributable to Turkey.”

B. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent argues that reasons must be given for an award, not for each specific
determination along the way. It is sufficient if the committee can understand the tribunal’s
reasoning and conclusions based on the articulated premises, but it need not agree with them.
The Respondent rejects the existence of a rule to the effect that overlooking pertinent facts
amounts to a failure to state reasons. Rather, it is for the Tribunal to establish which facts are
pertinent. If the Tribunal has not specifically mentioned facts, this is because it has found
them not to have been proven, or determined within its discretion that they were not pertinent.
A failure to refer to a particular argument or piece of evidence cannot amount to a failure to
state reasons. The evaluation of evidence is beyond the supervisory authority of an

annulment committee.”

The Respondent states that it is for the Tribunal to make the findings of fact and not for the
Committee to second-guess them. The obligation to state reasons in the Award merely
requires that the Tribunal set out what the pertinent facts are, and then draw comprehensible
conclusions from them and the applicable law. There is a difference between setting out the

pertinent facts and setting out the evaluation of any given piece of evidence.”>

C. Committee’s Analysis

Under Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention, a tribunal is under an obligation to state the
reasons upon which its award is based.”° Failure to comply with this duty is a ground for

annulment under Article 52(1)(e).

 

30-33.
15-20.

30

(i) The Standard of Reasoning

98. The purpose of a statement of reasons is to explain to the reader of the award, especially to

99.

10

S

the parties, how and why the tribunal reached its decision. Since the parties are the award’s
primary addressees, it is not necessary for a tribunal to restate all their arguments and
evidence. The parties will be familiar with the main issues before the tribunal, with the
evidence that was before it and with the main legal arguments presented to it. Moreover,

Article 48(3) does not require discussion of arguments without impact on the award.’7

Explaining to the parties the motives that have induced the tribunal to adopt its decision is
not the same as convincing the losing party that the decision was right. A party that has not
prevailed in litigation is inclined to regard the decision as incomprehensible and to feel that

the decision-maker has not explained adequately why it rejected its arguments.

Early ad hoc committees operating under the ICSID Convention have stated that reasons

»78

would have to be “sufficiently relevant” or “appropriate. The most widely accepted

formula for the requirements of reasons, which the parties in the present annulment

proceedings have endorsed, stems from MINE v. Guinea:

5.08. The Committee is of the opinion that the requirement that an award has to be
motivated implies that it must enable the reader to follow the reasoning of the
Tribunal on points of fact and law. It implies that, and only that. The adequacy of
the reasoning is not an appropriate standard of review under paragraph (1)(e),
because it almost inevitably draws an ad hoc Committee into an examination of the
substance of the tribunal’s decision, in disregard of the exclusion of the remedy of
appeal by Article 53 of the Convention. A Committee might be tempted to annul
an award because that examination disclosed a manifestly incorrect application of
the law, which, however, is not a ground for annulment.

5.09. In the Committee’s view, the requirement to state reasons is satisfied as long
as the award enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to
Point B. and eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of law.
This minimum requirement is in particular not satisfied by either contradictory or
frivolous reasons.”

7 Standard Chartered Bank v. United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/12), Award, November 2,
2012, paras. 273-275.

8 Klockner

 

Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, para. 130; Amco I v. Indonesia, Decision on

Annulment, 16 May 1986, para. 43.
79 MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, December 22, 1989, paras. 5.08, 5.09.

31

101. Therefore, the ad hoc Committee in MINE dismissed the concept of the adequacy of reasons
except for the rejection of contradictory or frivolous reasons. It held that the standard merely
requires that the reader can understand what motivated the tribunal. As long as an ad hoc

committee can follow the reasons, it is irrelevant what it thinks of their quality.
102. The ad hoc Committee in Wena v. Egypt endorsed this position and said:

The ground for annulment of Article 52(1)(e) does not allow any review of the
challenged Award which would lead the ad hoc Committee to reconsider whether
the reasons underlying the Tribunal’s decisions were appropriate or not,
convincing or not. As stated by the ad hoc Committee in MINE, this ground for
annulment refers to a “minimum requirement” only. This requirement is based
on the Tribunal’s duty to identify, and to let the parties know, the factual and
legal premises leading the Tribunal to its decision. If such sequence of reasons
has been given by the Tribunal, there is no room left for a request for annulment
under Article 52(1)(e).°°

103. The limited role of a failure to state reasons as a ground for annulment is also apparent in the

Decision on Annulment in Vivendi. The ad hoc Committee said:

[I]t is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that Article 52 (1)(e)
concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an award, not
the failure to state correct or convincing reasons. It bears reiterating that an ad hoc
committee is not a court of appeal. Provided that the reasons given by a tribunal
can be followed and relate to the issues that were before the tribunal, their
correctness is beside the point in terms of Article 52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons may
be stated succinctly or at length, and different legal traditions differ in their modes
of expressing reasons. Tribunals must be allowed a degree of discretion as to the
way in which they express their reasoning.*!

104. Subsequent ad hoc committees have since adopted this standard.** Therefore, an ad hoc

committee does not need to be persuaded that the reasons given by the tribunal are correct or

* Wena v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, para. 79.

8! Vivendi v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, para. 64 (emphasis in original). Footnote omitted.

® CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005, paras. 66-75; Mitchell v. DRC, Decision on Annulment,
November 1, 2006, para. 21; MTD v. Chile, Decision on Annulment, March 21, 2007, para. 92; Soufraki v. UAE,
Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007, para. 134; Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Pert, S.A.
(formerly Empresas Lucchetti, $.A. and Lucchetti Perti, S.A.) v. Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4),
Decision on Annulment, September 5, 2007, paras. 127, 128; Azurix v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September
1, 2009, paras. 53-56, 178 (‘“Lucchetti v. Peru”); M.C.L. Power v. Ecuador, Decision on Annulment, October 19, 2009,
paras. 82, 86; Fraport v. Philippines, Decision on Annulment, December 23, 2010, paras. 272, 277; Continental
Casualty v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 16, 2011, para. 100; Libananco v. Turkey, Decision on
Annulment, May 22, 2013, paras. 90-94; Impregilo v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, January 24, 2014, paras.
180-181; Caratube v. Kazakhstan, Decision on Annulment, February 21, 2014, paras. 101-102; Alapli Elektrik B.V.

 

 

32

convincing. The function of reasons is to enable the reader to understand what motivated the
tribunal. Ad hoc committees have consistently confirmed that ICSID Convention Article
52(1)(e) does not permit any inquiry into the quality or persuasiveness of reasons. Ad hoc
committees may be dissatisfied with the adequacy of reasons, but provided the reasons meet
the conditions set out in MINE, and confirmed in Wena and Vivendi, this will not be a ground

for annulment.

10:

an

. It follows that reasons may be terse, summarizing a tribunal’s overall impression of evidence
without evaluating it in detail. In particular, a finding that the record does not support a
particular proposition may not require detailed reasoning. Absence of convincing evidence

on a particular point is not a matter that needs discursive substantiation by a tribunal.

(ii) Implicit Reasons

106. Even where reasons on a particular point are missing, an ad hoc committee may reconstruct

missing reasons. The ad hoc Committee in Wena v. Egypt said in this respect:

Neither Article 48(3) nor Article 52(1)(e) specify the manner in which the
Tribunal’s reasons are to be stated. The object of both provisions is to ensure that
the parties will be able to understand the Tribunal’s reasoning. This goal does not
require that each reason be stated expressly. The Tribunal’s reasons may be
implicit in the considerations and conclusions contained in the award, provided
they can be reasonably inferred from the terms used in the decision.**

107. Other ad hoc committees have confirmed the possibility of reconstructing missing reasons.**
The task of reconstructing reasons includes looking at the record before the tribunal. In the

words of the ad hoc Committee in Rumeli v. Kazakhstan:

The Committee is not limited in its review of the Award under Article 52(1)(e) of
the ICSID Convention to the text of the Award alone, but rather should seek to

v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/13), Decision on Annulment, July 10, 2014, paras. 197-199 (“Alapli
v. Turkey”); El Paso y. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 22, 2014, paras. 217, 235; Kili¢ v.
Turkmenistan, Decision on Annulment, July 14, 2015, paras. 59-64.

83 Wena v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, para. 81.

“! MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, December 22, 1989, para. 6.104; CDC v. Seychelles, Decision on
Annulment, June 29, 2005, para. 87; Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007, paras. 63-64; CMS v.
Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 25, 2007, paras. 125-127; Azurix v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment,
September 1, 2009, para. 360; Rumeli v. Kazakhstan, Decision on Annulment, March 25, 2010, paras. 83, 138; Fraport
v. Philippines, Decision on Annulment, December 23, 2010, paras. 264-266; Continental Casualty v. Argentina,
Decision on Annulment, September 16, 2011, para. 101.

understand the motivation of the Award in the light of the record before the
Tribunal.*

108. Therefore, an award is not subject to annulment if the reasons for a decision, though not stated
explicitly, are readily apparent to the ad hoc committee. Implicit reasoning is sufficient as
long as the committee can infer them reasonably from the terms and conclusions of the award
as well as from the record before the tribunal. If the ad hoc committee can explain an award

by clarifying reasons that may be only implicit, it may do so and need not annul.

(iii) Contradictory Reasons

109. Contradictory reasons will not enable the reader to understand a tribunal’s motives and may
amount to a failure to state reasons.8° On the other hand, discussion of conflicting or
competing considerations should not lead an ad hoc committee lightly to assume
contradiction. In Vivendi v. Argentina, the ad hoc Committee warned against a hasty finding

of contradiction in an award:

[T]ribunals must often struggle to balance conflicting considerations, and an ad
hoc committee should be careful not to discern contradiction when what is actually
expressed in a tribunal’s reasons could more truly be said to be a reflection of such
conflicting considerations.*”

11

S

Other ad hoc committees have also held that a finding of contradiction would have to be

compelling.** In Continental Casualty v. Argentina, the ad hoc Committee said:

The Committee adds that for genuinely contradictory reasons to cancel each other
out, they must be such as to be incapable of standing together on any reasonable
reading of the decision. An example might be where the basis for a tribunal’s
decision on one question is the existence of fact A, when the basis for its decision
on another question is the non-existence of fact A. In cases where it is merely
arguable whether there is a contradiction or inconsistency in the tribunal‘s
reasoning, it is not for an annulment committee to resolve that argument. Nor is it

8S Rumeli v. Kazakhstan, Decision on Annulment, March 25, 2010, para. 179. In the same sense: Duke Energy v.
Peru, Decision on Annulment, March 1, 2011, para. 205.

8 Klockner v. Cameroon, Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985, para. 116; Amco I v. Indonesia, Decision on
Annulment, May 16, 1986, paras. 97-98; MINE v. Guinea, Decision on Annulment, December 22, 1989, paras. 6.105,
6.107; Pey Casado v. Chile, Decision on Annulment, December 18, 2012, paras, 281-287.

*7 Vivendi v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, para. 65.

88 Azurix v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 1, 2009, paras. 364-365; Rumeli v. Kazakhstan, Decision
on Annulment, March 25, 2010, para. 82; Fraport v. Philippines, Decision on Annulment, December 23, 2010, para.
274; Duke Energy v. Peru, Decision on Annulment, March 1, 2011, para. 166; Alapli v. Turkey, Decision on
Annulment, July 10, 2014, paras. 200-201; Daimler v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, January 7, 2015, para. 78.

  

 

34

111.

112.

113.

the role of an annulment committee to express its own view on whether or not the
reasons given by the tribunal are logical or rational or correct.*?
In particular, reasoning that explores alternatives to a tribunal’s decision should not be
regarded as contradictory even if the alternative seems ruled out by the tribunal’s primary
finding. Reasoning based on “even if” arguments is not contradictory but demonstrates that
the tribunal has looked also at other avenues of reasoning. For instance, if the tribunal finds
that a claim must fail as a matter of jurisdiction or admissibility, it is not contradictory to add

that the claim would have failed on the merits.
The ad hoc Committee in Daimler v. Argentina described this situation as follows:

[I]f after having stated its reasons and deciding a given point, the Tribunal, in an
excess of caution or otherwise, analyses the other arguments made by the parties,
such additional — and perhaps unnecessary — analysis cannot be compared with the
reasons for the decision of the Tribunal to determine whether the two sets of reasons
are contradictory, for even if they are they will not cancel one another. In such
cases, the reasons for the decision are already in the Award, and the additional
reasons can have no impact on the decision of the Tribunal.”

(iv) Alternative Remedies

Open questions as to the meaning of an award do not find their remedy in annulment for
failure to state reasons but, rather, in Article 50 of the ICSID Convention. That Article
provides for the interpretation of an award in case there is a dispute between the parties about
its meaning or scope. The possibility of an interpretation under Article 50 would make
annulment under Article 52 a disproportionate remedy to deal with ambiguities left by the
tribunal’s reasoning. Nor is annulment the appropriate remedy in case of omissions and
technical errors in the award. Under Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention a tribunal may,
upon the request of a party, supplement omissions in the award and rectify any clerical,

arithmetical or similar error.?!

* Continental Casualty v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 16, 2011, para. 103.
% Daimler v. Argentina, Decision on Annulment, January 7, 2015, para. 135.
°! Wena v. Egypt, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002, para. 80.

35

Iv. GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT INVOKED BY THE
APPLICANT

114. The Applicant invokes three grounds for annulment under Article 52 of the ICSID

Convention:

(i) that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers (Article 52(1)(b));

(ii) that there was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure (Article
52(1)(d)); and

(iii) that the Award failed to state the reasons upon which it was based (Article 52(1)(e)).

115. The Applicant’s complaints center around the Tribunal’s findings on attribution. It

summarizes the defects in the Award as follows:

e The Tribunal ruled that Tulip’s claims “fall outside the scope of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction.” It nevertheless proceeded to address the merits. “A decision on
the merits by a tribunal that lacks competence is the most obvious example of
an excess of powers.” In this case, the excess is plainly stated within the four
corners of the [Award].

e The Tribunal made itself willfully blind to evidence it itself had previously
determined to be material and relevant to the outcome of the dispute—the
testimony of Mr. Erdogan Bayraktar. The Tribunal gave the parties no
indication that it would derogate from its own procedural directives. It thus
deprived the parties of their right to be heard with regard to the evidence to
which the Tribunal rendered itself willfully blind.

e The first part of the Award dealing with attribution logically contradicts the
second part of the Award dealing with the merits. The merits discussion
assumes arguendo that the relevant actions in dispute were attributable to
Turkey. The attribution discussion concludes that the actions of Tulip’s
contractual counterparty Emlak were not attributable to the state because
Turkey’s actions did not render Emlak’s stated reasons for termination a mere
pretext. The merits decision nevertheless concludes that Turkey’s conduct did
not violate the BIT because Turkey did not introduce itself into Emlak’s
commercial decision-making process. This conclusion is precisely foreclosed
by the premise—assumed arguendo by the Tribunal—that the termination of the
contract in question was attributable to Turkey. °”

® App. Mem. Annul., para. 7. Footnotes omitted.

116. The Applicant states that these defects can be challenged under more than one of the three

grounds raised. As a result of these deficiencies, it seeks annulment of the entire Award.

117. The Committee will deal with the Applicant’s complaints by each category of defect pleaded:
(1) the Tribunal’s treatment of evidence relating to attribution; (2) the Tribunal’s
determination on the merits despite lack of jurisdiction; and (3) the Award’s contradictory

and incomplete reasons concerning attribution.

1. The Tribunal’s Treatment of Evidence Relating to Attribution
A. Applicant’s Position

118. According to the Applicant, the Tribunal consciously and deliberately disregarded critical
evidence on the record and therefore violated the Applicant’s right to be heard and the
principle of equality of arms. This is shown by the Award’s lack of citation to the evidence
in question and prior decisions of the Tribunal during the arbitration. The relevant evidence
is the witness testimony of Minister Erdogan Bayraktar and Emlak officials at the hearing, as
well as new documentary evidence produced following a request made by the Tribunal at the
hearing. The evidence was of a dispositive nature and, had the majority of the Tribunal
considered it, the conclusion on attribution in the Award would have been different, which
would have affected both the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and the merits of the claim. Furthermore,
by failing to consider the evidence, the Tribunal also failed to apply the ILC Articles on State

Responsibility, which formed part of the applicable law.

(i) Hearing Testimony
119. Mr. Erdogan Bayraktar was at all relevant times of the dispute the head of TOKI and at the
same time the Chairman of the Board of Emlak during the Applicant’s investment project in
Turkey, and later became a minister in the Turkish government. He thus had firsthand
knowledge of the project and the relationship between Emlak and TOKI. Following the
Tribunal’s order to call Mr. Bayraktar for examination at the hearing as the Tribunal’s
witness, Mr. Bayraktar provided oral testimony which went “directly to the issue of

attribution.”°? He corroborated a statement made in a newspaper article showing that TOKI

° Transcript, Day 1, p. 50.

exercised its control over Emlak to terminate the Contract for the public good. He further

developed on TOKI’s actions with regard to Emlak’s contractual counterparties.

12

S

However, although the testimony was clearly relevant to the matter of attribution, as indicated
in the Separate Opinion, the Majority does not discuss this evidence in the Award. According
to the Applicant, “the Tribunal turned itself willfully deaf to evidence the Tribunal knew
existed precisely because the Tribunal had to concede that addressing the evidence would
entail altering the outcome predetermined for the case before the evidence was presented for
a hearing.”** The Award confirms that this evidence was ignored because it states at
paragraph 322 that “there is no evidence of any specific and disproportionate influence by
Mr. Bayraktar or any instructions from TOKI to make a particular decision for an ulterior
sovereign purpose,” despite the fact that such evidence was adduced during his testimony.
The Separate Opinion also confirms this, as Mr. Jaffe stated that the Majority “all but ignores
the very evidence that they say would be probative, namely the evidence found in the

testimony of Erdogan Bayraktar.”*°

12

. According to the Applicant, there are only three possible valid reasons for disregarding the
evidence: (i) that the Majority found Mr. Bayraktar’s testimony on attribution to be irrelevant;
(ii) that the Majority found his testimony to be immaterial; or (iii) that the Majority deemed
that Mr. Bayraktar was not a credible witness. However, no such implications can plausibly
be drawn in this case. The Tribunal itself admitted that Mr. Bayraktar’s testimony was
relevant and material to the outcome by calling him to testify over the objections of the
Respondent, following a series of written and oral statements made by the Tribunal in the
course of the arbitration. Several procedural orders (Nos. 2-5) dealt with Mr. Bayraktar’s
examination as the Tribunal’s witness at the hearing pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule
34(2)(a). According to the Applicant, the Tribunal “would not have called Mr. Bayraktar
unless it thought that he would likely have meaningful testimony to give and that this
testimony would be relevant to the matters in dispute.”°° The directions in the orders included

topics of examination, e.g. the relationship between TOK] and Emlak, and the Emlak Board’s

° App. Rep. Annul., para. 36.
°> Transcript, Day 1, p. 61, quoting Separate Opinion, para. 6.
96 App. Rep. Annul., para. 113.

decision to terminate the Contract. The Tribunal also found that Mr. Bayraktar was a credible
witness because it accepted his testimony in connection with another matter addressed in the
Award. Although the Separate Opinion pointed out the importance of the testimony to the
Majority, the Majority chose to disregard the evidence without giving reasons why and

without addressing the Separate Opinion.

12:

N

In the Applicant’s submission, the Tribunal also failed to consider the testimony of Emlak
officials at the hearing. This testimony concerned whether or not the Emlak Board’s
termination decision was pretextual. The Award states that the evidentiary record did not
establish that Emlak had invoked contractual breaches as a pretext for termination of the
Contract; however, it contains no indication that the testimonies of Messrs. Keskin, Yetim

and Kurum were considered by the Tribunal.

(ii) New Documentary Evidence

12.

o

. The Applicant states that the Tribunal also failed to consider new documentary evidence
produced at the hearing, as well as testimony given on that evidence. The existence of the
documents was disclosed during an oral testimony at the hearing, and the Tribunal decided
to order the production of these documents. According to the Applicant, one of the
documents — an Emlak memorandum of February 11, 2010 — showed that the termination of
the Contract was pretextual. It showed that Emlak had no good-faith commercial reason for
reversing its recommendation to grant a further project extension. The document was
therefore relevant to the attribution analysis. However, the document and the ensuing
testimony about it went entirely unacknowledged in the Award, demonstrating “an apparent

pattern of [the Tribunal] in ignoring evidence in its deliberative process.”®”

12.

-

The Tribunal clearly considered the document relevant and material as it had exceptionally
ordered its production, and the Award indicates that the witness who testified about it (Mr.
Kurum) was a credible witness. Yet the Tribunal deliberately chose not to consider the

document and the related oral testimony, thus violating the Applicant’s right to be heard.

° Transcript, Day 1, p. 13.

(iti) Other Defects in the Treatment of Evidence

125. The Applicant argues that the Tribunal also breached the principle of equality of the parties

12

12

12

12

an

n

8.

©

in several ways: (i) by impermissibly privileging the proceeding’s written phase over its oral
phase, thereby advantaging the Respondent; (ii) by failing to restore the imbalance in the
equality of arms caused by the Respondent’s failure to cooperate in the production of

evidence; and (iii) by failing to apply evidentiary burdens consistently.

Both parties must have an equal opportunity to present their arguments and evidence, and the
right to expect that a tribunal will give equal attention to their respective submissions as to
the legal import of the evidence. In the Applicant’s submission, the Award appears to have
privileged the pre-hearing written submissions over the parties’ oral closing submissions.
Since there was new evidence in favor of the Claimant’s case at the hearing, this meant that

the Tribunal unfairly favored the Respondent.

The Respondent violated its obligation to produce three documents in its possession or even
to mention their existence prior to the hearing. The Tribunal ordered the production of these
documents at the hearing. Due to the Respondent’s violation, the Claimant was forced to rely
to a greater degree on evidence adduced at the hearing. The Tribunal did not wish to discuss
the Respondent’s violation and instead assured the Claimant that it could make its case on
the newly disclosed documents. These measures taken by the Tribunal at the hearing were
nevertheless insufficient, as it did not even acknowledge in the Award its finding of
exceptional circumstances necessitating an order that the Respondent produce the documents,
and as the Tribunal ultimately ignored the evidence produced. Therefore, the Tribunal failed

to restore the equality of arms between the parties.

The Award also demonstrates that the Majority of the Tribunal failed to apply the evidentiary
burdens of proof equally and appropriately to each party with respect to attribution.
(iv) Consequences of the Treatment of Evidence

According to the Applicant, the Tribunal’s jurisdictional determination must be annulled
because the Tribunal committed two serious departures from a fundamental rule of procedure.

First, the Tribunal failed to afford the Claimant the right to be heard with respect to evidence

40

13

13

13

presented at the hearing. Second, the Tribunal’s failure to hear the Claimant’s evidence at

the hearing also violated the principle of equality of the parties.

S

The right to be heard goes beyond a party’s right to present its case, but also requires that the
tribunal listen to the party’s argument, that the tribunal take such argument into account in
its deliberations, and, in connection with the obligation to state reasons under ICSID
Convention Article 52(1)(e), also requires that the award reflect the manner in which the
tribunal assessed the argument and the evidence in question.** This requires “the right to

have the possibility to present your case to be heard in an effective manner.””?

. In this case, these fundamental rights have not been observed because the Award, including
the Separate Opinion, demonstrate that testimony of Mr. Bayraktar, evidence that “went to

the heart of Claimant’s case,”!”

was deliberately ignored by the Majority. If the Tribunal
changed its mind about the importance of the evidence of Mr. Bayraktar, it should have given
notice to the parties to allow them the opportunity to make further submissions about the
change in approach.!°! That was required as part of the right to a fair hearing, which has been
confirmed by the Committee in Fraport v. Philippines and the ECtHR.'” The Tribunal’s
decision to ignore certain evidence presented during the hearing is “a serious departure from

the right to be heard” because the “evidence would have provided a critical counterweight to

evidence cited on the dispositive issues before the Tribunal.”!

2. In addition, the fundamental procedural requirement of equality of arms was violated when
the Tribunal disregarded certain evidence presented during the hearing. The principle of
equality of arms requires that one party be given the same tools available to the other party
to prove their respective cases, such that the parties are on an even playing field.'* It is a
tribunal’s responsibility to preserve this equality of arms, and to ensure that there are

consequences where one party materially derogates from its duty of cooperation. In this case,

°8 Transcript, Day 1, pp. 31-32.
® Transcript, Day 1, p. 31.

100
101
102
23,
103
104

Transcript, Day I, p. 32.

Transcript, Day 1, p. 90.

Transcript, Day 2, pp. 34-36. The Applicant refers to: Fraport v. Philippines, Decision on Annulment, December
2010, paras. 200, 202, 227, 229; and Article 6 of the ECHR.

Transcript, Day I, p. 83.

App. Mem. Annul., para 60.

41

13

13

13

105

the Applicant did not have access to certain documentary and testimonial evidence that was
highly relevant to the question of attribution until the hearing. By ignoring new evidence
adduced during the hearing, the Tribunal privileged the written phase over the oral phase,
which created an imbalance between the parties. Furthermore, the Tribunal applied
evidentiary burdens differently between the parties on the question of attribution and did not
make any effort to account for the Respondent’s failure to cooperate in the production and

presentation of evidence.

o

. The Tribunal’s treatment of the evidence also led to a manifest excess of powers. The
Tribunal’s findings on attribution led to the dismissal of the Emlak claims on jurisdictional
grounds, which is apparent from paragraph 361 of the Award concluding that the claims “fall
outside the scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.” It is well accepted by ad hoc committees
that the non-exercise of a jurisdiction that a tribunal has can lead to an excess of powers. In
this case, it is clear that the Tribunal committed an excess of power in its finding that it had

no jurisdiction over the claims arising from the conduct of Emlak.

4. The excess of powers must be considered manifest under any standard of manifestness,
because the willful disregard of the hearing testimony of Mr. Bayraktar was: (i) serious; (ii)
self-evident; and (iii) “no tribunal could tenably reach the conclusion that Emlak’s acts were
not attributable to the State after hearing and considering all of the evidence presented by the
parties.”!°° Therefore, the Applicant argues that the attribution and jurisdiction decision of

the Tribunal must be annulled as a manifest excess of powers.

an

. Furthermore, the Tribunal also failed to apply the applicable international law to its
determination of attribution. The ILC Articles would have compelled the Tribunal to
conclude, based on the available evidence, that the acts of Emlak in terminating the Contract
were attributable to the Respondent. The question before the Tribunal as per Article 8 of the
ILC Articles was “whether Emlak was being directed, instructed or controlled by TOKI with
respect to the specific activity of administering the Contract with Tulip JV in the sense of

sovereign direction, instruction or control rather than the ordinary control exercised by a

App. Mem. Annul., para. 218 (emphasis in original).

42

13

13

106
107
108

majority shareholder acting in the company’s perceived commercial best interest.”!°° Mr.
Bayraktar provided the evidence addressing this question, yet the Tribunal failed to consider
it. By disregarding the evidence, the Tribunal thus failed to apply the proper law. The excess

is manifest, as it is patently obvious that the Tribunal did not apply the ILC Articles.

B. Respondent’s Position

6. According to the Respondent, the Applicant seeks to annul the Tribunal’s factual findings on
attribution. Although the Applicant is labeling the defect as one that concerns the process of
the Tribunal’s decision, it is really a claim that the Tribunal erred in its evaluation of the
evidence. This is not a permissible ground for annulment, as annulment committees have no
authority to review an ICSID tribunal’s evaluation of evidence. Pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 34(1), it is for a tribunal to evaluate the admissibility and probative value of
the evidence, and it need not comment in the award on every piece of evidence. According
to the Respondent, “[t]here are no objectively pertinent facts. There are the Tribunal's
pertinent findings and it is within the Tribunal's discretion to decide what its pertinent facts

are, as the Tribunal is the one and the only trier of facts.”!°7

(i) Hearing Testimony

n

The Respondent submits that the Tribunal went out of its way to accommodate the Claimant
by calling Mr. Bayraktar as a witness. The Respondent agrees with the Applicant that it was
an unusual step to compel a sitting Government Minister to give oral evidence where no such
evidence had been proffered by the State. However, if anything, this only demonstrated that
the Tribunal was procedurally generous to Tulip and respected its right to be heard. The
Tribunal’s decision to order the examination of Mr. Bayraktar did not create any “heightened
expectation” regarding his testimony.!° The Tribunal could not have predetermined that the
evidence was relevant and material before the hearing, as it had yet to hear the evidence.
Instead, it gave the Claimant the opportunity to present the evidence that the Claimant

considered important on an issue that the Tribunal acknowledged was relevant and material.

 

Award, para. 309 (emphas
Transcript, Day 1, p. 174.
Transcript, Day 1, p. 161.

s in original).

 

4B

13

13

14

109
110
11

112

8. Under the legal test prescribed by Article 8 of the ILC Articles, the Claimant needed to show
that Emlak was acting on the instructions of, or under the directions or effective control of,
the State (in this case TOKI) in terminating the Contract. It is clear from Mr. Bayraktar’s
testimony that the Tribunal was well aware of Mr. Bayraktar’s two hats (his roles in TOKI
and Emlak) and that it was attentive to this evidence in connection with the issue of attribution
during his testimony.' The questions posed to Mr. Bayraktar by the counsel for the
Claimant were general and did not address, e.g., meetings at TOKI concerning the
termination of the Contract. In fact, Mr. Bayraktar’s testimony did not show that the lines of
separateness between TOKI and Emlak were all but non-existent, nor did it show any
evidence of interference by TOKI in the termination decision. It showed the contrary.''® The
Separate Opinion quotes the passages in Mr. Bayraktar’s testimony concerning the general
relationship between TOKI and Emlak and does not speak to the specific decision to
terminate the Contract.'!! As a consequence, the Majority was correct that there was no

evidence supporting attribution of Emlak’s acts to the State.

©

In addition, it is clear from the conclusion in the Separate Opinion that the Tribunal did
consider the evidence on attribution as a whole. The Separate Opinion quotes extensively
from Mr. Bayraktar’s testimony and disagrees with the Majority on the issue of attribution
on that basis. It is implausible to suggest that this evidence would not have been brought up
by Mr. Jaffe during the Tribunal’s deliberations, and the “Tribunal must have considered it
if for no other reason to determine whether it agreed with Mr. Jaffe or not.”!'!? The Majority
thus likely concluded that Mr. Bayraktar’s oral evidence did not add anything to what was
already before it on the issue of attribution and therefore did not discuss it in regard to each
specific issue of attribution. The Tribunal had discretion to evaluate the evidence as it best

saw fit, and that discretion cannot be subject to review.

0. In any event, the Claimant itself did not rely on Mr. Bayraktar’s testimony for its case on
attribution in its closing submission at the hearing. According to the Respondent, the

Claimant likely did not believe that the testimony was important for its case on attribution

Transcript, Day 2, pp. 40-51.
Ibid., pp. 47-48.

Ibid.

Transcript, Day 1, p. 164.

44

14

142.

143.

and cannot now put forward in the annulment proceeding an argument that it should have
pleaded during the arbitration. The Applicant’s conspiracy theory that the Tribunal
deliberately aimed to defeat the Applicant’s meritorious claim is therefore highly implausible

and fails for complete lack of evidence.

(ii) New Documentary Evidence

. The Tribunal gave the Claimant ample opportunity to adduce evidence and make submissions

in relation to the three documents produced and translated during the course of the hearing,
including recalling two witnesses to testify about the additional documents. The fact that the
Tribunal did not specifically mention one of the documents in the Award does not signify
that the Tribunal did not consider the evidence, but, even if that were the case, there is no
obligation on the Tribunal to cite every piece of evidence on the record. In any event, failure
by a tribunal to consider any one piece of evidence is insufficient to amount to an annullable

error.

Moreover, there is no evidence that the Respondent violated its disclosure obligations by
withholding the three documents during the document production phase. This oversight,
which was rectified during the hearing, cannot come close to a serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure.

(iti) Other Defects in the Treatment of Evidence

According to the Respondent, the procedural history as described by the Applicant itself
shows that the Tribunal went out of its way to accommodate the Claimant and hear its case,
both before and at the hearing. Therefore, the Applicant’s argument that there was an
imbalance in the equality of arms between the parties that the Tribunal failed to restore is
spurious. Even if the Tribunal had privileged the written phase over the oral phase of the
proceeding, such “privileging” could not amount to a departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure. However, even if it did, a tribunal has the discretion to evaluate the evidence in

whichever format it is presented, whether written or oral.

45

14.

14

14

14

113
114
115
116

(iv) Consequences of the Treatment of Evidence

4. The Respondent argues that there cannot be either full or partial annulment under any of the
grounds for annulment invoked with regard to the treatment of evidence in the proceedings.
The Respondent also refutes the Applicant’s argument that the grounds could be cumulated.
This is not permissible under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, which provides alternative
grounds for annulment. According to the Respondent, “[a] committee cannot find that the
complaint has some merit under one ground and a bit more merit under another ground and
therefore arrive at a fully justified complete ground of annulment.”!'? Even if the Committee
decided to annul the Tribunal’s findings on attribution, the decision on the merits would stand
because Mr. Bayraktar’s testimony was of no relevance to the Tribunal’s decision on the

merits.!!4

C. Committee’s Analysis

a

. It is common ground between the parties that a breach of the fundamental right to be heard
in the proceedings would be a ground for annulment.'!> The Committee accepts that the lack
of a fair hearing would be a serious breach of a fundamental rule of procedure under the
ICSID Convention. The right to a fair hearing encompasses a number of matters. In the
present case, the focus is on three particular aspects of a fair hearing, namely, the right to be

heard, the principle of equality of arms and the duty to give reasons.

an

The disagreement between the parties concerns the content of the right to be heard in the
factual circumstance of this case. The ECtHR has recognized “equality of arms” as an
important component of the right to a fair trial. The requirement is that “each party must be
afforded a reasonable opportunity to present his case — including his evidence — under

conditions that do not place him at a substantial disadvantage vis-a-vis his opponent.”!!°

n

Initially, when the Claimant wanted to cross examine Mr. Bayraktar, it wanted the

Respondent to produce him as a witness. It was only because the Respondent declined to do

Transcript, Day 2, p. 60.

Transcript, Day 2, p. 64.

Fraport v. Philippines, Decision on Annulment, December 23, 2010, paras. 197 et seq.

Dombo Beheer BV v. Netherlands, ECtHR, App. No. 1448/88, Merits and Just Satisfaction, October 27, 1993, para.
33.

  

46

148.

so that the Tribunal, in order to allow the Claimant to advance its case, decided in its
Procedural Order No. 2 to treat him as the Tribunal’s own witness. The Committee rejects
the suggestion that, in admitting the evidence of Mr. Bayraktar in this way, the Tribunal was
making any indication at all of the relevance or importance of this evidence. It was simply
ensuring equality of arms and holding the ring between the parties. Moreover, this
Committee cannot conclude merely from the fact that fairness led the Tribunal to admit Mr.
Bayraktar’s evidence that, having heard his evidence and his thorough cross examination by
the Claimant, the Tribunal was then obliged to conclude that his evidence was material to the
Tribunal’s decision. The Majority had the discretion to determine that the evidence was not
material and, although it might have been helpful had they expressly said so, the Committee

does not consider that the failure to do so is itself grounds to annul the Award.

The Tribunal is required to consider all the evidence before it and reach its own conclusions
as to which evidence is material to the findings it has to make and which is not. The Tribunal
heard evidence from a total of 17 witnesses, including Mr. Bayraktar, but it referred only to
the oral evidence of two of the Claimant’s witnesses and two of the Respondent’s witnesses

in its ruling, as set out in the table below:

 

 

Name Affiliation Dealt with in the Award?

Minister Called by the Tribunal [Yes — his oral evidence is referred to in
Erdogan he majority decision at para. 406 but in
Bayraktar relation to the zoning issue. His oral

evidence is considered in the Separate
Opinion at paras. 4,6 and 8.

 

 

Mr. Meyer Claimant’s Representative [Yes — Section D: Claims asserted on
Benitah and Witness behalf of Mr. Benitah; and para. 399(3).
Mr. Burak Erten | Claimant’s Witness INo — reference is made to witness

Statement (paras. 241, 384(4)) but not
ral testimony.

Mr. Erik Esveld | Claimant’s Witness INo — reference is made to witness
Statement (paras. 73, 126, 185, 186, 443)
but not oral testimony.

 

 

 

Mr. John Claimant’s Expert INo — no mention at all, except briefly on
Anderson procedural history (para. 32). No
treatment of evidence, oral or written,
hatsoever.
Dr. Jose Alberro | Claimant’s Expert INo — again no mention at all, except

 

 

 

 

briefly on procedural history (paras. 21,

 

47

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

32, 50). No treatment of evidence — oral
r written — whatsoever.
Prof. Metin Claimant’s Expert lYes — para. 260 only briefly.
Gunday Reference to Legal Opinion (paras.
235(3), 238, 308).
Mr. Ertan Yetim | Respondent’s Witness INo — reference to witness statement only
paras. 97, 114, 272, 406).
Mr. Murat Respondent’s Witness lYes — paras. 143, 160, 319, 322.
Kurum
Mr. Ibrahim Respondent’s Witness lYes — para. 165; also reference to
Keskin itness statements (paras. 63, 96).
Mr. Ekim Respondent’s Witness INo — no treatment of evidence, oral or
Alptekin ritten, whatsoever.
Mr. Enver Bulut | Respondent’s Witness INo — no treatment of evidence, oral or
ritten, whatsoever.
Mr. Ender Respondent’s Expert INo — reference only to Joint Legal
Ethem Atay [Expert Report (para. 288); Legal
Opinion (para. 406).
Mr. Nicolas Respondent’s Expert INo — no treatment of evidence, oral or
Barsalou ritten, whatsoever.
Mr. Erik van Respondent’s Expert INo — no treatment of evidence, oral or
Duijvenvoorde ritten, whatsoever.
Mr. Hervé de Respondent’s Expert INo — no treatment of evidence, oral or
Trogoff ritten, whatsoever.
Mr. Chris Ives Respondent’s Expert INo — no treatment of evidence, oral or
ritten, whatsoever.

 

 

 

 

 

149. The Committee considers that the lack of reference to the oral evidence of both parties is not
a dereliction of the Tribunal’s duty to act fairly by respecting the right to be heard and
ensuring equality of arms, but is in fact an illustration of exercising its judicial function of
choosing which evidence it finds relevant and which it does not. The Committee cannot
accept the Applicant’s allegation that the Tribunal ignored the oral testimony of Emlak
officials that the Emlak Board’s decision to terminate the Contract was pretextual. This
allegation rather reveals the disagreement of the Applicant with the Tribunal’s evaluation of
evidence and its conclusion that “[i]t is not established by the evidentiary record that Emlak
invoked alleged breaches as a pretext”!!’ for termination of the Contract in the pursuit of

State interest. Accordingly, the Committee rejects the Applicant’s argument that the failure

47 Award, para. 318.

48

15

15

15

S

N

to address all the factual matters dealt with in oral evidence must in itself lead to the Award

being annulled as a breach of the obligation to ensure a fair hearing.

Similar considerations also apply to the fact that the Tribunal has not referred in its reasoning
to one of the three documents it ordered the Respondent at the hearing to produce, namely,
an Emlak Memorandum of February 11, 2010. When a tribunal orders the production of a
document, it does so on the assumption that it may be relevant to the issues in dispute. It is
only after having received it, and having heard the arguments of the parties, that, in the
exercise of its discretionary power under ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1), it evaluates its
probative value. The Tribunal received the February 11, 2010 Memorandum during the
hearing. There is no doubt that it was aware of it and its content, as it had been discussed
during the cross-examination of Mr. Kurum. The fact that the Tribunal does not refer to it
specifically in its reasoning implies that it did not consider it to be material. As mentioned
in paragraph 83 above, failure to explain what the Tribunal thinks about that document may

be unwise, but does not amount to a violation of the right to be heard.

. The second criticism directed at the Tribunal in relation to the oral evidence of Mr. Bayraktar

is that the Tribunal, by failing to refer to it, failed in its duty to give reasons for its Award. A

contrast is made with the Separate Opinion, which does address Mr. Bayraktar’s evidence.

The obligation for tribunals to give reasons for their decisions arises out of the overriding
duty to afford the parties a fair hearing, guaranteed in Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention
and ICSID Arbitration Rule 47(1)(i), and reiterated in numerous decisions of ICSID ad hoc

committees. In Ruiz Torija v. Spain, the ECtHR stated:

The Court reiterates that Article 6(1) [of the ECHR] obliges the Courts to give
reasons for their judgments, but cannot be understood as requiring a detailed
answer to every argument. The extent to which this duty to give reasons applies
may vary according to the nature of the decision. It is moreover necessary to take
into account, inter alia, the diversity of the submissions that a litigant may bring
before the Courts and the differences existing in the Contracting States with
regard to statutory provisions, customary rules, legal opinion and the presentation
and drafting of judgments. That is why the question whether a Court has failed

49

153.

154.

15

an

15

157.

an

to fulfil the obligation to state reasons, deriving from Article 6 of the Convention,

can only be determined in the light of the circumstances of the case.!!®
It is the opinion of the Committee that these broad parameters apply equally to international
tribunals constituted under the ICSID Convention. The depth and extent of the duty to give
reasons will inevitably vary from one case to another. The duty is contextually sensitive and
a tribunal's reasons need not be extensive as long as its decision makes sense and enables the

parties to know the strengths and weaknesses of their respective cases.

Mr. Jaffe, in his Separate Opinion, formed the view that, as a “practical matter,” the decision
to terminate the Ispartakule III Contract was taken at the direction of TOKI, and hence the
State, for the purposes of Article 8 of the ILC Articles. He refers to Mr. Bayraktar’s oral
evidence at the hearing, particularly the fact that, throughout his oral evidence, Mr. Bayraktar
spoke not about Emlak’s interest and purpose, but about TOKI’s.!!° He then concludes that

Mr. Bayraktar’s testimony shows that TOKI’s sovereign interests drove the termination.!7°

. It is regrettable that the Majority does not address this divergence of view in terms, but it

does make findings on the issue at paragraphs 324 to 326 of the Award.

This disagreement between the Tribunal Members is a disagreement about evaluating the
evidence, and about the logic applied in answering the question of attribution and in the
reasoning of the conclusion reached by the Majority, as is shown in paragraphs 9 to 11 of the
Separate Opinion. Mr. Jaffe criticises the Majority’s conclusion made in paragraphs 324 to
326 of the Award that, because there were commercially viable grounds for the termination,

there was no basis for attributing the acts of Emlak to the State.
Mr. Jaffe states:

That approach answers the first question (whether the acts of Emlak are to be
attributed to the State) by answering the second question (whether the decision to
terminate was based on commercially viable grounds).!7!

48 Ruiz Torija v. Spain, ECtHR App. No. 18390/91, A/303-A, Merits and Just Satisfaction, December 9, 1994, para.

29.

49 Separate Opinion, par
'20 Separate Opinion, par

4, 6, citing Transcript, Day 3, pp. 25, 34, 52 -53.
8.

 
    

"21 Separate Opinion, para. 9.

50

15

15

16

16

16:

122
123
124
125

oe

However, he goes on to conclude that, although he would answer the first question differently
from his colleagues, he agrees with their conclusion on the second question and therefore

there was not sufficient proof offered to find a violation of the BIT.!??

9. The Committee will further address below the disagreement between the Majority and the
Separate Opinion as a matter of law, but in relation to the separate criticism that the
Majority’s failure to address Mr. Bayraktar’s evidence — and Mr. Jaffe’s findings based upon
such failure — in the Award itself is a breach of the obligation to give reasons, the Committee
concludes that the Award gives sufficient reasons for the parties, and particularly the
Applicant, to be able to understand why the Majority reached the decision it did on

attribution. Accordingly, the Committee rejects this criticism of the Award as well.

0. The Committee thus concludes that it cannot uphold the Applicant’s request that it annul the
Award under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, as there has been no serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure by the Tribunal in the original proceeding.

2. Tribunal’s Determination on the Merits Despite Alleged Lack of Jurisdiction

A. Applicant’s Position

. According to the Applicant, the parties agree that the Tribunal’s core holding concerned
attribution and that “the Tribunal could have exercised judicial economy and ended its
reasoning after paragraph 327 of the Award, but only as far as the acts of Emlak were
concerned.”!?3 The central issue therefore concerns how the Award addresses jurisdiction
and the merits. If a tribunal dismisses a case on jurisdictional grounds, the natural
consequence is that any following decision on the merits is either obiter dicta or a clear excess
of powers.'7* A tribunal’s exercise of a jurisdiction that does not exist has been recognized

as the “most obvious example” of a manifest excess of powers.!?°

2. In this case, it is clear from paragraph 327 of the Award that Section VI, entitled

“Attribution,” dismissed claims arising from the conduct of Emlak on jurisdictional grounds

Separate Opinion, para. 11.

Transcript, Day I, p. 72, quoting Resp. C-Mem. Annul., para. 55.

Transcript, Day I, p. 74.

App. Rep. Annul., para. 159, citing C. Schreuer with L. Malintoppi, A. Reinisch, A. Sinclair, The ICSID

Convention: A Commentary, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, p. 943, para. 155 (2009).

SL

16.

16:

16:

16

ow

aa

5.

an

because the Majority had determined that Emlak’s conduct was not attributable to the State.
According to Applicant, it is also apparent from paragraphs 358 and 361 of the Award that
Section VII of the Award, entitled “Treaty Versus Contract Claims,” dismissed claims
relating to Emlak’s conduct on jurisdictional grounds, because of the close link with the
attribution decision in Section VI.'2° Having decided that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction
over the Emlak claims, the Tribunal nevertheless proceeded to analyze the merits of these
claims in Section VIII, entitled “Claimant’s Claims,” and dismissed the claims on the merits.
In doing so, the Tribunal exercised a power that it did not have over the treaty claims that

were based on the acts of Emlak, and therefore committed an annullable error.

. Alternatively, the Tribunal’s determinations in Section VIII must be considered to be merely

obiter dicta without any legal effect. The Applicant states that, in such case, this portion of
the Award “cannot be given any kind of residual legal effect in this or any other proceeding,
and must be disregarded by the annulment committee in its entirety.”'?’_ In other words,
Section VIII could not amount to a separate and independent ground for dismissal of the

claims.'78

The Applicant argues that Sections VI, VII and VIII of the Award are inexorably linked,
meaning that, if the Committee decides to annul the Tribunal’s decision on attribution, it must

proceed to annul the entirety of the Award.

B. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent takes issue with the Applicant’s characterization of the findings on
attribution as pertaining only to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. According to the Respondent,
the Award indicates that the conclusion on attribution not only affected jurisdiction, but also

supported the dismissal of the claims on the merits.

The Tribunal dismissed the Emlak claims on three independent grounds in Sections VI-VII
and was fully entitled to do so. There were many reasons why it made sense for the Tribunal

to consider all of the alternative arguments advanced by the parties, as is shown by the

26 Transcript, Day 1, pp. 76-77.

27 App. Rep. Annul., para. 166.
8 Transcript, Day 1, p. 77.

structure of the Award. The first reason is that the parties’ arguments were linked. The
second reason is that the Tribunal needed to consider claims of BIT breaches of actors other
than Emlak, which it did in Section VIII. Third, the questions of attribution and treaty versus
contract claims, were, as admitted by the Tribunal, intimately linked with the merits. !7°
Fourth, it was clear that the Award was structured with the desire to achieve a unanimous

decision.!°°

The Respondent states that, although the Tribunal could have stopped at
paragraph 327 with regard to the acts of Emlak, there was a clear logic and aptness of the
Award’s structure, and judicial propriety in this case militated in favor of addressing all three

independent grounds for dismissing the Emlak claims.

16

n

Even though the question of attribution was linked to the merits, the Respondent submits that
lack of attribution was a finding relevant to both jurisdiction and merits. The issue affects
the competence of a tribunal as well as whether a State is responsible for an internationally
wrongful act (i.e. whether the claim has merit). The Tribunal’s determination that the Emlak
claims were outside of its jurisdiction was therefore not the end of the matter. Indeed, “[tJhe
finding of no attribution of the acts constituting the alleged breaches was in and of itself a
finding on the merits.”'*! Previous tribunals faced with similar situations have all concluded
that the issue of attribution is one also pertaining to the merits and have structured their
awards as the Tribunal did in this case.'*? In four cases, the tribunals also considered whether
there would have been a treaty breach if the acts had been attributable to the State.'*? The

Tribunal in this case thus followed a line of consistent jurisprudence on this matter.

16

od

For the above reasons, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed

its power by exercising a jurisdiction that it did not have. The Applicant has failed to show

29 Resp. C-Mem. Annul., para. 58.

30 Resp, Rej. Annul., para. 48.
BI

Resp. Rej. Annul., para. 36.

. Rej. Annul., paras. 51-55, referring to Plama Consortium Limited v. Bulgaria (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24),
Award, August 27, 2008; Hamester v. Ghana, Award, June 18, 2010; Bosh International, Inc. And B&P, LTD Foreign
Investments Enterprise v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/O8/11), Award, October 25, 2013 (“Bosh v. Ukraine”);
Ulysseas, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, UNCITRAL, Award, June 12, 2012 (“Ulysseas v. Ecuador”); Mohammad
Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan (SCC Case No. V (064/2008)), Partial Award on Jurisdiction and
Liability, September 2, 2009.

33 Tbid., para. 53.

 

169.

17

171.

Ss

both that there is an excess of powers, and that the excess is manifest, meaning that the

“excess of power should at once be textually obvious and substantively serious.”!*+

In any event, the Respondent submits that no matter what happens to the findings on
attribution, the Award must stand. The principle of severability prescribes that only the parts
of the Award which are tainted by an annullable error can be annulled. Even if the Committee
annulled the Tribunal’s findings on attribution with regard to the Emlak claims, the
alternative grounds under which those claims were dismissed must stand. The Award’s
dispositif leaves no doubt that the claims would have been dismissed even if the Tribunal had
found in favor of the Claimant on attribution. In other words, the Applicant can at most

achieve a partial annulment of the Award.

The Applicant submits fundamentally contradictory grounds for annulment with regard to
manifest excess of powers. On the one hand, the Applicant contends that the Tribunal failed
to exercise a jurisdiction that it had when it disregarded evidence and, as a result, concluded
that it had no jurisdiction over the Emlak claims. On the other hand, the Applicant also argues
that the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction when it considered the merits. However, in order
to succeed in annulling the full Award, the Applicant must show that both the jurisdictional

and the merits findings amount to annullable errors.

C. Committee’s Analysis

The Committee notes that the Tribunal devoted to the issue of attribution a separate chapter
in its Award, Chapter VI, which follows Chapter V, titled “Jurisdiction and Admissibility.”
The latter chapter deals with the issue of whether the Claimant made an “investment” in
Turkey for the purposes of Article 1(b) of the BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention,
concluding that the Tribunal was “satisfied that the Claimant’s principal claim arises out of
an ‘investment’ for the purposes of the BIT.”!*° The other issue which the Tribunal
considered in this chapter, namely whether the claims asserted on behalf of Mr. Benitah, and

the conclusion reached therein that such claims were inadmissible in the proceedings

'4 Transcript, Day 1, p. 154, quoting Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on the Application for Annulment, June 5, 2007, para.

85 Award, para. 208.

17

17.

N

o

instituted by Tulip,'** are of no relevance in the context of this annulment proceeding, as the

Tribunal’s conclusion on this point was not challenged by the Applicant.

The Tribunal has not discussed the issue of attribution in the chapter on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, but rather dealt with it in a separate chapter. The Tribunal itself provides an
explanation for this approach when it opines that “[t]he issue of attribution relates both to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction and to the merits of the dispute.”'*” The Tribunal was inspired by the
approach to the question of attribution adopted by the Tribunal in Hamester v. Ghana,

29138

describing that approach as “appropriate and expressly agreeing with it.!*? The Tribunal

in Hamester expressed the view that “[t]he question whether the issue of attribution is, in a

given case, one of jurisdiction or of merits is not susceptible of a clear-cut answer.”!4°

. The Tribunal quoted in full three of the paragraphs of the Hamester Award.'4! It is worth

noting that, in the quoted paragraphs, the Hamester Tribunal did not directly characterize the
issue of attribution as one which goes to jurisdiction, despite considering that issue in the
context of Ghana’s second “jurisdictional objection” based on non-attribution, which rested
on an analysis of the different acts complained of. The Tribunal in Hamester was more
nuanced, stating that “the question of attribution looks more like a jurisdictional question.”!4
It explained that “in many instances, questions of attribution and questions of legality are
closely intermingled, and it is then difficult to deal with the question of attribution without a

full enquiry into the merits.”!4*

In the end, the Hamester Tribunal adopted a pragmatic
approach, as is apparent from its noting that “‘as a practical matter, this question is usually
best dealt with at the merits stage, in order to allow for an in-depth analysis of all the

parameters of the complex relationship between certain acts and the State.”!*4

'36 Thid., para. 231, point 2 of the dispositif.

37 [bid., para. 276.

138 Tbid., para. 277.

89 Tbid., para. 279.

40 Hamester v. Ghana, para. 140.

'41 Award, para. 277, quoting Hamester v. Ghana, Award, June 18, 2010, paras. 143-145.
\42 Award, para. 277, quoting Hamester v. Ghana, Award, June 18, 2010, para. 143.

483 Ibid.

\44 Thid., quoting Hamester v. Ghana, Award, June 18, 2010, para. 144.

55

174. This is thus the approach which inspired the Tribunal in the original Tulip v. Turkey
proceeding and which has been adopted by a number of other tribunals, a trend identified by

the Respondent when referring to, inter alia, Bosh v. Ukraine and Ulysseas v. Ecuador.‘

175. The Tribunal expressed its view that attribution was relevant, in the context of the case it had
to deal with, for two reasons: first, for “ascertaining whether there [was] a dispute with a
Contracting State, here Turkey, for the purposes of the BIT and Art 25 of the ICSID

Convention,” and second, because in its view, “the claims presented in this investment
arbitration (particularly with respect to the conduct of Emlak) may only succeed if they are
attributable to the State.” The Tribunal continued by stating that “[i]n that sense, the issue of

attribution is also relevant to the merits of the dispute.”!*°

176. The Committee questions whether attribution is really relevant to ascertaining the existence
of a dispute between Tulip and Turkey. Article 8 of the BIT, which is about the settlement
of disputes between investors of one Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party,

defines an investment dispute:

[A]s a dispute involving:

(a) the interpretation or application of any investment authorization granted by
a Contracting Party’s foreign investment authority to an investor of the other
Contracting Party; or

(b) a breach of any right conferred or created by this [BIT] with respect to an
investment.'47
177. Thus, a dispute to which the dispute settlement procedures under Article 8 of the BIT apply
must be one falling within the scope of this definition. There is nothing in that definition
about attribution. Attribution may be relevant in the context of enquiring whether there was

a breach of an obligation under the BIT, but that pertains to the merits of a case, as the

45 Resp, C-Mem. Annul, para. 62, quoting Bosh v. Ukraine, Award, October 25, 2013 and Ulysseas v, Ecuador,
UNCITRAL, Award, June 12, 2012.

446 Award, para. 276.

47 Art, 8(1) of the BIT.

17

17

180.

~

2°

Tribunal was fully aware when it stated that “the issue of attribution [was] also relevant to

the merits of the dispute.”!4*

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, to which the Tribunal referred in its explanation as to
why it was necessary to consider the issue of attribution for the purpose of ascertaining the
existence of a dispute, opens Chapter II of the ICSID Convention, which is entitled

“Jurisdiction of the Centre.” It provides that:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out

of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or

agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national

of another Contracting State, which the Parties to the dispute consent in writing to

submit to the Centre.
Again, no specific mention is made of attribution in relation to disputes which may fall within
the jurisdiction of the Centre. Such dispute shall be a legal dispute arising directly out of an
investment and shall involve a national of a State Party to the ICSID Convention and another

State (or its designated agency or constituent subdivision) which is a Party to the Convention.

There is no specific definition of the term “dispute” either in the BIT or in the ICSID
Convention. When interpreting that term, in accordance with Article 31(3)(c) of the VCLT,
“there shall be taken into account [...] [a]ny relevant rules of international law applicable in
the relations between the Parties.” As the International Court of Justice (“ICJ’”) stated, there
is:
[...] established case law on that matter, beginning with the frequently quoted
statement by the Permanent Court of International Justice in the Mavrommatis

Palestine Concessions case in 1924: “A dispute is a disagreement on a point of law
or fact, a conflict of legal views or of interests between two persons.”!*?

The ICJ, on several occasions, stressed that for a dispute to exist, “[i]t must be shown that the

claim of one party is positively opposed by the other.”!*°

148 Ibid.

149 4

of the ional Ci ion on the El ion of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v.

Russian Federation), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, /.C.J. Reports 2011 (1), April 1, 2011, p. 84, para. 30,
referencing the Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions case, Judgment No. 2 1924, P.C.L.J. Series A, No. 2, p. 11.

80 South West Africa Cases (Ethiopia v. South Africa; Liberia v. South Africa), Preliminary Objections, Judgment,
1.C.J. Reports 1962, December 21, 1962, p. 328; Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application:

s7

18

18:

18.

18.

2002) (Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda), Jurisdiction and Adm

1. There can be no doubt that the Tribunal was seised of the dispute in which Tulip’s claim was
positively opposed by Turkey. Tulip advanced the claim that Turkey breached several of its
obligations under the BIT, the alleged breaches having been specified in the Request for
Arbitration and then subsequently throughout the written and oral phases of the proceeding.
The Tribunal, in its chapter on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, satisfied itself that “the

Claimant’s principal claim arises out of an ‘investment’ for the purposes of the BIT.”!*!

2. The Committee notes that, although the Tribunal announced that its inquiry into the issue of
attribution would be relevant in order to ascertain whether there is a dispute with Turkey for
the purposes of the BIT and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, it did not expressly state its
conclusion on this question. Rather, it focused on attribution for purposes of determining
whether the impugned conduct of Emlak was attributable to Turkey because, as it correctly
stated, the claims with respect to Emlak’s conduct “may only succeed if they are attributable

to the State.”!5?

3. Attribution is a concept elaborated upon in the context of State responsibility. The ILC
considered it to be one of the elements of an internationally wrongful act of a State. Article 2
of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility, which codifies customary international law,!>? is
entitled Elements of an internationally wrongful act of a State and provides that:

There is an internationally wrongful act of a State when conduct consisting of an
action or omission:
(a) is attributable to the State under international law; and
(b) constitutes a breach of an international obligation of the State.
4. Both elements have to be established in order to reach a conclusion that an internationally

wrongful act of a State has been committed. If one of the elements is missing, there is no
international wrongful act, and responsibility of a State cannot be engaged. In the words of

the ILC Commentary to the Articles on State Responsibility (“ILC Commentary” or

 

bility, Judgment, /.C.J. Reports 2006,

December 19, 2005, p. 40, para. 90.

151
152
153

Sta

Award, para. 208.

Ibid., para. 276.

See e.g., Archer Daniels Midland Company and Tate & Lyle Ingredients Americas, Inc. v. The United Mexican
ites (ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/04/5), Award, November 21, 2007, para. 275.

58

“Commentary”), attribution of the conduct of a person, organ, institution or entity to the State
under international law means that “conduct consisting of an act or omission or a series of
acts or omissions is to be considered as the conduct of the State.”!*4 International law
contains rules on attribution which the ILC codified and developed in Chapter II of its
Articles on State Responsibility (Articles 4-11). The ILC Commentary explains, “[tJhe
attribution of conduct to the State as a subject of international law is based on criteria
determined by international law and not on the mere recognition of a link of factual
causality.”'*> As the last Special Rapporteur of the ILC for State responsibility wrote, “[t]he
process of attribution as stated in Article 2 reflects a conception of attribution that is
essentially normative.”!°° The term “attribution” refers “to the body of criteria of connection
and the conditions which have to be fulfilled, according to the relevant principles of
international law, in order to conclude that it is a State [...] which has acted in the particular

case.?157

185. The Tribunal applied the relevant criteria for ascertaining whether the conduct of Emlak,
which formed the basis of the Claimant’s complaint in the original proceeding (in particular
the termination of the Contract), was attributable to Turkey. The Tribunal analysed all three
of the ILC Articles on which the Claimant relied, namely Articles 4 (conduct of organs of a
State), 5 (conduct of persons or entities exercising elements of governmental authority) and
8 (conduct directed or controlled by a State). After a thorough analysis, the Tribunal reached
the unanimous conclusion that “Emlak is not a ‘state organ’ within the meaning of Art 4 [of
the] ILC Articles”!** and therefore Emlak’s conduct could not be attributed to Turkey on that
basis. Likewise, the Tribunal reached the unanimous conclusion that “the evidence on the
record does not show that Emlak exercises any governmental power within the meaning of

Art 5 [of the] ILC Articles.”! These conclusions are not challenged by the Applicant.

'S4 Commentary to Chapter II, Yearbook of the ILC, 2001, Volume II, Part Two, p. 38, para. 1.

185 Tbid., para. 4.

'86 1. Crawford, State Responsibility, The General Part, Cambridge University Press, p. 113 (2013).

‘ST L. Condorelli & C. Kress, The Rules on Attribution: General Consideration, in: The Law of International
Responsibility (J. Crawford, A. Pellet, S. Olleson, eds.), Oxford University Press, 221 (2010).

58 Award, para. 291.

159 Tbid., para. 300.

 

18

18

18:

18

19

160
161
162

6. What is challenged is the Majority’s conclusion on attribution under Article 8 of the ILC
Articles. Mr. Jaffe attached his Separate Opinion on this question, which consisted of some
11 paragraphs, but noted expressly “that [his] separate views do not affect the outcome of the

proceedings.”!°°

n

The Tribunal devoted the major part of its analysis of attribution, some 26 paragraphs,'°! to
Article 8. The Tribunal, in interpreting Article 8, took into account the ILC Commentary, as
is demonstrated by a longer quote in paragraph 306 of the Award. The fact that a company
or enterprise is State-owned or controlled is not sufficient to attribute its conduct to the State,
as the quoted passage from the Commentary makes clear. Rather, the conduct of a corporate
entity has been attributed to the State when “the State was using its ownership interest in or

control of a corporation specifically in order to achieve a particular result.”!®

~

Relying thus on Article 8 and its Commentary, the Tribunal stated that:

[T]he relevant enquiry remains whether Emlak was being directed, instructed or
controlled by TOKI with respect to the specific activity of administering the
Contract with Tulip JV in the sense of sovereign direction, instruction or control
rather than the ordinary control exercised by a majority shareholder in the
company’s perceived commercial best interests. '°
9. The Committee has no doubt that the Tribunal correctly interpreted Article 8 of the ILC
Articles and applied the relevant test, that of effective control.'** Whether the evidence
adduced by the Claimant satisfied that test was for the Tribunal to evaluate. According to
Rule 34(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, “[t]he Tribunal shall be the judge of the

admissibility of any evidence adduced and of its probative value.” It is not for this Committee

to re-evaluate the evidence presented in the original proceedings.
0. The Tribunal, having considered the evidence, reached the conclusion that:
Separate Opinion, p. 1.

Award, paras. 301-326.
ILC Commentary to Article 8, para. 6 (emph

 

   

added), quoted in the Award, para. 306. The ILC referred to the

 

jurisprudence of the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal. See J. Crawford, The International Law Commission’s
Articles on State Responsibility: Introduction, Text and Commentary, Cambridge University Press, p. 113, fn. 174
(2002).

163
164

  

Award, para. 309 (emphasis in the original).
Mr. Jaffe also agreed that this was the relevant test. Separate Opinion, p. 1, point 2.

60

[...] while Emlak was subject to TOKI’s corporate and managerial control, Emlak’s
conduct with respect to the execution, maintenance and termination of the Contract
[was] not attributable to the State under Art. 8 of the ILC Articles due to an absence
of proof that the State used its control as a vehicle directed towards achieving a
particular result in its sovereign interests.!°
191. In the subsequent paragraph, which perhaps could have been visually more clearly separated
from the paragraphs on attribution under Article 8, the Tribunal summarized its overall
conclusion on attribution — that is on attribution under all three Articles (4, 5 and 8) on which
the Claimant relied — as follows: “the Tribunal therefore determines by majority that Emlak’s
conduct with respect to the Contract and the Ispartakule III Project is not attributable to the
Turkish State.”!°° The Tribunal continued with the following final statement, that Emlak’s

conduct was “on that basis, outside of the remit of the Tribunal.”!°7

19:

N

Neither the ICSID Convention nor the BIT uses the term “remit.” The English Oxford

Dictionary defines the term as “the referring or consignment of a matter to some other person

or authority for settlement,” “the transfer of a case from one Court or judge to another” or as

“an area of authority” frequently used as part of the expression “within (also beyond, etc.)

one’s remit.”!8

19.

wo

. It seems that the Tribunal meant “competence” or “jurisdiction” when using the term “remit.”
That impression is strengthened by considerations of the Tribunal in the following chapter,

Chapter VII, entitled “Treaty versus Contract Claims.”

19.

x

The Tribunal expressed the view that “it is difficult in this case clearly to separate the issue
of attribution from the question of whether the claims presented by the Claimant arise from
the BIT.” Having recalled its conclusions on Articles 5 and 8 of the ILC Articles, it stated
that “[t]he Tribunal’s finding that Emlak’s conduct is properly characterised as contractual

in nature, in the context of attribution, informs its determination that the claims asserted by

165 Award, para. 326.

166 Award, para. 327.

167 hid. The same term “remit” is used by the Tribunal in paragraph 231 when concluding its consideration of whether
the claims on behalf of Mr. Benitah were admissible. Having concluded that the Claimant cannot prosecute
Mr. Benitah’s claims as his attorney, it stated that “[t]here is no obvious bar to Mr. Benitah initiating his claim
investor within Art. 25 of the ICSID Convention, but that possibility does not fall within the Tribunal’s remit.
168 The Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd ed., Oxford University Press (1989).

169 Award, para. 358.

 

 

61

the Claimant with respect to Emlak’s conduct may not properly be characterised as treaty

claims.”!7°

19.

n

. As the Tribunal was of the view that “none of the claims presented by the Claimant with
respect to the conduct of Emlak are amenable to be characterised by the Tribunal as arising
out of the BIT,” it stated that “[a]ccordingly, they fall outside the scope of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction.”!7!

196. The Committee is thus fully aware that the Tribunal used the expressions that Emlak’s

conduct was “outside the remit of the Tribunal” or that the claims with respect to the conduct

of Emlak “fall outside the scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.” The Tribunal, however, in
the dispositive part of the Award, did not rule that it was without jurisdiction to consider the

Claimant’s claims relating to Emlak’s conduct. After ruling that, “[b]y majority, the acts of

Emlak are not attributable to Turkey,” the Tribunal decided “[u]nanimously” that, in any

event, the acts of Emlak do not constitute breaches of the BIT.”!7?

19

n

Article 53 of the ICSID Convention provides that “[t]he Award shall be binding on the parties
and shall not be subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for in
this Convention.” In the view of the Committee, it is the dispositive part of the Award that
is binding on the parties. This is a part in which a tribunal authoritatively rules on the
submissions of the parties, either on jurisdictional or merits submissions, following its
consideration of the parties’ evidence and arguments in the reasoning part of its
Decision/Award. The ICJ, in relation to its Judgments, stated that “[t]he operative part of a

Judgment of the Court possesses the force of res judicata.”'

198. The Committee notes that the Tribunal has made several findings, or, to use the Tribunal’s
terminology, “determinations,” in the dispositive part, namely:

1. The Claimant has made an investment into Turkey within the terms of the BIT
and the ICSID Convention.

190 Thid., para. 359.
"71 Tbid., para. 361.
' Tbid., p. 138.
13 Applicati

 

of the C ion on the Prevention and Puni of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and
Herzegovina v. Serbia and Montenegro), Judgement, 1.C.J. Reports 2007, February 26, 2007, p. 94, para. 123.

62

2. The claims of Mr Benitah are inadmissible.
3. By majority, the acts of Emlak are not attributable to Turkey.
4. Unanimously, and in any event, the acts of Emlak do not constitute breaches of
the BIT.
5. Also unanimously, the acts of TOKI, the Supreme Audit Board, the Turkish
police and Turkish government officials are attributable to Turkey but do not
constitute breaches of the BIT.”
None of them constitutes a finding that the Tribunal is without jurisdiction to consider
Tulip’s claims. Therefore, in the Committee’s view, one cannot conclude that when the
Tribunal made the determination that “the Claimant’s claims are dismissed,” it would have
exceeded its powers, even less so manifestly. This was not “a jurisdictional dismissal”! of
the claims, but a dismissal after having considered the merits. The Tribunal was entitled to

that course of action.

19

©

Moreover, Tulip alleged in the original arbitration proceeding that Turkey breached its
obligations under the BIT by the conduct of “various state actors such as TOKI, the Prime
Minister’s Office, the police, and the Supreme Audit Board.”!”° The Tribunal, noting
agreement between the parties that “these allegations plainly involve action by State organs

which would be attributable to the State,”!””

considered that “these [were] plainly assertions
about the conduct of state entities in the performance of their state functions.”'”* As these
claims relating to the conduct of the above-mentioned State entities were “properly within

7179 the Tribunal was under a duty to consider these claims on the

the Tribunal’s jurisdiction,
merits and to reach conclusions on them. This is what the Tribunal did in Chapter VIII of its

Award titled “[t]he Claimant’s Claims.”

201

S

. It is true that in that Chapter, the Tribunal also considered the claims based on Emlak’s
conduct which, as it earlier determined, was not attributable to Turkey.'*° As Tulip’s claims
were treaty claims alleging the breach of obligations under the BIT, such obligations could

have been breached only by Turkey, through acts of its State organs or other entities the

"74 Award, p. 138.

"5 App. Rep. Annul., para. 157.

"76 Award, para. 334, referring to Claimant’s Reply, para. 320.
"77 [hid., para. 328.

"8 Thid., para. 363.

"9 Thid., para. 368.

'80 Tbid., para. 327.

20

20!

20:

20:

181
182

conduct of which is attributable to it, as obligations under an inter-State treaty can be

breached only by a Party to it.

. The Tribunal was thus correct when it stated, in respect of the claims based on Emlak’s
conduct, that those claims “must fail.”!*! Although economy in drafting would have justified
the Tribunal to disregard these claims when it considered the claims on their merit, the
Tribunal was under no duty to proceed in such manner. It proceeded to consider these claims
on the assumption that Emlak’s conduct was attributable to Turkey.'*? This approach allowed
the Tribunal to “double-check” its conclusion resulting in the unanimous dismissal of Tulip’s

claims.

nv

. In view of the above, the Committee has to reject the Applicant’s submission that the Award
be annulled under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention on the ground that the Tribunal
manifestly exceeded its powers.

3. Award’s Contradictory and Incomplete Reasons

A. Applicant’s Position

a

. The Applicant submits that the attribution portion of the Award fails to state the reasons upon
which it is based. According to the Applicant, the Majority’s conclusions that Emlak’s
conduct was not attributable to the State because TOKI did not “instruct” or “direct” Emlak

is unmotivated. The Tribunal explained the relevant question before it as follows:

[Whether TOKI exercised effective control over Emlak and thereby enforced
public policy in the administration and termination of the Contract or whether
any aspect of the administration and termination of the Contract was performed
under the instructions or direction of TOKI in an exercise of sovereign power.'*?

&

The Applicant complains that the Majority only analyzed the first of the questions and paid
no attention to the “instructions” and “direction” elements. Resolution of these two issues

was necessary in order to be able to reach a decision that attribution under Article 8 of the

Ibid., para. 366.
Ibid., para. 367. The Tribunal was rather imprecise when it formulated its assumption that these claims in respect

of Emlak’s conduct “could be characterised as treaty claims attributable to the Respondent” (emphasis added). It is
the conduct which is attributable, not the claims.

183

App. Mem. Annul., para. 174., quoting Award, para. 305, (emphasis added).

64

20:

201

20)

184
185

ILC Articles had not been established. The Award only includes cursory references
concerning these elements in its paragraphs 311, 313 and 322. Because the standards for
these elements were not defined, the Majority’s conclusion that they were not established is

wholly unmotivated.

an

. The Applicant submits that the Tribunal’s reasoning on the two elements of Article 8 of the
ILC Articles on attribution is impossible to reconstruct. Although the Tribunal found that

1,”'84 it went on to conclude that there was “no

there was some evidence of “effective contro!
basis” to infer that the decision was taken under the control of TOKI and “no evidence” of
any specific influence or instruction.'** In the Applicant’s view, the Award contradicts itself
by stating that there was “some limited evidence” of effective control while at the same time
stating that there was “no evidence” of influence or instruction. In addition, the basis for
concluding that there was “no evidence” in regard to the other two elements of Article 8 of
the ILC Articles is unknown. This insufficient reasoning in the Award amounts to a failure

to state reasons.

an

The Applicant also submits that the Tribunal’s findings on attribution in the jurisdiction
portion of the Award contradict its findings in the merits section. The Tribunal made an
assumption for the purposes of its determination on the merits that Emlak’s conduct was
attributable to the State. In doing so, it needed to assume that the commercial justifications
for terminating the Contract were pretextual and that the termination was made as a result of
a political directive handed down by TOKI. However, in the merits portion, the Tribunal
found again that this assumption was incorrect. This contradiction is inherent in the reasons,

and the Award is therefore annullable.

B. Respondent’s Position

7. The Respondent stresses that reasons must be given for the award, not for each specific
determination made along the way. A failure to refer to a particular argument, document or

other piece of evidence cannot amount to a failure to state the reasons. According to the

Award, para. 310.
App. Mem. Annul., para. 179, quoting Award, paras. 313, 322.

65

20)

209.

210.

~

Respondent, “[t]his would interfere with the evaluation of evidence which is beyond the

supervisory authority of an annulment committee.”!*°

The Respondent argues that the Majority’s reasoning on attribution is clear and can be
followed with ease. The Tribunal discussed the legal standard under all three claimed
grounds for attribution (Articles 4, 5 and 8 of the ILC Articles) and considered the evidence
for each of the grounds, concluding that the evidence did not support the Claimant’s
arguments that the Emlak claims were attributable to the State. For example, the Award
devotes 17 paragraphs to the evaluation of evidence relating to arguments under Article 8 of
the ILC Articles.'*’ It is clear from the Award that the Tribunal applied the ILC Articles to

the facts of the case to determine questions of attribution.

As far as evidence regarding the criteria of “control,” “instructions” and “direction” are
concerned, the Majority — in paragraphs 311, 313 and 322 of the Award, the very paragraphs
quoted by the Applicant — specifically considered whether the evidence presented was
sufficient to prove that Emlak acted “on the instructions” or “under the direction” of TOKI.
The Majority’s analysis was clear on these issues and no reader could struggle to follow it
from the premise to the conclusion. In particular, the Respondent points out that paragraph

311 of the Award states:

An analysis of the content and nature of key decisions taken by Emlak’s Board

with respect to the Contract, including minutes and agenda papers, does not lead

to the conclusion that Emlak acted under the governmental control, direction or

instructions of TOKI with a view to achieving a certain State purpose.'*8
The Respondent contends that the Applicant itself did not elaborate on the difference of the
legal standards for “control,” “instructions” and “direction” during its closing arguments at
the hearing, or on how the evidence supported that those standards had been met in this case.
According to the Respondent, because of the Separate Opinion’s position concerning the
evidence on attribution, the Applicant is now trying to advance an argument that it did not

put forward during the arbitration.

'86 Resp, C-Mem. Annul., para. 33.
'87 Award, paras. 307-323.
'88 Resp, C-Mem. Annul., para. 103 (emphasis added).

C. Committee’s Analysis

211. The Committee notes that the Applicant’s request to annul the Award on the basis of the

21

21

21

2.

3.

-

Tribunal’s failure to state the reasons on which the Award is based (Article 52 (1)(e) of the
ICSID Convention) is focused on the alleged failure of the Tribunal to state reasons in “[t]he
attribution portion of the Award,”!®? namely for the conclusion that Emlak’s conduct was not
attributable to Turkey under Article 8 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility because
TOKI did not “instruct” or “direct” Emlak.

The Committee thus has to verify whether the Applicant’s criticism of this part of the Award
on the ground invoked is justified. The other conclusions reached by the Tribunal elsewhere
in the Award seem to be sufficiently motivated, enabling the Applicant to follow how the

Tribunal reached its conclusions.

The Committee observes that when the Tribunal analysed Article 8 of the ILC Articles on
State Responsibility, it expressed the view that “[p]lainly, the words ‘instructions,’ ‘direction’
and ‘control’ in Art. 8 are to be read disjunctively.”!°° The Tribunal was thus fully aware of
the fact that it had to consider “whether any of the categories of ‘instructions,’ ‘direction’ or
‘control’ [were] met for the purposes of Art. 8.”!°! This, however, does not imply that the
Tribunal could not have considered in parallel whether on evidence one of these “categories”

was met, but had to do it successively for each and every category separately.

While the Applicant disagrees with the Tribunal’s conclusions that Emlak’s “conduct” cannot
be attributed to Turkey “due to an absence of proof that the State used its control as a vehicle

directed towards achieving a particular result in its sovereign interests,”!°”

it is not asserting
that the Tribunal’s analysis of attribution on the basis of control is not adequately motivated
or reasoned. Therefore, the Committee need not dwell on this aspect of the reasoning on

attribution.

'89 App. Mem. Annul., p. 80, title of Section B.
19 Award, para. 303.

"1 Tid.

'% Award, para. 326.

215. It is the Tribunal’s conclusion that Emlak’s conduct was not attributable to Turkey on the

basis of either “instruction” or “direction,” as they were not been proven, which, in the view

of the Applicant, is unmotivated.

216. The Committee cannot agree with the Applicant that the Tribunal, while defining the standard

for “control,” made “no similar effort [...] to define the standards for ‘instructions’ or
‘direction.””! It is beyond any doubt that the Tribunal looked not only at the text of Article 8
of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility, but also at the authoritative ILC Commentary
that accompanies these Articles.!°* Having been inspired by the Commentary, the Tribunal
formulated the required standard. It stated that “the relevant enquiry remains whether Emlak
was being directed, instructed or controlled by TOKI with respect to the specific activity of
administering the Contract with Tulip JV in the sense of sovereign direction, instruction or
control.”!9> Thus, in the view of the Tribunal, the standard for attribution was the same for
all three possible bases of attribution, namely, instruction, direction, or control. The Tribunal
made clear that the question before it was “whether any aspect of the administration of the
Contract was performed under the instruction or direction of TOKI in exercise of sovereign

power.”!9

217. The Tribunal was thus looking for evidence that the “specific activity of administering the

Contract,” namely, its termination by Emlak, was done on instruction of TOKI, or whether
TOKI directed Emlak in reaching that decision with a view to achieving a certain State

purpose.

218. In the view of the Committee, there was no need for the Tribunal to define the terms

193
194
195
196
197
198

“instruction” or “direction,” as their ordinary meaning is rather clear. “Instruction” can be

understood as “making known to a person what he is required to do” or to give “an order.”!*”

“Direction” is defined as an “authoritative guidance, instruction,” as “instructing how to

proceed or act aright.”!° What the Tribunal needed was the evidence that State officials told,

App. Mem. Annul., para. 176.

See Award, para. 306, quoting extensively from the ILC Commentary to Article 8.
Award, para. 309 (first emphasis in original, second emphasis added).

Ibid., para. 305.

The Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd ed., Oxford University Press (1989).

Ibid.

 

68

21

221

©

S

or gave orders or authoritative guidance to, Emlak that it had to terminate the Contract with

Tulip in the State interest.

While the Tribunal admitted that “[t]here [was] some limited evidence supporting the
Claimant’s contention that the decision to terminate the Ispartakule III Contract was

connected to TOKI and the exercise of its public power,”!”

it, however, having looked at the
evidence, “consider[ed] that [its] weight [...] is strongly to the contrary,” showing “that the
decision to terminate the Contract with Tulip JV was made by the Board of Emlak
independently, in the pursuit of Emlak’s commercial interests, and not as a result of the
exercise of sovereign power by TOKI.”” In the Committee’s view, the quoted passages do
not reveal “a conceptual flaw in the Tribunal’s reasoning,” as asserted by the Applicant.?°' It
is not unusual that in the exercise of judicial or arbitral functions a court or a tribunal finds
some elements of the evidentiary record indicating one possible direction/conclusion, but
other elements indicating a different direction/conclusion. It is for a court or a tribunal to
weigh the evidence in accordance with the principle of free assessment of evidence” in order

to reach, on the balance of that evidence, its conclusions.

This is what the Tribunal did in this case. It is not difficult to follow its reasoning, including
that relating to attribution on the basis of instruction or direction. The Tribunal explains that
it “analys[ed] the content and nature of key decisions taken by Emlak’s Board with respect
to the Contract, including minutes and agenda papers.”?°?_ The Tribunal explicitly refers in
footnotes 336-340 to specific documents on the basis of which it reached its conclusion. In
relation to, as the Tribunal called it, “[t]he central act [...] with respect to which the Claimant

99204

[sought] compensation,”“* namely, the termination of the Contract, the Tribunal again refers

199 Award, para. 310.

200 Thid., para. 311.

201 App. Mem. Annul., para. 181.

2 R. Kolb, The International Court of Justice, Hart Publishing, p. 930 (2013). As the ICJ stated “within the limits of
its Statute and Rules, it has freedom in estimating the value of the various elements of evidence, though it is clear that
general principles of judicial procedure necessarily govern the determination of what can be regarded as proved.”
Military and Paranilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua, Judgment (Nicaragua v. United States), Judgment on

 

LCJ. Reports 1986, June 27, 1986, p. 40, para. 60. For ICSID arbitral proceedings see Rule 34(1) of the

ICSID Arbitration Rules.
203 Award, paras. 311-314.
24 Thid., para. 315.

to a number of documents (including quoting one of them).?°> In light of the above, the
Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal’s finding on the lack of attribution of Emlak’s
conduct in terminating the Contract to the Respondent on the basis of an alleged instruction

or direction is sufficiently reasoned.

22

. The Committee thus concludes that it cannot uphold the Applicant’s request to annul the
Award under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention on the ground that the Award has

failed to state reasons on which it is based.

  

285 Thid., paras. 316, 319, 320, fns. 341-342, 344-345.

70

V. COSTS

222.

22)

o

224.

206 Sempra v. Argentina, Decisi

A. Applicant’s Position

The parties submitted their claims for costs on July 15, 2015. The Applicant’s legal costs
total USD 1,119,955.28 and its expenses total USD 332,769.25. The expenses include the
advance payment to ICSID in the amount of USD 200,000.00, which was covered solely by
the Applicant in accordance with Regulation 14(3)(e) of the Administrative and Financial
Regulations, as well as the lodging fee of USD 25,000. The Applicant subsequently made a
further advance in the amount of USD 75,000 following a request made by ICSID on August
7, 2015. Accordingly, the Applicant’s total costs and expenses in the annulment proceeding

amount to USD 1,527,724.53.

. The Applicant notes that under Articles 61(2) and 52(4) of the ICSID Convention, ad hoc

committees have the discretion to examine the expenses incurred by the parties and to
determine how and by whom such expenses and costs shall be borne. The Applicant requests
that, in the event the Award is annulled, the Committee direct the Respondent to bear the
costs of the proceeding in full, in line with the ad hoc Committees in Sempra v. Argentina’
and MHS vy. Malaysia.’ If the Award is not annulled, the Applicant requests that, “at most,
the costs of the proceeding be divided equally between the parties,””°* and that each party
bear its own legal expenses and fees, in line with the approach by, amongst others, the ad hoc
Committees in Continental Casualty v. Argentina,?® Lucchetti v. Peru?!® and Soufraki v.

UAE"!

B. Respondent’s Position

The Respondent claims that it incurred legal fees and expenses to the amount of USD
718,347.81 in this annulment proceeding (including USD 100,000 in legal fees which is

contingent upon a favorable result of the annulment proceeding in the Respondent’s favor).

 

n on Annulment, June 29, 2010.

207 Malaysian Historical Salvors SDN BHD v. Government of Malaysia (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/10), Decision on
the Application for Annulment, April 16, 2009.
208 App. Letter on Costs, July 15, 2015, p. 2.

2 Continental Casualty v.

 

Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 15, 2011.

 

20 Lucchetti v. Peru, Decision on Annulment, August 13, 2007.
2"! Soufraki v. UAE, Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007.

7

225. The Respondent requests that the Committee order the Applicant to pay the Respondent’s
legal fees and expenses, with interest at a compounded, commercial rate. The Respondent
argues that it was forced to incur these costs by defending itself in a proceeding that was
“destined to fail and indeed frivolous.””!?_ The Respondent contends that, if the Award is
upheld, an order of costs may be made under either the “costs follow the event” standard or
the “fundamentally lacking in merit” approach. According to the Respondent, Tulip is using
the annulment proceedings to delay its payment under the Award, which is a circumstance
that should be considered by the Committee in line with recent jurisprudence.”!> Further, ad
hoc committees have ordered that the unsuccessful applicant pay the other party’s costs if the
application was fundamentally lacking in merit. In any event, in line with jurisprudence
during the last five years, the Respondent should not be required to contribute to the costs of
the proceeding as “no ad hoc committee that distinguished between the Costs of the
Proceeding and Party Costs has required a successful respondent to reimburse the applicant
for any of the Costs of the Proceeding.”?'+ This is supported by the text of the ICSID
Convention and the exceptional nature of annulment proceedings as recognized by the

Committee in M.C.I. Power v. Ecuador.?!°

C. Committee’s Analysis

221

an

Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, which is contained in its Chapter VI titled “Cost of

Proceedings,” provides:

[T]he Tribunal shall, except as the parties otherwise agree, assess the
expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings, and
shall decide how and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the
members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the
Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the Award.

    

ion for the Costs of the Annul. Proceeding, July 15, 2015, para. 3.

ion for the Costs of the Annul. Proceeding, July 15, 2015, paras, 12-15. Citing AES Summit v.
Hungary, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2012, para. 181; Alapli v. Turkey, Decision on Annulment, July 10, 2014,
para. 263.

214 Resp. Submission for the Costs of the Annul. Proceeding, July 15, 2015, para. 8, citing Continental Casualty v.
Argentina, Decision on Annulment, September 16, 2011, para. 285; Iberdrola Energia, S.A. v. Republic of Guatemala
(ICSID Case No. ARB/09/5), Decision on Annulment, January 13, 2015, paras. 145-147; Tza Zap Shum v. Republic
of Peru (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/6), Decision on Annulment, February 12, 2015, para. 207.

215 M.C.L. Power v, Ecuador, Decision on Annulment, October 19, 2009, para. 88.

 

 

72

22

22)

22!

230.

n

od

©

Rule 47(1)(j) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules implementing Article 61(2) states that “[t]he
award shall be in writing and shall contain [...] any decision of the Tribunal regarding the

cost of the proceeding.”

In accordance with Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention, Article 61(2) being part of
Chapter VI “shall apply mutatis mutandis to proceedings before the Committee.” Rule 53 of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules specify that these Rules “shall apply mutatis mutandis to any
procedure relating to the [...] annulment of an award and to the decision of the [...]

Committee.”

Both parties recognize that under the above-mentioned provisions the Committee enjoys

discretion in allocating the costs.

In accordance with Regulation 14(3)(e), the Applicant made the advance payments requested
by ICSID to cover the costs of the annulment proceeding (i.e. the costs and expenses of the
Centre and fees and expenses of the Members of the Committee) (“ICSID Costs”). The
ICSID Costs amount to USD 247,874.98.7!°

The Committee has rejected the Application. The Applicant has, however, requested that in
case the Award is not annulled, the Committee divides the ICSID Costs equally between the
parties. Although Regulation 14(3)(e) — stating that the Applicant shall be solely responsible
for making the advance payment — is without prejudice to the right of the Committee in
accordance with Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention to decide how and by whom the
ICSID Costs shall be paid, the Committee does not see any compelling reason to divide these
costs equally between the parties. As the ad hoc Committee in M.C.I. Power v. Ecuador
stated, “[a] consequence of this rule [Regulation 14(3)(e)], which imposes on the party who
applies for annulment the financial burden of advancing the costs, should normally be that
the Applicant, when annulment is refused, remains responsible for these costs.”?!7 The

Committee therefore decides that Tulip has to bear all of the ICSID Costs.

2!6 The amount includes estimated charges (courier, printing and copying) relating to the dispatch of this Decision.
The ICSID Secretariat will provide the parties with a detailed Financial Statement of the case account as soon as all
invoices are received and the account is final. The remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Applicant.

217 M.C.I. Power v. Ecuador, Decision on Annulment, October 19, 2009, para. 89.

73

231. The Committee does not share the Respondent’s view that the “annulment application [...]
was always destined to fail, and indeed frivolous.”?!® The Applicant raised a number of
worthwhile points that required the Committee’s detailed consideration. The Committee also
has to acknowledge that the Applicant and its Counsel pursued the annulment proceeding in
a professional and courteous way. In view of these factors, the Committee decides that each
party shall bear its own costs for legal representation and expenses incurred in this annulment

proceeding.

VI. DECISION

232. For the reasons given above, the Committee decides:

(1) Tulip’s Application for Annulment is dismissed in its entirety;

(2) Tulip shall bear all ICSID Costs incurred in connection with this annulment proceeding;
and

(3) Each Party shall bear its own costs for legal representation and expenses in the annulment

proceeding.

218 Resp, Submission for the Costs of the Annul. Proceeding, July 15, 2015, para. 3.

74

Ms. Cherie Booth QC Mr. Christoph Schreuer
Member Member

Date: (Q De coho daly Date: lS Leenks ZOlE

YH \owSo

H.E. Judge Peter Tomka
President

Date: 46 De he Rol

75

