Archived Content

 

Information identified as archived on the Web is for reference, research or recordkeeping purposes. It has
not been altered or updated after the date of archiving. Web pages that are archived on the Web are not
subject to the Government of Canada Web Standards. As per the Communications Policy of the Government
of Canada, you can request alternate formats by contacting us.

 

Contenu archivé

 

L'information archivée sur le Web est disponible a des fins de consultation, de recherche ou de tenue de
dossiers seulement. Elle n’a été ni modifiée ni mise a jour depuis sa date d’archivage. Les pages archivées
sur le Web ne sont pas assujetties aux normes Web du gouvernement du Canada. Conformément a la
Politique de communication du gouvernement du Canada, vous pouvez obtenir cette information dans un
format de rechange en communiquant avec nous.

 

AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER 11 OF THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

 

BETWEEN

UNITED PARCEL SERVICE OF AMERICA INC

AND

GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

 

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON
PETITIONS FOR INTERVENTION AND PARTICIPATION
AS AMICI CURIAE

 

THE TRIBUNAL:

Dean Ronald A Cass
L Yves Fortier CC, QC
Justice Kenneth Keith (Chairman)

17 October 2001

Para No

The request 1

The positions of the disputing parties and of Mexico and
the United States of America

The submissions on adding a party .......c.ccsescseesesecseseeeseeseseeeseeeseeetseeeeseseeseeasseeeees

The Tribunal’s opinion and conclusion on the power to add parties

The submissions on the participation of amici curiae..

The Tribunal’s opinion and conclusion on the participation of amici curiae
Relevant provisions of NAFTA and the UNCITRAL rules .......0.0.+.
The requirement of equality and of the full opportunity of

 
  
  

 

Parties to Present their CASC cesses 69
The Tribunal’s 70
The Tribunal’s order. 73

 

The requests
1. The Canadian Union of Postal Workers (the Union) and the Council of

Canadians (the Council) have petitioned the Tribunal requesting

(i) standing as parties to any proceedings that may be convened to
determine the claim made by UNITED PARCEL SERVICE OF
AMERICA, INC. (UPS) in this matter;

(ii) _ in the alternative, should the status as party be denied to one or
both Petitioners, the right to intervene as amicus curiae in such
proceedings to be accorded on terms that are consistent with the

principles of fairness, equality and fundamental justice;

(iii) disclosure of the statement of claim and defence, memorials,
counter-memorials, pre-hearing memoranda, witness statements
and expert reports, including appendices and exhibits to such

submissions, and any applications or motions to the Tribunal;
(iv) the right to make submissions concerning the place of arbitration;

(v) _ the right to make submissions concerning the jurisdiction of this
Tribunal, and, once they are fully known, the arbitrability of the

matters the disputing investor has raised; and,

2.

3.

(vi) an opportunity to amend this Petition as further details of this

claim become known to the petitioners.

In accordance with its Procedural Decision No. 2 the Tribunal has received briefs
in support of the petition from the Petitioners and briefs in opposition from United
Parcel Service of American Inc (the Investor or UPS) and the Government of
Canada (Canada). In terms of article 1128 of NAFTA the Governments of

Mexico and the United States of America have also made submissions.

The Petitioners give the following grounds in support of their request:

(i) Both Petitioners respectively have a direct interest in the subject
matter of this claim, and may be adversely affected by the award
of this Tribunal. Accordingly it would be contrary to both
national and international principles of fairness, equality and
fundamental justice to deny them the opportunity to defend their

interests in these proceedings;

(ii) Both Petitioners also have an interest in the broader public policy
implications of this dispute. These not only implicate the full
array of Canada Post services, but many other public service
sectors as well. Notwithstanding its reliance upon UNCITRAL
procedures, this dispute is not essentially private in character, but
rather is likely to have far reaching impacts on a broad diversity
of non party interests. Accordingly it would be unfair and
inconsistent with the principles of equality, fairness and
fundamental justice to exclude from these proceedings those who
wish to address these issues and are uniquely qualified to do so.
Moreover, allowing such participation will provide this Tribunal
with an important and different perspective on the questions
before it and the broader consequences that may follow from its

determination of those questions;

(iii)

iv)

(v)

Both Petitioners share two further interests in this matter. The
first is to ensure judicial oversight by the appropriate Canadian
court of these proceedings in accordance with Canadian
constitutional principles and the rule of law. The second is to
address the lack of transparency that has historically attended
international arbitral processes. Under UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules only the parties have the right to make submissions
concerning the place of arbitration, the arbitrability of the issues
in dispute, or the in-camera nature of the proceedings.
Conversely, non-parties have no right under these rules to invoke
judicial review of the tribunal’s award. Accordingly, a failure to
accord the Petitioners standing as parties to these proceedings
would effectively deny or limit their opportunity to make
submissions concerning these key questions or to invoke the
supervisory jurisdiction of a Canadian court and consequently
deny the treatment in accordance with fairness, equality and

fundamental justice;

By reason of these interests, the Petitioners have a unique and
distinct perspective and expertise concerning the issues that have
been raised by this claim that would be of assistance to this

Tribunal; and, on the grounds that,

This Tribunal has the authority pursuant to Article 15(1) of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules to accord standing to third parties
on whatever terms it deems appropriate subject only to the
requirement that all parties are treated with equality and given
the full opportunity of presenting their case. In exercising this
discretion it is incumbent on the Tribunal to have regard to all
applicable rules of international law including those set out in
human and labour rights conventions and treaties which establish

the right of all persons to equal and fair treatment before the law.

4. They seek the following orders:
(i) _ the Petitioners be made parties to these proceedings;

(ii) _ in the alternative, the Petitioners be accorded standing as Amicus
interveners, but nevertheless with the full right to present and to
test any and all of the evidence which may be introduced in these

proceedings;

(iii) the statement of claim and defence, memorials, counter-
memorials, pre-hearing memoranda, witness statements and
expert reports, including appendices and exhibits to such
submissions, and any applications or motions to the Tribunal, be

disclosed publicly;

(iv) the Petitioners be accorded the right to make submissions

concerning the place of arbitration;

(v) the Petitioners be accorded the right to make submissions
concerning the jurisdiction of this Tribunal, and, once they are
fully known, the arbitrability of the matters the disputing investor

has raised; and,
(vi) the Petitioners be allowed to supplement these submissions to

reflect the additional information made available by reason of

such disclosure.

The positions of the disputing parties and of Mexico and the United States of
America

5. The Investor’s position is that:

(i) The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to grant “party” status to

strangers to the arbitration.

(ii) The Tribunal may have jurisdiction to grant amicus curiae status
to strangers to the arbitration, in appropriate circumstances, on

receipt of adequate material warranting the grant of such status.

(iii) On the basis of the material filed by the Petitioners, amicus
curiae status should not be granted at this time, but the Tribunal
might consider granting leave to reapply in the future, on proper
material being submitted. If amicus curiae status is granted, the
amicus cannot be entitled to attend hearings or to be provided
access to any of the material filed with the Tribunal, but ought
instead to be limited to providing the written submission, limited
to no greater than ten pages, on the specific issue on which the

Tribunal might determine to receive such a brief.

6. The Investor accordingly submits

(ji that the petition requesting that the Petitioners be given standing

as a disputing party be dismissed, and

(ii) that the application to provide an amicus brief should be
dismissed at this time, but that the Tribunal might determine that
the Petitioners could be granted leave to make an application to
submit an amicus curiae submission, in the manner and at the
time determined by this Tribunal in its discretion pursuant to

Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

7. Canada’s position is similar to the Investor’s:

(i) The Tribunal has no jurisdiction to add the Petitioners as parties

to the arbitration or to grant them rights of parties.

(ii) The Tribunal has discretion to receive written amicus briefs

based on publicly available information.

(iii) In exercising its discretion, the Tribunal should consider

whether:

iv)

(v)

(a) There is a public interest in the arbitration;

(b) The Petitioners have sufficient interest in the outcome of the

arbitration;

(c) The Petitioners’ submissions will assist in the determination
of a factual or legal issue related to the arbitration by
bringing a perspective or particular knowledge that is

different from that of the disputing parties; and
(d) The Petitioners’ submissions can be received without
causing prejudice to the disputing parties.
The Tribunal should examine the circumstances of each
Petitioner separately.

However, on the issue of jurisdiction, place of arbitration and
procedural issues generally, there is no basis or reason for the

Tribunal to receive submissions from the Petitioners.

8. Canada accordingly submits that the Tribunal:

(i)

(ii)

Dismiss the Petitioners’ application to be added as parties to the

arbitration; and

Dismiss the Petitioners’ application to make submissions
concerning the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, place of arbitration and

procedural issues generally.

It further submits that:

(i)

(ii)

The Tribunal has discretion to receive written amici briefs
prepared on the basis of publicly available information as
permitted under the confidentiality order which will govern the

arbitration.

The Tribunal should exercise its discretion on whether to receive

written amici briefs in accordance with the criteria developed by

9.

international tribunals and domestic courts for deciding the issue;

and

(iii) The Tribunal should only consider receiving written amici briefs

at the merits phase of the arbitration.

The United States of America joins Canada in the view that arbitral tribunals are
not authorized under the NAFTA to grant requests of third parties such as
Petitioners to intervene as parties in Chapter 11 arbitral proceedings, but that, in
proceedings governed by UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, tribunals are authorized

to accept written submissions of such third parties as amici curiae.

. Mexico supports the disputing parties’ opposition to the Petitioners’ request for :

(1) status as parties; (2) the right to have all documents and pleadings in the
proceeding disclosed to them; and (3) the right to make submissions on
jurisdiction and the place of arbitration. The Tribunal, it says, has no jurisdiction
to accede to these requests. Mexico submits that these issues are reserved to the
submissions of the disputing parties and to the other NAFTA Parties with respect
to the interpretation of the treaty. Mexico does however differ from the disputing
parties and the United States of America on the matter of amicus briefs. It

contends that the Tribunal has no power to authorise the reception of such briefs.

. It is convenient to discuss separately the two issues of adding a party and the

amicus curiae role.

The submissions on adding a party

12.

The Petitioners in their submissions elaborate on what they say are their direct
and unique interests in the proceedings, their expertise and unique perspective on
the broader public interest issues raised by the dispute, and their interest in
making submissions on matters that are exclusively reserved to those with the

status of parties to the proceedings.

. The direct interests relate to the possible consequences of the proceedings for

Canada Post employees, including those who are members of the Union, and for

5

members of the Council, as for others, who depend on the mail and other services

provided by Canada Post.

. Apart from those impacts on their members, the Petitioners contend that the

claim raises issues of broad public interest which extend well beyond postal
services to other public and social services. Further, the expansive interpretation
of NAFTA urged by the Investor would dramatically expand the scope for
foreign investor claims and put at risk a broad diversity of government measures
that should not be vulnerable to such claims. They refer in particular to the
Investor’s invoking of articles 1503(3)(d) and 1502(3)(a) of NAFTA, provisions
which arguably are not applicable in this case. The Petitioners also wish to raise
questions about the application of the UNCITRAL arbitration rules and the New
York Convention to disputes arising under NAFTA investment provisions. They
say that they are uniquely qualified to contribute a perspective on these matters of

broader public interest, a perspective which would otherwise be absent.

. The matters which are exclusively reserved to parties and in respect of which the

Petitioners claim an interest in making submissions include the resolution of the
place of the arbitration (which they say is important for the extent of the
supervisory jurisdiction of Canadian or other courts over arbitrations),

jurisdiction and arbitrability, and certain procedural matters.

. On the Tribunal’s authority to grant standing, the Petitioners state that this

application is one of first impression, except for the award of 15 July 2001 of a
NAFTA Tribunal in Methanex Corporation v United States where, moreover, the
prospective interveners did not seek party standing. They identify two NAFTA
provisions as significant. Article 1120(2) provides that

The applicable arbitration rules shall govern the arbitration except to
the extent modified by this section [B].

. The Petitioners say that several provisions of section B modify the application of

the UNCITRAL Model Rules, among them article 1131(1):

A Tribunal established under this Section shall decide the issues in
dispute in accordance with this Agreement and applicable rules of
international law.

18. That provision, they say, applies to both matters of substance and procedure.
Referring to the “authoritative definition” of the sources of international law set
out in article 38(1) of the Statute of the International Court of Justice, they
contend that the Methanex Tribunal, which said it was bound by article 15 of the
UNCITRAL Rules and did refer to some tribunal and court decisions, failed to
have regard to some of the sources of international law. Article 38(1) is as
follows:

1. The Court, whose function is to decide in accordance with
international law such disputes as are submitted to it, shall apply:

a. international conventions, whether general or particular,
establishing rules expressly recognized by the contesting
states;

b. international custom, as evidence of a general practice
accepted as law;

c. the general principles of law recognized by civilized
nations;

d. —_... judicial decisions and the teachings of the most highly
qualified publicists of the various nations, as subsidiary
means for the determination of rules of law.

19. In terms of the first matter listed in article 38(1), “international conventions”, the

Petitioners state that

While the issue of third party intervention in arbitral proceedings is not
without precedent, it has very rarely arisen in the modern era of
international commercial arbitration. In fact, the issue of third party
intervention has either been ignored, or given very low priority by
those crafting the international and domestic regimes providing for
international commercial arbitration.

20. This indifference to third party rights, they say, appears to derive from certain
assumptions that have guided the development of the conventions — assumptions

which no longer hold. Except for the formal Parties, they continue, the provisions

2

2:

1.

N

of NAFTA are silent on third party rights, as is the New York Convention. While
the UNCITRAL Rules offer little guidance, article 15 does provide the Tribunal
with considerable latitude subject only to the requirement for equality in the
treatment of the parties and other specific requirements of the Rules. Moreover it
is generally regarded as a restriction on the principle of party autonomy. It
provides

Subject to these Rules, the arbitral tribunal may conduct the arbitration

in such a manner as it considers appropriate, provided that the parties

are treated with equality and that at any stage of the proceedings each
party is given a full opportunity of presenting his case.

While the requirement for equality of treatment or fairness was not established
with third party interests in mind, the rule does not prohibit the extension of the
principle to them, especially in the new era of investor-state arbitration. The
Petitioners mention as reasons for a broader reading of article 15 the public
character of disputes like the present and the diverse interests that may be

affected.

The Petitioners next refer to international conventions concerning human rights
and labour rights, quoting articles 14 and 26 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights about equality before courts and the right to a fair and
public hearing and equality before the law generally, and provisions of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and International Labour Conventions

about union rights:

We recite these conventions, not to suggest that they establish a formal
right of participation in these proceedings, but rather as an important
source of international law from which guidance can be taken in
determining the exercise by this Tribunal of its discretion with respect
to the Petition before it. In our submission, these Conventions
articulate applicable rules of international law which support the
extension of the principle of equality and equal treatment before the
law to third persons who may be affected by, or have a substantial
interest in, claims arising under the NAFTA investment rules.

23. When they turn to international custom and jurisprudence, the Petitioners

acknowledge the great weight accorded to the doctrine of party autonomy but

24.

25.

that guiding principle, they say, derives from the fundamental characterisation of

arbitration as a private and not a public function.

The Petitioners then develop a number of reasons for rejecting that
characterisation in this case with the consequence, as they see it, of allowing for
third party rights. First, this arbitration arises from a treaty base and not from a
private contract. Secondly, by contrast to the typical UNCITRAL award, the
investor-state claim, the scope of the issues are virtually unbounded and may
include broad issues of public policy and law. A related, third matter is the
public character of the disputes that may arise under Chapter 11; here the entire
framework of Canadian public policy relating to the provision of postal services
is put in issue in a dispute which has no foundation in contract and no private
character. Fourthly, investor-state claims can be seen as more analogous to the
judicial review applications than to private contract disputes. Finally, Canada has
consented unilaterally to arbitration which may be initiated by unknown foreign

investors concerning broad spheres of public policy and law.

The Petitioners next mention the practice of the Appellate Body of the World
Trade Organisation. It has accepted amicus submissions noting the “ample and
extensive authority to undertake and control the process by which it informs itself
both of relevant facts of the dispute and of the legal norms and principles
applicable to such facts” (United States — Import Prohibition of Certain Shrimp
and Shrimp Products Report of the Appellate Body of 12 October 1998,
WT/DSS58 AB/R, para 106). The Petitioners acknowledge that the Appellate Body
has distinguished between the right to make submissions and its authority to
receive them; further, the decisions are not particularly helpful on allowing
intervention as an added party. But, they continue, a clear distinction is to be
drawn between state to state dispute settlement under the WTO and the investor-
state apparatus under NAFTA.

While the former is justifiably limited to the Parties to the WTO, the
latter explicitly invites non-Party participation by allowing foreign
investors to invoke the dispute resolution machinery created by this
treaty. Accordingly, in the case of investor-state claims, for reasons of

equality and fairness, third party intervention is warranted in our
submission.

26.

27.

x

28.

29.

Under the heading, general principles of law (reflecting article 38(1)(c) of the ICJ
Statute), the Petitioners refer to the well established right in Canadian law to
intervene in civil proceedings as a party or amicus curiae. Also mentioned are
the requirements of natural justice and the law of standing in judicial review

cases.

The final heading in this part of the submission, referable to article 38(1)(d) of
the ICJ Statute, is judicial decisions and expert opinion. The Petitioners begin
with the judgment of the British Columbia Supreme Court in The United
Mexican States v Metalclad Corporation, 2001 BCSC 664, 2 May 2001. The
limited scope for judicial review recognised by that court underscores for the
Petitioners the importance of providing those with an interest in these
proceedings participatory rights commensurate with their interest. If those rights
are denied, it is extremely unlikely that they would be given a voice in any

application that might be made to review the award.

The Investor and Canada (the disputing parties) present essentially the same
arguments against this part of the Petition. The governments of Mexico and the
United States of America agree with their position. Both disputing parties
emphasise the relevant provisions of NAFTA and the UNCITRAL tules, in
particular article 15. Under article 1122 each NAFTA Party consents to investors
submitting claims to arbitration in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.
None of those provisions gives the Tribunal power to add parties to the
proceedings, nor, according to Canada, to grant them the rights of parties. In their
response, the Petitioners state that they are not seeking such rights. Accordingly,

we take that issue no further.

The arbitration, says the Investor, is conducted on the basis of the consent of the
disputing parties. Under article 1121 the Investor confirmed its consent to the
arbitration while article 1122 confirms that each of the NAFTA Parties have
consented to claims being submitted by Investors under the procedures set out in
Chapter 11. Further, the Investor makes it clear that it does not consent to the

participation of the Petitioners or any other third party as a disputing party or with

3

31.

32.

N

33.

S

any analogous status. Nor does it consent to the disclosure to the Petitioners of
the material provided to the Tribunal or to their making submissions on the place
of arbitration, jurisdiction or any other matters. Both disputing parties refer to the
Methanex award as recognising that the Tribunal has no power to add the
Petitioners as parties. They also refer to that Tribunal’s discussion of article 15 of

the UNCITRAL rules.

Next, the disputing parties point out that the Petitioners are seeking greater rights
than the other (non-disputing) NAFTA Parties have under article 1128, their
rights of participation (as the provision is headed) being confined to the
interpretation of NAFTA. And, the Investor adds, the Petitioners are seeking
greater rights than those accorded to the subnational governments of NAFTA

Parties.

The Methanex decision, Canada continues, is also consistent with the approach of
the common law under which neither arbitration tribunals nor the courts have the
power to compel a party to arbitrate with a non-party. The only exception
provided for under NAFTA is where more than one claim has been submitted and
they raise common questions of law and fact and the Tribunal decides to hear and
determine them together in the interests of fair and efficient resolution of the

claims (article 1126(2)).

As indicated (para 9), the United States of America joins Canada in the view that
arbitral tribunals are not authorised under NAFTA to grant requests of third
parties, such as the Petitioners, to intervene as parties in Chapter 11 arbitral

proceedings.

Mexico agrees with the position of the Investor, Canada and the United States of
America that no other person may be allowed to intervene. It also calls attention

to the fact that:

even an enterprise of a Party that is a juridical person owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an investor of another Party — and
that, by definition, is an entity that has a legal personality separate and
distinct from that of the investor — may not submit a claim to
arbitration on its own against the Party under whose law it is

34.

established or organized, and it is also not afforded a right of
intervention, even though it would have an interest in the dispute.

Thus, Section B limits the participation to the Investor who submits a
claim to arbitration and the NAFTA Party against whom the claim is
made.

Significance is also to be seen in the confined scope of the power of the Tribunal

to receive expert advice (article 1133).

The Petitioners in their response call attention to the failure of the disputing
parties and of Mexico to comment on several of the substantive arguments they
made in support of the petition or to refute the authority offered in support. With
the exception of Canada’s “somewhat terse recognition” that there is public
interest in Chapter 11 disputes, no one addresses the truly unique and
unprecedented dimensions of the NAFTA investment dispute procedures (see
paras 21 and 24 above). Nor had the submissions addressed the more
fundamental question of the role of international law in general and international
conventions and covenants in particular. Of particular relevance are the scholarly
works cited. They also emphasise significant developments in the law supporting
far greater transparency in respect of arbitral tribunals — a matter under the
amicus curiae heading in the petition, and accordingly considered later in this

decision.

The Tribunal’s opinion and conclusion on the power to add parties

35.

The Tribunal is established under and has the powers conferred by NAFTA,
particularly Section B of Chapter 11. Under that Section an investor of a Party
may submit to arbitration a claim that another Party has breached certain
obligations. Certain conditions are to be satisfied, including the Investor
consenting to arbitration and waiving other proceedings. Once the conditions are
satisfied, the disputing investor may, in terms of article 1120, submit the claim to
arbitration under one of three sets of provisions — here the UNCITRAL
arbitration rules. Under article 1122 each Party consents to the submission of a

claim to arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out in NAFTA. As

36.

37.

noted, Section B provides for consolidation where claims submitted under article
1120 have a question of law or fact in common (article 1126, para 31 above), for
Parties at their option to make submissions to the Tribunal on a question of
interpretation of NAFTA (article 1128, headed Participation by a Party, para 30
above), for the governing law (article 1131, para 17 above) and for the
preparation of expert reports at the request of a disputing party or at least without

their objection (article 1133, para 33 above).

None of those provisions confers authority to add parties to the arbitration either
generally or in the present circumstances. The disputing parties have consented
to arbitration only in respect of the specified matters and only with each other
and with no other person. Canada, along with the other NAFTA Parties, has
given that consent in advance in article 1122 and the Investor has given it in the
particular case by consenting under article 1121. (There is a separate issue,
raised by Canada’s challenge to jurisdiction, whether the Investor has met some
of the other conditions in Section B.) It is of the essence of arbitration that the
tribunal has only the authority conferred on it by the agreement under which it is
established, considered in context. NAFTA itself does not provide any basis for
the addition as parties of persons such as the Petitioners in this matter. Quite
apart from the absence of any positive general power to authorise the addition of
such parties, NAFTA itself would also support an adverse inference opposing
any such power. The Agreement does contemplate some role for parties other
than those whose dispute is the subject of a particular arbitration but only in two
confined circumstances : (1) if they are disputing parties whose dispute has
something in common with the original dispute (article 1126), or (2) if they are
NAFTA Parties and then only in respect of the interpretation of the Agreement
(article 1128).

The Petitioners do not of course attempt to discover the Tribunal’s authority in
particular provisions of NAFTA itself. Rather, they resort to article 15(1) of the
UNCITRAL rules, broader international law arguments and what they see as the

particular character of Chapter 11 disputes.

16

38. In its own terms, article 15(1) (set out in para 20 above) is about procedure. It
comes at the beginning of the section of the rules headed Arbitral proceedings. It
does two critical things. First, it gives the arbitral tribunal power to conduct the
arbitration in an appropriate manner. That power is essential to the very process
of dispute settlement by way of arbitration and might be thought to be inherent
even if not expressly stated. Secondly, in its two sets of limits it recognises both
the fundamental procedural rights of the parties to a fair proceeding, natural
justice or due process, and the other particular requirements of the rules. The
parallel provisions in the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial
Arbitration (articles 18 and 19(2)) have the same characteristics. They too affirm
the power of the tribunal to conduct the arbitration in such manner as it thinks fit
and the rights of the parties to be treated equally and to be given a full
opportunity to present their cases. They appear at the beginning of a chapter
headed Conduct of Arbitral Proceedings. The analytic commentary on the text

which became articles 18 and 19 said this:

“Magna Carta of Arbitral Procedure”

Article 19 may be regarded as the most important provision of the
Model Law. It goes a long way towards establishing procedural
autonomy by recognising the parties’ freedom to lay down the rules of
procedure (paragraph (1)) and by granting the arbitral tribunal, failing
agreement of the parties, wide discretion as to how to conduct the
proceedings (paragraph (2) [article 15(1) first part]), both subject to
fundamental principles of fairness (paragraph (3) [article 15(2) final
part]). Taken together with the other provisions on arbitral procedure,
a liberal framework is provided to suit the great variety of needs and
circumstances of international cases, unimpeded by local peculiarities
and traditional standards which may be found in the existing domestic
law of the place.

39. While the provision is plainly important, it is about the procedure to be followed
by an arbitral tribunal in exercising the jurisdiction which the parties have
conferred on it. It does not itself confer power to adjust that jurisdiction to widen
the matter before it by adding as parties persons additional to those which have
mutually agreed to its jurisdiction or by including subject matter in its arbitration
additional to what which the parties have agreed to confer. In this regard we

fully agree with the opinion expressed by the Methanex tribunal:

40.

Al.

42.

As a procedural provision ... [article 15(1)] cannot grant the Tribunal
any power to add further disputing parties to the arbitration, nor to
accord to persons who are non-parties the substantive status, rights or
privileges of a Disputing Party. ...

The Tribunal is required to decide a substantive dispute between the
Claimant and the Respondent. The Tribunal has no mandate to decide
any other substantive dispute or any dispute determining the legal
rights of third persons. The legal boundaries of the arbitration are set
by this essential legal fact. It is thus self-evident that if the Tribunal
cannot directly, without consent, add another person as a party to this
dispute or treat a third person as a party to the arbitration or NAFTA, it
is equally precluded from achieving this result indirectly by exercising
a power over the conduct of the arbitration. Accordingly, in the
Tribunal’s view, the power under Article 15(1) must be confined to
procedural matters. Treating non-parties as Disputing Parties or as
NAFTA Parties cannot be matters of mere procedure; and such matters
cannot fall within Article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

We do not consider that the broader international law arguments assist the
Petitioners. As they indeed acknowledge, international law and practice and
related national law and practice have either ignored or given very low priority to
third party intervention (para 19 above). Of the treaty provisions they cite, the
one which is nearest to being applicable — article 14 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights — is about persons whose rights and obligations in a
suit at law are being determined by a court or tribunal. That is not the present
case. The Petitioners’ rights and obligations are not engaged in that way or

indeed at all.

The Investor claims that Canada is in breach of its obligations under NAFTA
with resulting loss or damage to it. The Investor and Canada are the parties
whose rights and obligations are to be determined by the arbitration, and no one
else’s. The Petitioners indeed acknowledge that none of the treaty provisions
establish a formal right of participation in these proceedings; rather they are to
be seen as guiding the exercise by the Tribunal of its discretion (para 22 above).
But if the Tribunal not does not have the relevant power — to add parties — then

matters claimed to bear on the exercise of the power can have no significance.

Nor does the Petitioners’ characterisation of the arbitration as being different

from the private, contract based, narrowly focused norm assist their argument.

43.

They must still be able to point to a power in the Agreement read in its context

which authorises the Tribunal to add parties. They have not been able to do that.

It follows that the Tribunal rejects the request of both Petitioners to be granted

standing as parties.

The submissions on the participation of amici curiae

44.

4S.

46.

The Petitioners submit that the Methanex tribunal correctly concluded that it had
authority to allow third parties to make submissions on the issues before it. But,
they continue, the narrow view it adopted about the rights that might be accorded
is unsupported by general principles or judicial authority. The concept of amicus
curiae is a flexible one and, even when construed narrowly, the rights commonly
include access to the record and attendance at the proceedings. They cite
Canadian and United States of America authority and practice in support of those
propositions. The critical issue in determining the point along the continuum of
participation is the nature and extent of the intervener’s interest. In their opinion,
the Tribunal’s discretion under article 15, when read in accordance with the
applicable principles of international law, is broad enough to engender a wide

range of options including according an intervenor standing as a full party.

The Petitioners submit that Methanex tribunal in particular misunderstood the
nature of the limits imposed by the “in camera” requirement in article 25(4) of
the UNCITRAL rules. While that provision implies that the proceeding is closed

to the general public, it does not proscribe the persons who might be admitted.

The Petitioners recall their interests as identified earlier in their petition (eg
para 3 above) and highlight issues which they say are among those on which they
would introduce a perspective and evidence that would not otherwise be
available:
(i) the costing of mail, package and courier services is one with
respect to which [the Union] has particular interest, expertise and

a point of view that has often been distinct from that of Canada
Post;

47.

48.

(ii) the history, details and other arrangements concerning the
management of Canada Post pension funds, are also issues with
respect to which [the Union] as the beneficiaries of this pension
plan, have a unique interest and perspective;

(iii) the importance of integrated postal, package and courier services
to the viability of public postal services, the well being of
Canadian communities and in particular those in rural Canada is
germane to the issues UPS has raised. For example, the
interpretation of Canada’s obligations under Article 1105 must
take a sufficiently broad view of international law so as to
include the rights of affected third parties. This is an issue with
respect to which both Petitioners have a particular interest but
also specialized knowledge and expertise; and,

(iv) the Petitioners also share an interest in having the provisions of
Chapter Eleven ... accorded a strict and limited application in
light of the extraordinary nature of these provisions as detailed
more fully elsewhere in this brief. This certainly distinguishes
their interest and perspective from Canada’s, which is one of the
authors of this regime, and certainly from UPS that would have
the Tribunal accord these disciplines [too] expansive an
application.

The Petitioners say that they are prejudiced in being able to describe the full
nature of their interests and potential contribution by not knowing the Investor’s
particular claims and the arguments it has brought forward. They also seek the
right to make submissions on jurisdiction and arbitrability. They are aware of no
provisions in the UNCITRAL rules precluding the Tribunal from considering
objections by non-parties to its jurisdiction — jurisdiction being a matter which

the Tribunal can, they say, determine on its own motion.

The Investor does not dispute that the Tribunal may have the procedural power to
receive an amicus submission from a third party under article 15 of the
UNCITRAL Rules. The power is however limited, for example by article 25(4)
providing for in camera hearings. Further, the Tribunal should not receive
submissions unless it is confident that they will provide a particular insight, an
assessment which is to be made in the context of the assumption made by the
Methanex Tribunal that the disputing parties will provide all the assistance and
materials that the Tribunal needs to resolve the dispute. Next, any decision to

accept amicus briefs ought not to permit strangers to the arbitration to have

49.

50.

51.

greater rights than those afforded to NAFTA Parties under article 1128 (para 30
above). The Investor also calls attention to the prospect of the proceedings
becoming unmanageable if amicus briefs were allowed liberally. That would be
unfair and costly to the disputing parties. Any submission would have to be

helpful as well as relevant.

Applying these tests, the Investor says that it would be premature for the Tribunal
to receive amicus briefs from either of the Petitioners and, if so, to decide the
terms on which it should receive them. It then states the matters that should be
addressed in an amicus leave application:

(i) a description of the relevant expertise and experience of the

applicant and the nature of the applicant’s interest in the
arbitration;

(ii) an outline of the specific issues in the arbitration that the
applicant wishes to address;

(iii) a description of the way in which the applicant will make a
contribution that is not likely to repetitive of what has been
already submitted (by the disputing parties or other amici); and

(iv) the disclosure of the nature of the third party’s relationship with
either of the disputing parties or the NAFTA Parties.

The Investor adds that any brief ought to be strictly limited in length and
confined to the specific issues permitted. The amicus should not be allowed to
make oral submissions, to attend the hearing or to receive any material related to
the proceedings except that which the parties consent to being made public. In
accordance with the Methanex ruling, amici should not be able to adduce any
factual or expert evidence. The rights of the parties and the efficient

advancement of the proceedings are not to be prejudiced.

Canada begins its submission by stating its support for greater openness in
NAFTA Chapter 11 proceedings and its appreciation of the contribution that
transparency brings to building public confidence in the investor-state dispute
settlement process. Referring to article 15(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules and the
ruling in the Methanex case, it agrees that the Tribunal has a discretion to receive

amicus briefs where appropriate. Following a consideration of the Methanex

52.

53.

54.

ruling, a WTO Appellate Body ruling (European Communities — Measures
affecting Asbestos and Asbestos Containing Products WT/DS 135/9, AB-2000-
11, November 7, 2000) and Canadian court practice it proposes that a NAFTA
Tribunal should take into account the following factors when deciding whether to

receive amicus briefs:

(a) Is there a public interest in the arbitration?

(b) Do the Petitioners have sufficient interest in the outcome of the
arbitration?

(c) Will the Petitioners’ submissions assist in the determination of a
factual or legal issue related to the arbitration by bringing a
different perspective or particular knowledge to the issues on
which they wish to make submissions?

(d) Can the Petitioners’ submissions be received by the Tribunal
without causing prejudice to the disputing parties?

The burden is on each Petitioner to demonstrate that it meets the criteria. So far
as the first criterion is concerned, Canada does recognise that there is a public

interest in Chapter 11 disputes.

According to Canada, the Petitioners cannot introduce new issues and take the
case away from the disputing parties. There is no basis to accept submissions by
amici on jurisdictional issues for that would accord to the Petitioners the
substantive rights of NAFTA Parties under article 1128, which is beyond the
power of the Tribunal. In any event on that issue they have no particular or
unique expertise beyond that of the disputing parties and the Tribunal. The
Petitioners’ concerns about the application of the UNCITRAL Rules and the New
York Convention are beyond the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. And there is no basis or

reason for receiving submissions from them on the place of arbitration.

Canada avers that to avoid prejudice to the disputing parties, any amicus
submissions should be written so as to minimise the burden on the disputing
parties and avoid disrupting the arbitration. For example, in addition to being
limited to issues raised by the disputing parties, the briefs should not exceed 20
pages. Finally, in accordance with procedural equality and fairness the disputing

parties should be given the opportunity to respond to amicus briefs.

55.

56.

57.

58.

As indicated (para 9 above), the United States of America joins Canada in the
view that the Tribunal is authorised to accept written submissions from third

parties as amici curiae.

Mexico, by contrast, submits that NAFTA does not authorise this Tribunal to
accept unsolicited submissions, such as amicus briefs. It points out that while the
power of a court to receive amicus briefs is well recognised in the law of Canada
and the United States of America it is not recognised under Mexican law.
Concepts or procedures alien to its legal tradition and which were not agreed to
in Section B should not be imported into NAFTA dispute settlement proceedings
and set a precedent for cases where Mexico is the disputing party. Even if the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules are silent on the matter or, as the Methanex
Tribunal found, Article 15 authorises a tribunal to conduct the arbitration so as to
accept such submissions, in Mexico’s view, the absence of express language in
the international treaty means that the Tribunal cannot take it upon itself to

authorize actions that sovereign States party to the Treaty did not authorise.

Mexico disagrees with the Methanex Tribunal’s conclusion that allowing a third
party to make an amicus submission could fall within its procedural powers over
the conduct of the arbitration within the general scope of article 15(1) of the
UNCITRAL rules. The acceptance of amicus briefs under article 15(1) is beyond
the jurisdiction of a Tribunal because it could oblige the disputing parties to
respond to such arguments. Thus, the grant of an apparently minor procedural
right could create a substantive legal issue in dispute. Mexico considers that
nothing in the NAFTA nor in the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules restrains a
disputing party such as Canada in this case from consulting parties such as the
petitioners and adopting their views as its own arguments in order to support its
case. In fact, Mexico itself has done this in cases in which it has been the
respondent. It completes its submission by emphasising the implications of

articles 1128 and 1133.

In their response, the Petitioners reaffirm their initial submissions and state that

the provisions of Mexican law referred to by Mexico are relevant only if they

reflect general principles of law, international custom or some other source of

international law which the Tribunal is obliged to consider under article 1131(1).

The Tribunal’s opinion and conclusion on the participation of amici curiae

59.

60.

61.

The submission by Mexico raises a threshold issue : does the Tribunal have any
power at all to allow third parties to participate in these proceedings? The
Tribunal has already ruled that they cannot participate as parties to the

proceedings. But is a lesser, amicus curiae role, permitted?

As all those making submissions agree, the answer is to be found in the powers
conferred by article 15(1), read of course in its context. Those powers are limited
to matters of procedure and they are constrained by other relevant rules and
NAFTA provisions and by the principles of equality and fairness. They cannot
be used to turn the dispute the subject of the arbitration into a different dispute,
for instance by adding a new party to the arbitration. Rather, the powers are to be
used to facilitate the Tribunal’s process of inquiry into, understanding of, and
resolving, that very dispute which has been submitted to it in accordance with the

consent of the disputing parties.

Is it within the scope of article 15(1) for the Tribunal to receive submissions
offered by third parties with the purpose of assisting the Tribunal in that process?
The Tribunal considers that it is. It is part of its power to conduct the arbitration
in such manner as it considers appropriate. As the Methanex Tribunal said, the
receiving of such submissions from a third person is not equivalent to making
that person a party to the arbitration. That person does not have any rights as a
party or as a non-disputing NAFTA Party. It is not participating to vindicate its
rights. Rather, the Tribunal has exercised its power to permit that person to make
the submission. It is a matter of its power rather than of third party right. The
rights of the disputing Parties are not altered (although in exercise of their
procedural rights they will have the rights to respond to any submission) and the

legal nature of the arbitration remains unchanged.

62.

63.

64.

65.

We do not see articles 1128 and 1133 of NAFTA as standing in the way of that
power. The first is concerned with the rights of NAFTA Parties to participate, if
in a limited way, and not with the power of the Tribunal to allow third parties to
participate. And the second is about the power of the Tribunal to seek the
assistance of independent experts on specialised factual matters. The
contribution of an amicus might cover such ground, but is likely to cover quite
distinct issues (especially of law) and also to approach those issues from a

distinct position.

We consider that article 15(1) supports a power to allow submissions by amici

curiae.

In support of that conclusion, we call attention to the practice mentioned by the
Methanex Tribunal of the Iran — US Claims Tribunal and the WTO Appellate
Body which supports a power (but no duty) to receive third party submissions :
Iran v United States case A/15 Award No. 63 — A/15 —FT; 2 Iran— US CTR 40,
43; and Hot Rolled Lead and Carbon Steel, order of the Appellate Body of the
WTO. It is true that in contentious cases in the International Court of Justice
only states and in certain circumstances public international organisations may
have access to the Court (the latter only to provide information relevant to cases
before it.) But that limit appears to result directly from the wording of articles
34, 35 and 61-64 of the Statute of the Court which carefully regulate those
matters as well as from the practice under them extending over several decades;
see Shabtai Rosenne The Law and Practice of International Court, 1920-

1996(1997) chs 10 and 26.

We do not see as decisive for the existence of the power in article 15 the presence
or absence of amicus rules in the domestic law of the NAFTA Parties. The
matter is to be determined under international law, especially NAFTA
incorporating the UNCITRAL rules. Nor do we see the existence of the power as
trenching on the rights of the NAFTA Parties. To repeat, the particular matter
which is subject to arbitration remains unchanged. The disputant parties’ rights
remain unchanged. In particular their rights to fairness and equal treatment under

article 15(1) remain and the power of the Tribunal to control the arbitral process,

within the limits placed on it by NAFTA and other relevant rules, also provides
safeguards. The Tribunal now turns to those provisions, bearing in mind the
character of the dispute and issues and the wider public interest in them, as well

as the submissions supporting greater openness in Chapter 11 proceedings.

Relevant provisions of NAFTA and the UNCITRAL rules

66.

67.

68.

We have already said that articles 1128 and 1133 of NAFTA do not preclude the
existence of a power under article 15(1) to allow a third party to make amicus
submissions. Depending on the possible scope of a proposed amicus submission
they might however be relevant to the exercise of the discretion in a particular

case.

The relevant provision of the UNCITRAL rules to which attention is given in the
submissions is article 25(4) under which hearings are in camera unless the parties
agree otherwise. They have not so agreed. The provision does not however
prevent the Tribunal receiving written submissions. But it does prevent third
parties or their representatives attending the hearings in the absence of both

parties agreeing.

Next there is the difficult question of the confidentiality of the pleadings and
other documents generated in the course of the proceeding including those
identified in the Petition (see para I(iii) above). The privacy of the hearing is
perhaps to be distinguished from the confidentiality or availability of documents.
Under Chapter 11 and the UNCITRAL Rules provision is made for the
communication of pleadings, documents and evidence to the other disputing
party, the other NAFTA Parties, the Tribunal and the Secretariat — and to no one
else. The matter is also subject to any agreement between the parties or order in
respect of confidentiality. That issue has yet to be resolved. While principles of
transparency may support the release of some of the documentation, that is not a
matter which can be the subject of a general ruling. Some documentation may be
available in the public domain, through any agreement or confidentiality order

that might be made, or otherwise lawfully.

The requirement of equality and of the full opportunity of parties to present their case

69. The requirement of equality and the parties’ right to present their cases do limit

The

70.

71.

the power of the Tribunal to conduct the arbitration in such manner as it
considers appropriate. That power is to be used not only to protect those rights of
the parties, but also to investigate and determine the matter subject to arbitration
in a just, efficient and expeditious manner. The power of the Tribunal to permit
amicus submissions is not to be used in a way which is unduly burdensome for
the parties or which unnecessarily complicates the Tribunal process. The
Tribunal envisages that it will place limits on the submissions to be made in
writing in terms for instance of the length. The third parties would not have the
opportunity to call witnesses (given the effect of article 25(4)) with the result that
the disputing parties would not face the need to cross-examine them or call
contradictory evidence. The parties would also be entitled to have the

opportunity to respond to any such submissions.

Tribunal’s assessment

The Tribunal returns to the emphasis which the Petitioners, with considerable
cogency, have placed both on the important public character of the matters in
issue in this arbitration and on their own real interest in these matters. It recalls
as well the emphasis placed on the value of greater transparency for proceedings
such as these. Such proceedings are not now, if they ever were, to be equated to
the standard run of international commercial arbitration between private parties.
The Petitioners have made out a case for their being permitted to make written
submissions on appropriate matters as determined, on application, by the
Tribunal. One governing consideration will be whether the Petitioners are likely
to be able to provide assistance beyond that provided by the disputing parties.
The Tribunal will also have the power to fix conditions for their exercise of that

opportunity. One likely condition is on the length of the written submissions.

The Tribunal does not consider that among the matters on which it is appropriate
for the Petitioners to make submissions are questions of jurisdiction and the place

of arbitration. On both, the parties are fully able to present the competing

72.

contentions and in significant degree have already done so. In any event, it is for
the respondent to take jurisdictional points and the partics themselves have the
power to fix the place of the arbitration by agreement between them. The
Tribunal does not consider that any other proccdural matters of which it is aware
should be the subject of amicus submissions.

The circumstances and the detail of the making of any amicus submissions would
be the subject of consultation with the parties.

The Tribunal’s order

73.

The Tribunal declares that it has power to accept written amicus briefs from the
Petitioners. It will consider receiving them at the merits stage of the arbitration
following consultation with the parties, exercising its discretion in the way
indicated in this decision and in accordance with relevant international judicial

practice, In all other respects the Petitions are rejected.

for the Tribunal
17.October 2001

 

