 

 

BETWEEN

UNITED PARCEL SERVICE OF AMERICA INC

AND

GOVERNMENT OF CANADA °

 

AWARD ON JURISDICTION

 

 

THE TRIBUNAL:

Dean Ronald A Cass, Arbitrator
L Yves Fortier CC, QC, Arbitrator
Justice Kenneth Keith, President

Eloise Obadia, Secretary to the Tribunal

22 November 2002

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS Para NO

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The p di 1
The parties 6
The dispute in brief 10
Canada's chall to jurisdicti 13,
Jurisdiction over  dispules and in particular over investor CLAIMS wiassessessssesssannnssnneZd
Basis for di jurisdictional disp 30
A h to i 39
Relationship between chapter 11 and chapter 15... sssatesacenranensessseeennsse A]
of - article 1105. 71
Anticompetitive and article 1102 100
Publ i 104
(i) The cultural ind P 106
Gi) The i r Mz
Gii) Conclusi 114
Taxation 116
American subsidiaries of the investor.
Mini qui of pleading 123
Conclusi 134

 

Appendix 1; Amended Statement of Claim
Appendix 2 ; Representatives attending the hearing

 

The proceedings

1. United Parcel Service of America, Inc (UPS or the Investor) has brought a
claim against the Government of Canada (Canada) alleging that Canada has breached
its obligations under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA or
Agreement) with the result that it and its subsidiaries have suffered damage. Canada
challenges the jurisdiction of the Tribunal over significant parts of the claim as
elaborated in the Amended Statement of Claim (ASC or Claim, set out in Appendix
}). This Award rules on that challenge.

2. The ASC was filed on 30 November 2001, after the Tribunal had ruled in a
decision given on 17 October 2001 that Canada’s Notice of Motion objecting to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal under the original Statement of Claim be addressed at that
stage of the proceedings, that is before Canada was required to file ils Statement of
Defence,

 

Fax set ay nee seeneen ena ane ote swim ATE Ger ar ye ae ea as

3. In accordance with the timetable fixed by the Tribunal on 30 December
2001, Canada filed its memorial and reply memorial and UPS its counter memorial
and rejoinder memorial between 14 February 2002 and 19 April 2002. Mexico and
the United States of America then made written submissions under article 1128 of
NAFTA, and UPS and Canada responded to those submissions on 21 May 2002.

4, The hearing on jurisdiction was held on 29 and 30 July 2002 in Washington
DC, with the assistance of the Secretariat of the International Centre for the
Settlement of Investment Disputes which the Tribunal has appointed to administer the
arbitration. Ms Eloise Obadia, counsel at ICSID, acted as Secretary to the Tribunal.
The representatives of the parties who appeared at the hearing are listed in Appendix
2. Oral submissions were made on behalf of Canada by Donald Rennie, Patrick
Bendin, Michael Peirce, Sylvie Tabet and Alan Willis (Department of Foreign Affairs
and International Trade, Department of Justice, Trade Law Bureau) and on behalf of
UPS by Michael Carroli, QC (Davis & Company) and Barry Appleton (Appleton &
Associates),

5. Mexico and the United States, which were also represented at the hearing,
requested the opportunity under article 1128 to make written submissions relating to
issues conceming the interpretation of the Agreement arising out of the oral
submissions made by the disputing parties, The Tribunal agreed to the requests and
fixed a timetable. In accordance with the timetable, Mexico and the United States
made their post hearing submissions on 23 August 2002 and Canada and the Investor
made their replies on 3 September 2002.

The parties

6. UPS is incorporated under the Jaws of the State of Delaware. Its Claim
tefers to four wholly owned US Subsidiaries — UPS Internet Services, Inc, UPS
Worldwide Forwarding, Inc, United Parcel Service, Inc (New York), and United
Parcel Service, Inc (Ohio) (US Subsidiaries), UPS also owns United Parcel Service
Canada Limited (UPS Canada or the Investment), a company organized under the
laws of Ontario.

  

 

Hans

 

1. UPS Caneda provides courier and small package delivery and assorted
services and secure electronic communication services both throughout Canada and,
with UPS and its related companies (including the US Subsidiaries), worldwide.

8. Canada Post Corporation (Canada Post) is a Crown corporation established
in 1981 under the Canada Post Corporation Act. According to the Act, Canada Post is
an “agent of Her Majesty in right of Canada” and an “institution of the Government of
Canada”. Under the Act, Canada Post has the sole and exclusive privilege of
collecting, transmitting and delivering first class mail letters to addressees within
Canada. The privilege is subject to certain exceptions. With the approval of the
Government of Canada, it may make regulations which, among other things, prescribe
what is a letter and determine postal rates.

9 Canada Post also operates in the non monopoly postal services market in
Canada and in that market it is in competition with UPS Canada.

The dispute in brief

10. At the centre of UPS's Claim are its allegations of anticompetitive conduct
by Canada and Canada Post in the non monopoly postal services market and of
Canada’s failure to ensure that such conduct did not occur, Its ASC summarises
conclusions reached by a Commission appointed in 1995 by Canada to carry out an
independent review of Canada Post and its mandate, including its non monopoly
business activities, and Canada’s role in supervising and recognising those activities
(para 25). According to the Investor’s summary, the Commission concluded in late
1996 that Canada Post was an unregulated government monopoly engaged in
unrestrained competition with the private sector and in particular that

a. Canada Post's practices raised serious concerns of fairness and
appropriateness;

b, Canada Post is not subject to any effective accountability
mechanisms and lacks the necessary supervision 16 ensure that
its actions are fully consistent with the public interest;

c. Canada Post has resisted repeated calls to adopt a satisfactory

accounting system that identifies actual costs and revenues for
specific products and continues to carry out its competitive

4

 

 

Fax sent by
eae

 

activities on the basis of costs accounting processes that lack
transparency;

d. Canada Post is an unfair competitor in ways detrimental to
private sector companies in the non-monopolized postal
market in Canada;

e. Canada Post’s misallocation of costs constitutes a form of
cross-subsidization;

f. Canada Post's ability to leverage a network built-up with
public funds on the strength of a government granted
monopoly gives it a pricing advantage over competitors that is
seriously unfair;

g. Canada Post has developed a reputation. as a “vicious
competitor” whose predatory practices have led corporations
to refrain from criticisms for fear of retaliation, and

h. the competitive activities of Canada Post, based as they are on
the foundation of the corporation’s postal monopoly and of the
network it has built with public funds, are incompatible with
basic principles of fairness.

i. Canada, on 23 April 1997, determined not to implement measures to redress
those findings.

12. UPS, in the overview in its Claim, alleges that. by virtue of the facts it sets
out: ‘

14. _.,. Canada has breached NAFTA Articles 1102 and 1105, and
NABTA Articles 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2), all in a manner such
that UPS is entitled to bring this claim for compensation under
Section B of Chapter 11 of NAFTA. More particularly,
Canada has:

a, Breached its obligations under NAFTA Article 1102 by
not providing UPS and UPS Canada with the best
treatment available to domestic competitors in the Non
Monopoly Postal Services Market, and in particular, to
Canada Post;

b. Breached its obligations under NAFTA Articles
1502(3)(a) and 1503(2) by failing to ensure that Canada
Post not act in a manner inconsistent with Canada’s
obligations under the NAFTA; and

 

 

 

Fax sent by pete ne ~

   

c. Breached its obligations under NAFTA Article 1105 by
failing to accord UPS Canada treatment in accordance
with international law including fair and equitable
treatment.

Canada's challenge to jurisdiction

13. Canada’s jurisdictional challenge relates primarily to (b) and (c). Its”
principal jon is that anticompetitive behaviour and its regul; and control do

not fall within. the scope of articles 1105, 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2), read with the
jurisdictional provisions of article 1116(1)(b). Article 1116 enables an investor of a

 

Party to submit to arbitration a claim that another Party has breached certain
obligations under Chapters 11A and 15:

1, An investor of a Party may submit to arbitration under this
Section a claim that another Party has breached an obligation
under:

(a) Section A fof chapter 11] or Article 1503(2) (State
Enterprises), or

{b) Article 1502(3)(a) (Monopolies and State Enterprises)
where the monopoly has acted in a manner inconsistent
with the Party’s obligations under Section A.

and that the investor has mcurred loss or damage by reason of, or
arising out of, that breach.

2. An Investor may not make a claim if more than three years have
elapsed from the date on which the investor first acquired, or
should have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach and
knowledge that the investor has incurred Joss or damage.

14, Canada in its Memorial sets out the issues in its challenge to jurisdiction as -
follows:

@) whether the UPS claim under paragraphs 16(f) and (g), 22, 23,
27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32 and 34 of the Amended: Statement of
Claim for violations of Article 1501(1) and Article 1502(3)(d) of
the NAFTA should be dismissed as outside the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal;

Gi) | whether the UPS claim under paragraph 18 of the Amended
Statement of Claim that the Publications Assistance Program
breaches NAFTA Article 1102 should be dismissed as outside
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal;

 

 

reir ent

Gil) whether the claim under paragraph 33(a) relating to the Goods
and Services Tax (GST) should be struck as taxation measures
exempt under Article 2103; and

(iv) whether the UPS Amended Statement of Claim should be struck
in whole or.in part, for failing to satisfy NAFTA requirements
including the failure to establish:

{a) that the investor's non-Canadian subsidiaries or related
foreign companies are investments in the territory of
Canada; and

(b) all alleged breaches of obligations under Chapter 11 and
the damages associated therewith.
In relation to (i) Canada also identified para 33(b) at the hearing, In relation to (iii), as
will appear, UPS abandoned this pleading at the hearing.

15, It is convenient to indicate at this stage Canada’s obligations under the four
provisions of NAFTA which UPS invokes. Articles 1102 and 1105 appear in Chapter
11, headed Investment. Asticle 1102, headed National Treatment, requires each
Party, here Canada, to accord to the investors of another Party, here UPS, and their
investments, treatment no less favourable than it accords 1o its own investments with
respect, among other things, to the conduct and-operation of investors and their
investments. Article 1105, headed Minimum Standard of Treatment, requires each
Party “to accord investments of investors of another Party treatment in accordance

 

with international law, including fair and itabli and full y ‘ion and
security”.

16. Articles 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2) appear in Chapter 15, headed Competition
Policy, Monopolies and State Enterprises. Article 1502 is concerned with
monopolies (both privately owned and governmental) and Article 1503 with state
enterprises. (A government monopoly, like Canada Post, accordingly falls under both
provisions.) The two provisions cited require each Party, here Canada, to ensure
“through regulatory control, administrative supervision or the application of other
measures”, that their monopolies and state enterprises do not breach certain
obligations, (Paragraph 14(b) of the ASC does not repeat the quoted phrase.) More
specifically, each Party shall ensure that any monopoly (private or public)

acts in a manner that is not inconsistent with the Party’s obligations
under this Agreement wherever such a monopoly exercises any

 

 

      

regulatory, administrative or other governmental authority that the
Party has delegated to it in connection with the monopoly good or
service, such as the power to grant import or export licenses,
approve commercial transactions or impose quotas, fees or other
charges. (article 1502(3)(a))

and any state enterprise

acts in a manner that is not inconsistent with the Party’s obligations
under Chapters Eleven (Investment) and Fourteen (Financial
Services} wherever such enterprise exercises any regulatory,
administrative or other governmental authority that the Party has
delegated to it, such as the power to expropriate, grant licenses,
approve commercial transactions or impose quotas, fees or other
charges. (article 1503(2))
17, The emphasised words indicate the differences between the two provisions.
‘What is common to them is that if a Party has delegated governmental authority to a
monopoly or a state enterprise, the Party is to ensure, putting it broadly, that the
monopoly acts consistently with the Party's obligations under the Agreement (as a
whole) and the state enterprise acts consistently with the Party’s obligations under
chapters 1] and 14. That is to say a Party cannot avoid its obligations by delegating
its authority to bodies outside the core government. In chapter 14, Financial Services,
article 1402 similarly obliges a Party which requires financial institutions of another
Party to be subject to a self regulatory organisation to ensure that the organisation
observes the obligations of chapter 14.

18, The other provisions of articles 1502(3) and 1503 are not directed to
exercises by monopolies or enterprises of authorities delegated to them by a Party
which breach NAFTA obligations. Rather they focus on the actions of the
monopolies and state enterprises in their commercia] activities. Both require each
Party to ensure that the bodies do not discriminate, Article 1503(3) relating to state
enterprises reads as follows:
Hach Party shall ensure that any state enterprise that it maintains or
establishes accords non-discriminatory tweatment in the sale of its
goods or services to investments in the Party's territory of investors of
another Party.
19, The related provision for monopolies appears in article 1502(3)(c) which we
set out with paras (b) and (d):

 

AMS, S202 8g so eo.

 

Fax sent by oh

mE

WWE eer neroe servos cys

3. Each Party shall ensure, through regulatory control, administrative
supervision or the application of other measures, that any
privately-owned monopoly that it designates and any government
monopoly that jt maintains or designates:

(b) except to comply with any terms of its designation that are not
inconsistent with subparagraph © or @), acts solely in
with in its p or
sale of the monopoly good or service i in the relevant market,
including with regard 1o price, quality, availability,
marketability, transportation and other terms and conditions of
purchase or sale;

(©) provid discrimi y brad of
investors, to goods and to service providers of another Party in
its purchase or sale of the monopoly good or service in the
relevant market; and

 

 

{d) does not use its monopoly position to engage, either directly
or indirectly, including through its dealings with its parent, its
subsidiary or other enterprise with common ownership, in
anticompetitive practices in a non-monopolized market in its
territory that adversely affect an investment of an investor of
another Party, including through the discriminatory provision
of the monopoly good or service, cross-subsidization or

 

predatory conduct,
20, Those provisions impose substantive obligations on the State Parties. They
do not set up p di for the tution of disp arising out of the

provisions. In particular, they do not themselves enable an investor to bring
Proceedings against a Party. We now turn to the jurisdictional provisions.

Jurisdiction over disputes and in particular over investor claims

21. The Agreement includes among its objectives, along with substantive
Matters (such as eliminating barriers to trade and promoting conditions of fair
competition within the free trade area), the creation of effective procedures for the
resolution of disputes (article 102(1)(e)).

22, In terms of article 102, that objective, along with the other objectives, is
“elaborated more specifically through [the] principles and rules [of the Agreement]".
This is not the occasion for a full scale account of the procedures for the resolution of

 

 

 

Fax sent t by

 

disputes elaborated in the Agreement, but some features of the procedures may be
highlighted.

23, Some are to operate at the national level and are designed to protect the
rights of nationals of the Pasties doing business in, or affected by the actions of,
another Party, for instance in respect of intellectual property (eg articles 1714-1717)
and more generally in respect of administrative procedures, review and appeal
{articles 1804-1805). Other procedures are binational, as with the panels which
teplace judicial review of final antidumping and countervailing duty determinations
(chapter 19), Chapter 20 contains a general set of provisions for the settlement of
disputes between the Parties, through consultations; good offices, conciliation and
mediation by the Free Trade Commission (a body comprising Cabinet level
representatives of the Parties or their delegates); and arbitration. The relevant part of
Chapter 20 begins in this way :
The Parties shall at all times endeavor to agree on the interpretation and
application of this Agreement, and shall make every attempt through
cooperation and consultations to arrive at a mutually satisfactory
resolution of any matter that might affect its operation. (article 2003)
2, Those general provisions are excluded by particular provisions of the
Agreement, such as chapter 19 relating to antidumping or countervailing duty matters
(article 2004), A limit relevant to the subject matter of this case appears in the first
provision of chapter 15 concerning competition policy, monopolies and_ state
enterprises. Article 150) requires Parties to proscribe anticompetitive business
conduct. The effectiveness of the measures they take may be the subject of
consultation between the Parties, but no Party, the article says expressly, may have
recourse to dispute settlement under the Agreement for any matter arising under that
Particular provision,

25, To turn to the present situation, it is section B of chapter 11 that provides for
the settlement of disputes between a Party and an investor of another Party and which

_ UPS has invoked. Article 1115 states the purpose of the section, beginning with a

reference to the State — State settlement procedures of chapter 20:

Without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the Parties under-
Chapter Twenty (institutional Arrangements and Dispute Settlement
this Section i hanism for the settl of

RAs cer aivne eck rg.

ser eo

Fax sent
ones

by

 

Me ye eer aaroe 4e-pa

investment disputes that assures both equal treatment among investors
of the Parties: in accordance with the principle of international
reciprocity and due process before an impartial tribunal.
The particular provision of section B of chapter 11 which UPS invokes is article 1116,
set out earlier. (para 13),

26, Article 1117 contains a virtually identical provision for claims by an investor
of a Party on behalf of an enterprise that the investor owns or controls. Other
provisions of section B b the disp ut process, hudi

arbitration, Article 1120 gives the disputing investor a choice among arbitration
regimes. In exercise of that choice, UPS submitted its claim under the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules. Those Rules are relevant to a submission made by Canada about
the claimed inadequacy of the ASC, a matter considered later. Article 1131, headed

Governing Law, is also considered later.

27. Those two provisions apart, the only significant issues in this case relating to
Section B of chapter 11 arise from article 1116(1) itself, Under that provision the
investor has three possible heads of claim:

(1) The Party has breached an obligation under Section A — here
UPS claims that Canada has breached article 1102 (national
treatment) and article 1105 (minimum standard of treatment),

(2) The Party has breached an obligation under article 1503(2) — here
UPS claims that Canada has breached its obligation by failing to.
ensure that Canada Post not act ijn a manner inconsistent with
Canada's obligations under NAFTA.

(3) The Party has breached an obligation under article 1502(3){a)
where the monopoly has acted in a manner inconsistent with the
Party’s obligations under Section A — here UPS claims that
Canada has breached its obligations by failing to ensure that
Canada Post not act in a manner inconsistent with Canada’s
obligations under NAFTA.

Fa t97 20.

Fax sent by

HO ant cerdiroe tee

28. At this stage it is enough (o note two matters about UPS's pleading —

(1) Article 1503(2) does not refer fo the Party's obligations under the
Agreement in general, but only to those under chapters 11 and 14
(the latter of which is not relevant in this case).

(2) While article 1502(3)(a) does refer “to the Party’s obligations
under this Agreement”, arlicle 1116(1)(b) enables an Investor to
submit to arbitration a claim that the Party has breached article
1502(3)(e) “where the monopoly has acted in a manner
inconsistent with the Party's obligations under Section A [of
chapter 117’. On the face of it at least, the State — State
jurisdiction under chapter 20 is wider, not being subject to that
final qualifying clause. ‘

29. It will be recalled that Canada’s major challenge is to the jurisdiction of this
Tribunal over the anticompetitive behaviour alleged by UPS. It says that UPS cannot
bring that behaviour within articles 1105, 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2), read, in the case of
article 1562(3)(a), with the additional requirement of article 1116(1)(b) which is
invoked as a basis of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

Basis for determining jurisdictional disputes

30. International judicial practice has long recognized that challenges to
jurisdiction may be able to be determined in advance of the hearing of the merits of
the claim. So article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides:
In general, the arbitral tribunal should rule on a plea concerning its
jurisdiction as a preliminary question. However, the arbitral tribunat
may proceed with the arbitration and rule on such a plea in their final
award,
31. This power both supports the efficient and effective administration of the
arbitral process and reflects the fact that partics, notably State parties, to arbitration
processes are subject to jurisdiction only to the extent they have consented,

32. What is the test to be applied to resolving disputes about jurisdiction? The
partics were agreed from the outset of the written submissions on one matter. For the

12

ag

 

 

nase,

 

purpose of Canada’s challenge to jurisdiction, the facts alleged in the ASC (such as
those quoted in paras 10 above and 72-76 and 119 below) are to be accepted as
correct, While Canada accepts that proposition, it does contend however that the
legal inferences to be drawn from the facts are another matter : the Tribunal must be

free Lo decide questions of law which are relevant to its jurisdiction.

33. In the course of their written argument the parties formulated the test the
Tribunal is to apply in determining jurisdictional disputes in various ways. They
made extensive references io decisions of the International Court of Justice and of
.NAFTA tribunals, as well as of other wibunals. The differences between their
positions appeared to narrow through that written process and, at the oral hearing,
counsel for UPS accepted the test stated by Canada in its Reply Memorial:

[The Tribunal] must conduct a prima facie analysis of the NAFTA

obligations, which UPS seeks to invoke, and determine whether the

facts alleged are capable of constituting a violation of these

obligations. (original emphasis)
34, That formulation rightly makes plain that a claimant party’s mere assertion
that a dispute is within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is not conclusive. It is the Tribunal
that must decide. The formulation also importantly recognizes that the Tribunal must
‘address itself to the particular jurisdictional provisions invoked. There is a contrast,
for instance, between a relatively general grant of jurisdiction over “investment
disputes” and the more particularised grant in article 1116 which is to be read with the
provisions to which it refers and which are voked by UPS. Those provisions impose
“obligations”, as the test proposed by Canada and accepted by UPS indicates.

35. The International Court of Justice in the Case concerning Oil Platforms
(islamic Republic of Iran v United States of America).1996 IC} Reports 803, para 16
puts the test in this way:

[The Court) must ascertain whether the violations of the Tyeaty ...
pleaded by Iran do or do not fall within the provisions of the Treaty and
whether, as a consequence, the dispute is one which the Court has
juri ratione P to Article XXI,
paragraph 2.

 

That paragraph gave the Court jurisdiction over any dispute between the Parties about
“the interpretation or application” of the Treaty.

 

 

 

Fax sent by
een

 

PAR, 4601486 1éior ory: lpratt

36. The reference to the facts alleged being “capable” of constituting a violation

of the invoked obligations, as opposed to their “falling within” the provisions, may be

Of little or no consequence. The test is of course provisional in the sense that the facts
alleged. have still to be established at the merits stage. But any ruling about the legal
meaning of the jurisdictional provision, for instance about its outer limits, is binding - - -
on the parties.

37. Accordingly, the Tribunal’s task is 1o discover the meaning and particularly
the scope of the provisions which UPS invokes as conferring jurisdiction, Do the
facts alleged by UPS fall within those provisions; are the facts capable, once proved,
of constituting breaches of the obligations they state? It may be that those
formulations would differ in their effect in some circumstances but in the present case
that appears not to be so.

38, Before we turn to those provisions we consider briefly the approach we
should adopt to interpreting the relevant provisions of the Agreement.

Approach ¢o interpretation

39. Paragraph (2) of article 102 of the Agreement — the slatement of objectives —
directs
The Parties [to] interpret and apply the provisions of this Agreement in

the light of its objectives set ovt in paragraph 1 [mentioned in para 21
above] and in accordance with applicable rules of international law,

Article 1131(1) gives a similar direction to this Tribunal:

A Tribunal established under this Section shall decide the issues in
dispute jn accordance with this Agreement and applicable rules of
international law.

(Article 1131 (2) is set out in para 41 below.)

40. The “applicable rules of international law” include the “general rule of
interpretation” of treaties sct out in article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties along with article 32 which states supplementary means of interpretation.
Those provisions, as UPS and Canada agree and as ample international and national
authority confirms, state customary international law; see eg Oi! Platforms 1996 ICJ

14

Fax sent by

AE osne eer tarue tere ag:
PEEPS ees

 

‘Reports 803, para 23; and Jn the Matter of Tariffs applied by Canada to certain US-
origin Agricultural Products Final Report of the NAFTA Arbitral Panel, December 2,
1996 at 33, para 119, citing IC] and WTO Appellate Body decisions to the same
effect (n107). UPS made passing reference to preparatory work of NAFTA (the
travaux préparatoires), the subject of article 32 of the Vienna Convention.. On the
record before us there is no indication that there are travaux préparatoires that would
affect the interpretation of the relevant provisions of NAFTA, Accordingly, it is
sufficient for present purposes to set out article 31;

Article 31 General rule of interpretation

1, A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the
ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose.

2, The context for the purpose of the ees ofa treaty shall

ise, in addition to the text, includi and

‘P
annexes;

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made
between all the parties in connexion with the
conclusion of the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties
in connexion with the conclusion of the treaty and
accepted by the other parties as an instrument related
to the treaty.

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties
regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the
application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty
which establishes the agreement of the parties
regarding its interpretation;

(c) - any relevant rules of international law applicable in the
relations between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established
that the parties so intended.
That general rule, as we understand it, requires neither a broad nor a restrictive
approach,

41, One particular feature of the interpretation process under NAFTA arises
from one of the functions of the Free Trade Commission. Under article 2001(2) the
Commission shall;

15

 

Fax sent by

A4-PAS 22741782 1.

 

2 Pet ure

   

(c) resolve disputes that may arise regarding [NAFTA's]
interpretation or application,

Under article 1131(2)

An interpretation by the Commission of a provision of this Agreement

shall be binding on a Tribunal established under this Section.
42, Those provisions may be seen in the context of the first article of the general
dispute settlement provisions of NAFTA, article 2003 (para 23 above), and more
broadly in the context provided by the customary international law of the “authentic”
interpretation of treaties, declared now in para (3) of article 31 of the Vienna
Convention. Those aspects of the approach to the interpretation of the NAFTA
provisions are essentially agreed between the patties. :

43. Where the parties appear to disagree is on the relative balance and
importance of the components of article 31. So UPS, referring to a number of
decisions of NAFTA tribunals, stresses the importance of interpreting the Agreement
in light of its object and purpose. The very first chapter 20 Panel for instance said that
“any interpretation adopted by [it] must ... promote rather than inhibit the NAFTA's
objectives” (In the Matter of Tariffs Applied by Canada to certain US — Origin
Agricultural Products Final report of the Panel, December 2, 1996 at 34, para 122).
UPS also challenges an Interpretation af article 1105 issued by the Commission under
article 2001(2)(c).

44, Canada does accept that what is required is an examination of the treaty in
the light of the entirety of the Agreement, including its preamble and objectives. It
contends however that UPS is elevating the objectives of the treaty into independent
legal obligations forming the basis for a claim and is relying on general objectives of
the treaty to contradict the plain words of the provisions read in their context. UPS
denies that it is asserting that a NAFTA objective is an independent basis for a claim; -
rather the objectives simply inform the interpretation of the substantive provisions of
articles 1102, 1105, 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2), and are part of the relevant context. Any
interpretation of those provisions must be undertaken having full regard for the
objective of investment promotion identified in article 102(1)(c), together with the
objective of trade liberalization.

xax_ sent py

 

 

45, The parties also disagree — or appear to — over the role that certain so called

Tules of interpretation (such as the “plain meaning” rule, ejusdem generis, noscitur a

soctis and expressio unius est exclusio alterius) might play.

46. . The “general rile” {the singular in that heading is deliberate) stated in article
31 of the Vienna Convention is at the center of the Tribunal’s task. We have to
interpret the relevant provisions in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of NAFTA in their context and in the light of its
objectives, particularly as stated in article 102. The differences between the parties
may be more of emphasis; they may be more apparent than real when we come to
give meaning to the provisions in dispute. We now tum to those provisions,

Relationship between chapter 11 and chapter 15

47, There are two interactions between chapter 11 and chapter 15. First, chapter
11 (article 1116(1)), which defines our jurisdiction, allows a claim by an investor for
certain violations of chapter 15. Second, the obligations of Parties under chapter 15
are in part dependent on obligations under chapter 11. This relationship is made
express in article 1503(2). That article requires Parties to ensure that their state
enterprises (when exercising certain delegated authority) act in a manner that is not
inconsistent with the Parties’ obligations under chapter 11 (and also chapter 14). This

_.48 one of two provisions of chapter 15 for which investor claims are specifically

permitted. Hence, the interaction of this provision together with chapter 11
essentially provides authorization for investors to challenge violations of chapter 11 in
lwo circumstances, A challenge can be brought by an investor when the violations of
chapter 11 obligations flow from the direct action of one of the Parties to NAFTA or
when they flow from. conduct of stale enterprises in effect acting in the place of a
Party, This much is agreed by both UPS and Canada.

48. Canada and UPS disagree, however, over the relationship for jurisdictional]
putposes between article 1502(3)(a) and chapter 11. Canada argues that the ©
telationship parallels that with respect to state enterprises. That is, Canada asserts that
investor claims under article 1502(3)(a) are permitted only to the extent that they
claim a failure of a Party to assure that a monopoly acts consistently with chapter 11.

HI-PHA 4er.irue 1e6iBl org:
| nantes see eee geen tae

 

aw as

 

 

This provides a backstop to the other two provisions, extending beyond direct actions
by a Party or by an enterprise that is owned or controlled by a Party to reach similar
actions by a private or government monopoly acting under authority delegated from
the government, Jn Canada’s view, that is all that article 1502(3)(a) provides.

49. UPS contends that jurisdiction over investor claims is not so limited. Rather,
UPS says, NAFTA confers jurisdiction on tribunals such as this one over claims
predicated on the violation of any NAFTA undertaking so long as two conditions are
salisfied, First, the investor must asserl a colorable violation of chapter 11; and,
second, the investor also must assert a violation of article 1502(3)(a). UPS takes the
position that those assertions, so long as they are sufficiently pleaded, permit an
investor to submit to arbitration claims that a Party has violated any NAFTA

not ficall Juded from i State arbi

50. The dispute wras on the particular language in articles 1502(3)(a) and
1116(1){b). Unlike article 1503(2), article 1502(3)(a) requires each Party to ensure
that their monopolies, when exercising certain delegated authority, act in a manner
that is not inconsistent with the Party’s obligations under the Agreement. The
language used in article 1502(3)(a) reaches the Parly’s obligations under NAFTA as a
whole and not only under chapter 11 or chapter 15 (or, as in article 1503(2), chapter
14).

51. The dispute settlement provision of article 1116(1)(b), however, qualifies the
grant of jurisdiction over claims of a breach by a Party of its obligations under article
1502(3)(a). It limits jurisdiction over these claims to cases “where the monopoly has
acted in a manner inconsistent with the Party’s obligations under section A, and the
investor has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach”.

52. UPS reads the language just quoted from article 1116(1)(b) as setting
conditions in the disjunctive. On this reading, once jurisdiction is established, for
instance by way of an alleged breach of both articles 1502(3)(a) and 1102 (for breach
of national treatment), the jurisdiction would also extend — by way of the general
reference in article 1502(3)(a) -- to NAFTA as a whole. Thus, a tribunal convened
under chapter 11 of NAFTA would have jurisdiction over an allegation of breach of,
say, article 1502(3)(d) based on cross subsidization or other anticompetitive acts alone

18

 

cy.

 

 

and not involving any breach of national treatnent or other violation of chapter 11.
UPS contends that, in this proceeding, our jurisdiction does extend to that additional
allegation. On this view, the alleged breach of article 1102 will have served the
purpose of opening the door to alleged breaches of any. provision of NAFTA,

53. Canada submits that UPS cannot bring other claims through this door, One
reason asserted by Canada is that anticompetitive conduct is excluded from the scope
of dispute resolution specifically in article 1501. This article does preclude recourse
to dispute settlement to challenge a Party’s failure “to adequately adopt or maintain
measures to proscribe anticompetitive business conduct.” UPS states that it is not
challenging any deficiency under article 1501 but instead is challenging conduct that,
even if it might be characterized as a violation of Canada’s obligation under that
article, also violates other NAFTA provisions, such as article 1502(3)(d), In the
course of the hearing counsel for Canada accepted that a single set of facis could
come within more than one provision, for instance within both para (a) and para (d) of
asticls 1502(3) — even if it was difficult to envisage such a set of facts. We
accordingly accept that a single set of facts can indeed be the basis for claims under
more than one provision.

34, Canada also contests UPS's reading of article 1116(1), asserting that it
Tequires a specific showing that the facts claimed come within the scope of the
limiting clause of article 1116(1)(b). Only conduct that violates article 1502(3)(a) and
also violates an obligation under chapter 11 is within the provision according to this
view. All other claims are excluded.

55. UPS responds that the text of NAFTA nowhere excludes anticompetitive
matters from investor-State jurisdiction and says that the objectives included in article
102 militate in favor of finding claims respecting these, matters within dispute
resolution jurisdiction, In particular, UPS points to the objectives of promoting
conditions of fair competition in the free trade area and creating effective procedures
for the resolution of disputes (articles 102(1)(b) and (e)), and the principles and rules
of national tf d-nati and
outset of the article.

stated at the

P

 

 

 

Hates cer dase

 

 

56. Given those objectives, principles and rules, UPS contends, an exclusion
from jurisdiction would have to be expressly stated. UPS does not find such an
exclusion in the terms of the Agreement, even though there are many places in the
Agreement where: such an exclusion logically could have been: expressed. . The
exclusion could have been stated in five places — in article 1112 which gives priority
to other provisions of the Agreement which conflict with chapter 11; in article 1108
which with voluminous annexes itemizes specific exemptions and reservations; in

article 1101 which states the scope of chapter 11; in chapter 15 itself; and in the

exceptions to, and exclusions from, NAFTA in chapter 21. In none of these was ,

anticompetitive behaviour excluded. Why, UPS asks, was that? It answers, because
that was not the intent of the drafters of NAFTA.

57. The same inference, says the Investor, is also to be drawn from note 43, 4
note to article 1501, which says that no investor may have recourse to investor-State
arbitration under the Investment chapter for any matter arising under article 1501.
Counsel for UPS assert that this note was necessary to prevent alleged breaches of
article 1501 from being actionable under chapter 11. If that is so, the NAFTA Parties’
failure to include a similar note to article 1502 must, UPS says, give rise to an
inference that investors may broadly contest violations of obligations imposed by
article 1502 in investor-State arbitration,

58. The Investor also emphasises that, had the drafters intended to exclude
certain claims from those that could be advanced under article 1502(3)(a), the
provision would have been drafted differently. Jt would not have imposed the very
broad obligation on each Party to ensure that the monopolies covered by the provision
act in a. manner that is not inconsistent with Party obligations under this Agreement.
Instead, it would have imposed a much narrower obligation on each Party.

59, Canada’s response to this point is supported by Mexico and the United
States. Canada says that while it agrees that its obligations as a Party under article
1502(3)(a) extend to the whale Agreement, the scope of investor-State jurisdiction is
another matter. That jurisdiction is conferred only in terms of article 1116(1})(b) and
that provision requires, if jurisdiction is to exist, that the monopoly allegedly act ina
manner inconsistent with the Party’s obligations under chapter 1JA. Questions of
compliance with other provisions of the Agreement may be subject to State-State

20

i Pg: 22/28

 

 

fax Seuy oy

 

dispute procedures including arbitration (subject to exceptions as in article 1501(3))
but not to investor-State arbitration. Any other reading would ignore the plain
limiting words of article 1116(1)(b).

60. Certainly, Canada is correct in stating that the. extent of substantive
obligation is one thing; the extent of jurisdiction quite another. Jurisdiction is
conferred by article 1116(1)(b) and is subject to its terms. Article 1116 concerning
investor-State disputes, like the similar article 1117, states the extent of what the
Parties have agreed to in respect of claims being submitted to arbitration against each
of them by an investor of another Party. Other provisions may shed light on this
article, bul substantive terms of other provisions will not necessarily state obligations
subject to dispute resolution unless they fall within the purview of article 1116.

61. The meaning of article 1116 is not clarified by a possible adverse inference
from note 43 1o article 1501 or by other exclusions and exceptions. The NAFTA
Parties quite plainly viewed article 1501 as a potentially open-ended obligation that
could be a basis for complaint in a wide array of settings. For that reason, although
adopting an obligation that could be addressed in State-State consultations, the Parties
expressly excepted article 1501 obligations from State-State dispute setllement
procedures (article 1501(3)). Note 43 evidences the drafters’ caution. NAFTA
authorises a broader scope for State-State arbitration than for investor-State arbitration
and nowhere confers express authorisation to bring claims respecting article 1501
under investor-State proceedings. The natural inference, then, would be that there is
no such jurisdiction; but, given the evident concerns over possible invocation of
article 1501 obligations, the drafters added a note to make plain that investor-State
arbitration also cannot be used 1o enforce this article.

62. Similarly, we are not persuaded by UPS's reading of article 1112, providing
for precedence of other chapters in the case of conflicis between their provisions and
chapter 11. There is no conflict between arlicle 1116(1) and chapter 15, in particular
articles 1501 and 1502(3)(d). Rather it is article 1116 that establishes investor-State
jurisdiction — a matter with which those substantive provisions of chapter 15 are not
concerned — and confers it in para (1)(b) by reference to article 1502(3)(a) and section
A of chapter 11, Whatever the contours of article 1116(1)(b), this is the provision that

confers jurisdicti ive terms elsewhere in the Ag do not di

 

2

 

Heent 4erlivez 1Zia@l Pg: 24728 —

the grant of jurisdiction even if they provide obligafions broader than the scope of
investor-State dispute resolution.

63, This is not to disagree with UPS’s statement that the grant of jurisdiction

must be interpreted - as must other provisions in the Agreement — in light of the
objectives in article 102(1) of promoting conditions of fair competition and creating
effective dispute resolution procedures. But, as article 102(1) says, the objectives are
“elaborated more specifically through its principles and rules”. The critical relevant

tule in this case is defined by article 1116(1)(b).

64, The relevant statement in arlicle 1116(1)(b) is that a claim by an investor can
be predicated on a Party’s failure to assure that a monopoly or state enterprise does
not act in a manner inconsistent with that State’s obligation under NAFTA “‘where the
monopoly has acted in a manner inconsistent with the Party’s obligations under
Section A [of chapter 11]... .”

65. The first word in the qualifying phrase quite plainly limits the Parties’
consent to investor-initiated actions. UPS reads that word as being synonymous with
“so long as” while Canada reads that word as synonymous with “only to the extent
that.” The other official texts of NAFTA, besides the English text, are in Spanish and
French. The words used in these versions are cuando (in the Spanish text) and
lorsque (in the French).

66. The most plausible reading of these texts is that the condition being stated is
a substantial, conjunctive limitation on the scope of jurisdiction rather than a
disjunctive condition. That is most consistent with the usual meaning of “where” and
“when (or its equivalents) when they are being used metaphorically. Typically, the
meaning would be the conjunctive reading asserted by Canada and the other Parties to
NAFTA.

67. Moreover, the reading urged by Canada also is more consistent with the
Structure of the remainder of the jurisdictional grant in 1116. That provision grants
investors the right to bring a claim for a violation of Section A of chapter 11 or a
violation of article 1503(2) (which incorporates a violation of chapter 11 (or chapter
14) as a precondition). Canada’s reading of 1116(1)(b) would allow investors to seek

22

fax sent oy} , ASA esdarHe etl org: “arze

the grant of jurisdiction even if they provide obligations broader than the scope of
investor-State dispute resolution.

63. This is not to disagree with UPS’s statement that the grant of jurisdiction
must be interpreted - as must other provisions in the Agreement — in light of the
objectives in article 102(1) of promating conditions of fair competition and creating
effective dispute resolution procedures. But, as arlicle 102(1) says, the objectives are
“elaborated more specifically through its principles and rules”. The critical relevant
tale in this case is defined by article 1116(1)(b).

64, The relevant statement in article 1116(1)(b) is that a claim by an investor can
be predicated on a Party’s failure to assure that a monopoly or state enterprise does
not act in a manner inconsistent with that State's obligation under NAFTA “where the
monopoly has acted in a manner inconsistent with the Party's obligations under
Section A fof chapter 11]... .”

65. The first word in the qualifying phrase quite plainly limits the Parties’
consent to investor-initiated actions. UPS reads that word as being synonymous with
“so long as” while Canada reads that word as synonymous with “only to the extent
that.” The other official texts of NAFTA, besides the English text, are in Spanish and
French. The words used in these versions are cuando (in the Spanish text) and
forsque (in the French).

66. The most plausible reading of these texts is that the condition being stated is
@ substantial, conjunctive limitation on the scope of jurisdiction rather than a
disjunctive condition, That is most consistent with the usual meaning of “where” and
“when” (or its equivalents) when they are being used metaphorically. Typically, the
meaning would be the conjunctive reading asserted by Canada and the other Parties to
NAFTA,

67. Moreover, the roading urged by Canada also is more consistent with the
structure of the remainder of the jurisdictional grant in 1116. That provision grants
investors the right to bring a claim for a violation of Section A of chapter 11 or a
violation of article 1503(2) (which incorporates a violation of chapter 11 (or chapter
14) as a precondition). Canada’s reading of 1116(1)(b) would allow investors to seek

22.

 

 

dispute resolution for a violation of 1502(3)(a) if the conduct that violates that
provision consists in failure to prevent conduct that violates an obligation of chapter
11A. In all three parts of this provision, then, a violation of chapter 11 is the
substantive failing to be addressed. Only the mechanism for the violation differs in

"the three parts, In one part, the Party assertedly violates that substantive obligation
directly, in the second part the Party acts through a state enterprise, and in the third
part through a monopoly sanctioned by the State.

68. The alternative interpretation offered by UPS would allow a far broader
scape to investor-State disputes and wauld make the part of article 1116 dealing with
a Party's failures to police delegated conduct of monopolies the vehicle for broad
investor review. No obvious reason appears why Parties, having twice confined
investor-State dispute resolution to a narrow set of claims, would expand the ambit of
disputes dramatically if a state monopoly, instead of the State itself, acts
inconsistently with the State’s obligations under chapter 11A. UPS’s argument strains
both the text and the structure of the Agreement.

69. We therefore conclude that, to the extent that a claim is brought under article
1116(1)(a), a breach of Section A must be alleged. UPS’s claims under article
1502(3)(a), thus, are limited to claims of violations of obligations associated with
claimed failures to abide by terms of chapter 11A. UPS asserts two such bases for
such claims, under articles 1102 and 1105. Although the facts asserted by UPS may
make out a violation of other provisions of NAFTA as well as a violation of
obligations under these articles, our jurisdiction extends to the claims associated with
article 1502(3)(a) only so far as they can be brought within one of these provisions.

70. Canada raises no jurisdictional issue in respect of matters falling within.
article 1502(3)(a) read with article 1102, But it does contend that article 1105 ~ the
other provision of Section A of chapter 11 invoked by UPS along with article
1502(3)(2) - does not extend to the regulation of anticompetitive practices.
Accordingly it challenges the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the second head of claim
{para 12 above). That contention relates as well to the third head of claim which
depends solely on article 1105. We therefore turn to that provision.

23

 

 

nxoent 2er dare oo.

Minimum standard of treatment - article 1105

71, Article 1105(1) is as follows:

Minimum Standard of Treatment

Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another. Party
treatment in accordance with international law, including fair and
equitable treatment and full protection and security.

 

 

1 _2bs.
AS, LOSS

72. Under the third heading of the Claim, the allegation focuses on Canada’s

actions alone:

33.

Further, Canada is obligated under NAFTA Article 1105 to
accord to UPS Canada treatment in accordance with international
law, including fair and equitable treatment. Pursuant to NAFTA
Article 1105, Canada is obligated to:

(6) ensure the existence of a transparent and effective regime
for the supervision and regulation of Canada Post in the
non-monopoly postal market in Canada.

Canada has breached its obligations under NAFTA Article 1105,
by inter alia failing to provide transparency in the supervision,
regulation and operation of Canada Post including through its
accounting and financial reporling and by failing to enforce
Canadian law including in relation to the issues raised herein
when it knew or should have known that by doing so it provided
Canada Post with a competitive advantage over UPS Canada in
the Non Monopoly Postal Services Market.

73. The pleading under the second heading is more complex but also turns on
article 1105 with one exception (in para 29) where the national treatment standard

required by article 1102 is invoked,

obligations under article 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2) and continues:

22.

Canada Post is therefore required to act consistently with
Canada’s obligations under NAFTA Article 1105. | The
obligations under NAFTA Article 1105 include not engaging in

icompetiti practi while ising gl I
authority, such as the type of authority delegated to Canada Post.
Examples of such anticompetitive practices include:

a. cross subsidization;

b. predatory conduct and predatory pricing;

The ASC briefly summarises Canada’s

 

 

 

 

 

aarse, 46.01 rg:

4¢ras

 

 

¢, using a monopoly infrastructure and network developed
for the delivery of monopoly letter mail to benefit non-
monopoly products in an unfair manner; and

d. failing to allocate a fair and equitable portion of. the
costs incurred to each of its non-monopoly products
which benefit from the monopoly infrastructure and
network and pricing such non-monopoly products below
those allocated costs.

23. In addition, under NAFTA Article 1502(3)(d), Canada is
obligated to ensure, through regulatory contro], administrative
supervision or the application of other measures, that Canada
Post acts in a manner that does not use iis monopoly position
to engage, either directly or indirectly, in anticompetitive
practices in the Non-Monopoly Postal Services Market that
adversely affect UPS Canada, such as cross-subsidization or
predatory conduct. Accordingly, wherever Canada Post
engages in anticompetitive conduct in the non-monopolized
postal market it is acting inconsistently with Canada’s
obligation to ensure that Canada Post not engage in such
conduct.

74, The ASC sets out alleged breaches of articles 1502(3)(a) and. 1503(2) by
drawing on the findings of the 1996 report of the independent Commission (para 10
above). It states that when Canada did respond to the Commission's findings in April
1997 it determined not to implement measures to redress the findings, Since that date
27. ... Canada Post has engaged in anticompetitive and unfair
conduct including predatory conduct, predatory pricing, tied
selling, cross-subsidization and the unfair use of its monopoly
infrastructure and network, which conduct is inconsistent with
Canada's obligations under NAFTA.
78. The ASC provides many examples, extending over two pages, in support of
that general allegation, and further claims that Canada Post's ability to cross subsidize
is supported by Canada guaranteeing its borrowings, not requiring a market rate of
feturn and not requiring a return from Canada Post on its capital.
16. This section of the pleading concludes with three brief paragraphs, under the
heading Canada’s conduct since April 1997:
30. Since April, 1997 Canada has implemented no, or insufficient,

measures lo ensure that the anticompetitive and unfair practices
engaged in by Canada Post would not occur.

25

 

 

31. As a result, Canada has failed to supervise or exercise control
over Canada Post to ensure Canada Post has not acted in a
manner inconsistent with Canada’s obligations under NAFTA,
including from engaging in the unfair, inequitable, or
anticompetitive practices described above and has permitted
Canada Post to operate as a de facto unregulated: monopoly.

32, Accordingly, Canada has violated Articles 1502(3)(a) and
1503(2) of NAFTA.

77. The very wording of article 1105(1) suggests, according to Canada, that the
obligation it states is one that already exists under international law, one that requires
gach Party, in terms of the heading to the article, to accord a minimum standard of
treatment to investors of the other Parties. The reference is to the basic protection
conferred on foreign interests by the general body of international law, at least. We
say “at least” since the unrestricted reference to “international Iaw” in article 1105
would suggest, as UPS says, that treaty obligations may also contribute to the
protection afforded by that article.

B. In another standard usage invoked by Canada, the reference is to the law of
State responsibility towards aliens, again a part of customary international law. While
counsel for the Investor criticise that terminology, their real criticism is not so much
of the label but rather of the content of the obligations which Canada says arise under
article 1105. According to Canada, a breach of article 1105 requires treatment that
amounts to an outrage, to bad faith, to wilful neglect of duty, or to an “insufficiency”
of government action so far short of international standards that every reasonable
person would recognize its insufficiency. Further, Canada submits that the
obligations under article 1105 do not regulate anticompetitive behaviour. There can
be no doubt, it says, that there is insufficient state practice to establish customary
international Jaw on matters of competition. That position is also taken by Mexico
and the United States.

79. Canada and the other two NAFTA Parties depend as well on an

Interpretation of article 1105 issued on 31 July 2001 by the Free Trade Commission

under article 2001(2)(c) (para 41 above), The Interpretation reads as follows:
Having iewed the ion of ducted under

Chapter Eleven of the North American Free Trade. Agreement, the Free
Trade Commission hereby adopts the following interpretations of

 

26

 

 

 

 

 

nacems eer ares 14

Chapter Eleven in order to clarify and re-affirm the meaning of certain

 

of its provisions:
B. Mini Standard of Tn in A a with
) International Law

1. Article 1105(1) prescribes the customary international law
minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the minimum
standard of treatment to be ‘afforded to investments of investors
of another Party.

2. The concepts of “fair and equitable treatment” and “full
protection and security” do not require treatment in addition to or
beyond that which is required by the customary international law
minimum standard of treatment of aliens. ,

3. A determination that there has been a breach of another provision

of the NAFTA, or of a separate international agreement, does not

establish that there has been a breach of Article 1105(1).
80, The orthodox, even tradilional, character of article 1105 also appears on this
view from the context in which it appears, in a set of three provisions designed 1o
protect the rights and interests of investors throughout the free trade area. The other
two protections are very common in international. treaty practice. They require
national treatment under article 1102 and most favoured nation treatment under article
1103 (with the better treatment of the two being accorded under article 1104). Those :
obligations are relative. They depend simply and solely on the specifics of the
treatment the Party accords to its own investors or investors of third States. Article
1105, by contrast, states a generally applicable, minimum standard which, depending
on the circumstances, may require more than the relative obligations of articles 1102
and 1103. ‘That is also the case with other provisions of chapter 11, notably article
1110 which states limits on the Parties’ powers to nationalize or expropriate
investments of an investor of another Party.

81. The Investor, by contrast, stresses what it sees as the very general terms of
article 1105 and especially its requirement that Canada accord fair and equitable
treatment to it. Whether Canada had met that obligation was something that could be
decided only when all the relevant evidence had been adduced and fully assessed.
These are not matters that could be assessed in the abstract. Canada is attempting to
engage the Tribunal in prejudging the merits of the dispute.

27

 

 

ee yn ser taroe dee | Pg?

82. If however the Tribunal does consider it necessary to deal with these
submissions, the Investor rejects the argument based on the Free Trade Commission's
interpretation and Canada’s attempt to articulate the content of “international law” and
the “customary international Jaw minimum standard of treatment”. First, the Investor
does not accept the Commission’s Interpretalion, and even if ‘the Interpretation
identifies the law the Tribunal is to apply that does not. help Canada because the
Taterpretation does not define what is meant by the standard. Nor is it remotely
possible to assess whether the Investor has been accorded “fair and equitable
treatment” in the absence of the evidence to be produced during the merits phase.
Secondly, Canada is relying on authorities from a different context and a different era.
Thirdly, its position is inconsistent with the interpretive principles the Tribunal is
bound to apply and has been soundly rejected by NAFTA tribunals,'

83. As will be apparent from this brief summary, the submissions before the
Tribunal range widely. From that material one issue is however critical for the
present case. Does arlicle 1105 impose obligations on the Parties to control
anticompetitive behaviour as alleged in the passages of the ASC set out in paras 72 to
76 above? We consider the position, first, under customary international law and,
second, under relevant treaty provisions (touching in that context on the significance ~
of the Free Trade Commission’s Interpretation).

84, To blish a rule of y i ional law two requi must be

 

met ; consistent state practice and an understanding that that practice is required by
law. “It is of course axiomatic”, said the International Court of Justice in the
Libya/Malta Continental Shelf Case 1985 IC3 Reports 13, 29 (para 27), “that the
material of customary international law is to be looked for primarily in the actual
practice and opinio juris of States”. It went on to say that muliilateral treaties may
have an important role in recording and defining rules deriving from custom, or
indecd in developing them. That statement of principle demonstrates that the
obligations imposed by customary international law may and do evolve. The law of

 

1 UPS refers to Metalclad v Mexico, Award 25 August 2000; SD Myers v Canado, Partial Award 13 Novambor

2000; and Pope & Talbot v Canada, Award on the Merits of Phase 2, 10 April 2001, para 118; sec also the
Award in respect of damages, 31 May 2002, in that case, where following the issuing of the Interpretation the

Tribunal preferred to see the C action as an rather than on ‘but,

‘on the latter basis, it held that sts actual award was not incompatible with the Interpreiation and indeed Canada’s

actions violated the fair and equitable treatmont requiroment under Article 1105 even using Canada’s strlot

formulation of the requirement.

 

 

 

State responsibility of the 1920s may well have been superceded by subsequent
developments. It would be remarkable were that not so. But relevant practice and the
telated understandings must still be assembled in support of a claimed rule of
customary international law.

85. In their submissions, Canada, Mexico and the United States call attention, in
terms of state practice, to studies of national competition laws. Many states do not
have competition laws - only 13 out of the 34 Western Hemisphere nations and about
80 of the WTO members do; more than half of the laws have been enacted in the past
10 years. Further, national legislation, for instance that of the three NAFTA Parties,
differs markedly, reflecting their unique economic, social and political environment.
And there is no indication in any material before the Tribunal that any of thal
legislation was enacted out of a sense of general international legal obligation, UPS
indeed did not attempt to establish that aspect or the practice element of a customary

 

international law mile iting the prohibiting or lating of ve
behaviour.
86. Some reference has been made in the present context to. the many bilateral

treaties for the protection of investments that have been concluded over recent
decades as supporting a relevant rule of customary international law. Many of them
state an obligation of fair and equilable treatment to be accorded to investors
independently of the treatment required by international law. But, again, UPS has not
attempted to establish that that state practice reflecis an understanding of the existence
of a generally owed international legal obligation which, moreover, has to relate to the
specific matter of requiring controls over anticompetitive behaviour.

87. The absence of any such rule is alse demonstrated by multilateral treaty
making and codification processes, one contemporary, the other from 40 years ago,
The WTO Ministerial Declaration of 14 November 2001 (the Doha Declaration)
shows that WTO Members are only now beginning to address the possibility of
hegoliating competition mules on a multilateral basis. Ministers recognized the case
for a i 1 fi k to enh the policy to
international trade and development and the need for enhanced technical assistance
and capacity building in the area, and agreed that negotiations would take place after
the next session of the Ministerial conference on the basis of a decision taken by

on of

29

SR

 

 

 

 

explicit consensus at that session on modalities of negotiations. That process decision
is to be related to the absence from the GATT and WTO treaties of any general set of
provisions prohibiting or controlling anticompetitive behaviour.

88. The absence of current general obligations as indicated by state practice in
national legislation and the agreed process to establish a process reached at Doha can
be related to the efforls al progressive development and codification of state
responsibility undertaken within the International Law Commission of the United
Nations in the early 1960s. The draft articles prepared by the Commission's special
rapporteur, F V Garcia Amador, in 1961 at the end of that phase of the work covered
denial of justice to aliens, deprivation of liberty, expulsion and other forms of
interference with freedom of movement, maltreatment and other acts of inhumanity,
negligence in the performance of the duty to protect, and measures affecting acquired
rights. That final heading dealt with measures of expropriation and nationalization,
non-performance of contractual obligations in gencral and repudiation of public debts,
but the draft articles said nothing at all about regulating anticompetitive behaviour.

89. That. gap also appears in the draft convention on the international
responsibility of states for injuries to aliens prepared for the International Law
Commission by Professor Louis B Sohn and Professor Richard R Baxter of the
Harvard Law School in 1961.

90. Like the Garcia Amador text, the Harvard drafl, even although it was
Prepared over forty years ago, is still to be seen as something of a high water mark in
the statement of the law for the protection of aliens, particularly their property and
other economic rights and interests. That assessment is supported by the facts, first,
that it was the subject of serious criticism by some members of the International Law
Commission as failing to recognise the existence of two different economic systems
and failing to take account of the interests of the states other than the United States
and, second, that within a year or two the Commission decided to change direction
and to address the general rules of state responsibility rather than the more specific
Matter of state responsibility towards aliens which until then had been the subject of
its ion (see Ye ks of the I ional Law C ission 1959 vol 1, 147-
154; 1960 vol I, 264-270, 276-283; and 1963 vol II, 223-224, paras 51-55 of the
Commission’s Report to the UN General Assembly):

 

30

 

 

sent by -

nercene aera oe beat

91. UPS did not refer us to material subsequent to the Harvard drafi to
demonstrate that general international law had moved in the direction of requiring
states to prohibit or regulate anticompetitive behaviour.

92. We accordingly conclude that there is no rule of customary international law
prohibiting or regulating anticompetitive behaviour. ,

93. But is there nevertheless a basis in the text of arlicle 1105 itself or in some”
other treaty source (possibly admitted by the article’s general reference to
“4nternational law”) for this part of the ASC?

94, UPS says that there is, on the basis of Canada’s obligation to accord it “fair
and equitable treatment". According to UPS, that obligation is to be seen as
additional to the minimum standard and not to be subsumed within it.

95, It invokes the recent Pope and Talbot awards in support. The ruling in the
earlier award preceded, and the expression of opinion in the later award followed, the
FTC's Interpretation. They are inconsistent with the Interpretation, in particular
insofar as it says that the obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment is not in
addition to or beyond the customary international law standard ‘of minimum treatment.

96. The NAFTA Parties have now submitted to a number of NAFTA tribunals
that the “additive” interpretation is not available to the tribunals. By their consistent
position they provide, they say, an “authentic” interpretation, in terms of arlicle 31(3)
of the Vienna Convention. And in any event the FTC’s Interpretation is binding on
chapter 11 tribunals including this one.

97. We do not address the question of the power of the Tribunal to examine the
Interpretation of the Free Trade Commission. Rather, we agree in any event with its
conclusion that the obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment is not in addition
to or beyond the minimum standard. Our reasons in brief are, first, that that reading
accords with the ordinary meaning of article 1105, That obligation js “included”
within the minimum standard. Secondly, the many bilateral treaties for the protection
of investments on which the argument depends vary in their substantive obligations; ~
while they are Jarge in number their coverage is limited; and, as we have already said,

31

 

 

in terms of opinio juris there is no indication that they reflect a general sense of
obligation, The failure of efforts to establish a multilateral agreement on investment
provides further evidence of that lack of a sense of obligation. Thirdly, the'very fact
that many of the treatiés do expressly create a stand-alone obligation of fair and
equitable treatment may be seen as giving added force to the ordinary meaning of
article 1105(1) and particularly the word “including” (“notamment” and “inclnido”).
And the likely availability to the investor of the protection of the most favoured nation
obligation in article 1103, by reference to other bilateral investment treaties, if
anything, supports the ordinary meaning.

98. The remaining possible basis for finding support in article 1105 for the

dit apetitive iour is that the expression “f ional Jaw” in
that article may include treaties and in particular atticle 1502(3)(d). This possible
argument is also rejected by the FTC's Interpretation (paras 1 and 3). Again, we need
not address the matter of whether this Tribunal may challenge an Interpretation since

the analysis we undertook earlier of the relationship between chapter 11 and chapter

about

15 excludes the. possibility that any provision of article 1502(3) other than
subparagraph (a) can be the subject of investor-State arbitration.

99, The Tribunal accordingly concludes that those parts of the ASC, which are
based on article 1105, and which challenge anticompetitive behaviour and the failure
to prohibit or contro} it are not within its jurisdiction.

Antkcompetitive measures and article 1102

100. Canada challenges the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over paras 16(f) and 29 of the
ASC. The former, under the heading National Treatment, alleges breaches by Canada
of the obligation of “the best in-jurisdiction treatment with respect to .., the ...
conduct and operation of investments” (para 15) by giving benefits and privileges to
Canada Post which are not made available to competitors, including UPS, in
particular
(f) Allowing non-monopoly products access to and the benefit of
the infrastructure built to service Canada Post’s monopoly

products without appropriate charges being allocated to the
non-monopoly product

32

 

sSeoeieet

pope epee ste iememnmmennnemnnen iss feet

Canada did not at the hearing pursue a related challenge to para 16(g).

101. Paragraph 29 appears under the Chapter 15 (articles 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2))
heading in the ASC, but appears to be misplaced since it simply alleges a breach of
article 1102:

29. Further, Canada Post has also acted inconsistently with
Canada's obligations under NAFTA Article 1102 by not
allowing similar access to its monopoly infrastructure and
network to UPS Canada and its.other competitors thal it
provides to its non-monopoly business.

102, The conclusion we have reached under the previous heading about
anticompetitive measures not being subject to article 1105 is not relevant to these two
paragraphs. Paragraph 29 should refer to Canada’s breach of its obligations rather
than to Canada Post’s breach of Canada's obligations, but subject to that and its
repositioning with the other alleged breaches of the obligation to accord national
treatment, the pleading in the paragraph alleges facts which are capable of constituting
a violation of article 1102. That is also the case with para 16(f).

103. . Accordingly, this challenge to jurisdiction fails.

Publications assistance programme

104, Paragraph 18 of the ASC contains allegations relating to a Canadian
programme known as the Publications Assistance Programme (PAP), which appear in
the part of the Claim relating to national treatment (article 1102).

105. Canada argues that the allegations regarding the PAP should be dismissed as
outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal because of annex 2106 (the so-called “culturaf
industries exemption”) and article 1108(7)(b) (the “subsidies exemption"). These
claims are considered briefly below.

@ The cultura! industries exemption ©

106. Annex 2106 to NAFTA reads as follows:

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement ... any
measure adopted or maintained with respect to cultural industries ...

33

or ae

shall be gt d under this Agi ively in di

with the Canada-United States Free Trade "Aareomone
107. Canada's position, in brief, is that the PAP satisfies the criteria described in
annex 2106, namely, it is a “measure” that has been “adopted. or maintained with
respect to cultural industries.”

108, UPS submits that the particular activity in which Canada Post is engaged,
which the Investor refers to as the mere “delivery” of books, magazines, periodicals or

newspapers, does not fall within the definition of “cultural industries” set out in °

NAFTA article 2107, which is identical to FTA article 2012 and which reads as
follows:
{Cjultural industries means persons engaged in any of the
following activities:
(a) the publication, distribution, or sale of books, magazines,
periodicals or newspapers in print or machine readable form but not
including the sole activity of printing or typesetting any of the
foregoing;
109, Setting aside the issue whether or not the word “distribution” includes
“delivery” — though it bears noting that UPS itself suggests, elsewhere in ifs
submissions, that the PAP does concern the “distribution” of magazines by Canada
Post ~ it is, at first blush, arguable that the intent of the article 2107{a) definition is to
capture all aspects of what might be called the business of print-making and -selling;
and indeed it is not necessarily obvious why, if the object and purpose of the “cultural
industries” provisions of NAFTA are to benefit those industries, the delivery to
consumers of cultural products should be excluded.

110. It might also be observed that at least certain activilies associatéd with
culwral industries but which Canada and the United States nonetheless chose to
exclude from the NAFTA/FTA definition are expressly identified in article 2107(a),
to wit: “.,. the sole activity of printing or typesetting”. UPS states that these words

indicate that “it is apparent that the cultural industries exception was not intended to

apply to such an industrial process”, which it describes as “the commercial or
industrial process of door to door delivery of magazines to subscribers”. It might,
however, be argued that the intent of the Parlies to NAFTA is clear on its face,

34

 

 

namely, to exclude from the definition of cultural industries (as between Canada and
the United States) “the sole activity of printing or typesetting”.

1h. UPS submits that “[t]he mere fact that magazines are carried through the
mail does not convert the mail delivery system into a cultural industry ...”, This
assertion is likely correct, as far as it goes. It does not necessarily follow, however,
that the activity of delivering cultural products to consumers is inconsistent with the
protection of Canadjan “cultural industries”, as the concept is understood in the
context of NAFTA, or that the persons engaged in delivering such products are
excluded from the article 2107(a) definition of cultural industries,

(i) The subsidies exemption

112. As mentioned, Canada also submits that the PAP is exempt from the
application of NAFTA article 1102 by virtue of article 1108(7)(b), which reads, in
part:

Articles 1102, 1103 and 1107 do not apply to:

(b) subsidies or grants provided by a Party or a state enterprise,
i i gov d loans, and

 

insurance,

113. The Investor disagrees with Canada’s position. It argues that a subsidy
measure (such as the PAP) benefiting a particular cultural industry (in this case, the
magazine industry) should not discriminate against a foreign investor in a different
industry. Canada responds that UPS misconceives the focus of the exemption in”
question, which is clearly “subsidies” and not, as UPS suggests, “industries”. It points
out that at para 18 of its ASC UPS itself describes the impugned conduct of Canada as

‘4 3 ded

 

ig ‘and imp! ing a Publ A Program, to
subsidize the Canadian magazine industry ...”.
(iit) == Conclusion
114, Having considered the issues which arise in respect of Canada’s contention

that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear UPS's allegations regarding the PAP, and

35

 

 

 

bearing in mind the appropriate test for determining jurisdictional disputes (paras 33-
37 above), the Tribunal is of the view that there is simply insufficient evidence on the

record, at the present time, on the basis of which it could dismiss the Investor's.

allegations... By the same token, it is not possible for the Tribunal to ascertain the
correctness of UPS’s characterisation of the PAP as some sort of subterfuge, or
colorable scheme.

115. In due course, with the benefit of a more complete factual record as well as
more fulsome analysis of the issues by the parties, the Tribunal will be prepared to
revisit these questions, if invited by the parties to do so, during the merits phase of the
arbitration.

Taxation measures

116, The ASC contains allegations relating to goods and services tax. ‘They
appear in parts of the Claim relating both to national treatment (article 1102) and
‘minimum standard (article 1105). The allegation relating to article 1105 was
challenged by Canada, in its Memorial, as being outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
Counsel for the investor stated at the hearing that it abandoned that particular claim
and as a consequence para 33{a) of the ASC. Jt did however maintain the Claim
relating to the tax so far as article 1102 was concerned. As a result of that statement,
counsel for Canada did not at the hearing pursue its challenge in relation to taxation.

117. The Tribunal recoids those clarifications which have the consequence that no
Canadian challenge remains under this heading. We simply note that while article
2103 provides that nothing in the Agreement applies to taxation measures, one of the
limits to that exception is that article 1102 (but not article 1105) does apply to taxation
measures (with exceptions that are not relevant). Accordingly the position taken by

"the two parties appears to conform exactly with the Agreement.

American subsidiaries of the investor

118. Under article 1101, headed Scope and Coverage, chapter 11 applics to
measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to

36

 

 

(a) investors of another Party;

(b) investments of investors of another Party in ‘the territory of the
Party; ....

119. As already noted, the ASC refers to the Investor, to its US Subsidiaries and
to UPS Canada. In relation to the claimed breaches of article 1102, the ASC alleges
that

39. By reason of the benefits and privileges set out above, which are
not correspondingly made available by Canada to UPS Canada,
UPS, the US Subsidiaries and UPS Canada have suffered harm,
loss and damage, including but not limited to competitive
disadvantage, reduced profit, reduced market share, and
increased out of pocket expense. Canada has violated its
obligation to accord national treatment pursuant to NAFTA
article 1102 to UPS and UPS Canada, and is therefore liable to
pay compensation. (emphasis added)

In respect of article 1105 the ASC says:

35. By virtue of the facts set out in paragraphs 20 to 34 above, UPS,
the US Subsidiaries and UPS Canada have suffered harm, loss
and damage, including but not limited to competitive
disadvantage, reduced. profit, reduced market share, and
increased out of pocket expense. Canada has violated its
obligations under NAFTA and is Jiable to pay compensation.
(emphasis added)

120. Canada says that the references to US Subsidiaries in these paragraphs
should be struck. They do not allege either that the Subsidiaries are “in” Canada or
that the loss was suffered by UPS itself. So far as the wording of the ASC itself is
concerned, we note that the final sentence of para 19 is indeed limited to UPS and
UPS Canada and that the final paragraph of the ASC under the heading Relief Sought
and Damages Claimed is further restricted, just to UPS:
38. UPS claims damages of not less than US $160 million . as
compensation for the damages caused by ‘or arising out of
Canada’s breaches of its obligations under NAFTA, costs
including professional fees and disbursements, costs of the
arbitration, interest, compensation to remedy the tax
consequences of any award and such further relief as this tribunal
might deem appropriate.
121, In terns of the jurisdictional provisions of articles 1101 and 1116, UPS, to
recover damages, would have to establish at the merits stage that the damage was

37

 

 

 

suffered either by it or by one or more of its investments “in” Canada. (There is of
course no question about UPS Canada.) The evidence may — or may not ~ establish
that any damage suffered by the US Subsidiaries may properly be attributed to UPS
itself or that those Subsidiaries, as investments of UPS, were “in” Canada.

122. While the ASC might have been worded somewhat more precisely in this

respect, the Tribunal considers that it gives adequate notice of the claim to Canada,

against the jurisdictional limits set out in chapter 11 governing the claim that the

Investor may make in respect of ils investments and subsidiaries. To repeat, at the

merits stage, UPS will have to establish on the evidence how and to what extent

within those limits it has suffered damage or losses. Accordingly, at this stage, the
~ Tribunal rejects the challenge by Canada under this heading,

Minimum requirements of pleading

123. In its Memorial Canada sought

to strike the Amended Statement of Claim for failure to comply with
the requirements of Chapter 11 and UNCITRAL Rules for advancing a
claim, In particular, UPS has failed to

Gi) plead the minimum required facts and damages flowing from
the alleged breach with sufficient particularity.
According to the Memorial, this objection and that relating to the US Subsidiaries
(which we have already rejected) “are, alone, a sufficient basis on which to strike the
Amended Statement of Claim in its entirety”.

124, At the hearing, however, counsel for Canada made no reference at all to this
contention either in their primary submissions or in their reply. Counsel for UPS by
contrast did touch on the matter.

125. Since Canada did not formally abandon this challenge, we do address it. We
do that briefly and essentially in terms of the argument made by the Investor, an
argument which we did find persuasive.

126, The applicable rules of international law to which article 1131(1) refers
include of course the requirements of impartial and fair judicial process, a matter also

38

te ee nee a tee ke ae

 

 

 

emphasised by the statement of purpose at the beginning of section B of chapter 11.
Procedural rules and rulings are means to those ends, not ends in themselves.

127, A statement of claim must be specific enough to put the respondent properly
on notice so that it can reply adequately in its statement of defence. The tribunal also
must be informed of the essence of the claim. An exhaustive statement of the facts or
of the evidence supporting the claim is not required, What is required, according to
article 18(2) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, is the following:

The statement of claim shall include the following particulars:
(a) The names and addresses of the parties;
{b) A statement of the facts supporting the claim;
(c) The points at issue;
(d) The relief or remedy sought.
The claimant may annex to his statement of claim all documents he
deems relevant or may add a reference to the documents or other
evidence he will submit.
128, The ASC follows the list of particulars set out in article 18(2). Thus it has
parts headed The Parties, Relevant Entities, Procedural History. of Dispute and
Jurisdiction, Overview ~ Breaches of NAFTA, Canada’s NAFTA Obligations (under
which it states facts as well as legal obligations and alleges breaches by reference to
both), Points in Issue and Relief Sought and Damages Claimed. (The italics indicate
the four elements included in the Jist in article 18(2) of the Rules.) The Investor used
essentially the same structure in its initial Statement of Claim which was much longer
(75 pages plus 26 pages of appendices), a matter which Canada criticised in an earlier
phase of the case when it challenged, it appeared, more than 100 paragraphs of the
claim and said that it should not have to waste significant time and effort responding
to lengthy and complex allegations that prima facie were not properly before the
Tribunal (see paras 17 and 19 of the Decision of the Tribunal of 17 October 2001 on
the filing of a statement of defence). In a formal sense at least, the Investor complies
with the UNCITRAL article.

129. Canada also calls attention to the elements required by article 1116 : that the
claim is that the Party has breached an obligation under one of the specified
Provisions and the Investor has incurred loss or damage by reason of or arising out of

39

 

 

 

that breach. The ASC does allege such breaches (para 12 above) and, in its final
paragraph headed Relief Sought and Damages Claimed (para 120 above), claims
damages as compensation for the damage caused by or arising out of Canada’s
breaches of its obligations under NAFTA.

130. Canada complains nevertheless that there is insufficient precision. The
Investor has failed to advise the Tribunal and Canada of all the alleged measures,
breaches of chapter 11 and the alleged damage suffered. In particular, six paragraphs
(paras 16, 22, 27, 34, 35 and 36) provide non exhaustive lists of alleged breaches.
Further, leave to amend the statement of claim to provide greater precision should not
be granted if the other party would be prejudiced or the amendment fell outside the
submission to arbitration.

131, The Jast submission refers to one of the controls which the Tribunal has over
the development of the claim to ensure that it understands the essential matters and
that the other parly has proper notice. Under article 20 of the UNCITRAL Rules,
either party may amend or supplement its claim or defence unless the tribunal
considers the amendment inappropriate having regard to delay, prejudice or other
circumstances; further, a claim may not be amended to take it outside the scope of the
arbitration claim. It will be observed that the article does not have quite the balance
that Canada would suggest. While the tribunal may exercise control over
amendments, its leave need not be sought in the first instance. Article 22 is also
relevant, as both parties remind the Tribunal. It has the power to decide whether
further written statements, in addition to the statements of claim and defence, should
be required from the parties or may be presented by them. Those powers are to be
yead with the broad powers of the tribunal under article 15 of the UNCITRAL Rules
to conduct the arbitration in such manner as it considers appropriate provided that the
parties are treated with equality and given a full opportunity to present their cases.

132. Looking at the ASC as a whole and in the context of principle and the
relevant UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal considers that it does adequately give notice
to Canada of the essential elements of the claim it must meet. It does enable Canada
to formulate a statement of defence. As the process of the production of evidence and
of proof proceeds (a process supported by the Tribunal’s powers mentioned earlier
and also arlicle 24 of the UNCITRAL Rules), the Investor will have the opportunity to

40

 

 

vere ee MAE ACSA AG* ERS

give its claims greater precision. It is of course in its interests to do so if it is to
establish its claims as a matter of fact.

133, The Tribunal concludes that this objection by Canada fails.

Conclusion.

134, Canada’s challenge to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over heads of claim B
{paras 20-28 and 30-32) and C (paras 33(b) and 34) succeeds on the basis of the
Tribunal's rulings in respect of the relationship of chapter 11 and chapter 15 and of
the scope of article 1105. It follows that

(a) paras 22, 23, 33(b) and 34 are struck as is the consequential reference to article
1502(3)(d) in para 36, and

{b) it is incumbent on UPS to demonstrate, in the first instance by a further
amended statement of claim, that the claims made in paras 27, 28 and 30-32
and the related allegations of fact can be based on a provision of section A of
chapter 11 other than article 1105.

135, Canada’s challenge to jurisdiction over para 16(f) and para 29 is dismissed
but UPS's attention is drawn io the comments made in the Award about the

formulation and positioning of para 29.

136, Canada’s chalienge to jurisdiction over para 33(a), based on the taxation
exemption, is moot since the Investor agreed to delete that part of its Claim.

137. Canada’s challenge to jurisdiction over the claim concerned with the
Publications Assistance Program (para 18) is joined to the merits.

138, Canada’s challenge in respect of the US Subsidiaries of UPS is joined to the
merits.

139. Canada’s ct to the ad 'y of the Amended of Claiin is

iS! y

 

dismissed,

41

 

 

feet SLT OS ne wt Muna

 

140. In its written pleadings UPS sought a costs order in its favour and Canada
did not refer to the matter. Given the result, the Tribunal decides that the parties are
to bear their own costs of this phase of the proceeding.

141. The parties are to advise the Tribunal by Monday, 9 December 2002 of their
proposals for the appropriate next steps in the procedure, including a timetable, and
are to respond, if necessary by Monday, 16 December 2002.

For the Tribunal
/” . ‘ a
Kare Lb “K

President
22 November 2002

42

 

