Archived Content

 

Information identified as archived on the Web is for reference, research or recordkeeping purposes. It has
not been altered or updated after the date of archiving. Web pages that are archived on the Web are not
subject to the Government of Canada Web Standards. As per the Communications Policy of the Government
of Canada, you can request alternate formats by contacting us.

 

Contenu archivé

 

L'information archivée sur le Web est disponible a des fins de consultation, de recherche ou de tenue de
dossiers seulement. Elle n’a été ni modifiée ni mise a jour depuis sa date d’archivage. Les pages archivées
sur le Web ne sont pas assujetties aux normes Web du gouvernement du Canada. Conformément a la
Politique de communication du gouvernement du Canada, vous pouvez obtenir cette information dans un
format de rechange en communiquant avec nous.

 

AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER 11 OF THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

 

BETWEEN

UNITED PARCEL SERVICE OF AMERICA INC

AND

GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

 

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON
THE PLACE OF ARBITRATION

 

THE TRIBUNAL:

Dean Ronald A Cass
L Yves Fortier CC, QC
Justice Kenneth Keith (Chairman)

17 October 2001

The parties do not agree on the place where the arbitration is to be held. In
accordance with the Tribunal’s procedural decision No. 1 they have made
submissions on the matter. The Investor submits that the place of the arbitration
should be in the United States and proposes Washington DC, Boston MA or San
Francisco CA, while Canada submits that the hearing should be in Canada and

proposes Ottawa or alternatively Toronto, Montreal or Vancouver.

Under article 1130 of the (NAFTA), unless the disputing parties agree
otherwise, the Tribunal shall hold the arbitration in the territory of a Party that is
a party to the New York Convention on the execution of foreign arbitral awards
(as are Canada, Mexico and the United States), selected in this case in
accordance with the UNCITRAL arbitration rules. Article 16 of those rules

reads:

1. Unless the parties have agreed upon the place where the
arbitration is to be held, such place shall be determined by the
arbitral tribunal, having regard to the circumstances of the
arbitration.

2. The arbitraltribunal may determine the locale of the arbitration
within the country agreed upon by the parties. It may hear
witnesses and hold meetings for consultation among its members
at any place it deems appropriate, having regard to the
circumstances of the arbitration.

3. The arbitral tribunal may meet at any place it deems appropriate
for the inspection of goods, other property or documents. The
parties shall be given sufficient notice to enable them to be
present at such inspection.
That provision makes it plain that there is a difference between the “place where
the arbitration is to be held” and the particular places at which different aspects
of the work of the Tribunal may be carried out. The provision also does not in
its terms purport to regulate the law of the arbitration. In a general way, article
1131 of NAFTA does that by directing the Tribunal to decide the issues in
dispute in accordance with the Agreement and applicable rules of international
law. The Agreement in its own terms and by reference to the UNCITRAL rules
regulates particular aspects of matters such as evidence, an issue which the

Investor raises in relation to the present matter.

7.

In particular UPS contends that there would be inequality were the place of the
arbitration to be in Canada because of the provisions of the Canadian Evidence
Act which prevent the disclosure of confidences of the Canadian cabinet. We
do not consider that this matter is significant. As Canada points out, any such
claim by Canada might be made whatever the place of the arbitration. As
mentioned, such a claim would have to be assessed not under the law of Canada
but under the law governing the Tribunal. The issue is in any event hypothetical

at present.

The UPS submission also calls attention to the critical principle of the equal
treatment of the parties, a principle which is emphasised as well by NAFTA and
by the UNCITRAL rules.

On more specific matters, both parties referred us to the UNCITRAL notes on
organising arbitral proceedings. These notes were finalised by the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law in 1996 following extensive
consultations, including discussions at several meetings of arbitration
practitioners. The purpose of the notes is to assist arbitration practitioners.
Although the notes are not binding and an arbitral tribunal remains free to use
the notes as it sees fit and is not required to give reasons for disregarding them,
other chapter 11 Tribunals have found them a helpful framework for
consideration. We also find them to be of value. Paragraph 22 of the notes says
this:
Various factual and legal factors influence the choice of the place of
arbitration, and their relative importance varies from case to case.
Among the more prominent factors are : (a) suitability of the law on
arbitral procedure of the place of arbitration; (b) whether there is a
multilateral or bilateral treaty on enforcement of arbitral awards
between the State where the arbitration takes place and the State or
States where the award may have to be enforced; (c) convenience of
the parties and the arbitrators, including the travel distances; (d)

availability of and cost of support services needed; and (e) location of
the subject-matter in dispute and proximity of evidence.

We consider those five matters in turn.

A.

Suitability of the law on arbitral procedure of the place of arbitration

UPS contends that the position of the Canadian government in litigation relating
to another NAFTA arbitration (the Metalclad Corporation v Mexico case) and
the position of the Canadian courts provide insufficient deference to the rulings
of chapter 11 Tribunals. It calls attention in particular to the fact that in
argument in that case Canada submitted that the leading Canadian authorities
supporting deference to arbitral tribunals ought to be rejected and that awards of
chapter 11 Tribunals “are not supposed to be worthy of judicial deference and
are not supposed to be protected by a high standard of review”. The submission
continued that chapter 11 Tribunals are neither expert nor specialised Tribunals.
The Canadian submission concluded in this way:

Given the characteristics of NAFTA chapter 11 dispute settlement, and

applying the pragmatic and functional approach, it is clear that in

interpreting NAFTA, chapter 11 Tribunals should not attract extensive

judicial deference and should not be protected by a high standard of
judicial review.

UPS’s concern was that the standard of review proposed would effectively
allow appeals against chapter 11 decisions. We would note however that the
British Columbia Supreme Court does not appear to have adopted the position
urged on it by the Government : United Mexican States v Metalclad
Corporation 2001 BCSC 664, Tysoe J, 2 May 2001. It said that it was to take
its law from the provisions of the International Commercial Arbitration Act
RSBC ch 233, s34 of which essentially incorporates the limited grounds for
review included in the UNCITRAL model law, a model law now adopted in
many jurisdictions and commonly seen as requiring real deference by reviewing
courts. The Court quoted this passage from a judgment of the British Columbia
Court of Appeal :

It is important to parties to future such arbitrations and to the

integrity of the process itself that the court express its views on

the degree of deference to be accorded the decision of the

arbitrators. The reasons advanced in the cases discussed above

for restraint in the exercise of judicial review are highly

persuasive. The "concerns of international comity, respect for the

capacities of foreign and transnational tribunals, and sensitivity
to the need of the international commercial system for

B.

predictability in the resolution of disputes" spoken of by
Blackmun J. [in Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-
Plymouth Inc., 473 U.S. 614 (1985)] are as compelling in this
jurisdiction as they are in the United States or elsewhere. It is
meet therefore, as a matter of policy, to adopt a standard which
seeks to preserve the autonomy of the forum selected by the
parties and to minimize judicial intervention when reviewing
international commercial arbitral awards in British Columbia.
Quintette Coal Ltd v Nippon Steel Corp [1991] Vol 1 WWR 219,
229 (BCCA)

Further, as Canada submits, the Tribunals in two earlier chapter 11 cases have
concluded that both countries possess equally suitable laws on arbitral
procedure; Ethyl Corporation v Government of Canada, decision of 28
November 1997, pp 5-6 (38 International Legal Materials 704); and Methanex
Corporation v United States of America, reasons of 31 December 2000,
para 26. Moreover, the grounds for review, as available under Canadian law,
are applicable not only if the place of the arbitration is in Canada but also,
wherever the place of arbitration may be, if any question of recognition or
enforcement arises in a Canadian court. But the place of arbitration might well

be seen as the more appropriate forum for such proceedings.

The Tribunal is troubled by Canada’s submission on this issue in the Metalclad

case.

The existence of a treaty on the enforcement of arbitral awards between

the state where the arbitration takes place and the state or states where the
award may have to be enforced.

12.

Since both Canada and United States are parties to the New York Convention

this factor is neutral.

Cc.

Convenience of the Parties and the arbitrators including travel distances

We agree with earlier chapter 11 Tribunals (such as that in the Methanex case
para 28) that this factor includes not just the Parties but also their counsel
because their extra travelling time and expenses will ultimately be borne as
costs by the disputing Parties. Canada emphasises that the head offices of the
Canadian agencies whose measures are in issue are in Ottawa as are Canada’s
counsel. While UPS’s head office is in Atlanta, Georgia, its Investment, UPS
Canada, has its head office in Mississauga, Ontario, a city adjoining Toronto.
Counsel for the Investor is also located in Toronto. The balance of convenience
therefore strongly favours Canada over the United States. UPS points out that it
is a United States based company and is represented by counsel located in
Toronto, Vancouver, Washington DC and Atlanta, Georgia. A United States
location such as Washington DC, Boston, MA, or San Francisco, CA are all
acceptable to it and its legal counsel. The convenience of the Tribunal
members, it says, does not dictate any particular choice. On that final matter

Canada is essentially in agreement.

Availability and cost of support services

UPS says that any of the locations suggested could provide the support services.
That should not be a determining circumstance. It calls attention to the fact that
the Tribunal has however proposed that the administrative services of ICSID be
used and if that decision were made this would be a strong reason in favour of
Washington as a convenient location for the arbitration. Canada responds to
that point by recalling that, when the Tribunal suggested to the parties that they
consider ICSID as the body to provide the administrative services, the Tribunal
made it clear that that suggestion was without prejudice to the determination of
the place of the arbitration. UPS does however call attention to the fact that
article 1120 of NAFTA permits the parties to use ICSID, reflecting the intention
of the three NAFTA governments that they were amenable to Washington DC
being a neutral place of arbitration. UPS says that this was recognised by the

Ethyl Tribunal (para 10 above) in its decision.

Location of the subject matter in dispute and the proximity of the
evidence

Canada argues that this factor weighs very heavily in favour of Canada and in
particular Ottawa. The location of the evidence relevant to the subject matter in
dispute, it says, is not subject to serious debate. All the records relating to the
impugned measures and the individual decision-makers implicated by the
Investor in its claim are in Canada, most being based in Ottawa. Further, the
subject matter in dispute is located in Canada. UPS alleges that measures taken
in Canada by the CCRA and other Federal and provincial governmental
agencies and by Canada Post affecting the UPS Investment in Canada breach
Canada’s obligations under chapter 11. UPS expresses some concern about this
criterion in the context of NAFTA proceedings since, by definition, it could
nearly always favour the respondent NAFTA party. The measures at issue will
relate to the respondent in all cases, as would many factual issues relating to the
NAFTA party alleged to be in breach of its chapter 11 obligations. To give this
criterion undue weight would lead to the result that the place of arbitration
under chapter 11 arbitrations would nearly always be in the territory of the
respondent party. This was clearly not the intention of the NAFTA parties and
the text does not provide for that result. This is in contrast, UPS points out, to
state arbitrations under chapter 20 which are always to be in the capital of the
respondent NAFTA party. Canada Post, the state enterprise at issue in this case,
is located across Canada and operates around the world, including the United
States into Mexico. Both the Investor and Canada Post are active in the
Canadian and international delivery services industry. So far as the evidence is
concerned, although it is difficult to assess this issue at this early stage in the
arbitration, it can be said with some certainty that the arbitration will be largely
based on documentation and expert evidence. With modern information
technology, the handling of documentation should not be an issue in this
arbitration particularly given that the disputing parties have a high degree of
expertise and sophistication in the handling of information. So far as witnesses
and experts are concerned, there is no clear balance of convenience. Witnesses
will be from throughout North America and likely from Europe. There is
neither advantage nor disadvantage for either disputing party if the arbitration is

located in either the United States or Canada.

The Tribunal’s assessment

16.

Of the factors mentioned so far two are neutral — B and C (although in the usual
course travel from New Zealand to the United States is marginally more
convenient than it is to Canada); two weigh slightly in UPS’s favour (A,
because of the attitude of the Canadian government in the Metalclad litigation
and D because the Tribunal, although without prejudice, has already suggested
to the Parties that they consider ICSJD as its registry); and another is in
Canada’s favour (E, but the importance of that factor in the arbitration is not

’

clear at present),

Neutrality has been identified as a factor relevant to the place of arbitration
(although it is not in the UNCITRAL list), for instance in the Methanex decision
paras 35-39. Canada addressed it in its submission. That factor is plainly
relevant given the broad reference to “the circumstances of the arbitration” in
Article 16(1) of the UNCITRAL rules (para 2 above).

In one sense a neutral place is not available given that the claimant is a United
States corporation and Canada is the respondent and the place of the arbitration
is to be in one or other country. It is however relevant that it is Canada’s
measures that are in issue, even if it has been the place of arbitration in all
chapter 11 investment disputes in which it has been the respondent. Tt is also
relevant that Washington DC can be seen as having the neutrality of being the
seat of the World Bank and ICSID, rather than the seat of federal government in
the United States of America. And UPS’s hcadquarters are in Atlanta, GA.

While the matter is finely balanced, the Tribunal considers that the balance does
favour the United States of America as the place of arbitration and in particular
Washington, DC. The Tribunal so decides.

LoS. VEDW~_t t.
for the Tribunal
17 October 2001

