Archived Content

 

Information identified as archived on the Web is for reference, research or recordkeeping purposes. It has
not been altered or updated after the date of archiving. Web pages that are archived on the Web are not
subject to the Government of Canada Web Standards. As per the Communications Policy of the Government
of Canada, you can request alternate formats by contacting us.

 

Contenu archivé

 

L'information archivée sur le Web est disponible a des fins de consultation, de recherche ou de tenue de
dossiers seulement. Elle n’a été ni modifiée ni mise a jour depuis sa date d’archivage. Les pages archivées
sur le Web ne sont pas assujetties aux normes Web du gouvernement du Canada. Conformément a la
Politique de communication du gouvernement du Canada, vous pouvez obtenir cette information dans un
format de rechange en communiquant avec nous.

 

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN OF THE
NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
AND THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

BETWEEN:
UNITED PARCEL SERVICES OF AMERICA

Claimant / Investor

and

THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Respondent / Party

MEMORIAL ON COMPLIANCE WITH
THE AWARD ON JURISDICTION

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

Overview 1
I. Argument 3
A. UPS has not complied with the tribunal’s ruling on article 1105... cesses 3
1. The Tribunal has ruled that supervision and transparency issues are not covered by
Article 1105 4
2. Paragraphs 43 and 51 are unclear and by implication could only raise anticompetitive
conduct

 

 

B. UPS has not demonstrated its claims can be based on article 1102
1. Chapter 11 claims cannot be brought in respect of the conduct of monopolies and state

 

 

 

 

enterprises 7
2. In any event, UPS’ claims of anticompetitive conduct do not come within the scope of
Article 1102 12
3. UPS’ claims are subject only to Article 1502(3)(d), which is not arbitrable under
Chapter 11 16
C. UPS has raised new claims under articles 1103,1104 and 1105 ......cccecceceeeseeeeeeeeteeeteee 18
1. The Article 1103 and 1104 claims are prejudicial to Canada, and do not identify the
measures at issue 19
2. Claims involving Fritz Starber are outside the scope of this arbitration.......0.0.0..00 20

Il. Order Requested 21

OVERVIEW
1. Canada does not lightly submit this Memorial on Compliance with the Award on
Jurisdiction. Canada respects the Tribunal’s Award on Jurisdiction, and will not repeat
objections that have been dismissed or joined to the merits. Such outstanding objections will be
raised in the Statement of Defence, as ordered by the Tribunal. However, Canada submits that
the Revised Amended Statement of Claim does not comply with the Tribunal’s Award. UPS of
American [hereinafter UPS] has failed to strike claims that the Tribunal ordered struck; has
shifted other claims around without demonstrating any basis for retaining them; and has raised a
number of entirely new claims without leave or justification. All of these claims should be
struck before this arbitration proceeds.
2. UPS’ Amended Statement of Claim made numerous claims under Chapters 11 and 15
alleging that Canada Post has engaged in anticompetitive conduct, including cross-subsidization
and predatory pricing. Canada objected to many of these claims, on the basis that UPS was
attempting to bring obligations into Chapter 11 that were excluded from investor-State
arbitration, in an attempt to make them arbitrable.
3. The Tribunal upheld certain of these objections. It found that claims of anticompetitive
conduct under 1502(3)(d) were outside its jurisdiction because the relationship between Chapters

11 and 15:

excludes the possibility that any provision of article 1502(3) other than
subparagraph (a) can be the subject of investor-State arbitration.!

' United Parcel Service of America Inc. v. Government of Canada, (November 22, 2002) (Award on Jurisdiction)
para, 98 [hereinafter Award on Jurisdiction].

Further, it found that such claims of anticompetitive conduct cannot be brought under Article
1105; as a result, the Tribunal struck, inter alia, paragraphs 22, 33(b) and 34 of the Amended

Statement of Claim. Finally, the Tribunal directed that:

it is incumbent on UPS to demonstrate, in the first instance by a further amended
statement of claim, that the claims made in paragraphs 27, 28 and 30-32 and the
related allegations of fact can be based on a provision of Section A other than
article 1105.7

4. UPS has now filed its “Revised” Amended Statement of Claim. The revisions do not
comply with the Tribunal’s Award in three respects. First, UPS has failed to strike all the
paragraphs the Tribunal ordered struck. UPS continues to allege that a lack of regulatory
supervision and transparency can constitute a violation of Article 1105 (for example, RASC
para. 41). Second, UPS has failed to abide by the condition the Tribunal imposed on retaining
paragraphs 27 and 28 of the Amended Statement of Claim. Where the Tribunal required UPS to
“demonstrate” that those claims could be “based on” another article, UPS simply changed them
to claims under Article 1102 (RASC paras. 28 and 30). Third, UPS has taken advantage of the
Tribunal’s leave to file a further amended claim by introducing new claims relating to Fritz
Starber (RASC paras. 37-39), and new claims relating to Articles 1103 and 1104 (RASC paras.
32-35).

5. In order to make out a claim under Article 1102, an investor would have to show that the
conduct violates national treatment independent of whether it is anticompetitive. UPS has failed
to do this. The Revised Amended Statement of Claim continues to make claims based on alleged
anticompetitive conduct that fall under Article 1502(3)(d). In its Award on Jurisdiction, the
Tribunal found that claims of anti-competitive conduct falling under Article 1502(3)(d) are

outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. While an investor might make a claim that conduct that

? Tbid., para. 134.

is otherwise anti-competitive conduct under 1502(3)(d) also violates Article 1102, the investor
could not rely on the alleged anti-competitive character of the conduct as a basis for the claim
under Article 1102. In other words, an investor cannot make the claim that conduct violates
Article 1102 as anti-competitive conduct per se.

6. As a result, Canada is facing a claim that, for the third time, raises issues outside the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. With each filing, UPS has re-packaged its earlier claims slightly, without
changing their true substance. Indeed, press reports indicate that a UPS spokesperson has

claimed that the Award on Jurisdiction changed nothing:

Everything stands. Nothing is off the table. All it really means to the case is we
have some retooling to do.*

7. No amount of retooling can change the substance of the UPS claim. Canada therefore
requests that the claims identified in this Motion be struck, and that UPS be denied any further
opportunity to amend its pleadings.

I. ARGUMENT

A. UPS HAS NOT COMPLIED WITH THE TRIBUNAL’S RULING ON ARTICLE
1105

 

8. UPS’ arguments under Article 1105 simply re-formulate claims the Tribunal ordered
struck. Canada objects to the following paragraphs of the Revised Amended Statement of
Claim:
e Paragraphs 40 to 42, which allege a lack of transparency and supervision over Canada
Post. These issues were previously raised in paragraphs 33(b) and 34 of the Amended
Claim and were ordered struck pursuant to paragraph 134 (a) of the Award on

Jurisdiction.

e Paragraphs 43 and 51, which allege that the facts pleaded with respect to Article 1102
also amount to a breach of Article 1105. Apart from the impossibility of determining the

3 See, for example, I. Jack, “Ottawa Claims Lawsuit Under NAFTA Has Narrowed: Courier to Keep Case Alive,”
National Post (23 November 2002) at 6. Annex I.

facts to which UPS refers, the only possible implication arising from these claims is an
allegation of anticompetitive conduct, notwithstanding the concluding language in each
paragraph.

1. The Tribunal has ruled that supervision and transparency issues are not covered by
Article 1105

9. The Tribunal rejected UPS’ allegation that Article 1105 obligates Canada to ensure the
existence of a transparent and effective regime for the supervision of Canada Post. The Tribunal
therefore struck both paragraphs 33(b) and 34 of the Amended Statement of Claim. This
decision followed from two of the Tribunal’s conclusions. First, the Tribunal concluded there is
no rule of customary international law prohibiting or regulating anticompetitive behaviour.*
Second, the Tribunal concluded that Article 1105 does not itself provide a basis for claims
challenging anticompetitive behaviour and the failure to prohibit or control it.’

10. Paragraphs 40 to 42 raise virtually identical issues to the paragraphs ordered struck, and
seem to be an attempt to circumvent the Tribunal’s ruling. Paragraph 40 alleges a lack of
transparency in the regulatory framework governing the conditions of competition between
Canada Post and UPS. The only difference from the earlier paragraphs is that UPS now styles
this as a “denial of justice”. This does not alter the substance of the allegation, namely that
Canada is not properly supervising Canada Post or its allegedly anticompetitive conduct.
Paragraph 41 alleges that Canada Post has implemented new business plans to compete with
UPS; this is somehow inherently “unfair” to UPS. Paragraph 42 essentially repeats the
allegation in paragraph 40, and suffers from the same fatal flaw.

11. Alternatively, if UPS is arguing that Article 1105 obliges NAFTA Parties to provide
investors with sufficient information to allow them to identify breaches of other NAFTA

provisions, Canada asserts that such a transparency obligation is unknown to customary

4 Award on Jurisdiction, supra note 1, para. 92.

 

international law. It has no place in the Article 1105 minimum standard of treatment,
particularly in the concept of “fair and equitable treatment” cited by UPS.° Indeed, the Supreme
Court of British Columbia, in reviewing the award in Metalclad v. The United Mexican States,
rejected the possibility that Article 1105 included a transparency obligation.’ The NAFTA
Chapter 11 Tribunal in Feldman v. United Mexican States agreed with the British Columbia
court, saying it found “this aspect of their decision instructive.”

12. Canada also adopts and relies upon the arguments it raised during the course of its first
jurisdictional objection with respect to the scope and meaning of Article 1105. The reference to
“equity” in Article 1105 is made in a specific legal context, and does not establish an equitable
jurisdiction for the Tribunal. The question therefore is not whether Canada’s legal system
provides a framework that meets someone’s concept of what is “fair” or “equitable”. The
question is whether Canada’s conduct has risen to the level of an international wrong.’ The
transparency “obligation” UPS raises can in no way meet the high standard required for rising to
this level. There thus can be no such obligation in Article 1105, and paragraphs 40 to 42 should
be struck.

2. Paragraphs 43 and 51 are unclear and by implication could only raise
anticompetitive conduct

13. In paragraphs 43 and 51 UPS attempts to raise violations of Article 1105 without
specifying the facts on which it relies. Both paragraphs purport to incorporate all the facts
pleaded and claims made with respect to Article 1102, “to the extent that they do not assert an

independent breach of anti-competitive conduct per se”. Which claims and which alleged facts

© “Notes of Interpretation of Certain Chapter 11 Provisions”, NAFTA Free Trade Commission, July 31, 2001 at
paras. B(1) and (2). Tab 2.

’ United Mexican States v. Metalclad Corp. [2001] B.C.S.C. 664 at paras. 68-74. Tab 3.

* Feldman v. United Mexican States, Case No. ARB(AF)99/1, Award of December 16, 2002, at para. 133. Tab 4.
° Myers Inc. v. Canada, (November 13, 2000), (Interim Award), paras. 261-263.

are included or excluded is entirely unclear, in part because so many of UPS’ 1102 allegations do
“assert an independent breach of anti-competitive conduct per se”. Canada submits that these
paragraphs are insufficiently clear to establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. In the Award on

Jurisdiction, the Tribunal found that a statement of claim must be:

... Specific enough to put the respondent properly on notice so that it can reply
adequately in its statement of defence.'”

Canada submits that because neither paragraph provides it with sufficient information to
formulate a defence, they should be struck on that ground alone.

14. In any event, both paragraphs attempt to revive claims of anticompetitive conduct, in
spite of their final provisos. The allegations and claims under Article 1102 largely consist of the
claims of anticompetitive conduct that the Tribunal ordered removed from the Amended
Statement of Claim’s section on 1105. In Canada’s view, paragraphs 43 and 51 are a transparent
attempt to circumvent the Tribunal’s Award, and should be struck.

B. UPS HAS NOT DEMONSTRATED ITS CLAIMS CAN BE BASED ON
ARTICLE 1102

15. At paragraph 134(b) of the Award on Jurisdiction the Tribunal stated:

it is incumbent on UPS to demonstrate, in the first instance by a further amended
statement of claim, that the claims made in paras 27, 28 and 30-32 and the related
allegations of fact can be based on a provision of section A of chapter 11 other
than article 1105.

UPS has not complied with this direction. Instead, it has created a new grouping of claims
purporting to allege direct breaches of Article 1102 by Canada Post, making no attempt to

demonstrate that these claims can be based on that article.

'© Award on Jurisdiction, supra note 1, para. 127. See also para. 132.

16. Paragraphs 27 and 28, for example, of the Amended Statement of Claim remain in the
new claim, almost without change. UPS has included words such as “discriminatory” and “more
favourable”, but UPS has pleaded nothing to demonstrate that Canada Post accords it less
favourable treatment than it accords, in like circumstances, to domestic investors. The pleading
amounts to a simple reordering of the Amended Statement of Claim, and does nothing to
establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. The NAFTA does not allow Chapter 11 claims to be
brought in respect of the conduct of monopolies or state enterprises unless they can be brought
within specific elements of Article 1116, and UPS’ claims do not in any event come within the
scope of Article 1102. They fall within Article 1502(3)(d), which the Tribunal has already ruled
is not subject to investor-state arbitration.

1. Chapter 11 claims cannot be brought in respect of the conduct of monopolies and
state enterprises

17. Paragraphs 26-31, as well as paragraph 52(a), do not allege facts capable of sustaining a
claim that conduct of a monopoly or state enterprise has caused a violation of an obligation in
Chapter 11. Article 1116(1) requires that Chapter 11 claims in respect of the conduct of
monopolies and state enterprises be brought through either 1502(3)(a) or 1503(2). Under either
article, claims must include an allegation that the monopoly or state enterprise was exercising
delegated governmental authority with respect to the conduct that is the subject of the claim.
There is no such allegation in the Revised Amended Statement of Claim. This absence is not
simply a failure in form that might be corrected by yet another revision of the claim. Rather,
because the impugned conduct could never be characterized as an exercise of governmental
authority, UPS’ claims should be struck as falling outside the jurisdiction that the NAFTA

confers on the Tribunal.

18.

a) Claims involving the conduct of Canada Post must be brought through either
Article 1502(3)(a) or Article 1503(2)

The requirement to bring claims in respect of the conduct of monopolies or state

enterprises through either 1502(3)(a) or 1503(2) is consistent with the Tribunal’s conclusions on

the relationship between Chapters 11 and 15. In the Award, the Tribunal determined that its

jurisdiction is defined by Article 1116.'' Paragraph 1 of that Article reads:

20.

An investor of Party may submit to arbitration under this Section a claim that
another Party has breached an obligation under:

(a) Section A or Article 1503(2) (State Enterprises), or

(b) Article 1502(3)(a) (Monopolies and State Enterprises) where the monopoly
has acted in a manner inconsistent with the Party’s obligations under Section
A.

The Tribunal found that Article 1116(1) is divided into three parts:

In all three parts of this provision then, a violation of chapter 11 is the substantive
failing to be addressed. Only the mechanism for the violation differs in the three
parts. In one part, the Party assertedly violates that substantive obligation
directly, in the second part the Party acts through a state enterprise, and in the
third part through a monopoly sanctioned by the State. '”

The Tribunal also found that allegations brought under the second or third parts must

incorporate a violation of either 1503(2) or 1502(3)(a), as well as a violation of Chapter 11.

Thus, the Tribunal found that the requirements in Article 1116(1)(b) form a “substantial,

conjunctive limitation on the scope of jurisdiction ...”.'> Similarly, a violation of Article

1503(2) must incorporate a violation of either Chapter 11 or Chapter 14.'*

21.

In Canada’s submission, these conclusions describe a compulsory framework through

which a Chapter 11 claim must be brought. A claim brought against a Party’s violation of

"' Thid., paras. 47, 62.
!? Tbid., para. 67.
'3 Tbid., para. 66.
'4 Tbid., para. 67.

Chapter 11 must be brought through the first part of Article 1116(1)(a), and need only allege a
violation of Section A of Chapter 11. A claim brought against the Party in respect of the conduct
of a state enterprise or a monopoly must be brought through the second part of 1116(1)(a) or
through 1116(1)(b). In either case, the claimant must make out an allegation that encompasses a
violation of both Chapter 11 and either 1502(3)(a) or 1503(2). In other words, the complaint
must consist of an allegation that the Party breached 1502(3)(a) or 1503(2) by failing to prevent
certain conduct by the monopoly or state enterprise that itself violated an obligation in Section A
of Chapter 11. There is no provision for bringing a claim against a monopoly or state enterprise
directly under Chapter 11.

22. This requirement to plead through Chapter 15 when bringing allegations in respect of the
conduct of monopolies or state enterprises is confirmed by the terms of Articles 1502(3) and
1503(2). Article 1502(3) sets out all the obligations of the Parties relating to the conduct of
government and private monopolies. In sub-paragraph (a) it subjects them to the whole NAFTA,
when they are exercising delegated governmental authority, but not otherwise. Sub-paragraphs
(b) through (d) create additional obligations governing the commercial conduct of monopolies.
Similarly, Article 1503(2) subjects state enterprises to the terms of Chapters 11 and 14, when
they are exercising delegated governmental authority, and 1503(3) governs their commercial
conduct. These provisions are the /ex specialis applicable to the conduct of monopolies and state
enterprises; claims in respect of such conduct must fall within them.

23. UPS’ Chapter 11 claims in respect of the conduct of Canada Post must therefore be
brought through either Article 1502(3)(a) or Article 1503(2). This conclusion follows from the
Tribunal’s previous analysis of Article 1116(1), and from the ordinary meaning of Articles

1116(1), 1502(3) and 1503(2).

b) Claims under Articles 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2) must assert an exercise of
governmental authority

24. Both Articles 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2) limit a Party’s obligation to ensure that monopolies
and state enterprises act in a manner consistent with Chapter 11 to situations in which they are
exercising a delegated governmental authority. For example, Article 1502(3)(a) requires a Party

to ensure that a monopoly:

acts in a manner that is not inconsistent with the Party’s obligations under this
Agreement wherever such a monopoly exercises any regulatory, administrative or
other governmental authority that the Party has delegated to it in connection with
the monopoly good or service, such as the power to grant import or export
licenses, approve commercial transactions or impose quotas, fees or other
charges.

25. This means not all acts by monopolies and state enterprises are capable of engaging the
Party’s liability under Articles 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2), and in turn under Chapter 11. Only those
acts involving such an exercise of delegated governmental authority can be the subject of an
investor-state claim. Put another way, for an investor to claim that a monopoly has taken a
“measure” adopted or maintained by Canada within the meaning of Article 1101, that measure
must have been taken by the monopoly in the exercise of delegated governmental authority.
Placed into the context of Article 1102, the “treatment” complained of must also result from such
an exercise of delegated governmental authority.

26. Asapreliminary matter, therefore, UPS’ Article 1102 claim must depend on an
allegation that it has been the victim of “treatment” at the hands of Canada Post, and that Canada
Post in according this treatment was engaged in activities such as granting import or export
licences, approving commercial transactions or imposing quotas, fees or other charges. Absent
this allegation, there is no “measure” by Canada Post capable of sustaining an investor-state

claim, and no jurisdiction for the Tribunal.

27. The allegations made in paragraphs 26 through 31 and paragraph 52(a) of the Revised
Amended Statement of Claim do not allege that Canada Post was acting in the exercise of
delegated governmental authority. Instead, UPS alleges only that Canada Post failed to accord
national treatment to UPS, in violation of Article 1102. In some instances UPS alleges that
Canada Post failed to supervise itse/f adequately (e.g., paras. 27 and 30); in other instances, UPS
simply asserts that Canada Post has violated Article 1102 (e.g., para. 28). In no instance does
UPS allege that Canada violated either 1502(3)(a) or 1503(2) by failing to ensure that Canada

Post acted in a manner consistent with Article 1102, in the exercise of delegated governmental

authority.
J) UPS cannot allege an exercise of governmental authority
28. UPS’ failure to allege an exercise of governmental authority is no mere failure in form.

The facts pleaded by UPS cannot sustain an allegation that Canada Post was exercising any
delegated governmental authority with respect to the matters at issue. UPS’ claims are based on
Canada Post’s accounting or costing decisions and on other internal matters that bear no relation
to such governmental authority as the granting of import or export licences, the approval of
commercial transactions or the imposition of quotas, fees or other charges. As a result, neither
Article 1502(3)(a) nor Article 1503(2) applies to the facts alleged in paragraphs 26-31, and there
can be no Chapter 11 jurisdiction created.

29. UPS assumes that Canada Post, as a state enterprise, always exercises delegated
governmental authority. This argument cannot be sustained. The NAFTA clearly defines a
Party’s liability for the actions of monopolies and state enterprises for the purposes of Chapter 11
in Articles 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2), which specify that the monopoly or state enterprise must be
engaged in the exercise of delegated governmental authority. If UPS were correct, that

requirement would be redundant, and large sections — indeed, a substantial majority — of Articles

ll

1502(3)(a) and 1503(2) would be reduced to inutility. Such a result would fly in the face of the
basic rules of treaty interpretation, and cannot have been the intention of the NAFTA Parties.

30. Canada therefore submits that paragraphs 26 to 31 of the Revised Amended Statement of
Claim be struck, as they do not allege an exercise of delegated governmental authority.
Furthermore, they cannot be corrected to make such an allegation, because the facts pleaded
cannot sustain one. The paragraphs are therefore beyond the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

31. Paragraph 52(a) similarly alleges violations of Articles 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2) without
alleging that Canada Post was exercising delegated governmental authority. It too should be
struck, because the facts pleaded cannot sustain an allegation that Canada Post was engaged in
such an exercise.

2. In any event, UPS’ claims of anticompetitive conduct do not come within the scope
of Article 1102

32. Canada further submits that UPS’ allegations of anticompetitive conduct, including cross-
subsidization and predatory conduct, in paragraphs 27-30 and 52(a) of the Revised Amended
Statement of Claim are not capable demonstrating a breach of Article 1102. UPS does not even
allege the facts necessary to establish the basic legal elements of that Article. Thus, regardless of
whether Canada Post was exercising delegated governmental authority, UPS has not made out a
claim under Article 1102. This is hardly surprising, as the allegations simply do not raise
national treatment issues. UPS itself must recognize this, or it would have pleaded these claims
under Article 1102 in the first instance.
33. Canada submits that the following paragraphs of the Revised Amended Statement of
Claim are not capable of constituting a violation of Article 1102:

e Paragraph 27, which reincarnates certain elements of the former paragraph 22. It alleges

that Canada Post has “failed to use appropriate accounting devices to properly allocate

costs ...”, claiming that such failures allow for “discriminatory and unfair behaviour”.
This is a straightforward allegation of anticompetitive conduct in the form of cross-

12

34.

subsidization, made possible by inadequate supervision, lifted directly from a paragraph
that the Tribunal ordered struck. The allegation has been moved from 1105 to 1102, with
only a token effort made to relate it to the text of 1102.

Paragraph 28, sub-paragraphs (c), (e) and (h), which repeat almost verbatim the
allegations formerly in paragraph 27. Again, these are straightforward claims of
anticompetitive conduct in the form of cross-subsidization and predatory pricing, re-
characterized as violations of 1102. UPS alleges that Canada Post competes in non-
monopoly sectors “without fairly charging or disclosing the appropriate costs”'; that
Canada Post developed its e-post products using revenues from monopoly products,
allowing it to sell them below cost;'° and that Canada Post has not properly attributed the
costs of its pension plan to non-monopoly products, allegedly permitting Canada Post to
price those products below their properly attributable costs.'”

Paragraph 28, sub-paragraphs (a) and (f), which contain allegations of anticompetitive
conduct in the form of the restrictive trade practices of exclusive dealing and refusal to
deal, respectively.

Paragraph 29, which in the claimant’s alternative pleading revives elements of the former
paragraph 29 relating to anticompetitive conduct. UPS alleges Canada Post has “failed to
ensure, through accounting, regulatory and/or structural measures” that it does not
employ its monopoly infrastructure so as to affect conditions of competition in non-
monopoly sectors. This allegation is simply dropped into the section on Article 1102
with no link to the legal elements necessary to establish a violation of the article.

Paragraph 30, which is a near verbatim reproduction of former paragraph 28, with the
insertion of a few token key-words from Article 1102. The second and third sentences
contain allegations of anticompetitive conduct in the form of cross-subsidization and
predatory conduct, respectively, without pleading the legal elements of Article 1102.

Paragraph 52(a), which makes an allegation of anticompetitive conduct in the form of
cross-subsidization.

The fact that UPS has superficially re-characterized its claims as coming under Article

1102 does not suffice to create the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. As the Tribunal stated in its Award on

Jurisdiction, UPS’ pleadings must “demonstrate” that the allegations raised are capable of

sustaining a violation of a provision in Section A.'* UPS has chosen Article 1102 for this

purpose, but has failed to make the necessary demonstration.

'S Revised Amended Statement of Claim, para. 28(c), chapeau.
'© Tbid., para. 28(e).

"" Tbid., para. 28(h).

'8 Award on Jurisdiction, supra note 1, para. 134(b).

35. Article 1102 provides in part:

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party treatment no less
favorable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors with
respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct,
operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party
treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to
investments of its own investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition,
expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of
investments.

36. This is a relative obligation, requiring specific allegations to raise even the possibility of
a violation of Article 1102. UPS must allege that Canada has accorded treatment to a Canadian
investor or investment that it has not provided, in like circumstances, to a foreign investor or
investment. One of the most basic elements of Article 1102 is thus a simple comparison:
whether a Party has accorded better treatment to its own investors than to those of another Party.
UPS has failed to meet even this elementary standard in its pleadings relating to anticompetitive
conduct.

37. UPS’ argument amounts to the following: Canada Post is a monopoly that also engages
in non-monopoly business. It does not properly account for its monopoly and non-monopoly
costs. This results in UPS being disadvantaged in comparison to Canada Post.

38. Even if we assume arguendo that UPS’ allegations are true, they cannot demonstrate that
UPS has received less favourable treatment than that accorded, in like circumstances, to
domestic investors or their investments. There is no allegation that Canada Post has purported to
dictate the accounting or costing practices of UPS or other investors. There is no allegation that

Canada Post has created one system for Canadian investors and another for foreign investors.

There is not even an allegation that Canada Post has the power or purports to have the power to
do either of these things, or to exercise any other control over UPS.

39. In the absence of these allegations, which are required elements of Article 1102, UPS’
allegations cannot amount to “treatment” under any circumstances. Canada Post’s accounting or
costing practices are not “treatment” of UPS, or anyone else. They are internal decisions relating
only to Canada Post. In short, UPS is not complaining of any treatment it has received at the
hands of Canada Post; it is complaining about the presence of a monopoly in a non-monopoly
market.

40. This argument simply does not raise any question of the treatment UPS receives at
Canada’s hands, let alone the treatment UPS receives from Canada Post in the exercise of
delegated governmental authority. The argument is entirely limited to Canada Post’s internal
operations as they relate to its role as a competitor in the market place. Canada Post’s
competitive activities cannot in and of themselves result in a violation of Article 1102, because a
competitive relationship is by definition one in which enterprises seek to establish a superior
market position.

Al. UPS’ argument therefore relates to commercial activities, not governmental ones. The
fact that those commercial activities are undertaken by a monopoly or state enterprise cannot
convert them into governmental ones. That is precisely why Articles 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2)
distinguish between simple actions of monopolies and state enterprises, and those undertaken in
the exercise of delegated governmental authority. To allow UPS to bring a claim exclusively on
the basis of commercial activity — even by the state — would be to extend the concept of national
treatment beyond all recognition. It would also create an inconsistency in the NAFTA where

none need exist — Canada Post’s presence in a non-monopoly market is permitted by the NAFTA

in Article 1502(3)(d). Such an inconsistent result cannot have been the intention of the Parties,
and ought to be avoided under the standard rules of treaty interpretation.

42. The absurdity of UPS’ argument becomes evident when considering the remedies Canada
might implement to grant “national treatment” under the UPS definition. Under that definition,
Canada Post would be required to respect NAFTA obligations even for its commercial activities
in non-monopoly markets. Canada would therefore have to ensure that Canada Post and its
subsidiaries never offered contractual terms more favourable than those offered by any of its
foreign competitors. Similarly, Canada would have to prevent Canada Post and its subsidiaries
from offering services below foreign competitors’ prices to attract their market share. In short,
Canada would have to prevent Canada Post from competing — although only with foreign
couriers. The result would be that Canada Post could never compete in a non-monopoly market.
UPS’ expansive interpretation of the national treatment obligation cannot be correct.

3. UPS’ claims are subject only to Article 1502(3)(d), which is not arbitrable under
Chapter 11

43. | A simple comparison of the text of Article 1502(3)(d) with the allegations in paragraphs
27, 28 (a), (c), (e), (f) and (h), 29 (where it pleads in the alternative), 30 and 52(a) confirms that
UPS’ claims are not capable of constituting a violation of Article 1102. The allegations therein
all centre on anticompetitive conduct such as cross-subsidization and predatory conduct, which
are expressly covered by Article 1502(3)(d).

44. That Article provides that a Party shall ensure any monopoly it maintains or designates:

does not use its monopoly position to engage, either directly or indirectly,
including through its dealings with its parent, its subsidiary or other enterprise
with common ownership, in anticompetitive practices in a non-monopolized
market in its territory that adversely affect an investment of an investor of another
Party, including through the discriminatory provision of the monopoly good or
service, cross-subsidization or predatory conduct.

45. In each of paragraphs 27-30, and 52(a) UPS alleges that Canada Post is not subject to
adequate constraints when it competes in the market, allowing it to cross-subsidize non-
monopoly services with earnings from monopoly services. Even a cursory reading of these
allegations is sufficient to demonstrate this. There are allegations of Canada Post’s failure to use
appropriate accounting devices (para. 27), its failure to properly allocate costs (paras. 27,
28(c)(e)(h), and 30), and its general failure to regulate its non-monopoly activities (para. 29). In
short, UPS is plainly alleging that Canada Post has engaged in anticompetitive conduct such as
cross-subsidization and predatory conduct. UPS simply dropped words like “anticompetitive
conduct”, replacing them with vague references to discriminatory and unfair behaviour, in an
attempt to give its arguments the flavour of Article 1102. The change in wording does not
change the substance.

46. Subparagraphs 28(a) and 28(f) contain allegations of anticompetitive conduct in the form
of restrictive trade practices. In sub-paragraph 28(a), UPS alleges that Canada Post engages in
exclusive dealing by preventing its retail franchisees from selling products that compete with
Canada Post. In sub-paragraph 28(f), UPS alleges that Canada Post is refusing to deal with UPS
by allowing only Purolator to sell stamps at its retail outlets. Both of these claims fall properly
within the scope of Article 1502(3)(d).

47. Indeed, all of these claims are squarely within the ambit of Article 1502(3)(d), which
expressly governs claims of anticompetitive conduct. As such, they can only be brought under
State-to-State dispute settlement. UPS is seeking to undo the Tribunal’s clear rejection of its

argument that UPS can enforce the terms of Article 1502(3)(d) through Chapter 11:

... the analysis we undertook earlier of the relationship between chapter 11 and
chapter 15 excludes the possibility that any provision of article 1502(3) other than
subparagraph (a) can be the subject of investor-State arbitration.'?

48. The Tribunal should reject this attempt to evade its Award on Jurisdiction. While the
Tribunal’s analysis was conducted in the context of Article 1105, the conclusions as to the
relationship between Chapters 11 and 15 are not specific to that article. UPS cannot bring the
terms of Article 1502(3)(d) into Article 1102 any more than it could into Article 1105. Article
1116 still applies, and still limits the investor’s ability to bring Chapter 15 claims to either
1502(3)(a) or 1503(2), and not 1502(3)(d).
49. UPS’ allegations that Canada Post has violated Article 1102 by engaging in
anticompetitive conduct are just not contemplated in the NAFTA, which expressly permits the
designation of monopolies and state enterprises (Articles 1502(1) and 1503(1)), implicitly
permits monopolies to engage in non-monopoly businesses (1502(3)(d)), and expressly subjects
monopolies and state enterprises to Chapter 11 obligations only when they are exercising
delegated governmental authority (1502(3)(a) and 1503(2)). UPS therefore seeks use a
jurisdiction of the Tribunal that Chapter 11 does not grant, to enforce obligations on Canada Post
that Chapter 15 does not create.

C. UPS HAS RAISED NEW CLAIMS UNDER ARTICLES 1103,1104 AND 1105
50. UPS has raised entirely new claims under Articles 1103 and 1104 in paragraphs 32-35,
alleging that Canada provides more favourable treatment to investors of non-NAFTA Parties
than that provided to UPS. The claims are repeated under Chapter 15, in paragraph 52(b).
Furthermore, UPS has raised new claims concerning Fritz Starber in paragraphs 37-39 that are

outside the scope of the original claim. None of these claims were in the Notice of Intent, as

'° Tbid., para. 98.

required by Article 1119. Canada should not have to face new claims in UPS’ third iteration of
its Statement of Claim.

1. The Article 1103 and 1104 claims are prejudicial to Canada, and do not identify the
measures at issue

51. The treaties complained of existed when UPS filed its Statement of Claim, and when it
filed its Amended Statement of Claim. When the Tribunal provided UPS with the opportunity to
submit a Revised Amended Statement of Claim, it was to permit UPS to correct the deficiencies
in its last pleading — deficiencies of UPS’ own making. As Canada has shown, UPS did not
follow the directions of the Tribunal; instead, it has taken advantage of the Tribunal’s grant of
leave to further amend its Statement of Claim to file new claims. Canada submits that allowing
these changes would be prejudicial to Canada, and requests that they be struck.

52. Canada also objects to the claims in paragraphs 32-35 because they do not identify the
measure complained of, let alone the treatment accorded under it. UPS alleges that Canada has
entered into treaties that provide better treatment than that available under NAFTA. That is the
full extent of the allegation. UPS has not alleged that Canada has taken any measure under those
treaties. Under the definition in NAFTA Article 201, the treaties themselves are not measures;
even if their terms were more favourable in the abstract, which Canada denies, their mere
existence does not satisfy the elements of Articles 1103 and 1104. Furthermore, just as UPS has
not identified the allegedly inferior treatment it has received, it has not provided any basis for its
claim that this alleged treatment caused it any harm.

53. Canada therefore submits that paragraphs 32-35 should be struck in their entirety, along
with paragraphs 52(b). The references to Articles 1103 and 1104 in paragraphs 21 and 53 should

also be struck.

2. Claims involving Fritz Starber are outside the scope of this arbitration

54, Once again UPS has taken advantage of the Tribunal’s order in the Award on Jurisdiction
to file entirely new claims. This time, the claims relate to a previously unnamed alleged
subsidiary of UPS, and have no connection to the original dispute. UPS’ claims in paragraphs
37-39 were not included in the Notice of Intent. Article 1119 requires an investor to identify,
inter alia, the provisions of the Agreement alleged to have been breached and the issues and
factual basis for the claim.

55. Article 20 of the UNCITRAL rules permits a claimant to amend the claim, but imposes a

limitation on this ability. The Article provides:

During the course of the arbitral proceedings either party may amend or
supplement his claim or defence unless the arbitral tribunal considers it
inappropriate to allow such amendment having regard to the delay in making it or
prejudice to the other party or any other circumstances. However, a claim may not
be amended in such a manner that the amended claim falls outside the scope of
the arbitration clause or separate arbitration agreement.

UPS’ claim concerning Fritz Starber is not within the scope of the original Notice of Intent, and
therefore “falls outside the scope of the arbitration clause ...” and should be struck for that

reason.

20

Il. ORDER REQUESTED
A ruling by the Tribunal as a preliminary question, pursuant to Articles 21(1) and (4) of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, that the following paragraphs in the Revised Amended Statement
of Claim be struck: paragraphs 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43,

51, 52(a), 52(b), 52(c).

A ruling that consequential references to Articles 1103, 1104, 1105, 1502(3)(a) and 1503(2) in

paragraphs 21, 22 and 53 should also be struck.

Submitted this 7th day of February 2003, at Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Of counsel to
the Government of Canada

21

