Archived Content

 

Information identified as archived on the Web is for reference, research or recordkeeping purposes. It has
not been altered or updated after the date of archiving. Web pages that are archived on the Web are not
subject to the Government of Canada Web Standards. As per the Communications Policy of the Government
of Canada, you can request alternate formats by contacting us.

 

Contenu archivé

 

L'information archivée sur le Web est disponible a des fins de consultation, de recherche ou de tenue de
dossiers seulement. Elle n’a été ni modifiée ni mise a jour depuis sa date d’archivage. Les pages archivées
sur le Web ne sont pas assujetties aux normes Web du gouvernement du Canada. Conformément a la
Politique de communication du gouvernement du Canada, vous pouvez obtenir cette information dans un
format de rechange en communiquant avec nous.

 

AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER 11 OF
THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

BETWEEN

UNITED PARCEL SERVICE OF AMERICA INC
AND

GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

 

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
RELATING TO CANADA’S CLAIM OF
CABINET PRIVILEGE

 

THE TRIBUNAL:

Dean Ronald A Cass, Arbitrator

L Yves Fortier CC, QC, Arbitrator
Justice Kenneth Keith, President

Ucheora Onwuamaegbu, Registrar

8 October 2004

Counsel for Canada, on 11 June 2004, forwarded to the Tribunal a letter of 25
May 2004 from the Clerk of the Privy Council of Canada claiming privilege in
respect of 377 documents or portions of documents “which are confidences of
the Queen’s Privy Council for Canada”. The Clerk gave these reasons for his
claim:
In Canada there is a prohibition that does not allow the disclosure of
documents that are considered to be Cabinet confidences, namely
documents that contain evidence of Ministers’ discussions and
deliberative process. This prohibition stems from the Canadian
political system, in which the government is responsible to
Parliament, and must gain and maintain the confidence of the House
of Commons in order to govern. The responsibility and
accountability of Cabinet Ministers are essential elements of this
system.

The principle of Cabinet confidentiality was recently clearly
reaffirmed by the Supreme Court of Canada in the case of Babcock v
Attorney General of Canada [2002] 3 S.C.R. 3. As Clerk of the
Privy Council and Secretary to the Cabinet, I am responsible for the
custody of Cabinet confidences. Prior to objecting to the disclosure
of documents, | have to be confident that the information comes
within the Cabinet confidence definition, and secondly that it is
information that the government wishes to protect, taking into
account the competing public interests in disclosure and retaining
confidentiality. I would have made the same decision regarding
these documents in a domestic dispute.

The 377 documents for which the Cabinet confidence privilege is
claimed, relate to the Cabinet and Treasury Board (which is a
Committee of Cabinet) approval of various initiatives, and financial
and commercial transactions of the Canada Post Corporation. The
documents consist mainly of Treasury Board submissions and
decisions, Memoranda to Cabinet, briefing notes for ministers,
correspond between Mini: and draft lati These are
at the core of Cabinet confidentiality in that they provide direct
evidence of the information presented to Ministers for the purpose
of their discussions and deliberations.

 

The Clerk of the Privy Council, in the words of counsel for Canada, “is the most
senior non-political official in the Government of Canada. He provides
professional and non-partisan support to the Prime Minister on all policy and
operational issues that may affect the government”.

On 17 June 2004, UPS filed a motion seeking the following relief:

(i) An order requiring Canada to indicate which documents listed
in the Schedule to the Clerk’s letter are responsive to specific
document requests in the Investor’s Information Request, within
three weeks time;

(ii) An order requiring Canada to produce such documents within
three weeks; and

(iii) A declaration that the Tribunal will make the appropriate
adverse inferences in the event of Canada’s failure to comply
with these orders.

Canada, in its reply of 13 August 2004, provided two schedules supplied by the
Privy Council. The first lists 27 documents which were provided to UPS in
redacted form on 30 July 2004 and the second lists 143 documents which are
also responsive to UPS’s Information Request but which cannot be produced as
the information is privileged. The schedules give descriptions of the
documents, relating them to the particular terms of the paragraphs of s39(2) of
the Canada Evidence Act. They also note for each document the UPS question
from its Information Request. Canada asked that UPS’s motion be dismissed
with costs.

On 26 August 2004 UPS in its rejoinder sought the following relief:

(i) An order requiring Canada to produce unredacted versions of
the 170 documents identified as responsive to the Investor’s
Information Request, within three weeks time; and

(ii) A declaration that the Tribunal will make the appropriate
adverse inferences in the event of Canada’s failure to comply
with this order.

Canada responded to that rejoinder on | September 2004.

The claim by the Clerk is made under the law of Canada, in particular s39 of the
Canada Evidence Act which provides:

Confidences of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada

39. (1) Where a minister of the Crown or the Clerk of the Privy
Council objects to the disclosure of information before a court,
person or body with jurisdiction to compel the production of
information by certifying in writing that the information constitutes
a confidence of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada, disclosure of
the information shall be refused without examination or hearing of
the information by the court, person or body.

(2) For the purpose of subsection (1), "a confidence of the
Queen's Privy Council for Canada" includes, without restricting the
generality thereof, information contained in

(a) a memorandum the purpose of which is to present
proposals or recommendations to Council;

(b) a discussion paper the purpose of which is to present
background explanations, analyses of problems or policy

options to Council for consideration by Council in making
decisions;

(c) an agendum of Council or a record recording
deliberations or decisions of Council;

(d) a record used for or reflecting communications or
discussions between ministers of the Crown on matters
relating to the making of government decisions or the
formulation of government policy;

(e) a record the purpose of which is to brief Ministers of the
Crown in relation to matters that are brought before, or are
proposed to be brought before, Council or that are the subject
of communications or discussions referred to in paragraph
(d); and

(f) draft legislation.

(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), "Council" means the
Queen's Privy Council for Canada, committees of the Queen's Privy
Council for Canada, Cabinet and committees of Cabinet.

(4) Subsection (1) does not apply in respect of

(a) aconfidence of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada
that has been in existence for more than twenty years; or

(b) a discussion paper described in paragraph (2)(b)

(i) if the decisions to which the discussion paper
relates have been made public, or

(ii) where the decisions have not been made public, if
four years have passed since the decisions were made.

Parts of the arguments made by the parties turn on this provision and on the
Babcock decision mentioned by the Clerk in his initial claim. While the
Tribunal will return to aspects of those arguments it begins with the basic
principle, accepted by the parties, that Canadian law is not directly in point.
Canada may not have the advantage of its own law if it is more generous than
the law governing the Tribunal. As the Tribunal said in its Decision of 17
October 2001 on the Place of Arbitration a claim for Cabinet privilege “would
have to be assessed not under the law of Canada but under the law governing
the Tribunal”. That law does not in this context refer the Tribunal to national
law. Further, s39(1) in its own terms does not apply to this proceeding since the
Tribunal does not have “jurisdiction to compel the production of information”.
Canada puts the point in these words:

Canada does not expect the Tribunal to apply s.39 as law governing
this arbitral proceeding. Instead, it asks the Tribunal to consider it

8.

along with the Canadian case law as a description of the mechanism
by which the Clerk of the Privy Council for Canada responsibly
exercises the power to claim Cabinet confidentiality. Certification
is the trigger by which information becomes protected on the basis
that the documents are of a certain character and that it is desirable
that confidentiality be retained because the public interest in so
doing outweighs other interests.

The parties accept that Canada may claim privilege in respect of certain
documents, but they disagree on the extent of that privilege and, in fact, on the
judgment or assessment involved in it. On the first matter UPS contends that
the privilege is limited to state secrets (such as information the release of which
would compromise national security), while Canada submits that wider
categories of information, including Cabinet deliberations, are protected. We
will return to that issue. It is convenient first to consider the judgment or
assessment to be made by the state official who makes the claim to privilege.

The authorities to which the parties have referred us indicate that, in addition to
determining whether the document in question falls within the particular
category or whether its release would compromise the relevant protected public
interest, the official is also, if that first test is satisfied, to consider and weigh the
competing public interest in disclosure, in this case for the purposes of the
arbitration (and not of course for general public release). (The authorities from
common law countries include, in addition to the Babcock case, United States v
Nixon 418 US 683, 705-713 (1974); Sankey v Whitlam (1978) 142 CLR |
(HCA); Environmental Defence Society v South Pacific Aluminium [1981] |
NZLR 146 and 153 (NZCA); Air Canada v Secretary of State for Trade [1983]
2 AC 394 (CA and HL), and Carey v Ontario [1986] 2 SCR 637, 654-673.) It
may be that there are interests, particularly in respect of core national security or
military secrets, where no such weighing is required, but Canada does not so
contend in respect of Cabinet deliberations. The Clerk, it says, must

be confident that the information comes within the Cabinet
confidence definition. He must also exercise his judgement to
conclude that it is information the government wishes to protect,
taking into account the competing public interests in disclosure and
retaining confidentiality. (emphasis added)

In that it repeats what the Clerk said in the second paragraph of the extract from
his letter of 25 May 2004 set out in para 1 above.

On their face however that letter and the schedules submitted to the Tribunal do
not demonstrate that the Clerk has undertaken the weighing required. He begins
by saying that “In Canada there is a prohibition that does not allow the
disclosure of documents that are considered to be Cabinet confidences ...”. The
attached list of the 377 documents does no more than repeat the wording of the
relevant paragraph of s39(2). That is also the case with the later schedules
listing the 170 documents. To the extent that the claimed privilege in respect of
Cabinet documents exists in the present case, the process of invoking it must
involve that element of weighing. In this case the process has not included that

element and to that extent is deficient, assuming that a privilege does exist in
respect of Cabinet confidences.

We return to that question of the extent of the privilege. Does it extend beyond
state secrets and if so to what? Does it extend to Cabinet documents of the kind
in issue here? The authority to which UPS referred us in support of limiting the
privilege to “state secrets” does not provide a definition of that expression.
Depending on the definition, that expression may of course cover a narrow or
wide range of matters. We need not however attempt to resolve that matter of
definition since the materials available to us, including national freedom of
information laws, indicate plainly that state practice does support the protection
of information falling within deliberative and policy making processes at high
levels of government. Those processes cannot function completely in the open.
That recognition of the need for protection exists notwithstanding the movement
to be seen in many countries towards greater openness in the public sector. But
the protection to be afforded is in general carefully circumscribed to protect no
more than the interests that call for protection, for instance in frank and
uninhibited exchanges between Cabinet members or in advice given to them,
and, as already discussed, those interests in general are subject to being
outweighed by the competing interest in disclosure.

As stated, the Clerk has not on the record before us undertaken the necessary
weighing. Further, the record does not show that he has made the initial
judgment in respect of each document by reference to the protection of a
relevant public interest. For instance the description of many of the documents,
tracking the relevant provisions of the Canada Evidence Act, says only that they
“present proposals or recommendations” to the Cabinet (s39(2)(a)) or record its
decisions (s39(2)(c)); but the particular “proposal” might have been accepted in
full and the resulting “decision” publicly announced or promulgated in law, and
disclosing those documents may not threaten in any way candour of
communication or a vigorous deliberative process — the more so, if, as with
many of the documents, five years or more have passed since they were
prepared.

Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that the claim to Cabinet privilege is not
made out.

The Tribunal directs that Canada consider whether it wishes to assess whether
the claims to privilege may be established by reference to particular stated
public interests which justify protection and to weigh that justification, if it is
made out, against the public interest in disclosure, for the purpose of the
arbitration, to UPS and the Tribunal. The result of any such process, if it is
undertaken, must be made available to UPS and the Tribunal by 29 October
2004.

A failure to disclose, found by the Tribunal to be unjustifiable, may lead to the
Tribunal drawing adverse inferences on the issue in question. Whether it does
draw such an inference will depend on the circumstances surrounding that issue.
As stated in the ruling of 21 June 2004 that is not a matter that can sensibly be
ruled on in the abstract.

For the Tribunal
8 October 2004

