Archived Content

 

Information identified as archived on the Web is for reference, research or recordkeeping purposes. It has
not been altered or updated after the date of archiving. Web pages that are archived on the Web are not
subject to the Government of Canada Web Standards. As per the Communications Policy of the Government
of Canada, you can request alternate formats by contacting us.

 

Contenu archivé

 

L'information archivée sur le Web est disponible a des fins de consultation, de recherche ou de tenue de
dossiers seulement. Elle n’a été ni modifiée ni mise a jour depuis sa date d’archivage. Les pages archivées
sur le Web ne sont pas assujetties aux normes Web du gouvernement du Canada. Conformément a la
Politique de communication du gouvernement du Canada, vous pouvez obtenir cette information dans un
format de rechange en communiquant avec nous.

 

AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER 11 OF
THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

BETWEEN

UNITED PARCEL SERVICE OF AMERICA INC
AND

GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

 

DECISIONS OF THE TRIBUNAL
RELATING TO DOCUMENT PRODUCTION
AND INTERROGATORIES

 

THE TRIBUNAL:

Dean Ronald A Cass, Arbitrator

L Yves Fortier CC, QC, Arbitrator
Justice Kenneth Keith, President

Ucheora Onwuamaegbu, Registrar

21 June 2004

INTRODUCTION

1.

The Tribunal has considered and now rules on procedural issues relating to
document production and interrogatories. It would of course prefer that the
parties resolve these issues between themselves, as at one stage appeared to
be in prospect. They and their advisers are in a much better position than the
Tribunal to know the shape of their cases and the detail of the evidence and
argument that they intend to provide support of it.

The Tribunal is conscious of the need for the parties, particularly the
respondent, to know the case they are to make and meet and of the
requirements of equality of the parties and of natural justice. It urges the
parties to attempt to resolve any remaining procedural matters so that the
arbitration may proceed with due expedition to the merits. In particular, it
requests the parties to propose a timetable for the remaining stages leading to
the merits hearing, by agreement if at all possible.

A INVESTOR'S REFUSAL TO PRODUCE CERTAIN DOCUMENTS

3.

Canada in its document request to the Investor sought documents under 61
headings. The Investor agreed to respond to all the requests but with five
exceptions. The disputed requests are as follows:

54. Documents evidencing UPS' reduced profit by reason of the
"benefits and privileges set out above, which are not
correspondingly made available by Canada to UPS, and the US
subsidiaries";

55. Documents evidencing UPS' reduced market share by reason
of the "benefits and privileges set out above, which are not
correspondingly made available by Canada to UPS, and the US
subsidiaries";

56. Documents evidencing UPS' increased out-of-pocket expense
by reason of the "benefits and privileges set out above, which are
not correspondingly made available by Canada to UPS, and the
US subsidiaries"; [these three relate to para 31 of the Revised
Amended Statement of Claim]

58. Documents evidencing that UPS has suffered harm by reason
of the alleged breaches in paragraphs 32-34 of the Revised
Amended Statement of Claim;

61. Documents evidencing UPS' "harm, loss and damage", as set
out in paragraph 44 of the Revised Amended Statement of Claim,
by reason of the allegations made in paragraphs 40-43.

4.

The Investor

refused these requests as they sought evidence of reductions in
profits, market share or out-of-pocket expenses “by reason of”
certain breaches of NAFTA alleged in the Revised Amended
Statement of Claim. Rather than simply requesting profit market
share and expense information, as Canada had done elsewhere in
its document request, Canada’s disputed requests sought
explanations of how these financial results were influenced by
breaches of the NAFTA. These explanations will be properly
provided through expert evidence filed with the Investor’s
memorial. Accordingly, Canada’s disputed requests were
premature.

This refusal must be seen against the direction given by the Tribunal in its
procedural decision of 4 April 2003 to divide the proceedings, with damages,
as appropriate, being dealt with separately from the merits. On | August
2003 the Tribunal directed, in relation to document production, that
“although [it] has divided the arbitration, leaving any issues of damages for
the later stage, UPS will have to demonstrate in terms of article 1116 [of the
NAFTA], that it has incurred loss or damage”.

The Investor says that it has produced all of its documents relating to loss or
damage in response to requests 8 to 23 and 37.

Those requests seek financial statements and all documents relied upon to
produce them, including revenues and costs of all UPS companies and each
UPS product or service that competes with Canada Post’s product or service;
documents describing UPS products that compete or could compete with
Canada Post parcel services, small package express services and electronic
services, documents concerning market share and competitors including
Canada Post; documents defining the Canadian parcel market, small
package express market and electronic services market, by revenue or
volume; studies evidencing any variation of UPS market share by reason of
competition with Canada Post; documents describing UPS services that
compete with Canada Post services; and documents relating to the impact on
UPS of the Postal Import Agreement. The “documents [consisting] of
detailed financial, cost, market share and competitive environment
information were marked as responsive to requests 8 through 23 and request
37, as applicable, of Canada’s document request”.

The Tribunal repeats that it will be for the Investor, if it is to establish
breach of article 1115, to demonstrate that it has suffered loss or damage.
That will be a matter which it will have to address at the merits stage in its
written and oral argument by reference to the record then before the
Tribunal. The record will include the documents referred to in para 7. The
Investor will not at the merits stage have to establish the extent of any such
loss or damage.

9. The Tribunal —_ accordingly dismisses Canada’s application
for a direction that the Investor produce documents in response to the
disputed items in its document request.

B_ INVESTOR’S REFUSAL TO DELIVER THE CONFIDENTIALITY
AGREEMENTS TO CANADA

10. The Confidentiality Order made by the Tribunal on 4 April 2003, with the
consent of the parties, provides in part as follows:

7. It shall be the responsibility of the disputing party wishing to disclose
material containing confidential information to any person pursuant to
paragraphs 5(d) or (e) to ensure that such person executes a
Confidentiality Agreement in the form attached as Appendix “A”
before gaining access to any such material. Each disputing party shall
maintain copies of such Confidentiality Agreements and shall make
such copies available to the other disputing party upon Order of the
Tribunal or upon the termination of this arbitration. Where material

ini dential ii ion is to be disclosed to a firm,

pany or group, all employees and of the

firm, organization, company or group with access to the material must

execute and agree to be bound by the terms of the attached
Confidentiality Agreement.

Restricted Access

8. Where a disputing party wishes confidential information, as described
in paragraph 1(b), to be kept confidential from the other disputing
party, the disputing party shall clearly identify on each page of the
material containing such information the notation ‘Restricted
Access ~ Dissemination Prohibited”.

9. (1) A person is entitled to receive access to information described
in paragraph 8 of this Order only if that person:

(a) is legal counsel employed or retained by Canada,
Canada Post Corporation, United Parcel Service of
America, Inc. or United Parcel Service Canada Ltd., and
their support staff;

(b) is an expert or consultant retained by a disputing party
in connection with this proceedings; and, in either case

(c) their access to the information is necessary for the
preparation or the conduct of the case

(2) Information provided under this section shall only be used for
the purpose of these proceedings and shall only be given to persons
referred to in subsection (1) if such persons:

(a) execute a Confidentiality Agreement in the form
attached as Appendix “‘A”;

(b) undertake not to disclose the information or permit to be
disclosed the information in whole or in part, except for
the purposes of use during the course of this proceeding;
and

(c) return the information and file a certificate to the effect
that any notes or copies, in paper or electronic format,
have been sealed or destroyed.

The Tribunal reads para 9 as dealing with a subset of the documents already
covered by para 7. The provisions of para 7, including those about making
copies of the confidentiality agreements available to the other party, apply to
the documents covered by para 9 along of course with the additional
requirements of that paragraph. Under the clear terms of para 7, the
confidentiality agreements which are to be executed are to be made available
only at the end of the arbitration or by order of the Tribunal. There is no
immediate automatic obligation to make them available on the execution of
the agreements.

Canada contended that the Investor should make copies of all the agreements
available to it before it released the documents it was to disclose to the
Investor. It filed a Motion to that effect.

The Investor, while submitting that it is not obliged, in terms of paras 7
and 9, to make the agreements available has in fact made those executed by
its two counsel of record available to Canada. Canada as a result, on | March
2004, gave instructions to her escrow agents to deliver the documents to Mr
Appleton, Counsel for the Investor.

Because of the disagreement between the parties over the interpretation of
the order of 4 April 2003 and because the Tribunal’s Order contemplates
further dissemination, Canada maintains its request that the Tribunal rule on
its Motion. It also asks the Tribunal to order counsel for the Investor not to
further disseminate the restricted documents pending a decision on the
Motion.

Counsel for the Investor confirmed in a letter to Canada of 26 September
2003 that it would strictly comply with the provisions of the Confidentiality
Order. It objected to providing all the agreements since that would
effectively disclose the names of all potential expert witnesses or consultants
retained by the Investor. That information at this time is privileged and
confidential, a point accepted by Canada in its submissions.

The Tribunal will proceed on the basis of the statement by counsel for the
Investor that it will comply strictly with the provisions of the Confidentiality
Order; that undertaking includes in particular paras 7 and 9 and the
provisions in the latter relating to restricted documents. In terms of para 7 of
that order, the agreements which have not been disclosed will be made

available to Canada at the latest at the end of the arbitration. The
parties, and Canada in particular, will have the benefit of those agreements
when the Tribunal no longer exists. Those agreements would appear to
provide Canada with the assurances and legal remedies against disclosure
which it seeks.

Further, para 7 of the Order enables the parties to ask the Tribunal to order
release at an earlier time.

As the Tribunal understands the matter, Canada does not at this stage seek
the release of any further confidentiality agreements. It also understands that
the documents held in escrow have been released.

Accordingly it sees no need at this stage to make any order or direction in
this respect.

C INVESTOR'S REFUSAL TO ANSWER CERTAIN

20.

21.

22.

INTERROGATORIES

The Investor refused to answer more than half of the 197 interrogatories
submitted to it by Canada. The Investor submits that those interrogatories are
not proper and are not consistent with international arbitral practice under
NAFTA chapter 11 and the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. That was so for
one or more of four reasons: the questions

(a) relate to the presentation of the Investor's case;
(b) are irrelevant to the proceeding;

(c) ask for documents; or

(d) seek information within Canada's knowledge.

A number of the Investor's refusals depend on more than one of the reasons
and it accordingly it lists some of the disputed questions under more than one
heading; and Canada in its submissions and listing of the questions divides
Reason (a) into two.

Canada asks the Tribunal to direct the Investor to answer fully 105 questions
which it lists. It also asks the Tribunal to direct that

(a) the failure by the Investor to answer a question about facts additional to
those already supplied to Canada to establish UPS Canada as an
investment of UPS would prevent UPS from adducing evidence or
making submissions in support of such allegation; and

(b) the failure by the Investor to answer questions in all other categories will
be a ground for the Tribunal to drawn an adverse inference in respect of
such allegations.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Those additional —_ requests, especially the second, highlight
one type of difficulty the Tribunal faces at this stage in ruling on those
matters. It will always be open to the parties and in particular to Canada to
submit at the oral stage that the failure of the other party to produce evidence
or other information in support of a pleaded allegation means that the
allegation is not established; the drawing of an adverse inference is
frequently an aspect of such a submission and of any ruling on it. These are
not matters which can sensibly be ruled on in the abstract. For one thing,
there may be evidence or answers to other interrogatories which will bear on
the unanswered interrogatory.

The point is a broader one. As indicated above in paras 3 and 8 in a different
context, it is for the Investor to make out its claim. It must assess for itself
whether its failure to adduce evidence including the disclosing of documents
or the answering of interrogatories will prejudice its ability to make out its
case.

Canada makes the point that although the Tribunal's direction relating to
document production requires a description of "a narrow and specific "
category of documents, no such limiting language appears in the direction
relating to interrogatories. While that is so, the Tribunal did express the view
that " on balance . . . interrogatories may be useful in narrowing the issues
[between] the parties", and noted its power to give specific directions to
resolve disputes about interrogatories. Further," the procedures relating to
the refusals to respond to document production shall apply with respect to
interrogatories"; and the overall purpose , as the parties agree, is to facilitate
the process of arbitration by narrowing the issues and giving proper notice to
the other party. The initial pleadings, the documents disclosed, the later
pleadings and further evidence are, of course, all part of that process.

At this stage, the Tribunal considers that it can best contribute to that overall
purpose and process by directing Canada to submit more specific

interrogatories which

(1) are more clearly directed to matters of fact (bearing in mind in particular
the second sentence of Para D.1 of the direction of 4 April 2003),

(2) will help narrow the scope of the claim as pleaded, and

(3) do not require documents to be disclosed.

It directs that those reformulated interrogatories be submitted by 6 July 2004
and that any objection of the Investor be submitted no later than

20 July 2004.

The Tribunal repeats its preference that the parties resolve this matter by
agreement if they possibly can.

For the Tribunal
21 June 2004

