INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
In the Proceeding between

URBASER S.A.
AND CONSORCIO DE AGUAS BILBAO BIZKAIA, BILBAO BISKAIA UR PARTZUERGOA.

(Claimants)
and
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/26

Decision on Jurisdiction

Rendered by
Professor Andreas Bucher, President
Professor Pedro J. Martinez-Fraga, Arbitrator
Professor Campbell McLachlan QC, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal: Mr. Marco Tulio Montaiiés-Rumayor

Representing Claimants: Representing Respondent:

Dra. Mercedes Fernandez Fernandez Dra. Angelina Maria Esther Abbona
Dr. Juan Ignacio Santabaya Gonzalez Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Jones Day Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacion
Madrid, Spain Buenos Aires, Argentina

Also representing Urbaser S.A.:
Juan Carlos Calvo Corbella

D. Enrique del Carril

Del Carril, Colombres, Vayo y
Zabalia Lagos

Madrid, Spain

Date: December 19, 2012

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Juris:

Table of Contents

 

A. Pi
B. The nature of the dispute
1. Claimants’ claims on the merits a7
2. Respondent's position and objections to jurisdiction. 11
C. The legal frameworl 12

Il. Respondent's First Objection: Claimants failed to meet the requirements set forth in Article X of.
the Argentina-Spain BIT.
A. Preliminary matters
B. The Parties’ analy:
1. °s pi
2. Claimants’ position

C. The Tribunal’s findings
1. The purpose and relevance of understanding the 18 month rule....

2. The requirement of submi n of the “dispute” to the “competent tribunals” of the Host
State 49
a) The effects of the emergency laws on the operation of Argentina’s courts 49
b) Competence of local courts requires Claimants’ jus standi.. 51
54
he “substance” cannot be reached through proceedings of an ancillary nature. 55
b) The “substance” cannot be reached pursuant to summary or expedited proceedin;

 

Mee

 

 

 

 

 

 

f the requirements of Article X (2) and (3) of the BIT ....
sition

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
 

    
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

c) The “substance” cannot be reached by a declaratory judgment.
d) What fora for claims for compensation of damages?
e) The 18 month requirement with respect to ordinary court proceeding:
4. Conclusi
Ill. _ Respondent’s Second Objection: Claimants have no legal standing to bring claims for legal
rights that belong to another entity 69
1. 69
2. Claimants’ position 14
3. The Tribunal’s findings. 78
Iv. Respondent's Third Objection: The investment invoked by Claimants is not a protected
under the Argentina-Spain BIT 84

 

 

A. — Preliminary matters
B. The transfer of AGBA shares held by Dycasa S.A. to URBASER S.A. ...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

1. *s position
2. Claimants’ position
3. The Tribunal’s findings.
C. CABB’s shareholder interest in AGBA and its participation agreements concluded with third
parti 95
1. s position 95
2. Claimants’ position 97
3. The Tribunal’s findings. 99
D. CABB’s legal standing as a public entity not acting with the authorization of the Kingdom of
Spain 102
1. s position 102
2. Claimants’ position 104

  

 

3. The Tribunal’s findings. 105
V. Decision. Ill

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

I. Background
A. Procedure

1. On July 20, 2007, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre’’) received a Request for Arbitration (“the Request’’)
dated July 6, 2007, presented in the Spanish language (‘Solicitud de Arbitraje”) and
submitted by URBASER S.A. AND CONSORCIO DE AGUAS BILBAO BIZKAIA, BILBAO
BISKAIA UR PARTZUERGOA (“Claimants”, respectively “URBASER” and “CABB”)
against the ARGENTINE REPUBLIC (“Argentina” or “Respondent’). The Claimants
submitted the Request pursuant to Article X of the Agreement on the Reciprocal
Promotion and Protection of Investments between the Argentine Republic and the
Kingdom of Spain signed on October 3, 1991 ' (“Argentina-Spain BIT” or “the BIT”).

2. On October 1, 2007, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered the
Request and notified the Parties of its registration.

3. Claimants and Respondent (the “Parties”) agreed to waive the nationality
requirement as provided in Article 39 of the ICSID Convention (the “Convention”).
Respondent selected the formula provided for in Article 37(2)(b) of the Convention
regarding the constitution of the Tribunal. Claimants agreed to this choice, subject to
the provisions of Article 38 of the Convention.

4. On December 18, 2007, Claimants appointed a national of Spain as arbitrator
and proposed the designation of another arbitrator as president of the Tribunal.
Respondent rejected the latter proposal on December 28, 2007, and suggested another
candidate to become president. Claimant objected to this new proposal on January 3,
2008. On February 15, 2008, Respondent appointed an arbitrator of Argentine
nationality and advanced a new proposal for president of the Tribunal. Because both
arbitrators proposed by the Parties shared the nationality of Claimants and
Respondent, respectively, pursuant to Article 39 of the Convention the agreement of
all parties was required to confirm these appointments. On June 18, 2008, Claimants
rejected both proposals that Respondent had raised.

5. On September 29, 2008, Claimants withdrew their initial appointment of an
arbitrator and instead appointed Professor Pedro J. Martinez-Fraga, a national of the
United States of America, as Arbitrator. The Parties were informed on October 30,
2008 that Professor Martinez-Fraga had accepted his appointment.

' acuerdo para la promocién y proteccién reciprocas de inversiones firmado por la Repiblica Argentina y el Reino
de Espaiia el 3 de octubre de 1991.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

6. Respondent stated on December 18, 2008 that an agreement had been reached
between the Parties to accept the appointment of a national of a party pursuant to
Article 39 of the Convention. On January 20, 2009, Claimants requested that the two
remaining arbitrators be appointed by the Chairman of the Administrative Council,
one of them to serve as the Tribunal’s president. By letter dated February 13, 2009,
the Centre confirmed that in the absence of an agreement between the Parties, no party
could designate an arbitrator having the nationality of either Party.

7. On February 23, 2009, Respondent appointed Sir Ian Brownlie, a national of
the United Kingdom, as arbitrator. On February 26, 2009, the Centre confirmed that
Sir Ian had accepted his appointment.

8. On May 26, 2009, Respondent rejected and Claimants accepted a proposal by
the Centre for the appointment of a president of the Tribunal. A new proposal by the
Centre on June 9, 2009 was accepted by Claimants on June 16, 2009 and rejected by
Respondent on the same day. A further proposal submitted by the Centre on July 10,
2009 was refused by both Parties on July 17, 2009.

9. The Centre then considered Claimants’ earlier request to have the third
presiding arbitrator appointed by the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council
as provided for in Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 4 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules. By letter dated July 30, 2009, the Centre informed the Parties that it
intended to propose the appointment of Professor Andreas Bucher, a national of
Switzerland and a member of the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators, as the third arbitrator
and President of the Tribunal. In an additional letter dated August 21, 2009, the
Secretary-General of ICSID responded to Respondent’s objections to the proposed
appointment by concluding that these objections were not compelling.

10. On August 25, 2009, Respondent agreed to the appointment of another Swiss
national that the Centre earlier had suggested and to which Claimants had agreed on
May 26, 2009. When the Centre stated that it was going to seek this appointee’s
acceptance, on September 1, 2009, Claimants stated that their earlier acceptance was
no longer in effect and that they were opposed to Respondent’s attempt to have
Professor Bucher’s designation replaced upon its unilateral initiative.

11. On October 13, 2009, the Parties were informed that the Chairman of the
ICSID Administrative Council had appointed Professor Andreas Bucher as the
President of the Tribunal. On October 16, 2009, the Parties were further informed that
Professor Bucher as well as Sir Ian Brownlie and Professor Pedro J. Martinez-Fraga
had accepted their respective appointments and that accordingly, the Tribunal was
deemed to be constituted and the proceedings to have begun on that date.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

12. In view of the first session of the Tribunal that was envisaged to be held in
Paris on December 16, 2009, the Parties submitted an agreement on multiple issues
listed on that meeting’s provisional agenda. By letter dated December 10, 2009, the
Tribunal offered additional suggestions for the Parties’ consideration. As the Parties
were making progress in resolving outstanding issues, the meeting in Paris was
cancelled, based on the expectation that agreement would be reached on the
outstanding issues listed on the provisional agenda within a few days between the
Tribunal and the Parties.

13. On January 3, 2010, Sir Ian Brownlie passed away. Pursuant to Arbitration
Rule 10(2), the proceeding was thus suspended and the Argentine Republic was
invited to appoint an arbitrator.

14. On February 26, 2010, the Argentine Republic appointed Professor Campbell
McLachlan QC, a national of New Zealand as arbitrator. On March 8, 2010, the
Centre informed the Parties that Professor McLachlan had accepted his appointment
and that therefore, in accordance with Arbitration Rule 12, the proceeding resumed the
same day from the point it had reached at the time the vacancy occurred.

15. On March 18, 2009, Claimants filed with the Centre a Proposal to disqualify
(“Propuesta de Recusaci6n”) Professor McLachlan as Arbitrator pursuant to Article 57
of the ICSID Convention. The same day, the Centre confirmed receipt of the Proposal
and declared that in accordance with Arbitration Rule 9(6) the proceeding was
suspended until a decision on the Proposal for disqualification was taken.

16. On April 16, 2010, Respondent filed a submission in response to the
disqualification proposal. Invited thereupon to make his own statement on the matter,
if any, Professor McLachlan submitted such statement by letter dated May 5, 2010.
The Parties all filed a further response to this statement on May 14, 2010.

17. Considering the Proposal for disqualification submitted by Claimants in
accordance with Arbitration Rule 9(4), Professor Pedro J. Martinez-Fraga, Arbitrator,
and Professor Andreas Bucher, President, decided on August 12, 2010 to dismiss the
Proposal.

18. As of the date this Decision issued, i.e. August 12, 2010, the proceedings
resumed. By letter of August 18, 2010, the Tribunal raised remaining procedural
issues. By their respective statements of September 2, 2010, the Parties confirmed that
all outstanding items had been clarified and agreed upon. On September 23, 2010, the
Tribunal received the Parties’ joint Agreement on the issues included in the first
meeting’s Agenda that had been convened for December 16, 2009, both in Spanish
and in English. By letter of September 27, 2010, the Tribunal approved the Parties’

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

Agreement on the issues listed on the first meeting’s Agenda and declared the first
session closed.

19. In accordance with the rules contained in that Procedural Agreement and
within the time limits fixed therein and later amended in part, the Parties filed
submissions as follows:

. Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits dated January 27, 2011

. Respondent’s Memorial on Objections to the Jurisdiction of the Centre
and the Competence of the Tribunal dated April 12, 2011

. Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction dated June
22, 2011

. Respondent’s Reply on Objections to the Jurisdiction of the Centre and

the Competence of the Tribunal dated August 15, 2011

. Claimants’ Rejoinder on Objections to the Jurisdiction of the Centre
and the Competence of the Arbitral Tribunal dated September 29, 2011.

These submissions were presented in Spanish and completed by a translation in
English. A selected number of the attached documents and legal authorities were
provided in English, either as originals or as translations.

20. Each Party filed supporting documentation together with the submission to
which it relates. Further, on July 27, 2011, and in addition to a request contained in its
Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction, Respondent requested the Tribunal to order
Claimants to submit additional documents that (a) were mentioned in Legal Opinions
filed by Claimants but not submitted; (b) would allow to determine the standing and
legal representation of CABB; and (c) relate to Claimants’ shareholding in AGBA and
to the transfer of those shares. In their letter of August 4, 2011, Claimants rejected this
request. After several complementary exchanges of letters submitted by the Parties,
the Tribunal’s decided on August 15, 2011 not to rule on this matter before the
exchange of briefs on jurisdictional issues concluded. Taking account of the
documents filed by Claimants together with their Rejoinder on Objections to
Jurisdiction, Respondent submitted a new request on October 21, 2011, containing a
shorter list of documents requested, to which Claimants replied through their letter of
November 3, 2011. In its Procedural Order of November 14, 2011, the Tribunal
requested Claimants to submit a number of documents referred to in Prof. Manévil’s
Report but not submitted, while it declined to make an order on Respondent’s request
in relation to other documents, i.e. “accounts in participation agreements” concluded
by CABB and financial statements of Aguas de Bilbao S.A., which Claimants had
refused to produce because they related to third parties alien to these proceedings. In
reply, Claimants indicated in their letter of November 24, 2011 that one of the

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

documents requested in fact had never existed and that in relation to all others those
that were available already had been submitted, while the remaining documents to be
searched could not be found and were, in any case, not necessary to resolve the matter
submitted to arbitration. Respondent addressed these propositions that Claimants
advanced in a letter dated December 5, 2011, that requested the Tribunal to draw a
negative inference from Claimants’ position with respect to the contents of the share
transfer agreements and related documentation that was not submitted. Respondent
further reiterated its request that Claimants submit the accounts contained in the
participation agreement concluded by CABB with Aguas de Bilbao S.A. and confirm
that there are no other accounts in participation agreement relating to AGBA. In their
comments dated December 19, 2011, Claimants rejected Respondent’s requests and
denied the relevance of the documents Respondent still sought to file with this
Tribunal.

21. The Parties having agreed that it would be appropriate to hold a jurisdictional
hearing, it was so decided. In accordance with Arbitration Rule 13(3), the Parties
agreed to hold such hearing in Paris.

22. This hearing on the jurisdictional matters raised through Respondent’s
objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of this Tribunal was
conducted in Paris on February 6-8, 2012. The following Experts had presented
written statements and were examined at that occasion:

. Prof. Dr. Ismael Mata, presented by Respondent
. Prof. Dr. Ricardo Augusto Nissen, presented by Respondent
. Prof. Dr. Rafael Mariano Manévil, presented by Claimants

. Prof. Dr. Alberto B. Bianchi (Second Opinion), presented by Claimants

. Prof. Dr. Tomas Ramon Fernandez, presented by Claimants

Prof. Mata was examined through videoconference between Paris and Buenos Aires.
All other Experts were examined in Paris. The second part of the hearing was devoted
to the presentation of the Parties’ closing statements. At the end of the hearing,
Respondent and Claimants declared that they had no remaining objection in respect of
the conduct of this proceeding since this Tribunal’s constitution.

23. Complementary documentation was filed after the hearing in compliance with
decisions made on agreed terms by the Tribunal at the close of the hearing, as follows:

. Copies of a sample of decisions rendered by courts of the Argentine
Republic, initially submitted on a CD-Rom exclusively, completed by

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

an English summary of each decision prepared by Respondent, and
commented upon by Claimants in a Note submitted on March 20, 2012;

. English translation of a claim of annulment, offer of evidence and
reservation of rights filed with the La Plata Contentious Administrative
Court No. 2 on December 4, 2006, concerning which Respondent
prepared some corrections, which were reviewed in turn by Claimants
who did not raise on their side a need to make any more specific
observation or clarification;

. Claimants’ English translation of Exhibits to the Request for
Arbitration;
. Copies of slides used by Claimants during their closing statement at the

hearing of February 8, 2012. While Respondent submitted its set of
slides at the hearing, the Tribunal was of the view that Claimants’ filing
occurring after the hearing was, under the circumstances, not
detrimental to any of Respondent’s procedural rights or positions.

24. The hearing held in Paris was recorded and a transcript prepared both in
Spanish (hereinafter: TR-S, Day page/line) and in English (TR-E Day page/line).
Unfortunately, the audio recording of the hearing covering part of Claimants’ closing
presentation in Spanish contained serious technical defects, rendering it inoperable in
most part. The English version, performed by the interpreters, was recorded correctly
and completely. A translation of this version in Spanish was provided. Respondent
then objected to the filing of a brief entitled “Cierre” and described in Claimants’
letter of March 20, 2012 as “[a] written note in support of the claimants’ closing
statement.” The Tribunal recognized that this Note has the effect of duplicating
somehow the oral presentation given by Claimants. This is not what the procedural
rules agreed upon by the Parties and the complementary provisions adopted in
preparation and during the conduct of the hearing had permitted. The presentation of
each Party in support of its position concerning Respondent’s objections to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction was to be made orally and recorded in the transcript. No rule
authorized a Party to submit a written brief covering a matter presented orally and
available as recorded in the transcript. However, the Tribunal had to adopt a solution
that would be fair to Claimants in light of the fact that no fully accurate transcript of
their presentation in Spanish is available. Therefore, the Tribunal accepted
Respondent’s objection in part and decided to disregard this document for the
remainder of this proceeding to the extent it contains statements that are not present in
equivalent terms in the English transcript. The Parties were advised accordingly by
letter dated May 17, 2012. Claimants submitted on June 12, 2012 corrections to the
English and Spanish transcripts of their closing statements, to which Respondent
declared not to have comments.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

25. At the end of the hearing in Paris and in its letters of February 8 and 24, 2012,
the Tribunal submitted to the Parties a series of questions they were invited to
comment upon, which was done by March 20, 2012.

26. On August 24, 2012, the Parties filed with the Tribunal declarations regarding
their costs incurred respectively in this proceeding in relation to its jurisdictional
phase.

27. The Tribunal had a deliberation on September 1, 2012.

B. The nature of the dispute

1. Claimants’ claims on the merits

28. Summarized and reduced to its basic elements in reliance on Claimants’
presentation, the dispute’s history starts when CABB, as a member of a consortium
also composed of Sideco Americana S.A., Impregilo S.p.A. and Iglys S.A., was
successfully submitting a bid for the provision of drinking water and sewage services
in the Province of Buenos Aires. The successful bidders were required to set up a
company in Argentina, to act as Concessionaire. Thus, AGUAS DEL GRAN BUENOS
AIRES S.A. (AGBA), organized on December 2, 1999, became the holder of the
concession for the provision of a drinking water supply and sewage services in the
Region B of the Province of Buenos Aires, based on the Concession Contract it had
concluded with the Province of Buenos Aires on December 7, 1999.

29. URBASER became stockholder of AGBA soon after its constitution, when it
first acquired shares through Urbaser Argentina S.A. and then directly. Dycasa S.A.
also became shareholder at that time. Actually, URBASER entities hold a stake of
27.4122% in AGBA’s capital stock. Of this shareholder participation, 26.3435% is
directly owned by URBASER. The remaining 1.0687% is held by Urbaser Argentina
S.A., an Argentine company. URBASER is the owner of 100% of Urbaser Argentina
S.A. It directly owns 98% of Urbaser Argentina, and holds the remaining 2% through
Transportes Olivos S.A.C.I. y F. an Argentine company. Transportes Olivos S.A.C.I.
y F. in turn is 98% held by Urbaser Argentina S.A. URBASER holds a 2% interest in
Transportes Olivos S.A.C.I. y F. CABB holds 20% of AGBA’s capital stock. Other
shareholder interests in AGBA were held by Impregilo S.A., Iglys and Sideco. The
Employee Stock Ownership Program (“Programa de Participacién Accionaria del
Personal”- PPAP) holds a 10% shareholder interest in AGBA.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

30. On March 27, 2002, pursuant to Decree No. 757/2002, Sideco was authorized
to transfer its shares to Impreglio and Iglys. At that time URBASER, Urbaser Argentina,
and Dycasa were approved for purposes of securing shareholder status in AGBA.

31. Thus, URBASER and CABB collectively acquired an interest of 47.4122% in
the water supply and sewage concessionaire for 7 districts in the Province of Buenos
Aires. URBASER is the environmental arm of the ACS Group, Actividades de
Construccién y Servicios and is a leader in the management of public utility services.
CABB is a Spanish entity almost exclusively engaged in the provision of water and
sewage services, which is characterized by Claimants as having independent legal
status and capacity, whose members include a great number of Municipalities and the
Basque Government. It is the entity responsible for the primary network management
in the Province of Bizkaia (Basque Country). It serves more than 70 Municipalities
and, as Claimants note, it is also authorized to carry out such activities in other
countries.

32. Claimants assert that the dispute arose when AGBA was proscribed from
charging tariffs in conformance with its own internal decision-making. The dispute
further ripened when the concession was taken away on July 14, 2006, and the
Province notified AGBA of the early termination of the Concession. This notification
was issued pursuant to Decree 1666 dated July 11, 2006. Claimants assert that the
prohibition to calculate the tariffs in US-$ and to review them by reference to US
price indexes was of great importance. The state of emergency legislation prevented
operation, maintenance, and amortization costs from being computed in US-$, as
provided for in Law 25.561 of January 6, 2002. This legislation also was adopted in
the Province of Buenos Aires pursuant to Law 12.858, dated February 28, 2002.

33. The tariffs were converted from US-$ into Pesos, using an exchange rate of
1:1, during a time when the Peso had depreciated by more than two thirds of its value.
Concessionaire’s obligations, however, remained constant; AGBA had to endure the
reduction and freezing of its tariffs to one third of their initial value without that value
ever reverting to its initial levels or even increasing at all as of the termination date. In
the fourth year, the Province enacted a new law that caused the reversal of
privatization of services, which actually took place at the seventh year of the
Concession. This legislation was to be applied without the prior adaptation of the
contract. The new regulatory framework included provisions that materially altered
the rules relied upon by the Claimants at the time of the investment. Moreover, the
investors were faced with clearly uncooperative behaviour on the part of the Executive
Branch of the Province of Buenos Aires (the Grantor) and the Buenos Aires Water
Regulatory Agency (ORAB). Both authorities adopted measures and decisions or
refrained from taking action so as to ensure that the economic burden on the users
would be minimized or mitigated, and they prevented AGBA from applying the

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

established tariffs and from adopting any procedure intended to collect amounts that
could constitute a nuisance to delinquent users who were also their constituency at the
voting polls. The economic equilibrium of the Concession was thus disrupted and the
investment lost. The Grantor took formal actions only and did not consent to the
adoption of any methodology designed to contribute to the readjustment of AGBA’s
Concession Contract. The Grantor never seriously committed to any renegotiation
. In fact, the Grantor itself terminated the Contract. The termination was no

 

process
more than the final act of a death foretold that divested Claimants from any remaining
value of an investment that already had been materially devaluated.

 

34. While AGBA’s requests to increase the tariffs and to restore a distorted
economic equation were rejected, other service concessionaires, and particularly the
entity that would replace AGBA in the concession area (Aguas Bonaerenses S.A.,
ABSA), were granted tariff increases and subsidies that had been dismissed with
respect to AGBA. Similar events concerning other water service reverse-privatization
processes in Argentina also took place.

35. AGBA is undergoing liquidation because the concession was terminated and as
a result of having been prevented from charging the tariffs. The investors have waited
a long time and have not been paid any compensation at all. Impregilo S.p.A. is
another AGBA shareholder who has initiated an ICSID arbitral proceeding that led to
issuance of an Award on June 21, 2011.7

36. It is Claimants’ position that the Argentine Republic is the party responsible
for the actions and omissions of the Federal Government and the Province of Buenos
Aires, being both the legislature and the executive branches of the Federal
Government and the Province of Buenos Aires, including their actions as Grantor and
those of the Regulatory Agency.

37. Claimants contend that the Argentine Republic is responsible for the actions of
the Province under BITs and customary international law. In the instant case, its
responsibility is based on the Spain-Argentina BIT of October 3, 1991. Article I(2) of
this BIT makes reference to the “territory” in which the investment is located, and
Article I(4) defines “territory” as the “land territory of each Party.” In Argentina, such
territory comprises all Provinces.

 

2 Impregilo S.p.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/O7/17. The Award is pending before an ad hoc
Committee constituted on January 30, 2012.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

38.

10

Claimants’ Prayer for Relief is stated in their Memorial on the Merits and has
been confirmed as follows:

“T, A declaration that the Argentine Republic breached the provisions of
the Bilateral Investment Treaty executed between the Argentine Republic and
the Kingdom of Spain on October 3, 1991 and, in particular, the following
obligations of the referred Treaty: Article III.1 on the obligation to protect
foreign investments and the prohibition to adopt unjustified or discriminatory
measures; Article IV.1 on the obligation to afford fair and equitable treatment
to the referred investments; and Article V, which forbids any illegal and
discriminatory expropriation of foreign investments and imposes the
obligation to compensate the investor in the event of expropriation or any
other measure of similar characteristics and effects.

2. An order for the Argentine Republic to compensate CABB and
URBASER for all damages caused by the referred breaches and,
consequently, to pay the following amounts:

21 To URBASER, S.A., the sum of USD 101,758,797 (ONE
HUNDRED AND ONE MILLION, SEVEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY-
EIGHT THOUSAND, SEVEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-SEVEN
U.S. DOLLARS).

2.2 To CONSORCIO DE AGUAS BILBAO BIZKAIA,
BILBAO BIZKAIA UR PARTZUERGOA, the sum of USD
109,449,861 (ONE HUNDRED AND NINE MILLION, FOUR
HUNDRED AND FORTY-NINE THOUSAND, EIGHT HUNDRED
AND SIXTY-ONE U.S. DOLLARS)

3. An order for the Argentine Republic to pay interest to the Claimants,
as accrued in the amounts established in sections 2.1 and 2.2 above, at an
annual compound interest rate of 15% (FIFTEEN PER CENT), computed
from December 31, 2010 up to the date of actual payment.

4. An order instructing the Argentine Republic to make any additional
compensation as may be required to remedy the damages caused to the
Claimants, as deemed just and adequate by the Tribunal.

5. The mandate for the Argentine Republic to bear the costs of this
arbitration, including the fees payable to the ICSID, the fees and costs
incurred by the Arbitral Tribunal and all legal costs, experts’ fees, and any
other expenses incurred by the Claimants in this proceeding under the concept
of full compensation.

This request for relief and payment of interest contemplates any amounts
resulting from the evidence produced in this arbitration, as deemed
appropriate by the Arbitral Tribunal.

The Claimants hereby expressly reserve the right to supplement, add to or
amend the claims asserted in this Memorial, according to the circumstances

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

considered in the course of the arbitration proceeding, pursuant to Article 46
of the ICSID Convention.”

39. Claimants have submitted their claims to ICSID arbitration without resorting
first to the competent courts of the Argentine Republic, as provided for in Article X
(2) of the BIT. They assert that they were authorized to proceed directly to
international arbitration by virtue of the Most Favoured Nation Clause (MFN clause)
contained in Article IV(2) of the BIT. They maintained this position in this proceeding
and reject Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction based on this ground and other
premises that Respondent has raised.

2. Respondent’s position and objections to jurisdiction

40. In general, Respondent rejects Claimants’ claims in their entirety and contends
that Claimants have not asserted a plausible or prima facie case for violation of any of
the provisions of the Argentina-Spain BIT. Whereas it did not address the substance of
Claimants’ claims in its written submissions on the matter of jurisdiction, Respondent
advised the Tribunal in its introductory statement at the hearing that the whole case is
a “story of a total failure to comply with the expectations that the State had.”> Even
before the emergency measures were taken, the Concessionaire was not able to meet
its obligations under the operative agreements concerning the provision of services.
Respondent further asserts that it was fundamental for the Argentine Republic to know
who was awarded the Concession and this knowledge in particular was important with
respect to the company acting as the Technical Operator. There were clear rules
pertaining to the transfer of shares that have not been observed neither by URBASER
nor by CABB. The Authorities of the State had not been informed of several transfers
of shares that had actually been made. In this connection Respondent further avers that
Claimants violated the legal framework to which the investment was submitted.

41. Respondent has raised three objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in the
instant case, all of them being invoked in order to re-assess the basic importance of
consent and of complete compliance with the terms of such consent.

42. First, Respondent objects that the condition set forth in Article X (2) and (3) of
the BIT requiring that disputes between a Contracting Party to the BIT and an investor
of another Party be first submitted to the local courts of the Host State had not been
complied with. Claimants admit that there was no such submission. Respondent
asserts that this is a jurisdictional requirement and cannot be circumvented by using
the Most Favoured Nation Clause (MFN clause) contained in Article IV(2) of the
underlying BIT.

> TR-E, Day 1, p. 12/12 s.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

43. Second, Respondent requests that the Tribunal reject Claimants’ claim because
neither general international law, the Argentine-Spain BIT, the ICSID Convention,
nor Argentine law provide for indirect or derivative shareholder actions. Respondent
observes that Claimants assert that both URBASER and CABB are shareholders of
AGBA. Their respective investments are limited to shares in AGBA. Consequently,
Respondent asserts, their claims must be confined to the protection of rights arising
from those shares. The rights Claimants seek to enforce are derived from the
Concession Contract and are not held by Claimants but rather belong to AGBA.

44. The third objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction states that URBASER had
proceeded to an acquisition of shares contrary to the laws of Argentina when it
acquired all Dycasa’s shares in AGBA. Similarly, Respondent further avers that
CABB also had engaged in illegal transfer of shares when it transferred its shares to
third parties through participation agreements that imply serious violations of the law
governing the holding and transfer of shares in AGBA. Moreover, Respondent objects
that CABB had no standing to resort to ICSID arbitration because it had not obtained
the prior express authorization of the Kingdom of Spain.

45. Respondent’s Prayer for Relief is stated in its Memorial on Objections to the
Jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal. It requests the Arbitral
Tribunal to:

“(1) decide, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41(4), to admit this Objection to
Jurisdiction and to grant the request for production of documents made in
Section E;

(2) order, in accordance with the arguments presented by the Argentine
Republic, a second round of pleadings (reply and rejoinder) at this
jurisdictional stage; and

(3) declare, pursuant to Rule 41(5), that the Centre has no jurisdiction and
that the Tribunal has no competence over this dispute and, therefore, reject
this claim, taxing costs and fees against Claimants, in accordance with
Arbitration Rule 47(1)(j).”

Cc. The legal framework

46. The Tribunal at the outset notes that under Article 41(1) of the ICSID
Convention, it is “the judge of its own competence” and hence has to arrive at its own
conclusion regarding Respondent’s objections.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
13

47. The Tribunal’s jurisdiction, if any, is based on an agreement between the
Parties to this proceeding to submit the dispute framed by Claimants to ICSID
arbitration. The agreement of the Republic of Argentina is contained in Article X of
the Spain-Argentine BIT. More precisely, this provision contains an offer of each
Contracting State of the BIT to submit disputes to arbitration, which an investor may
accept. Such acceptance is often contained in an investor’s request for arbitration. This
acceptance is what happened in the instant case, as both Claimants decided to submit
the dispute to arbitration under the Argentine-Spain BIT. Additionally, Claimants
suggest that by virtue of the MFN clause in Article IV(2) they also invoke the
provisions on dispute resolution contained in the BITs concluded by the Republic of
Argentine with Chile and France, respectively, which do not require prior submission
of the dispute to the domestic courts of the Host State.

48. The issues to be dealt with in this Decision, as they arise based on
Respondent’s jurisdictional objections, relate to the scope and the content of the offer
to arbitrate contained in Article X of the BIT. In very broad terms, the issues before
this Tribunal relate to each Claimant’s standing as investors under the BIT and to the
requirements that must be met in order for this ICSID Arbitral Tribunal to have
jurisdiction pursuant to Article X of the BIT.

49. The arbitration clause offered and invoked in this case is contained in a treaty.
The interpretation and meaning of its terms must therefore follow the principles and
tules of interpretation of the law of treaties. This law is settled in the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969, to which both Spain and the Republic of
Argentina are Parties.* The applicable principles and rules are contained in Articles 31
to 33 of this Convention, which do not need to be reproduced here in full. The primary
principle is stated in Article 31(1) providing that a treaty be “interpreted in good faith
in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose.”

50. The broad purpose of the Argentine-Spain BIT is stated in its Preamble as the
aim of the Contracting Parties in the following terms:

“Desiring to intensify economic cooperation for the benefit of both countries,
Intending to create favourable conditions for investments made by investors
of either State in the territory of the other State, [and]

Recognizing that the promotion and protection of investments in accordance
with this Agreement will encourage initiatives in this field.”

While focusing on the treaty’s object and purpose is important as a general guideline
for the understanding of the BIT, attention also must be accorded to the interpretation

* Argentina ratified the Vienna Convention on 5 December 1972; Spain acceded to it on 16 May 1972.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
14

of each particular provision. The Contracting States adopted the provisions of the BIT
with the broad intention of creating favourable conditions for foreign investments.
Nevertheless, the Contracting States may have adopted concrete solutions that may be
considered as not favourable enough in such a perspective, in particular when looking
at prevailing investment policies of today. In such a case, the favourable conditions as
they were understood, negotiated and expressed in legal terms by the Contracting
States when they signed the treaty must prevail, unless in a particular legal framework
the BIT leaves room open for an interpretation based on more recent developments in
the realm of investment protection law. Such an “open window” allows, however,
only little air to come in because the interpretation of the BIT language must be made
in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the BIT in their
context.

Sl. The Tribunal notes that it has not received information on the preparatory work
undertaken by the Contracting States. The Parties have not referred to any relevant
agreement or instrument of the kind referenced to in Article 31(2) of the Vienna
Convention, nor to any “subsequent practice” of the kind referred to in Article
31(3)(b) that would establish an agreed interpretation of the BIT between the two
Contracting States. Also, there is no authentic interpretation agreed to between the
Parties to the BIT. The Argentine Republic had referred to the position taken by the
Kingdom of Spain before the Maffezini Tribunal,” but such argumentation merely
shows what had been argued by counsel at that time on Spain’s behalf in that
particular arbitration. It does not allow a broader understanding concerning an
interpretation shared by the Spanish Government in general pertaining to the
application of certain provisions of the BIT. Were such an agreement or understanding
to be deemed legitimately binding, it would require a mutual agreement between
Spain and The Republic of Argentina.

52. When considering the purpose either of the BIT as a whole or of a particular
provision, the Tribunal has to give such purpose an understanding that comports with
the equally important principle of effectiveness (or principle of effet utile). Any treaty
tule is to be interpreted in respect of its purpose as a rule with an effective meaning
rather than as a rule having no meaning and effect. This principle is one of the main
features of the law of treaties and has been applied by many ICSID Tribunals.° It is
given effect within Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention by virtue of the
requirement to interpret in good faith. Effectiveness of a treaty rule denotes the need
to avoid an interpretation which leads to either an impossibility or absurdity or
empties the provision of any legal effects.

5 Emilio Augustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, (CSID/ARB/97/7, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of
January 25, 2000.

® Cf. CEMEX Caracas investments B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID/ARB/08/15, Decision on
Jurisdiction of December 30, 2010, No. 107, with further references.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

53. The interpretation of the BIT in light of its objective and purpose must be
further contextualized with the “mother” treaty to which most BIT’s (including that in
the instant case) relate, i.e. the ICSID Convention. As well stated in its preamble, the
broad and fundamental purpose of this Convention is the promotion of and support for
private international investment. However, at this level as well, this goal is embedded
in a policy that seeks to foster a reasonable and tempered balance between the
interests of the investors and those of the Host States. This objective was plainly
stated in the Report of the Executive Directors in the following terms:

“While the broad objective of the Convention is to encourage a larger flow of
private international investment, the provisions of the Convention maintain a
careful balance between the interests of investors and those of host States.”
(para. 13)

While this proposition is true for the ICSID Convention, it must also be true for the
BITs that have been developed based on this treaty.

54. With respect to the applicable law, the Tribunal has to premise the legal
foundation of its decision on the ICSID Convention, the Argentine-Spain BIT and,
where appropriate, on other sources of international law, with priority accorded to the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. Article X(5) of the BIT contains a
provision on applicable law which reads as follows:

“The arbitral tribunal shall make its decision on the basis of this Agreement
and, where appropriate, on the basis of other treaties in force between the
Parties, the domestic law of the Party in whose territory the investment was
made, including its norms of private international law, and the general
principles of international law.”

While this provision is primarily directed to the applicable law on the merits of the
dispute, it may have a role to play in connection with certain specific issues to be
examined concerning jurisdiction, e.g. where the operation of Article X (2) and (3) of
the BIT requires consulting of the Host State’s domestic law.

55. The Tribunal briefly notes the double layer structure for examining the
Centre’s jurisdiction and this Tribunal’s competence. Both of these fundamental
aspects and their most important constituent elements, as are the concepts of
investment and the requirement for consent, must be based, respectively, on the ICSID
Convention and on the Spain-Argentine BIT.

56. When considering the question of its jurisdiction, the Tribunal’s task is not to
examine the merits of Claimants’ claims. At a minimum, and according to generally
accepted practice, the Tribunal is requested merely to examine whether on a prima

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
16

facie basis the facts alleged by Claimants are sufficient that they may support a
finding of possible breaches of the provisions of the BIT and the claims submitted.”

57. Claimants have filed with the Tribunal an extensively documented Memorial
on the Merits of their claims. These claims arise out of a legal dispute. The Tribunal
finds that, prima facie, the facts as alleged, if established, may constitute possible
violations of at least some of the provisions of the BIT invoked by Claimants, that
could justify a claim for compensatory damages. This level of averment is sufficient to
allow a ruling affirming the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Whether Claimants’ recitation of
the facts is proven will, to the extent necessary, be examined at the merits stage of this
proceeding if the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is affirmed. The prima facie test does not
preclude the Tribunal from making legal determinations concerning jurisdiction.

  

IL. Respondent’s First Objection: Claimants failed to meet the
requirements set forth in Article X of the Argentina-Spain BIT

A. Preliminary matters

58. Respondent’s first objection is focused on the terms set forth in Article X (2)
and (3) of the BIT requiring that disputes between a Contracting Party to the BIT and
an investor of another Party first be submitted to the local courts of the Host State.
The same objection includes the position that this requirement cannot be circumvented
by using the Most Favoured Nation Clause (MFN clause) contained in Article IV(2)
of the BIT.

59. Claimants’ basic position in this respect is that they did not and had no
juridical obligation to submit their claims to courts of the Argentine Republic, because
of the MEN clause which Claimants assert to be equally applicable to the terms of the
dispute resolution clause in Article X of the BIT. As a subsidiary issue, Claimants
contend that it would have been impossible, in any event, to have the dispute resolved
by the local courts in the Argentine Republic in the 18 month period prescribed by
Article X(3)(a) of the BIT before its submission to an international arbitral tribunal.

60. The Tribunal will separate the two related issues raised by Respondent’s
objection and first examine the requirement for the investor to submit the dispute to
the local courts of the Argentine Republic (hereinafter also referred to as the “18

7 Cf. Phoenix Action Ltd. v. The Czech Republic, \CSID/ARB/06/5, Award of April 15, 2009, No. 58-64; Saipem
S.p.A. v. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, 1CSID/ARB/05/07, Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation
on Provisional Measures of March 21, 2007, No. 84-91; Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan,
ICSID/ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction of April 22, 2005, No. 235-254, 263-281. For a case where jurisdiction
was denied because the prima facie test failed, cf. Telenor Mobile Communications A.S. v. The Republic of
Hungary, 1CSID/ARB/04/15, Award of September 13, 2006, No. 34, 68-80.

   
  

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
17

month rule”), standing on its own terms in Article X (2) and (3). It is only in the case
that this requirement, as properly construed, was not met or to be met by Claimants
that a related query ripens. The second question would be whether the MFN clause
has the effect of permitting Claimants to submit their dispute to international
arbitration without first addressing the Host State’s local courts. This second question
is moot unless the 18 month rule applies and was not met, or had to be met, in this
case.

61. Before articulating the 18 month rule, Article X(1) of the BIT requires that the
Host State and the investor shall attempt to settle amicably the dispute “as far as
possible.” Article X then defines the rule on prior submission of disputes to the local
courts of the Host State as follows:

“2, Where a dispute within the meaning of paragraph | cannot be settled
within six months from the date on which one of the parties to the dispute
instigated it, it shall, at the request of either party, be submitted to the
competent tribunals of the Party in whose territory the investment was made.

3. The dispute may be submitted to an international arbitral tribunal in
any of the following circumstances:

(a) At the request of either party to the dispute, when no decision has
been reached on the substance 18 months after the judicial proceeding
provided for in paragraph 2 of this article began or

When such a decision has been reached, but the dispute between the
parties persists;

(b) When both parties to the dispute have so agreed.”

62. As a matter of fact, the dispute was formally notified to the Government of the
Argentine Republic by separate letters with similar content from CABB, dated
December 21, 2005, and from URBASER, dated January 24, 2006. Both letters
requested the formal commencement of negotiations in order to reach an amicable
solution within the framework of Article X of the BIT. In the Attorney General’s reply
of March 24, 2006 it was stated that Claimants must first submit the dispute to an
Argentine Court, prior to resorting to international arbitration. It also was noted that
the investor’s direct standing to sue was denied with respect to rights that are to be
claimed by AGBA and not by its shareholders. Pursuant to letters dated September 5
and 6, 2006, Claimants observed that the six month term stated in Article X(2) of the
BIT had elapsed without the dispute having been settled. They then requested the
commencement of arbitration proceedings under the ICSID Convention. The Attorney
General replied on September 27, 2006 stating that no actual proposal or claim had
been submitted by the investor in order to have the controversy settled and that their
reference to the negotiation period appeared as a pure formality; therefore, unless the
investors change their position, the amicable negotiation period provided by the BIT
“may not start running.”

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

63. In their letters sent on October 11, 2006, Claimants noted that there had not
been any attempt on Argentina’s part to conduct negotiations and that because the six
month term for reaching an amicable settlement had been met, arbitration proceedings
could now commence. As arbitration was requested in early September of 2006, the
three months period fixed by Article X of the BIT had long elapsed when the Request
for Arbitration was filed with the ICSID Centre on July 6, 2007. The Tribunal notes
that in the course of this proceeding, Respondent did not again raise an objection
asserting that the six month negotiation period never had started running. In fact, there
is in Article X no formal requirement other than that the dispute had to be “instigated”
by one of the parties. This predicate did undoubtedly take place pursuant to
Claimants’ letters of early September 2006.

B. The Parties’ analysis of the requirements of Article X (2) and (3) of the
BIT

I. Respondent’s position

64. Respondent explains that Article X establishes a sequential dispute settlement
system: (1) Disputes will have to be amicably settled. (2) When six months have
elapsed with no settlement being reached, the dispute shall then be filed, upon request
by one of the parties, with the competent courts of the Host State. (3) The dispute may
be submitted to international arbitration if (i) a period of 18 months has elapsed after
submission of the dispute to domestic courts, or (ii) a final decision has been rendered
but the Parties are still in dispute.

65. The prior submission to the local courts is a jurisdictional requirement that
may not be unilaterally set aside. It does not reflect merely a waiting period because it
imposes an obligation to submit the case to domestic courts. The rule contains two
elements: an obligation ratione fori and an obligation ratione temporis. The rule
requires that international arbitration is subject to the prior submission of the dispute
to the Argentine Courts for a term of 18 months or until a decision is rendered on the
merits of the case, whichever comes first.

66. The purpose of the requirement is to offer a concrete opportunity for the courts
of the Host State to provide for a suitable remedy. The BIT does not require that the
dispute be resolved, but merely that it be submitted to the domestic courts for the
specified period of time. Thus, these courts would have the opportunity to attempt to
resolve the dispute before the Host State’s responsibility is discussed at the
international level. Respondent also notes that the rule of Article X(2) is akin to the

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
19

rule of exhaustion of local remedies in international law; the State where the violation
occurred should have an opportunity to redress it by its own means.

67. By its nature, the 18 month rule is a jurisdictional requirement that is part of
the offer to arbitrate, which includes that condition and that cannot unilaterally be
modified. Claimants are third parties to the BIT. Therefore, they may not alter it and
have to comply with its provisions as they stand. The requirement that disputes be first
submitted to local courts is an essential prerequisite and an integral part of the
“standing offer” to arbitrate. The option for an investor to omit this step is simply not
provided for in the BIT. This requirement is closely related to the consensual nature of
arbitration. As regards a BIT, the respect for the State’s consent is an essential
element. In the BIT at issue in the instant case, the requirement for prior submission to
local courts constitutes an important element of such consent.

68. Claimants have failed to comply with this obligation and they have
acknowledged non-compliance since the time at which they filed their Request for
Arbitration.

69. Respondent objects to Claimants’ contention that the requirement first to resort
to local courts is exceptional. Respondent submits that it is not. It is a common
provision in BITs and was included in a dozen BITs. The 18 month clause was
specifically negotiated by the Argentine Republic. This intent on the part of
Respondent is demonstrated by the fact that, after entering into treaties that did not
include the 18 month clause, the Respondent continued to execute treaties that
included this provision in certain cases. Such a clause was included in the BITs with
Italy (1990), Belgium/Luxemburg (1990), the UK (1990), Germany (1991) and
Switzerland (1991). Then, the Argentine Republic concluded BITs with France,
Poland, and Chile, all in 1991, that did not contain the 18 month rule. The Republic of
Argentina reverted to its older practice in the BITs concluded with France (1993),
Spain (1991), Canada (1991), Austria (1992), the Netherlands (1992) and South Korea
(1995). But even if the rule were exceptional, it would not in any way change its
binding nature as far as concerns the Argentine-Spain BIT, as it applies in this case.

70. Nothing prevented Claimants from filing legal claims. A number of decisions
have been rendered by courts of the Argentine Republic within the 18 months period.
As further explained by Respondent’s Expert, Prof. Mata, the domestic legal system
of the Argentine Republic provides for a wide range of possibilities for Claimants to
submit their dispute to the local courts in an expedited fashion and to have such claims
decided within the term established in the Treaty.

71. In its Answer to questions raised by the Tribunal at the conclusion of the
hearing, Respondent stated at the outset that there is no doubt that it was possible for

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
20

Claimants to bring the instant dispute before Argentine Courts, at least for three
reasons: First, under Article 18 of the Constitution every person has a constitutionally
guaranteed right of access to justice. Second, under Article 20 foreigners enjoy all the
civil rights of the citizen. Third, Article 75, paragraph 22, provides that treaties are
superior to laws, which also means that Article X(2) of the BIT is directly enforceable
in Argentina. Any provision that would deny Claimants access to justice would be
unconstitutional.

72. Claimants did bring the dispute before this Arbitral Tribunal notwithstanding
non-compliance with a fundamental condition attached to Argentina’s consent to
international jurisdiction. Respondent points to the recent decision of the US Circuit
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia in the case Republic of Argentina v. BG
Group plc, decided on January 17, 2012, which affirmed that the Contracting Parties
to the UK-Argentine BIT provided that an Argentine court would have eighteen
months to resolve a dispute prior to resort to arbitration. Whatever an Argentine Court
decided on the admissibility and/or merits of the claims, it would not have prevented
Claimants from subsequently pursuing their claims before an arbitral tribunal.

73. Respondent adds that nevertheless, the fact that Claimants could have brought
this dispute before domestic courts does not mean that, in turn, Argentina — as a party
to such potential lawsuit — would not have the right to raise any objection it may have
against, for example, Claimants’ jus standi or otherwise.

74. In the referenced Answer, Respondent addressed a selection of different
actions as suitable to comply with the requirements of Article X(2) of the BIT. The
first of several alternatives could have been a motion for merely a declaratory
judgment, based on Article 322 of the Federal Code of Civil and Commercial
Procedure, which would allow for a “declaration of unconstitutionality of laws,” based
on a violation of an international treaty, which is in itself unconstitutional. The
investor could argue that a given measure taken by the Government or one of its
subdivisions adversely affects its rights under the BIT, and that it requests a judicial
decision on the conformity of such measure with the BIT. As to Claimants’ objection
that this action does not allow for the submission of a claim for damages, Respondent
replies that Article X(2) only requires that the dispute submitted to the domestic courts
be the same as the one subsequently submitted to international arbitration, but that
nothing prevents a party in this latter proceeding from requesting additional remedies
such as compensation for damages, not included in the action before the domestic
courts provided that it is the same dispute. This scenario would result, as Respondent
explains in its Answer, when damages deriving from the contested measures did not
exist at the time the dispute was submitted to domestic courts. Thus, a motion for a
declaratory judgment may be filed in order to prevent the occurrence of damages,
which complies with the purpose of Article X(2) of the BIT. Whatever the domestic

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
21

courts may finally decide within the framework of a motion for a declaratory
judgment, the investor would have complied with the requirement of prior submission
to local courts.

75. Second, Respondent mentions as another means, albeit in some vein
comparable to a declaratory judgment, the possibility for a Spanish investor to resort
to an Amparo action for the purposes of complying with the requirements of Article
X(2) of the BIT. Such a proceeding is based on Article 43 of the Constitution and can
be initiated by any person (including a shareholder or investor) concerning any act or
omission of the public authority and rights or guarantees recognized by a treaty.
Respondent has submitted summaries of a large number of actions brought before
domestic courts, which include many Amparo actions and decisions rendered in less
than 18 months. An Amparo action mainly seeks a declaration but does not exclude in
actual practice a court ruling ordering banks to return funds to their customers. In any
event, as stated above, a claim for damages is, in Respondent’s view, not
indispensable in order to comply with the requirement of prior submission. Such an
action before domestic courts may be filed in order to prevent damages. Respondent
also cites a precedent showing that an Amparo action can deal with complex issues,
e.g. relating to the telecommunications market.

76. Respondent further asserts that no comparison can be had with the action
brought by AGBA before administrative courts. This action, so Respondent contends,
was not brought by Claimants but by AGBA who is not an investor protected by the
BIT. In addition, it is further averred that the claim expressly states that it must be
distinguished from potential actions brought by AGBA’s shareholders under BITs.
Therefore Respondent concludes, this action is irrelevant for purposes of compliance
with the requirement contained in Article X(2) of the BIT.

77. Finally, Respondent explained in yet another answer to a question raised by the
Tribunal, that neither the Emergency Law nor Decree No. 214/2002 precludes the
filing of actions. Article 12 of the Decree only ordered a stay for 180 days and
exclusively for actions concerning financial and foreign exchange matters. This
provision was amended by Decree No. 320/2002 dated February 15, 2002, which
stayed the “compliance with precautionary measures” and the “enforcement of
judgments” but again did not preclude the filing of actions. The decree referred solely
to lawsuits relating to the financial and foreign exchange system and the stay only
remained in force for 180 days in 2002.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
22

2. Claimants’ position

78. Claimants stated in their Request for Arbitration that the request was filed
“without taking the action to the internal courts of the Argentine Republic”, and have
done so pursuant to the MEN clause contained in Article IV(2) of the Spain-Argentina
BIT.

79. Claimants agree that consent is of course essential to all arbitral jurisdiction
and that Article X constitutes an integral part of the offer to arbitrate. However, they
contend that the MFN clause of Article IV(2) also is contained in that offer. There is
no normative juridical principle, Claimants advance, that MFN clauses do not apply to
jurisdictional issues. This expansive construction is all the more relevant where, as in
the instant case, the Spain-Argentina BIT’s MEN clause provides that it applies to “all
matters governing this Agreement.”

80. Numerous BITs signed by the Argentine Republic do not require that the
dispute be first submitted to the courts of the host country. That is the case with the
BITs of Argentina with Pert (Art. 10.2), Chile (Art. X), USA (Art. VII, 2 and 3) and
France (Art. 8.2). Claimants invoke these BITs and especially the ones with Chile and
France to the extent that those treaties permit the foreign investor to resort to
international arbitration directly without any need of first filing a complaint with
Argentina’s domestic courts. Simply stated, were this requirement imposed on
Spanish investors they would be accorded a treatment less favourable than the
treatment that the Republic of Argentina extends to Pert, Chile, the U.S., and France.
According to Claimants, the requirement to resort first to the local courts of the Host
State is an exceptional condition. As stated by the Tribunal in the Plama case, it is
“curious.”

81. Claimants explain that Concessionaire AGBA brought several challenges
before Argentina’s domestic courts, mostly seeking reversal of the decisions made by
the Regulatory Agency and the Grantor. For the most part, these remedies are still
pending, more than four years after the termination of the Contract. AGBA also
brought an action for annulment of Decree No. 1666/06 which ordered the termination
of the contract. The action was brought before the Contentious Administrative Branch
No. 2 in and for the City of La Plata on December 4, 2006. The proceeding is still in
the evidentiary phase. Therefore, it is asserted that Claimants’ decision to resort
directly to the arbitral tribunal is also fully justified on grounds of diligence and
efficiency. It had to be assumed that it would be impossible to have a dispute resolved
by the local courts in the period prescribed in the BIT. The possibilities of securing a
court decision within 18 months are non-existing.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
23

82. More generally, Claimants place great weight on their contention that the
failure of Argentine Courts to settle investment disputes promptly is both well
chronicled and beyond cavil. The wide range of opportunities to submit such a dispute
to local courts, as affirmed by Respondent, are merely hypothetical and of no practical
moment.

83. Claimants point to a press article where Mr. Rosatti, Respondent’s Attorney
General, explains that it was absolutely impossible for the Argentine courts to settle
disputes similar to investment disputes within the 18 month period.® Mr. Rosatti’s
statement was based on a study conducted by the Auditing Division of Argentina’s
Attorney General, at a time when Mr. Rosatti was acting Attorney General. That study
analysed1,600 proceedings commenced against the Federal Government of the
Republic of Argentina during the five year period of time from 1985 to 2000. The
disputes considered in the study were similar to disputes arising from the violation of
a BIT in as much as the amounts claimed were significant and also because that they
concerned adversarial proceedings that entailed a trial phase or final hearing. Based on
this study the average duration of a proceeding would be six (6) years and one month.
Claimants produce a letter from the “Direccién Nacional de Auditoria” dated
September 7, 2011, suggesting that a request made by a lawyer (not acting on
Claimants’ behalf) for delivery of a copy of the research was denied purportedly
because the relevant documentation was not available in the archives of that
institution. It was also stated that the research had to be expanded to a much broader
sample of decisions, which in turn gives rise to logistical concerns, as well as issues
pertaining to the protection of fiscal and banking secrets.

84. Claimants observe that Respondent remained silent when faced with these
facts and did not even try to object or to offer more recent and favourable statistics
that somehow mitigate the proffered evidence. Claimants in this connection further
aver that because Respondent is perfectly aware of the futility of pursuing judicial
remedies in local courts within an 18 month timeframe, Respondent attempts to
convince the Tribunal that the 18 month target may be reached through other means,
i.e. remedies other than ordinary proceedings.

85. Claimants note that Respondent relies in large part on Prof. Mata’s description
of a number of remedies to secure the protection of an investor, completed by further
explanations given at the hearing. However, they also observe that Prof. Mata
confuses the remedies available to AGBA with the rights of the investors under the
BIT. The investors lack standing to bring any of the expedited summary actions under
the Concession Contract signed with AGBA. Those remedies, which are available

® Horacio D. Rosatti, Los tratados bilaterales de inversién, el arbitraje internacional obligatorio y el sistema
constitucional argentino, in La Ley, Buenos Aires, October 15, 2003, footnote 18.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
24

before domestic courts, are intended to be used by the Concessionaire and not by the
investors. Moreover, as AGBA’s experience in pursuing such claims demonstrates,
neither the administrative nor the court proceedings would have been at all
adjudicated within 18 months. Prof. Mata also misses the point that Claimants do not
want to prevent or avoid damages; they seek damages for the violation of the BIT. As
of the time that the Contract had been terminated and the service transferred to the
new concessionaire, one of the fundamental assumptions at the basis of Prof. Mata’s
Report became moot.

86. The first category of possible remedies listed in Prof. Mata’s Report is an
action for the protection of constitutional rights (action for Amparo). Such proceeding
is, in principle, reserved for the prompt adjudication of clear violations of
constitutional rights, laws or treaties. It does not extend to pecuniary claims.
Claimants further explain that an Amparo action is inadmissible in the absence of
obvious arbitrariness or illegality, in cases requiring a protracted final hearing and the
extensive analysis of evidentiary issues. The expedited procedures governing Amparo
actions are to be adjudicated only for purposes of addressing simple and clear legal
issues. As the file demonstrates in this case, only by proffering considerable oral
(witness) and documentary evidence will the Claimants be able to air all relevant issue
pertaining to liability and damages and thus prosecute a comprehensive action seeking
relief for the loss of their investment.

87. According to Prof. Mata the subject matter of an Amparo action is defined as
the remedy suitable to restrain obvious unlawful or arbitrary conduct. Prof. Mata’s
understanding of an Amparo proceeding clearly established that such a proceeding
could hardly be suitable for an action as has been filed before this Tribunal although
Prof. Mata does not so testify. After the crisis of 2001/02, the courts hearing those
actions solely decided on the return of funds in US$ to bank customers, but they did
not order the payments of any interest or grant of any relief for damages. Bank
customers seeking such relief had to resort to independent ordinary proceedings.
Indeed the Argentine Supreme Court has ruled that an Amparo action is not
appropriate for purposes of assessing complex factual disputes or the application of
law to facts whether a plaintiff suffered pecuniary or liquidated damages. Prof. Mata
confirmed at the hearing that in cases of losses to be compensated through
compensatory damages, relief only could be sought pursuant to ordinary proceedings
before a court of law. An Amparo action cannot be brought where the claimant seeks
damages.

88. Section 43 of the Argentine Constitution of 1994 establishes the restrictions on
Amparo actions and the proscription against bringing such a claim where damages are
sought. Such a proceeding may be brought as to acts or omissions on the part of the
State that “presently or imminently harm, restrict, alter or threaten to violate, with

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
25

obvious arbitrariness or illegality, rights or guarantees recognized in this
Constitution.” An Amparo action may be brought against wrongful government
actions of the type described. Its purpose is to avoid the effects of such actions rather
than to compensate the aggrieved parties for wrongs caused by their effects.

89. Claimants assert that at the hearing, Prof. Mata further explained that an
Amparo action can do more than address the protection of constitutional rights. It can
also be used to seek a declaration that an administrative decision is null and void
because it is unconstitutional. An Amparo proceeding also can suspend the effects of
such an administrative decision and even allow economic compensation.” Such
compensation, however, does not extend to a compensation of damages. It refers to
cases where banks were required to return deposits that they held in accounts. Such
judgments had been rendered only against banks and were limited to the return of
property. Claimants assert that Respondent’s expert cannot instruct the Tribunal on a
single Amparo action concerning the compensation of damages payable by the State.
Claimants point to the Expert’s statement excluding such an action from those capable
of providing protection and resulting in a damages award.

90. Claimants also recall that if an Amparo action is used to annul an
administrative decision claimed to be unconstitutional, such a proceeding is materially
different from an action brought before an arbitral tribunal under a BIT. A claim under
a BIT under no analysis of law or fact can seek the annulment of an administrative
ruling. Therefore, Claimants conclude, an Amparo action seeking such a declaration is
inapposite to Article X(2) of the BIT.

91. Claimants further explain that from a procedural perspective as well, an
Amparo action is not an adequate means to file claims that investors would assert. The
Amparo action is restricted to acts or omissions by public authorities impairing with
manifest arbitrariness or illegality constitutional rights or guarantees that require no
significant debate or analysis of evidence. Because of the complex nature and
character of an investment dispute, it is impossible for an Amparo action to be suitable
for the airing and resolution of a matter of this nature. Examples of this proposition
can be found in the set of judgments that Respondent presented. For instance, in the
case No. 220/04, it is ruled that an Amparo action is reserved for clearly exceptional
circumstances. There are excluded from its scope any dispute requiring discussion and
evidence, and any other dispute for which other suitable means are available for the
Respondent’s protection. Numerous other judgments that Respondent presented
contain similar statements. In 2006 AGBA filed an Amparo seeking to obtain a
declaration of unconstitutionality, but the judge decided that the subject-matter of the
dispute only gave rise to an ordinary administrative action. AGBA also filed a nullity

° TR-E, Day I p. 136/16-137/2

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
26

action at the same time, which again was only of a purely declaratory nature. Both
actions have been pending for more than five years and, to Claimants’ knowledge both
still remain in the evidentiary phase of the proceedings.

92. The second category of possible actions that Respondent presented relates to
expedited summary proceedings, which constitute an exceptional procedural means
arising from a claim brought against an act or omission committed by a private party.
In the instant case Claimants are seeking damages for the alleged actions of the
Provincial Government: Therefore, such procedure would be inapposite. The investors
had no opportunity to bring an expedited summary proceeding before an Argentine
Court based upon allegations of discriminatory and expropriatory actions. Claimants
note that Prof. Mata admits that ordinary proceedings are the proper procedural means
for purposes of bringing such a case, as a more extensive trial and evidence phases are
required.

93. Claimants also note that at the hearing Prof. Mata admitted that the only cases
in which such actions were permitted are those established pursuant to Action 321 of
the Argentine Code of Civil and Commercial Procedure. According to Prof. Mata,
these cases may include actions based on the law of a treaty if the treaty so provides;
he added that the 18 month rule of the BIT “points to an expedited summary solution
to obtain compensation for damages.”'° Claimants observe that nothing in the BIT
provides that any claim under the BIT may be brought pursuant to summary
proceeding. The 18 month rule does not imply such a commitment because it does not
compel Argentine Courts to settle a dispute within this period of time; it merely states
that if the courts fail to reach a decision within this timeframe, the investor can refer
the matter to international arbitration. Based on the description provided in Prof.
Mata’s Report, such an expedited summary action is by far incompatible with the
complexities endemic to an investment claim. Such an action is neither suitable nor
viable as an alternative to be filed before an Argentine Court.

94. As indicative of a third type of an alternative court procedure Prof. Mata
mentions the principle of useless procedural steps (“ritualismo inttil”) that would
allow avoiding the filing of an administrative claim before bringing an action against
the Province for the violation of the BIT. Indeed, in the Argentine Republic, before
bringing an action against the State, the plaintiff must first file an administrative
claim. There exists a number of exceptions, none of which are applicable, in
Claimants’ view, to the instant case. Therefore, if the investors had decided to bring
an action for damages arising from the violation of the BIT before an Argentine Court,
they would have had to exhaust all administrative remedies available to them as a
condition precedent to bring such action. Thus, such an ordinary proceeding and the

' TR-E, Day 1, p. 91/16-19.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
27

prior administrative action would have to come to closure in less than 18 months.
Prof. Mata explains that while in principle an administrative claim must be filed
before the filing of a complaint, this might be avoided under the “useless procedural
step” doctrine, which could also apply when litigation would take at least 5 years to be
resolved, instead of the 18 months as required in the BIT. Claimants state, however,
that even such acceleration, purely hypothetical in the absence of case law relating to
investment disputes, could not at all sustain a claim for damages within an 18 month
window. They also note that the concept was excluded by Prof. Mata at the hearing
when he admitted that the doctrine does not apply to claims filed before courts. It
simply refers to a possible elimination of prior administrative proceedings required
before going to court, which does not at all concern any aspect of Claimants’ claims
under the BIT. It would also be a pure speculation to think that such a device would
offer an exemption from costs, which Prof. Mata confirmed were of 3%, a percentage
that in Claimants’ view would result in the amount of U.S. $ 6 million.

95. In a fourth category Prof. Mata affirms that the shareholders had standing to
bring possessory actions or actions in rem (“acciones posesorias y reales”) against a
disturbance of their property by the Provincial State. However, in this case, AGBA as
Concessionaire is the property, and it holds the property that is the subject-matter of
the Concession. Accordingly, Claimants could not have brought a possessory action
against the State unless the disturbance of their possession is a discriminatory and
arbitrary action without any legal title, even where such actions were apparent and
elaborate evidentiary proffers were not necessary. The termination decree deprived
AGBA of the bare possession of the property. Although it has been challenged, this
Decree is presumed legally valid until annulled in court. Therefore, a possessory
action could not apply because the Decree constituted a legal title. The Province took
possession of the property of the Concession after the termination of the Contract. The
validity of the termination and the damages arising from such termination must
therefore be addressed in a proceeding other than through a possessory action. After
the termination of the Contract neither AGBA nor its shareholders could refuse to
return the items held in possession, while reserving their rights to challenge such a
measure and to seek damages. Faced with the Decree terminating the Contract, AGBA
had no means to resist the deprivation of the use of the property of the Concession.
Claimants further assert that Prof. Mata also rejected this methodology at the hearing
as inadequate for purposes of framing a claim for damages. While explaining the
potential usefulness of such an action under specific circumstances, Prof. Mata
admitted that it has nothing to do with relief in the form of compensatory damages.
Claimants admit that such an action would be available for the Concessionaire who
has been deprived of its assets, but not for Claimants who do not expect to recover any
assets pertaining to the Concession.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
28

96. As a fifth possible procedural recourse, Prof. Mata mentions an action for a
declaratory judgment of certainty (“accién declarativa de certeza’”). Its mere
description disqualifies it as an available remedy. Indeed, it is a residual action, when
no other judicial remedy is available. It is an action that seeks to do away with an
uncertainty of law by virtue of a declaratory judgment. The action thus has a
preventive nature. It does not require the existence of an actual harm and it does not
open the door for petitioning a damages award. Prof. Mata explained at the hearing
that this action merely seeks issuance of a declaratory judgment that may serve as a
basis for establishing damages at a subsequent stage. Claimants state that the issue
here is different because the dispute involves defining whether the BIT was violated
and, if so, determining the damages to be paid to the investors in the form of
compensatory damages.

97. The sixth category of purportedly prospective actions consists of prohibitory
injunctive relief (“prohibicién de innovar”), also called, as occurred at the hearing,
“precautionary measures” (“medidas cautelares”). Prohibitory injunctive relief or
medidas cautelares must derive from a pending underlying action. Medidas cautelares
alone cannot constitute a cause of action or proceeding. Furthermore, the underlying
proceeding must be one where damages as such are sought. It is axiomatic that a
medida cautelar cannot serve as a condition precedent to any action, nor can it
constitute a decision on the merits as referenced to in Article X(3)(a) of the BIT.
While Prof. Mata confirmed at the hearing that in certain cases damages may be
awarded, such award would be exceptional and provisional, because such measures (i)
are always ancillary to a main legal action, (ii) do not entail a decision on the merits
and (iii) are contingent on the final judgment rendered in the main legal action.

98. Finally, in a seventh category Claimants close the enumeration of the
instruments Prof. Mata identifies in his Report as would be potential suitable remedies
for Claimants by referencing the Amparo action for administrative default or delay
(“amparo por mora administrativa’). This proceeding is a specific type of Amparo
action that applies where administratively no response issues to a properly filed
complaint. Claimants opine that it is hard to see how this remedy may be considered
as the predicate action under the BIT. For such an Amparo action to meet the
condition precedent requirement, the investor first should have brought an
administrative claim, which would then have been left unanswered. The nature of such
an administrative claim remains undefined, nor is it at all clear how this additional
remedy would provide for any abbreviation of 18 month window under the BIT. At
the hearing Prof. Mata acknowledged that it did not constitute a judicial proceeding
but rather a method designed to elicit a response from an otherwise unresponsive
administrative rubric. The proceeding bears no relationship to a judicial proceeding.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
29

99. Claimants thus state in sum that none of the remedies described in Prof. Mata’s
Report satisfies their right to claim damages for the losses suffered based on violations
of the BIT, nor could any such remedy satisfy the requirement to settle the dispute
within 18 months. They also observe that in light of Prof. Mata’s explanation at the
hearing, based on his own testimony, of all of the expedited proceedings provided for
under Argentine law only the “expedited summary action” was open to Claimants. He
introduced an additional remedy consisting of direct recourse to the Supreme Court
noting that, apart from these remedies, only an ordinary proceeding would be viable.

100. Claimants advance that the alternative of an original action brought before the
Supreme Court came to light (i.e. was raised) for the first time during the hearing. It
had not been contemplated or otherwise raised or suggested in Prof. Mata’s Report as
one of the expedited procedural remedies. Prof. Mata’s Report referred to Article 117
of the Argentine Constitution, but the Republic of Argentina is not mentioned in that
Article as a possible defendant. Only the provinces are mentioned. According to the
Supreme Court practice, it is not possible to bring an action directly before the
Supreme Court against both the sovereign and a province. The Supreme Court may
only exercise appellate jurisdiction as provided by Article 116. A proceeding directly
initiated before the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 117 would be an ordinary
proceeding that is incapable of being settled within 18 months. Hence, an action
directly brought to the Supreme Court is not a suitable remedy for purposes of
meeting the predicate under the BIT.

101. Consequently, Claimants conclude that Prof. Mata’s Report and his testimony
at the hearing demonstrate that a claim of the kind pending in this proceeding can only
be brought in ordinary judicial actions and before an administrative court in the City
of Buenos Aires. Argentine laws provide for two types of proceedings regarding
claims against the Government. Some claims may be brought before administrative
authorities where they are handled by a Government agency and not by a court. Such
an action does not comply with Article X(2) of the BIT because it is not submitted to a
“competent tribunal.” A claim against the sovereign has to be heard by the Federal
Administrative Courts. These courts exercise exclusive jurisdiction as to such claims.
Thus, the prerequisite for submitting the dispute to a domestic court as provided in
Article X (2) and (3a) of the BIT consists of filing a claim with an Argentine federal
administrative court. Yet, as has been amply demonstrated, no judgment can be
obtained in that tribunal in the first instance within 18 months.

102. Prof. Mata found support for the possibility of reaching a decision within 18
months in Sections 34 and 36 of the Argentine Code of Civil and Commercial
Procedure, which provide for expedited court proceedings. Claimants observe that the
resulting obligation to render a prompt decision has been in force since 1968 and has
yet to prove that it may mitigate overburdened dockets. The provisions of the BIT

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
30

may not be used to argue that a decision can be obtained within 18 months because of
the particular diligence Argentine courts exercise when faced with a BIT based claim.
This likelihood is all the more so because Article X of the BIT does not impose an
obligation on Argentine courts to settle the dispute within 18 months. When affirming
that this deadline somehow shall be met, both Respondent and Prof. Mata base their
conclusion on pure hypothesis and speculation.

103. In their Answer to questions raised by the Tribunal at the end of the hearing,
Claimants also affirmed that prior recourse to local courts can only make sense if the
action is deemed by the investor to be capable of satisfying its interests. Obtaining a
mere declaration of a breach is hardly enough; the investor needs a decision that binds
the breaching State to pay compensation. The requirement of first resorting to local
courts would be both senseless and futile if, upon compliance, the investor would still
fail to obtain what it lawfully pursues, i.e. compensation for damages. In such a case
or any other, the purpose of prior recourse to local courts would never be achieved if
the actions filed before the local courts and before the arbitral tribunal were different.
A local judge cannot possibly adjudicate a dispute if the claim to be settled is not
before him or her. Therefore, if the claim before the arbitral tribunal is for damages, it
would be insufficient to seize a domestic court with a declaratory action only. The
action referred to in Article X (2) and (3) must be of the same kind.

104. In any event, even where it is assumed that Respondent’s arguments are true
and accurate, Claimants still would be fully denied access to domestic courts. As early
as when Respondent received the notices of dispute in 2005/06 it first asserted in its
very answer that only AGBA would have legal standing to bring an action in its
capacity as Concessionaire. Claimants underscore that Respondent’s position is
inconsistent, initially arguing that the AGBA shareholders could not bring their own
claims before courts, but now asserting that Claimants have multiple remedies
available to resort to litigation in Argentina. This is an additional factor showing that
the effective submission of the dispute to the Argentine Courts is hypothetical.

105. In response to another question posed by the Tribunal, Claimants explain that
the emergency laws caused proceedings before the local courts to be suspended and
this suspension prevented the enforcement of any possible award of damages. As this
issue also was mentioned by Prof. Mata, it is noted that Decree 214/2002 was issued
10 years ago. The provisions of Article 12 on suspension of proceedings remained
effective for 180 days. The emergency now has been extended until December 31,
2013.''! The emergency laws did not hinder thousands of Amparo claims from being
presented. Precautionary measures were suspended as well as enforcement against the
Federal State for 180 days. The Government deemed that any judicial claim would be

"' Law 26,729, cf. TR-E, Day 1 p. 45/19-22, 46/1-9.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
31

inconsistent with the “preservation of social peace,” referred to in one of the recitals to
Decree 320/2002 dated February 15, 2002, which amended Section 12 of Decree
214/2002, restricting the possibility of bringing legal action that were deemed contrary
to social peace. Such limitations also were applicable to agreements concluded with
concessionaires’ shareholders, Decree 1090/2002 and Resolution 308/2002 prohibited
access to renegotiation to all who filed claims before local courts. In light of these
provisions of the emergency legislation it cannot be asserted that foreign investors
were allowed to resort without any restrictions to local courts. It is hypothetically
possible that Claimants might not have been prevented from filing a claim in an
ordinary proceeding in 2006 or in 2007. However, in such a scenario, it is impossible
to imagine that a claim would have been solved within 18 months. For Claimants, the
situation would not have been any different than it was when it was presented by the
Abaclat Tribunal.'? At that time the Abaclat Tribunal admitted that any claim for
compensatory damages was doomed to fail because the emergency laws prevented the
State from reaching any in-court or out-of-court or private settlement. Indeed, even
were the claimants to obtain a favourable judgment from the local courts, the
Government would be prevented from paying it.

Cc. The Tribunal’s findings

I. The purpose and relevance of understanding the 18 month rule

106. The Parties have expressed diverging views over the importance and the
purpose of the 18 month rule.

107. When considering the purpose of the 18 month rule as it is emerging from the
analysis of the BIT and the explanations provided by the Parties, the Tribunal has to
start by referencing the fundamental principle contained in Article 31 of the Vienna
Convention providing that a treaty be “interpreted in good faith and in the light of its
object and purpose” and that such interpretation must be in accordance with the terms
of the treaty in their context. This principle based on purpose and good faith gives rise
to the principle of effectiveness requiring an interpretation that has an effective
meaning in relation to the objective of the legal provision under examination.
Article X (2) and (3) of the BIT thus have to be interpreted according to these
principles.

108. Article X(2) does not set a mandatory obligation. When stating that “the
dispute [...] shall [...] be submitted to the competent tribunals” of the Host State, it

"Abaclat and Others v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/O7/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility of August 4, 2011, No. 586 and 588.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
32

seems to require that once a dispute had been raised, and the time period for
negotiating a settlement had elapsed, the dispute must be brought to court at the
initiative of either party. But such an understanding goes too far. What these words
mean is enlightened by the provisions of Article X(3). Indeed, based on letter a),
recourse to local courts is a requirement for access to international arbitration. But it is
not more. The party raising the dispute can also decide not to go before domestic
courts and to run the risk that later access to international arbitration might be denied.
As stated in letter b), the parties can also agree to accede directly to international
arbitration, in which case they dispose of the requirement of Article X(2). These
points are sufficient to show that the 18 month rule is different from a requirement to
exhaust local remedies, even if some analogy is possible on other points.'*

109. Before considering the meaning of Article X (2) and (3), it becomes necessary
to determine whether Respondent is not prevented by the principle of estoppel or any
similar rule based on the fundamental principle of good faith to raise an objection
based upon non-compliance with the requirement of Article X(2) when Respondent
itself had the opportunity to bring the dispute before its competent tribunals but failed
to do so. The provision states indeed in clear terms that the dispute shall be submitted
to domestic courts of the Host State “‘at the request of either party.” "4 Therefore, based
on the plain meaning of this language, Respondent not only had an actual opportunity
but also an obligation itself to take the initiative to get its own courts involved.

110. Nonetheless, even if the requirement of Article X(2) is not applicable to
Claimants alone, it would still follow from the terms of Article X(3) that there is a bar
to international arbitration if none of the parties comply with the 18 month rule. If
Respondent has not done so, Claimants are not thus provided with free leave to move
to arbitration. Accordingly, it also follows that one party cannot claim that it is not or
no longer bound by the requirement of Article X(2) because the other party did not
take any action. This provision opens an alternative possibility to bring the dispute
before local courts, but it does not say more. Moreover, the Argentine Republic had
drawn Claimants’ attention to this provision at a very early stage of the proceeding, in
response to Claimants’ filing of the notice of dispute, in the Attorney General’s letters
sent to each Claimant on March 24, 2006. The point remains, however, that
Respondent had an opportunity to request from its local courts at least a declaratory
judgment, which in Claimants’ view was insufficient for them because their claim is
based primarily on an action for the compensatory damages. Because Respondent has

8 For the Tribunal in Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID/ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction of
August 3, 2004, No. 104, and for the Tribunal in Gas Natural SDG S.A. v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID/ARB/03/10, Decision on Preliminary Questions on Jurisdiction of June 17, 2005, No. 30, the rule is not
comparable to the local remedies rule, whereas for the Wintershall Tribunal it is, cf. Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft
v. The Argentine Republic, 1CSID/ARB/04/14, Award of December 8, 2008, No. 124-126.

4 Prof. Mata acknowledged that it would be sible for the State to introduce “action of /esividad” and request
that a decree considered as not legitimate or illegal be rescinded; TR-E, Day 1, p. 141/3-142/4.

 

   

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
33

a right to seek a declaratory ruling, it does not appear convincing for Respondent to
then turn around and object to Claimants’ position that they could have asked for such
a judgment when this form of relief clearly did not meet their interests, which are
focused on pecuniary damages.

111. Under the circumstances of this case, submission to domestic courts of the
Argentine Republic appears, on the face of the terms of Article X(2) of the BIT, as a
necessary precondition for the right to submit the dispute to international arbitration.
This reading of Article X(2), however, does not answer the question of whether in
light of its meaning, (i) this provision was applicable to Claimants, and (ii) did in fact
impose on them an obligation to comply with its terms if they wanted to have access
to international arbitration.

112. This question has been understood as raising a point of debate concerning the
distinction to be made between a jurisdictional issue and a question of admissibility of
a claim brought before an international arbitration tribunal generally and before an
ICSID tribunal more particularly. It is contended that jurisdiction is an element
pertaining to the tribunal and not of a claim. Conversely, admissibility is an element of
a claim but not one that pertains to a tribunal.'° Jurisdiction is fixed by treaty and
cannot be altered by the parties to the dispute. '° The parties, however, may acquiesce
in any breach of a requirement of admissibility; such acquiescence would “cure” the
breach.'” In other words, defects as to admi bility can be waived or cured by
acquiescence, while jurisdictional insufficiencies cannot be equally remedied.'*
However, even if such categories were to be adopted, which appears to be an
extremely delicate proposition as a matter of comparative law, '° the question whether
a particular legal issue falls in one and not the other is contingent on the meaning of
the relevant provisions of the BIT. This latter consideration is all that matters.

 

113. Developing such categories may have theoretical appeal but adds nothing to
the interpretation of the provisions on dispute resolution of BITs. Thus, the Hochtief
Tribunal inquired whether the 18 month period is a requirement of the kind which the
Host State could accept or otherwise acquiesce to its non-compliance, and whether it

'S Hochtief AG v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID/ARB/07/31, Decision on Jurisdiction of October 24, 2011, No.
90.

‘6 Tbid., No. 92.

"" Ibid. No. 94.

'S Thid., No. 95.

© Thus, it is stated in Hochtief AG v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/07/31, Decision on Jurisdiction of
October 24, 2011, No. 90, that a claim might be taken as “inadmissible” on the ground of lis alibi pendens or forum
non conveniens. This had also been suggested as an analogy in SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v.
Republic of the Philippines, ICSID/ARB/02/6, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of January 29, 2004, No.
170, footnote 95. However, if this appears correct from a Common Law perspective, it is certainly more than
doubtful as a matter of Civil Law where the lis alibi pendens exception clearly affects jurisdiction. In Benvenuti et
Bonfant v. The Government of The People’s Republic of Congo, \CSID/ARB/77/2, Award of August 8, 1980, No.
1.13 and 1.14, lis pendens was considered as a problem of jurisdiction.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
34

had in fact done so. The Tribunal determined that it deemed this provision as one
“going to the admissibility of the claim rather than the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.””°
Significantly, the Tribunal does not articulate the reasons for its conclusion that the 18
month rule constitutes a matter of admissibility. It further concluded that the limits of
its jurisdiction are set by the Argentina-Germany BIT, but that on the basis of the
MEN clause contained in that BIT, claimant had the right to rely on the procedures set
out in the provision on dispute resolution of the Argentina-Chile BIT (including the
“fork in the road provision”).”!

114. For this Tribunal, there is no reason to adhere to the conclusion and findings of
the Hochtief Tribunal and to shift the 18 month requirement from a jurisdictional issue
to question of admissibility and then to conclude that it cannot be complied with by
virtue of an agreement or by acquiescence. The 18 month rule of the Argentine-Spain
BIT is part of the offer to arbitrate contained in Article X and, upon its acceptance by
the investor, would trigger the jurisdiction of this Tribunal were all requirements
complied.”

115. The distinction has been developed in greater detail by the Abaclat Tribunal in
its Decision on Jurisdiction.”* The approach chosen by that Tribunal merits
examination and strict scrutiny.

116. The Abaclat Tribunal observes that a salient feature of admissibility
demonstrates that a lack of admissibility means that the claim was neither fit nor
mature for judicial treatment, while a lack of jurisdiction strict sensu means that the
claim could not at all have been brought before the body called upon.* Such a
distinction contributes more to the confusion than to any elicitation of the issue. If the
claim is not mature for judicial treatment it cannot be brought before the designated
judicial body either, which means that it satisfies both requirements of unavailability
and irredeemably dilutes the suggested distinction.

117. The Abaclat Tribunal also suggests that want of admissibility may “usually”
not be subject to review by another body, but the non-review suggested by this
“usually” does not apply to a decision refusing arbitral jurisdiction.”° The correctness
of such a general statement should be tested within the framework of the applicable
legal provisions governing review of arbitral decisions. In the ICSID system, a

” Hochtief AG v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID/ARB/07/31, Decision on Jurisdiction of October 24, 2011, No.
96.

*! [hid., No. 99.

2 In Impregilo S.p.A. v. The Argentine Republic, 1CSID/ARB/07/17, Award of June 21, 2011, No. 91, 94, the
similar requirement in Article 8(3) of the Argentina-Italy BIT was qualified as a “jurisdictional requirement.”

3 Abaclat and Others v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/07/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of
August 4, 2011.

4 hid., No. 247(i).

5 tbid., No. 247(ii).

 

 

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
35

decision stating that a claim lacks admissibility may be brought before an annulment
committee based on one of the grounds listed in Article 52(1) of the Convention and
in particular when the claimant alleges that the tribunal had “manifestly exceeded its
powers” (lit. b). This feature of ICSID practice renders both the distinction wrong in
theory and useless in practice.

118. The Abaclat Tribunal further expanded on the issue by contending that in case
admissibility is refused the defect giving rise to refusal may be cured and the claim
resubmitted, while the same does not hold true when jurisdiction has been denied by
the same Tribunal.”° Again, the practical utility of this theoretical distinction at best is
suspect. If an ICSID Award is issued holding that the claim is not admissible, it may
be indeed possible to cure the defect and to resubmit the case. The “re-submitted”
claim, however, will be aired before a new tribunal. But where jurisdiction has been
denied, the same procedural outcome is possible if the denial was caused by a lack of
consent that was later granted, thus allowing for the case to be filed before a different
tribunal. The Waste Management II Tribunal highlights and underscores the
proposition that a jurisdictional insufficiency can be redressed pursuant to a new
filing:

“Tn international litigation the withdrawal of a claim does not, unless
otherwise agreed, amount to a waiver of any underlying rights of the
withdrawing party. Neither does a claim which fails for want of jurisdiction
prejudice underlying rights: if the jurisdictional flaw can be corrected, there
is in principle no objection to the claimant State recommencing its action.””"
(emphasis supplied).

Similar reasoning led the TSA Tribunal to observe that from a formal point of view, a
claim prematurely filed in an ICSID proceeding where the 18 month requirement in
the Dutch-Argentina BIT had not yet elapsed could be rejected for lack of jurisdiction
and then resubmitted as an ICSID arbitration upon maturation of the term. While the
Tribunal perhaps understandably rejected such a solution as “highly formalistic,” it
dealt with the issue as jurisdictional and not an admissibility concern.”*

°© Thid., No. 247(iii).

27 Waste Management, Inc. II v. United Mexican States, 1CSID/ARB(AF)/00/3, Decision on Mexico's Preliminary
Objection concerning the Previous Proceedings of June 26, 2002, No. 36, also quoted in: Cementownia Nowa Huta
S.A. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID/ARB(AF)/06/02, Award of September 17, 2009, No. 109.

*8 TSA Spectrum de Argentina S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/05/5, Award of December 19, 2008,
No. 110-112.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
36

119. The Abaclat Tribunal, however, found the distinction to be pivotal when
analysing predicate conditions to the filing of an international arbitration. The
Tribunal’s language commands consideration:

“[...] that the negotiation and 18 months litigation requirements relate to the
conditions for implementation of Argentina‘s consent to ICSID jurisdiction
and arbitration, and not the fundamental question of whether Argentina
consented to ICSID jurisdiction and arbitration. Thus, any non-compliance
with such requirements may not lead to a lack of ICSID jurisdiction, and only
— if at all — to a lack of admissibility of the claim, [...].””” (emphasis supplied)

The Tribunal further concluded:

“The negotiation and litigation requirement provided in Articles 8(1) and (2)
of the BIT does not condition Argentina‘s consent to ICSID jurisdiction and
arbitration, and merely relates to the circumstances under which such consent
is to be given full effect and be implemented.”

120. The Tribunal in that case saw a distinction between conditioning consent to
ICSID jurisdiction to the fulfilment of a precondition, and conditioning the effective
implementation of such consent, i.e., the possibility to resort to ICSID arbitration upon
fulfilment of such a precondition.*! But as the Tribunal rightly noted, the first part of
that distinction makes “little sense” in light of Argentina’s adherence to the ICSID
Convention and its acceptance of ICSID arbitration in the BIT.* All that matters is
whether Argentina’s consent was subject to preconditions, irrespective of whether
they are of a general nature or limited to particular cases, or the extent to which they
relate to “circumstances” concerning consent. Nothing is added in qualifying such
preconditions as relating to the consent’s “effective implementation” — a novel term or
conceptual category that the Abaclat Tribunal confects but does not fully articulate, let
alone engage in any sustained analysis concerning the term’s juridical genesis. In this
same vein, the term “implementation” is nowhere defined and only appears to serve as
a foundation for the inference that consent is to be assumed. Similarly, the manner, if
any, in which “implementation” of consent, in sharp relief with the question of
whether there is actual consent, touches or concerns the nature of the conditions
precedent also remains obscured by the analysis. Put simply, no guidance is offered
suggesting how such implementation is subject to “circumstances” that should be
understood as different from the consent’s underlying conditions.

121. When analysing Article 8 of the Argentina-Italy BIT, as did the Abaclat
Tribunal, or Article X of the Argentina-Spain BIT, it becomes clear that the conditions

?° Abaclat and Others v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/07/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of
August 4, 2011, No. 496.

* Thid., No. 500(iii), 501(v).

*! Ibid., No. 494.

* Ibid., No. 495.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
37

or preconditions for triggering access to international arbitration are enunciated in the
relevant sub-paragraphs of these provisions. There is no indication whatsoever on
whether any of these requirements should be qualified as a fundamental exigency, and
therefore as jurisdictional, or merely as relevant for the consent’s “effective
implementation,” and therefore to be dealt with as a matter of admissibility only.*?
Indeed, neither Article 8 of the Argentina-Italy BIT nor Article X of the Argentina-
Spain BIT at all reference the word “implementation.” The plain meaning and
language of the respective Articles is silent as to the nature and character of the
conditions precedent to the filing of an international arbitration as “jurisdictional.”

122. Finally, the Abaclat Tribunal inquires whether in light of the undisputed fact

that claimants had not submitted their dispute to the Argentine courts “whether

9934.

Claimants should have done so””” and after examination of the matter it concluded

that “[...] the disregard by Claimants of the 18 months litigation requirement does not
preclude them from resorting to ICSID arbitration.”*>

123. Thus, “resorting to ICSID arbitration” clearly means “access to ICSID
jurisdiction” after compliance with jurisdictional requirements. The 18 month rule,
whether it has to be observed or may be disregarded under particular circumstances, is
a prerequisite for arbitral jurisdiction and not merely a “circumstance” for providing
full effect and implementation for a consent a priori determined as valid and
enforceable. In fact, the Abaclat Tribunal does not show otherwise when arriving at
the interpretation of the relevant elements of the 18 month rule.*°

124. Similarly, the Desert Line Tribunal began by classifying the res judicata
objection of the fork in the road rule as “one of admissibility rather than jurisdiction”,
which does not affect the tribunal “having jurisdiction” but raises the question whether

it should decline to exercise it.*” Having adopted an “approach to jurisdictional
issues”,*® the Tribunal concluded that the objection “does not bar the Arbitral Tribunal

from having jurisdiction in the present case.”

*3 When explaining the legal power to exercise the judicial or arbitral function, the Minority Arbitrator in the
Abaclat case noted: “Any limits to this power, whether inherent or consensual, i.e. stipulated in the jurisdictional
title (consent within certain limits, or subject to reservations or conditions relating to the powers of the organ) are
jurisdictional by essence.” Cf. Abaclat and Others v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/O7/5, Decision on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility of August 4, 2011, Dissenting Opinion of Prof. Abi-Saab, No. 126. He also noted
that requirements that under general international law are considered as requirements of admissibility become
conventionally jurisdictional when they are inserted in the jurisdictional title (No. 23).

™ Ibid., No. 576.

*S Ibid., No. 590, also No. 580.

* On one other point, the Abaclat Tribunal seems to have been misguided by its focus on the nature of a ground for
admissibility attributed to the 18 month rule, when stating that the wording of Article 8 of the Argentine-Italy BIT
“does not suffice to draw specific conclusions with regard to the consequences of non-compliance with the order
established by Article 8.” It clearly does because it then precludes access to international arbitration, but it does so
in terms of jurisdiction and not of admissibility of claims as the Tribunal wanted to understand the issue.

*” Desert Line Projects LLC v. The Republic of Yemen, CSID/ARB/05/17, Award of February 6, 2008, No. 128.

*8 Ibid., No. 132.

® Ibid., No. 138.

    

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

125. Jurisdiction in the judicial or adjudicative context means the authority to
render legal decisions. It includes consideration of the sphere of such authority, i.e. the
scope of the judicial competence. Whether such jurisdiction and competence is
awarded in a particular factual setting depends upon the applicable legal provisions. If
the exercise of such authority requires compliance with certain conditions, these
conditions are prerequisites to the exercise of a tribunal’s jurisdiction and competence.
This principle also must apply when a particular condition relates to the nature of a
claim and thus raises a question as to the claim’s admissibility. If the applicable
provision on dispute resolution qualifies such condition as a requirement to be
complied with before the tribunal can affirm its jurisdiction, the provision then must
also pertain to jurisdiction.*° No theoretical assumption can remove from that
condition its jurisdictional character merely by qualifying it pursuant to a legal fiction
a condition of admissibility with the effect that any form of non-compliance could be
waived or cured by acquiescence. This jurisdictional element is all the more present
when jurisdiction is based on consent, as it must be under the ICSID Convention.

126. Moreover, the ICSID Convention does not contain a concept akin to
“admissibility” of claims.“' The Convention distinguishes between jurisdiction and the
merits of claims. To the extent that the lack of “admissibility” is asserted as an
objection at the jurisdictional stage, it is dealt with at that stage within a jurisdictional
framework or in the context of the Tribunal’s competence with respect to at least one
or all of its elements (rationes temporis, loci, personae, et materiae).” If it is not so
addressed, it is merged with the merits, and thus examined, if at all, at that stage.

 

° Cf. ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The Argentine Republic, PCA No. 2010-9, Award on
Jurisdiction of February 10, 2012, No. 262, stating that a failure to respect a precondition to the Host State's
consent to arbitrate “cannot but lead to the conclusion that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction.” The same point was
made in Emilio Augustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, ICSID/ARB/97/7, Decision on Objections to
Jurisdiction of January 25, 2000, No. 36

tated in CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID/ARB/O1/8, Decision on
Objections to Jurisdiction of July 17, 2003, No. 41: “The distinction between admissibility and jurisdiction does
not appear quite appropriate in the context of ICSID as the Convention deals only with jurisdiction and
competence.” These terms are repeated in Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. The Argentine
Republic, 1CSID/ARB/O1/3, Decision on Jurisdiction of January 14, 2004, No. 33,

* Such hypothesis seems to be covered by the words “for other reasons” contained in Arbitration Rule 41(1) in
relation to an objection that would be directed, not against the jurisdiction of the Centre, but against the
competence of the Tribunal.

“8 This is the outcome in SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines,
ICSID/ARB/02/6, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of January 29, 2004, where the Tribunal accepted its
jurisdiction under the BIT with respect to a contractual dispute but had to address the effect of an exclusive
jurisdiction forum selection clause contained in the contract and “affecting the substance of SGS’s claim” (No.
149). For the Tribunal, the question was not whether it had jurisdiction, but whether it was proper to allow the
parties to comply with the contractual forum clause (No. 154). When so holding, the Tribunal considered that its
own decision on SGS" claim to payment to be brought before the chosen court would be “premature” (No. 155,
162) and that it must await the determination of the amount payable in accordance with the contractually-agreed
process (No. 163). Accordingly, it decided to stay the proceeding pending this determination (No. 175). Thus,
while affirming its jurisdiction without reservation, the Tribunal decided to abate the proceeding on the merits of
the contractual claim as long as one of its issues was not yet resolved through the contractually agreed process of
litigation. Similarly, in The Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania, ICSID/ARB/06/3, Decision on Objections on

 

 

 

 

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

127. Therefore, there is no point in classifying the 18 month rule as a matter of
admissibility governed by procedural rules that could be modified by the Tribunal
according to the needs and specificities of each particular proceeding.

128. There is also no moment to subscribe to the proposition that “procedural
obstacles” are not jurisdictional requirements and “may be disregarded where
appropriate.” The Wintershall Tribunal aptly rejected this premise labelling it an
“unqualified formulation,”*° and observed that when the 18 month rule imposes an
obligation and not a mere option, non-compliance “cannot possibly be described as a
>»46 Tt also rightly observed that the cases usually referred to in
support of the proposition that a condition precedent may readily be disavowed with
prejudice relate to provisions on periods reserved for purposes of reaching a
settlement and not to mandatory terms requiring the pursuit of remedies in local
courts.“” Even in the case of a provision requiring a negotiation period it has been
concluded that such condition precedent is “very much a jurisdictional one.”

mere ‘defect of form.

129. When misguided theoretical constructs are set aside, the determinative issue is
plainly reduced to the object and purpose of the system provided for in Article X (2)
and (3).”° The core question can be posed in two ways; (i) were Claimants required to
submit the dispute to the competent tribunals of the Republic of Argentine before
resorting to ICSID arbitration? or (ii) “was Argentina deprived of a fair opportunity to
address the dispute within the framework of its own domestic legal system because of
Claimants’ disregard of the 18 months litigation requirement”?”°

130. For the present Tribunal, the clear wording of the relevant provisions of
Article X and the equally lucid suggestion as to its purpose that Respondent has
advanced (to which Claimants did not object per se), lead to the conclusion that resort
to domestic courts is a precondition to be met before resorting to international

 

Jurisdiction and Admissibility of April 18, 2008, No. 112-114, an objection as to the admissibility of the
substantive content of claimant’s complaint was merged with the merits.
“+ As asserted by Prof. Schreuer when acting as claimants’ Expert before the Wintershall Tribunal, cf. Wintershall
Abtiengesellachafy The Argentine Republic, ICSIDIARB/04/14, Award of December 8, 2008, No. 133.

* Ibid., No.
“6 Ibid., No. 7
“" Cf. Ibid., No. 133-153.
*8 Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/O1/3, Decision on
Jurisdiction of January 14, 2004, No. 88. Non-compliance with such condition precludes jurisdiction to consider
the claim, cf. Antoine Goetz et consorts c. République du Burundi, CIRDVARB/95/3, Award of February 10, 1999,
No. 93, using the term “irrecevable” (in French). The jurisdictional nature of the requirement is also supported and
extensively discussed in light of other, supporting but also diverging ICSID decisions, in Murphy Exploration and
Production Company International v. Republic of Ecuador, (CSID/ARB/08/4, Award on Jurisdiction of December
15, 2010, No. 140-157.
*° Cf, in similar terms, with respect to Article 8 of the Argentina-Italy BIT, Abaclat and Others v. The Argentine
Republi ICSID/ARB/07/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of August 4, 2011, No. 580.

° As addressed in Abaclat and Others v. The Argentine Republic, CSID/ARB/07/S, Decision on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility of August 4, 2011, No. 581.

   

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
40

arbitration. As stated by the JCS Tribunal when considering the UK-Argentine BIT,
the words “shall be submitted” leave “no ambiguity as to the mandatory character” of
the rule,*! which “cannot be satisfied by anything less than what it explicitly calls
for”. In the words of the Wintershall Tribunal addressing a counterpart provision,
Article 10(2) of the Argentine-Germany BIT:

“Thus, the submission of the dispute to an International Arbitral Tribunal is
conditional upon prior fulfilment of the provision contained in Article 10(2)
unless the parties to the dispute agree otherwise.”*

The Tribunal further writes:

“[...] it becomes a condition of Argentine’s ‘consent’ — which is, in effect,
Argentina’s “offer” to arbitrate disputes under the BIT, but only upon
acceptance and compliance by an investor of the provisions inter alia of
Article 10(2); an investor (like the Claimant) can accept the ‘offer’ only as so
conditioned.”™

The referenced pronouncements notwithstanding, any construction of the prescribed
terms of the 18 month rule must comport with the language’s context and also needs
to be harmonized with the purpose and objective of the clause, as prescribed in Article
31(1) of the Vienna Convention. Even where it is acknowledged that this rule imposes
an obligation on the investor, it must still be applied in a way that allows its meaning
to prevail so that its intended purpose and objective are preserved and not frustrated.
Such obligation cannot be imposed on the investor if it does not serve its purpose in
the context of the whole system of access to arbitration provided in Article X.

131. The 18 month rule is a second step on the procedural progression towards
international arbitration. It would be void of meaning if it were merely duplicative of
the first step articulated in Article X(1). This latter provision offers the Parties an
opportunity to reach an amicable settlement. It does not require the taking of any
action or, if it were to be construed as requiring a minimum of a good faith effort, it
nevertheless does not prescribe any sanction or penalty in the event of non-
compliance. If the 18 month rule is to be accorded a reasonable interpretation, the
requirement of Article X(2) must demand more from each party. If its operational is to
be achieved, it requires that the investor submit the dispute to the competent courts of
the Host State. But it also requires that the Host State allows its courts to operate in a
manner that the opportunity to reach a suitable remedy is provided in efficient terms.

51 ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The Argentine Republic, PCA No. 2010-9, Award on Jurisdiction
of February 10, 2012, No. 247.

* [hid., No. 251.

% Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. The Argentine Republic, ICSIDIARB/04/14, Award of December 8, 2008, No.
122, and for the development No. 116-122.

* Thid., No. 116.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
4l

The requirements embodied in Article X(2) are, and should be, bilateral. If the Host
State shall not be deprived of a “fair opportunity”°> to address the dispute through its.
own courts, the same objective must be ensured in favour of the investor, who equally
cannot be deprived of a “fair opportunity” to have the dispute examined by the
competent domestic courts. In the words of the TSA Tribunal, the remedy available to
the investor must “give him a fair chance of obtaining satisfaction at the national level
within the said time frame.”*° Thus, the proper interpretation of the meaning of the 18
month rule is that it requires more from the Host State than merely to avoid that the
tule becomes “completely ineffective” or represents a “futility” or even an “obvious
futility”, or “futility or otherwise,” as the terms are used by the JCS Tribunal.°’ The
Host State must assume it's part of the obligation embodied in the 18 month rule,
which places the threshold above the floor requirement of avoiding “futility or
otherwise.”

132. Contrary to Respondent’s arguments, the record before this Tribunal
demonstrates that the 18 month rule is not supported by a policy of high priority.
When studying the series of BITs signed by the Argentine Republic and submitted to
the Tribunal, it is evident that in fact there was no BIT concluded after the BIT with
Spain that contained a comparable 18 month rule. Hence, any assertion that the 18
month rule is one of great public importance and policy, simply is belied by the very
chronological history of BITs that the Republic of Argentina has executed. The
Tribunal understands that such a rule was included in the Argentina-Germany BIT of
1993,°8 and in two other BITs executed with the Netherlands in 1992 and with the
Republic of Korea in 1994,°° none of which form part of the Tribunal’s record.
Moreover, even as of the time that the Spain-Argentina BIT was executed in 1991,
other BITs were executed that did not contain any such rule.”

133. When analysing treaty law retrospectively with the benefit of hindsight, the
preferred solution is manifestly the “fork in the road” system. This scenario would be
akin to having the Argentine Republic abandon the 18 month rule as of the execution

* In the terms of Abaclat and Others v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/07/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility of August 4, 2011, No. 581.
*° TSA Spectrum de Argentina S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/05/5, Award of December 19, 2008,
No. 110.

57 ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The Argentine Republic, PCA No. 2010-9, Award on Jurisdiction
of February 10, 2012, No. 269, 273. Adopting such a low and unrealistic threshold, the JCS Tribunal did not
proceed with an analysis of the availability of remedies within the Argentine legal system, although it had obtained
reports that “extensively analyse this issue”, causing an “open and legitimate debate” between the Parties’ experts
(No. 269).

*§ Cf. Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/04/14, Award of December 8, 2008,
No. 1, 121.

* Cf. Annex 1 to ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The Argentine Republic, PCA No. 2010-9, Award
on Jurisdiction of February 10, 2012.

© Which was understood as a “lack of consistency” by the Tribunal in Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID/ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction of August 3, 2004, No. 105.

  

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
42

of its BIT with Spain.°! From this same perspective, it would make sense to conclude
that such rule was considered useless or even futile. This line of reasoning, however,
is of no moment to this Tribunal, which is called to interpret the 18 month rule of
Article X (2) and (3) of the Argentine-Spain BIT as agreed upon by these two
Contracting States. This rule is to be taken as it stands, notwithstanding the precise
degree of priority accorded to it since 1991 and placed on it today as a matter of
investment policy between these states or beyond.

134. There is little to add to what already has been stated by the Maffezini Tribunal:

“the Contracting Parties to the BIT — Argentina and Spain — wanted to give
their respective courts the opportunity, within the specified period of eighteen
months, to resolve the dispute before it could be taken to international
arbitration.”

This Tribunal has no reason to doubt that a similar statement, as stated by Respondent
before other ICSID Tribunals™ and again in the instant case, represents the original
intention of the Contracting States of the Argentina-Spain BIT. There is no possible
doubt either that the deference to domestic courts of the Host State is an “obstacle” on
the way to reach the level of international arbitration. But this is what the Contracting
States wanted when negotiating and signing their BIT.

135. When further considering the purpose of the 18 month rule, the Tribunal has to
consider the principle of effectiveness as a complementary focus for the interpretation
of this provision. Respondent agrees that the system provided by Article X(2) is not to
be compared to a simple “waiting period.” Any interpretation must entail a formal
submission to the domestic courts so that these tribunals may effectively analyse the
dispute. In further analysing the provisions of Article X(3)(a), such domestic
proceedings must be of a nature to possibly reach a decision on the substance within
18 months. This provision does not require an adjudication to issue.” Yet, a party
must be granted an opportunity or a chance to have the court reach an adjudicatory
phase, otherwise the entire system would be meaningless.

 

6! This is the conclusion drawn in Emilio Augustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, \CSID/ARB/97/7, De:
on Objections to Jurisdiction of January 25, 2000, No. 57, adding that for Spain, it was not the preferred solution
(No. 57-59).

® See, for the same position, Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. The Argentine Republic, CSID/ARB/04/14, Award
of December 8, 2008, No. 128.

® Emilio Augustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, \CSID/ARB/97/7, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of
January 25, 2000, No. 35

° Cf, among others, Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction of
August 3, 2004, No. 104, where the Tribunal says that it “concurs” with Respondent in recognizing this intention,
but nevertheless objects that Argentina had not presented any evidence beyond its affirmations of such policy (No.
105).

® Emilio Augustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, \CSID/ARB/97/7, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of
January 25, 2000, No. 28 s., 30.

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
43

136. If there is no such opportunity of an adjudicatory ruling, the provision would
not only impose an additional waiting period for no ostensible purpose, but it would
also have the added prejudice of causing claimants to disclose the evidence underlying
their claim while the Host State would be allowed, as another tribunal put it, “to assess
the claim, gather evidence, and prepare a defence to a possible international arbitration
claim.”® In addition to the mere result of having to wait another 18 months,
Claimants would also have to suffer unequal and unfair treatment, as they would be
required to present their case, while Respondent would be free from having to disclose
its legal and factual defences to the claim, and simultaneously allowed to gather
evidence supporting the investor’s case in preparation of the prospective and likely
arbitration. Certainly, such a reading of the 18 month rule would be conducive to
asymmetrical treatment advantaging the Host State to the claimant’s detriment, a
result not contemplated by the Article X rubric.

137. This reading of the rule also establishes that as far as this Tribunal is
concerned, any interpretation of the 18 month rule cannot be based on a theoretical
musing pursuant to which the rule is deemed useless and, therefore, to be disregarded
because it “is difficult to see the rationale for imposing, in the terms used in Article
10(3)(a), a duty to spend a period of 18 month with the dispute listed on the docket of
domestic courts as a precondition for the reference to arbitration.” Certainly, the rule
may not be disregarded based upon the likelihood of a “pointless litigation” even were
the parties to spend 18 months in a proceeding where one or both may decide in
advance to reject any decision that a court may issue. And what if, under the
circumstances, it would appear that a domestic court would not just let the parties
“spend a period of 18 months” with their case merely listed on the docket? And why
should the requirement be lifted merely because the investor is not willing to agree to
a suitable remedy even if the domestic judge makes an effort to reach such a result?

138. The Contracting States to the BIT were certainly aware of the difficulties
arising in most cases where a claimant would find itself in the courts of a Host State.
These challenges notwithstanding, the parties agreed to include this requirement in
their treaty and to defer access to international arbitration accordingly. This remedy
may be considered an option less favourable to arbitration, but this consideration is
not what matters. What matters is that the 18 month rule is part of the dispute
resolution provision of the Argentine-Spain BIT. In any event, the Decision on
jurisdiction issued by the Hochtief Tribunal cannot serve as persuasive authority

% ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The Argentine Republic, PCA No. 2010-9, Award on Jurisdiction
of February 10, 2012, No. 269, footnote 298, in fine. The Tribunal adds that such purpose, among others, would go
“beyond resolving the dispute”, thus admitting that it has nothing to do with the purpose and objective of the 18
month rule.

® Hochtief AG v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/07/31, Decision on Jurisdiction of October 24, 2011, No.
50, referring to Article 10 of the Argentine-Germany BIT.

® Thid., No. 51.

  

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
44

because in that case Tribunal advised that it did not need to decide the point of
whether domestic litigation should always be an essential precondition or whether
there exists an “implied right of unilateral reference to arbitration.” In the absence of
such a right a “problem arises””? whenever the precondition contained in the 18 month
tule applies, although “its meaning is clear.””! This suggested questioning implies a
hypothetical understanding of the rule that does not comply with its wording and
purpose.

139. This Tribunal recognizes that the 18 month rule suggests the presence of an
obstacle before access to international arbitration is granted and that it does not
represent the most favourable option with respect to the efficient protection of
international investment. It may even be said that it is “unusual,” although it also has
been suggested that it is “by no means an unusual clause” in BITs.” But such
considerations have no weight when it comes to determining the meaning and best
interpretation of a provision that the Contracting States agreed upon and _ that
constitutes treaty law as long as it is in force.

140. The 18 month rule is also not susceptible to any interpretation that may only
benefit an investor. The Hochtief Tribunal viewed the 18 month litigation period as
“[providing] no inherent benefit [...] to the other party” other than the imposition of a
period in which the parties may refine and reflect upon their respective positions.”
While the Hochtief Tribunal duly accepts respondent’s position that the 18 month
period provides the courts with an opportunity to resolve the dispute as being “true,” it
nonetheless notes that the arbitrary limit of 18 months and the removal of any duty to
accept the judgment of the local courts render the rule “to some extent perfunctory and
insubstantial.” Additionally, adherence to the 18 month rule “would bring no
necessary benefit” and “no necessary result other than the delay of the arbitration
proceedings,” facts from which the Tribunal “derives some encouragement to believe
that its decision is correct,””> which consists of accepting the MEN clause contained in
the Argentina-Germany BIT with the effect of rendering inapplicable the 18 month
requirement. The Tribunal’s reasoning is not supported by evidence relating to the

® Ibid., No. 54.

” Ibid., No. 53.

7! Jhid., No. 52. The Dissenting Opinion of Arbitrator Chr. Thomas recalls that the 18 months period “is plainly a
product of compromise between the States Parties” and that their choice of a period of 18 months, described as
“arbitrary” by the Majority (No. 88 of the Decision) had the purpose to permit a Contracting Party’s legal system to
at least have an opportunity to address the dispute (No. 7)

® Jbid., No. 54. Another Tribunal thought useful to qualify the requirement as “curious” and “nonsensical from a
practical point of view”, although the Tribunal had no reason to address the issue and did therefore not proceed to a
serious examination of the matter; cf. Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, 1CSID/ARB/03/24,
Decision on Jurisdiction of February 8, 2005, No. 224.

n | Winrrshait Aktiengesellschaft v. The Argentine Republic, (CSID/ARB/04/14, Award of December 8, 2008, No.

  

 

” Hochief AG v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID/ARB/07/31, Decision on Jurisdiction of October 24, 2011, No.
87.

* Tbid., No. 88 (for all quotes).

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
45

possible operation of the 18 month rule before Argentina’s domestic courts. And
while it is focusing on the benefit available to the investor, it does not take into
account the Host State’s position that the local courts will thus be granted an
opportunity to find a suitable remedy, although that position is characterized as
“true.”

141. While it is correct to understand that the meaning of the 18 month rule has to
be determined in light of the efficiency of the rule, there is no point in interpreting this
provision on the extent to which it provides the investor with a “benefit.” This rule
was agreed upon in order to reach a common purpose that the Contracting States
sought to achieve, albeit as an “obvious compromise.”
however, that such purpose or objective is exclusively focused on the interests of or
possible benefits to the investor. As detailed above, while the ICSID Convention and
the BITs are certainly leading instruments for the promotion of private international
investments, they also have as their objective and purpose to provide for a reasonable
and negotiated balance between the interests of prospective investors and those of the
Host States. As the CMS Tribunal observed, the scope of a given bilateral treaty
“should normally be understood and interpreted as attending the concerns of both
parties.””* A unilateral approach that benefits investors does not comply with the
prevailing understanding of investment treaty law.

There is no indication,

142. Having canvassed the basic meaning of the purpose and objective of the
second step towards a potential arbitration under Article X, the Tribunal, before
proceeding with the examination of more specific elements, must raise the question
whether different or additional canons of interpretation must be applied in order to
establish a different balance or relationship between the respective interests of the
Host State and of the investor, other than the one resulting from this analysis. ICSID
case-law establishes yet another effort to interpret the 18 month rule conducive
towards a result favouring easier access to international arbitration, in some cases
even rendering it possible for the investor to disregard the requirements set by these
provisions.

143. Indeed, for the Abaclat Tribunal, the question of whether investor’s non-
compliance with these requirements deprives the Host State of a “fair opportunity” to
have the dispute examined by its domestic courts, “in turn requires a weighting of the

    

7 The Dissenting Arbitrator Chr. Thomas states that “one cannot rule out the possibility that the local court could
uphold the investor's claim that the measures complained of violate municipal law or that a contested legal right
claimed to exist under that law does in fact exist. Even if such findings did not lead to a settlement, they would
enhance the prospects of success in any subsequent international claim.” (No. 8)

7” Emilio Augustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, ICSID/ARB/97/7, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of
January 25, 2000, No. 57
78 CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/O1/8, Award of May 12, 2005, No.
360.

  

 

  

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
46

interests of the Parties,” which includes, on the part of the investor, consideration of
claimants’ interest “in being provided with an efficient dispute resolution
mechanism.”” In a first step, it is stated correctly that the opportunity to address the
dispute through the domestic judicial system must not be theoretical, “but there must
be a real chance in practice that the Host State [...] would address the issue in a way
that could lead to an effective resolution of the dispute.”®° For the present Tribunal,
however, to reach this understanding, there is no need to introduce any further
“weighting of the interests of the Parties,” in addition to what results in any way from
the purpose and the required efficient meaning of the provision.

144. For the Abaclat Tribunal, a step further would be the alternative hypothesis of
an acceptable disregard of the 18 month rule and of the opportunity it provides for an
examination of the dispute by local courts, “where, based on the overall circumstances
of the case, it appears that such opportunity [...] could not have led to an effective
resolution of the dispute within the 18 month time frame.” In such a case, “it would be
unfair to deprive the investor of its right to resort to arbitration based on the mere
disregard of the 18 months litigation requirement,” because “such disregard would not
have caused any real harm to the Host State.”*' A claim brought before local courts
would have been suited only if this could have been done “in such a way as to
effectively resolve the dispute.”

145. First, this Tribunal is compelled to underscore that this interpretation does not
comport with the plain language of the 18 month rule (whether contained in the
Argentine-Italy BIT or the Argentine-Spain BIT), which does not impose an
obligation on the part of local courts or the Host State in general to adjudicate the
merits of a judicial proceeding within 18 months. This objective is a goal and the
implementation of the provisions of Article X (2) and (3) shall not prevent such a
result from being achieved, but it is not a requirement that must be met in order to
render the 18 month rule applicable. The interpretation suggested does not comply
with the rule’s purpose, which is to offer the domestic judicial system an opportunity
to find a suitable remedy, and nothing more.

146. Secondly, and more importantly, the Abaclat Tribunal does not state any legal
reasoning, juridical principle, or precedent that would ascribe a normative component
for the “weighing of the interests of the Parties” test to be added to the application of
the 18 month rule. Neither the purpose, objective, nor policy underlying the rule give
rise to the propriety of such a standard. In fact, the Tribunal engaged in its own

” Abaclat and Others v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/07/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of
August 4, 2011, No. 582.

® Thid., No. 582.

*! [hid., No. 583.

® Thid., No. 585.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
47

exegesis beyond its own balancing of interests test in stating that claimants’ interest to
be protected concerning their claim was “their interest of being able to submit it to

wee 9983
arbitration”®

and that such interest was satisfied only when it was possible to address
4 Tf these premises
constituted the underlying conditions of Article X (2) and (3), resort to local courts
could never occur and the interests of the Host State would be disregarded. Indeed, the

dispute resolution system would be rendered dysfunctional. This interpretation could

the claim in such a way “as to effectively resolve the dispute.

always be understood as restricting the investor’s ability to submit the claim to
arbitration because it would never be established from the very commencement that
the dispute would be “effectively resolved.”

147. As far as this Tribunal is concerned, if there is to be any “weighing of the
interests of the Parties” to be considered for purposes of interpreting Article X (2) and
(3) of the BIT, it is the weighing of interests as negotiated and approved by the
Contracting States of the BIT. These Parties to the BIT have made an assessment of
the terms that best suited them at the time of the negotiations and most effectively met
their needs with respect to an international dispute resolution system that could attach
to contentions arising from investments within their national territory. Perhaps the
Contracting States may decide in the future that such a brand of dispute resolution
should yield to a change galvanized by a more expansive policy favouring access to
arbitration. Decisional-law constructs, however, such as the “weighing of the
interests” test cannot merely be imposed as an amendment to treaty language that an
Arbitral Tribunal elects to engraft. As the JCS Tribunal warned, ‘“judicially-crafted
exceptions must find support in more than a tribunal’s personal policy analysis of the

provisions at issue.”*°

148. If it is thus accepted that the system of Article X (2) and (3) of the BIT
contains a treaty obligation for the investor to submit its dispute to domestic courts, it
must also be accepted that as far as the Host State is concerned, the same system
contains a treaty obligation to keep its courts available for this purpose. This bilateral
requirement is more than just part of the required effectiveness of the 18 month rule. It
also forms part of a requirement based on the acknowledged principle of good faith. In
the context of the 18 month rule, this principle of bilateralism holds that the Host State
is precluded from insisting on the investor’s obligation to resort to domestic courts if
the investor is not able to fulfil such obligation because of the unavailability of courts
capable of handling such disputes that may reasonably contemplate on adjudication on
the substance of the dispute within 18 months.

® Thid., No. 584.

* Thid., No. 585.

85 ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The Argentine Republic, PCA No. 2010-9, Award on Jurisdiction
of February 10, 2012, No. 265.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
48

149. The issue concerning what constitutes the relevant timeframe for performance
of the requirements contained in the 18 month rule is now ripe for discussion. While it
is one thing to conclude that the interpretation of Article X (2) and (3) must in good
faith be based on the object and purpose that constituted the guiding factors for the
Contracting States when they negotiated and concluded the BIT, it is yet another thing
to determine the time-frame in which the requirements contained in the 18 month rule
must be fulfilled. The moment when the Contracting Parties’ intent and purpose
emerged and was fixed in its legal form in Article X of the BIT is not the time when
the requirements of the 18 month rule are to be performed. The Wintershall Tribunal
holds that the “principle of contemporanity” is not relevant.*° This is basically correct
when the issue under consideration relates to the meaning of the rule. But such
principle, if adopted, must govern the conduct of the Parties as to the workings of the
18 month rule. On this point, the reasons articulated by the Wintershall Tribunal are
not convincing to this Tribunal. In that case it was stated that claimants did not proffer
any evidence that “when the BIT was entered into” the 18 month rule was “incapable
of being complied with (at the start) for the reason that the legal system or the
judiciary in Argentina was not efficient or receptive to claims by foreign investors,”
while the state of the legal system or the state of the courts in Argentina from January
2002 onwards “is of little relevance.”*” If this proposition were adopted as true, the
consequences would be absurd, e.g. Argentina could have rendered its courts
completely unavailable shortly after 1993, when the Argentina-Germany BIT was
concluded and the German investors would have been obligated ad infinitum to submit
their case to these courts and to bear on the economic burden of such useless
proceedings. Clearly, the Wintershall Tribunal did not examine the obligations
implied in the 18 month rule as one to be performed by the Host State’s judicial
system.

150. The JCS Tribunal decided that it “simply cannot conclude that recourse to the
Argentine courts would have been completely ineffective at resolving the dispute.”**
The record before this Tribunal is materially distinguishable in large measure because
this issue relating to the bilateral obligations of the 18 month rule has been presented
to this Tribunal in the form of pleadings and expert-witness testimony (written and
oral).®? Further, the Parties were given an opportunity to address questions on this
matter presented by the Tribunal during and after the hearing. This matter has to be
more closely examined in the following sections.

®° Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. The Argentine Republic, CSID/ARB/04/14, Award of December 8, 2008, No.
129.
* [hid., No. 129.

* ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited v. The Argentine Republic, PCA No. 2010-9, Award on Jurisdiction
of February 10, 2012, No. 269.

® In the proceeding before the /CS Tribunal, no cross-examination of expert witnesses had apparently taken place
at the Jurisdiction Hearing (cf. Ibid., No. 38, 42, 269).

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
49

2. The requirement of submission of the “dispute” to the “competent
tribunals” of the Host State

151. The first element of importance is the reference in Article X(2) to the
obligation (“shall”) of the party to the dispute to submit it to the “competent tribunals”
of the Contracting Party where the investment was made, with the possible segway,
referred to in Article X(3), so that the tribunal seized with the matter may reach a
decision “on the substance” within 18 months. The correct understanding of the
concept of “competence” is important in this respect. As further confirmed in Article
X(3)(a), the proceeding conducted before the competent tribunals must be a “judicial
proceeding.” The term “competence” therefore only refers to an institution exercising
the functions of a court or a comparable body having jurisdiction.

152. In order to have the 18 month rule effectively put in operation it must be
possible to submit the dispute to a tribunal having “competence” in all respects
necessary to allow a litigation to proceed on the “substance.” Even when not
proceeding at this stage with the aim of reaching a full definition of this latter term,
the Tribunal has to make a first step here in stating that in order to allow exercising
jurisdiction with respect to the “substance,” the party required to submit the dispute to
domestic courts must be able to find a court having “competence” without being left
with doubts and legal uncertainty, and this in respect of all aspects of competence
ratione loci, temporis, materiae et personae.

153. There is no dispute on the competence ratione loci of courts available in the
Province of Buenos Aires. The controversy dividing the Parties relates to the
availability of such courts notwithstanding the emergency laws; the admissibility of an
action brought by Claimants in their capacity as investors and shareholders of AGBA;
and the nature of actions that might possibly be submitted to such courts. The first
issue raises a question pertaining to the competence ratione temporis of the Argentine
courts, which for designated time-frames were not permitted to exercise jurisdiction as
a result of the country’s state of emergency (a). The second issue concerns the local
courts’ competence ratione personae regarding actions brought by parties acting as
investors and shareholders of AGBA (b). The third aspect relates to the nature of the
dispute to be submitted to domestic courts under Article X of the BIT, which is
closely linked to the concept of “substance” of the dispute as used in this provision;
this matter will be addressed in the next section (3).

a) The effects of the emergency laws on the operation of Argentina’s
courts,

154. The Abaclat Tribunal identified two reasons for its view that the investors’
disregard of the 18 month requirement did not preclude them from resorting to ICSID

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
50

arbitration, both grounds related to the Emergency Laws. First, it noted that claims
seeking compensatory damages were destined to fail (and therefore presumably would
never be part of a merits hearing) because these Laws and the related legislation
“prohibited the Argentine government from entering into any juridical, extra-juridical
or private transaction.” Thus, even were claimants to have prevailed, the government
would still have faced the impossibility of performance, i.e. fulfilling the liquidated
judgment.” Assuming this assertion to be correct, it goes far beyond the requirements
of Article 8 of the Argentina-Italy BIT and of those of Article X of the Argentina-
Spain BIT. There is indeed no requirement of a possibility to reach a transaction or of
the ability of the Host State to approve such a settlement. Neither is the obligation to
submit the dispute to local courts subject to a requirement that the Argentine
Government would have the wherewithal, means, or ability (physical or juridical) to
tender the payment in compliance with a judgment. Such requirements are all the
more disconcerting because they do not apply as conditions to effective submission to
international arbitration either.

155. The question thus to be addressed is whether the emergency legislation
prevented Argentine courts from exercising their jurisdiction with respect to a dispute
arising from an investment governed by the Argentine-Spain BIT. The Tribunal has
received no evidence to the effect that the emergency legislation would have
precluded Argentina’s Courts from examining such a dispute. This legislation
certainly had the effect of restricting the range of possible outcomes, at least in as
much as the State was bound not to enter a settlement nor to accept any enforcement
of a liquidated damages judgment. Article 12 of Decree 214/2002 suspended
compliance with any precautionary measure in a legal action initiated against the
Government and it also suspended the enforcement of any judgment. However, this
suspension was limited to 180 days as of the date of the Decree’s entry into force. It
has not been demonstrated that the extension of the state of emergency also had the
effect of extending this 180 day time frame. Moreover, such suspension of court
measures and decisions was exclusively directed at the financial industry sector
concerning specific transactions such as loans, debts, bonds, deposits or financial
rescheduling, thus not covering disputes over investments like the one in the instant
case. There also may have existed provisions proscribing access to any renegotiation,
as contended by Claimants in their Answer to the Tribunal’s question: a stage where
new documentary evidence was no longer admissible. But such restrictions do not
demonstrate that submission of Claimants’ dispute to domestic courts was impossible
or did not provide any opportunity to reach a fair result. There is insufficient evidence
demonstrating that the Government “was seeking to prevent any judicial interference
with the emergency legislation,” thus causing a “serious problem” were an investor

°° Abaclat and Others v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/07/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of
August 4, 2011, No. 585.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
51

required to “go to domestic courts to challenge the very same measures,” as affirmed
by the BG Group Tribunal in light of its finding that BG Group’s claims were
admissible for arbitration although BG Group had not submitted the dispute to local
courts as provided for by Article 8 (1) and (2) of the UK-Argentina BIT.” Indeed,
when this conclusion was reached, the 180 day suspension period had long since
elapsed, and the Tribunal did not explain whether the dispute under consideration
related to the financial system which was at the core of the preservation provisions of
the emergency legislation.

156. In light of the limited evidence received covering all of the practical aspects,
consequences, and implications of the emergency legislation, it does not appear
inconceivable that Claimants possibly may have initiated a proceeding seeking a
declaration that the emergency law was unconstitutional regarding the prosecution of
aclaim arising from the Argentina-Spain BIT.” Such a proceeding would have been,
however, a far cry from one satisfying the requirement for a “fair opportunity” to
reach a decision on the substance according to the provisions of Article X of the BIT.
At the outset, such a declaration would have to be completed and conceptually
complemented by another declaration stating that the measures taken with respect to
Claimants’ investment did not comply with the protective provisions of the BIT.
Second, a claim for compensation could have been brought only after both such
declarations had issued. This effort was not only “highly unlikely”? but actually
impossible based upon the operational time frame of ordinary local courts, as shall be
explained below.

b) Competence of local courts requires Claimants’ jus standi

157. Respondent contends that because Claimants had the opportunity to bring this
dispute before domestic courts does not mean that, in turn, Argentina — as a party to
such potential lawsuit — would not have the right to raise any objection it may have
against, for example, Claimants’ jus standi or otherwise. That Respondent may have
such a right under the laws of the Republic of Argentine may be correct. If so,

°! BG Group Plc. v. The Argentine Republic, Final Award of December 24, 2007, No. 153, 156. The Award was
vacated by the US Court of Appeals, District of Columbia Circuit, on January 17, 2012 (No. 11-7021), for lack of
“arbitrability”, Claimant having failed to submit the dispute to judicial proceedings in Argentina and to wait 18
months before filing for arbitration.

There is no reason to mitigate somehow such an initiative by contending that the “Argentine Government could
have arranged for an examination of the constitutionality of the Emergency Law”, but “did apparently not see the
need to proceed with such examination”, as stated in Abaclat and Others v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID/ARB/07/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of August 4, 2011, No. 586. This had been
“arranged” long ago by the Argentine judiciary when seized with thousands of claims under Amparo. As to
decisions rendered by the Supreme Court, cf. CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID/ARB/O1/8, Award of May 12, 2005, No. 215 s.

% Abaclat and Others v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/07/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of
August 4, 2011, No. 585.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
52

however, the proposition merely begs the question of whether such a proceeding
would have met the strictures of Article X(2) of the BIT.

158. For this Tribunal, it clearly does not. Access to a “competent tribunal” as
provided for in Article X(2) necessarily implies access to a “competent” court ratione
personae to hear the dispute, which means that Claimants’ jus standi is admitted and
cannot be denied on a ground based on domestic law, which would find no legal
support in the BIT. It does not make sense to assert that Claimants were under an
obligation to submit the dispute to domestic courts (under circumstances to be further
examined below) only to object to the exercise of the courts’ competence based on
lack of jus standi. Admissibility is a prerequisite for compliance with the obligation
set forth in Article X(2), the content of which will have to be further addressed below.

159. Article X(2) requires as one of its operational features that the competent
tribunal where an investment dispute would have to be submitted prior to access to
arbitration must be a tribunal where the investor is admitted as a party having jus
standi to proceed. This requirement does not preclude a domestic court, arguendo,
from denying Claimants’ capacity as an investor within the meaning of the BIT. But
such a court cannot object to Claimants’ standing under the BIT for reasons
exclusively based on domestic law. In other words, there is no point for the Host State
to argue that remedies are available to the investors before domestic courts while also
arguing that the same investors have no jus standi to resort to litigation before these
very same domestic courts.

160. The requirement of submitting the dispute to the competent tribunals of the
Host State is intended, as strongly and correctly advocated by Respondent, to provide
for an opportunity to arrive at a suitable remedy to the dispute. In order to allow for
this objective, the proceeding to be followed before those tribunals must have the
effect of bringing to the court for purposes of adjudication the substance of the
dispute. The provisions of Article X clearly support such an understanding. Article
X(3)(a) provides leave to an international arbitral tribunal, at the request of either
party to the contention, “when no decision has been reached on the substance 18
months after the judicial proceeding provided for in paragraph 2 of this article began.”
The party seeking to submit the dispute to local courts must act accordingly only to
the extent that it has access to a tribunal that is competent to exercise jurisdiction over
the “substance” of the dispute. The same provision also means, together with
Article X(2), that the requesting party is entitled to have access to a local court
competent to hear the dispute on the merits. Such right is directly based on Article X
of the BIT and cannot be restricted or rendered a theoretical construct on the basis of
additional requirements derived from the domestic law.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
53

161. This analysis leads to the proposition that the local court requirement cannot
compel an investor-claimant to submit its case to a tribunal before which it has no
access or where there is a risk that access may be successfully opposed by the adverse
party. This proposition does not raise an issue of access as Respondent referenced in
its Answers to the questions raised by the Tribunal. There is no doubt left that a
foreign investor has “access” in the traditional meaning of the term, as guaranteed by
the Constitution to every citizen. Respondent suggested, however, that Claimants
would have to accept as a condition precedent within the meaning of Article X(2)
submitting the dispute to a local court where Respondent then could object to
Claimants’ jus standi. In this connection, Prof. Mata stated at the hearing that the
investor would have to demonstrate that, before an Argentine local court, in addition
to his quality as an investor, “he has a legitimate standing to take action.” As stated
in the discussion of the concept of “competence” of local courts, such a hypothesis is
excluded because the framework of Article X (2) and (3) require such tribunal to be
able to exercise jurisdiction with respect to the “substance” of the dispute. Claimants
cannot be required to submit their dispute to courts where they do not enjoy jus standi
under the local law applicable to such courts. This proposition also stands in striking
contrast to Respondent’s statement on the basic purpose of the provision concerning
access to local courts in an effort to arrive at a suitable remedy that may avert
international arbitration. This objective would be impossible to achieve ab ovo were
the Host State allowed to invoke from the very commencement of the litigation that
the investor has no jus standi before the court and succeed in this assertion. Even if
such an objection could be invoked and subsequently rejected, the time expended in
the proceeding would have to be calculated as falling within the 18 month time frame
and would thus render the timely issuance of a decision on the merits all the less
likely.

162. Throughout the course of this proceeding, it has been Respondent’s position
that Claimants lack standing to sue before Argentine’s Courts as investors under the
BIT concerning rights that belong to AGBA. Respondent referred to Section 75,
paragraph 22, of the Argentine Constitution to assert that treaties are superior to laws
and that therefore, Article X(2) of the BIT is directly enforceable in Argentina.
Nonetheless, Respondent also has affirmed as early as in the letters sent on May 24,
2006, i.e. prior to the date on which local court proceedings could have been brought
pursuant to Article X(2), that nothing in the very same provision, together with
Section 31 of the Constitution, “can lead to the conclusion that a foreign investor is
thereby granted standing to sue,” which means that “in this case, in view of the rights
claimed, the action must be brought by AGBA.”

° TR-E, Day 1, p. 63/24 s., 109/17-19, 134/17 s.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
54

163. This position has been confirmed and it is reflected in Respondent’s second
objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. The arguments that Respondent asserts in
support of this objection include the proposition that under Argentine domestic law,
Claimants as shareholders of AGBA lack standing to act in their own name in support
of rights that are considered to belong to AGBA and not to the shareholders. Indeed,
Respondent asserts that no provision of Argentine corporate law allows a shareholder
to bring a claim on behalf of the corporation. The ownership of shares in AGBA does
not authorize Claimants to bring any derivative action by invoking the rights of the
company. The necessary consequence is that Claimants jus standi would have been
denied before the competent courts of the Argentine Republic, with the effect that
their claim would not have been heard on the merits for this reason.”° Such position
affirmed under the Argentine domestic law renders ineffective and thus useless any
attempt to resort to domestic courts for purposes of finding a suitable remedy on the
substance of the dispute that Claimants brought as investors and shareholders. In the
opinion of the Tribunal, the Respondent cannot have it both ways. By advancing and
continuously maintaining this position, it effectively denied that its courts were
competent to entertain the Claimants’ claim under the BIT. It cannot now contend
otherwise.

3. The nature of the “dispute” to be decided “on the substance” within
18 months

164. After stating in paragraph 2 of Article X that the “dispute” shall be submitted
to the competent tribunals of the Host State, paragraph 3(a) prescribes submission of
the dispute to an international arbitral tribunal if “no decision has been reached on the
substance” and this “18 months after the judicial proceeding provided for in
paragraph 2 of this article began.” This requirement may only make sense when the
court seized had been accorded the opportunity to adjudicate the substance of the
dispute. This requirement contemplates that the tribunal before whom the case is
pending, shall have jurisdiction to preside over the substance of the alleged BIT
infractions. Put simply, the fundamental architecture and objective of Article X (2)
and (3) would be frustrated were the local courts foreclosed procedurally from a
merits adjudication. The meaning of the term “decision on the substance” constituted
a point of contention for the Parties and, therefore, shall be submitted to sustained
analysis.

°5 When he was asked whether it is possible that shareholders can bring an action before Argentine courts on the
basis of damages sustained in their investment, Respondent's Expert, Prof. Nissen, answered: “On the basis of the
corporation law of Argentina, which is the one legislative norm that governs this and governs every single resident
of Argentina, the answer is no.” TR-E, Day 2, p. 179/14-18

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

a) The “substance” cannot be reached through proceedings of an ancillary
nature.

165. A “decision on the substance” as in keeping with Article X(3) of the BIT must
relate to the dispute as submitted in an effort to reach a settlement as provided for in
paragraph 1. The rule on prior submission to domestic courts has as its objective
allowing courts the opportunity to fashion a suitable remedy based upon the relief
requested by Claimants.

166. Therefore, an adjudication that only yields a provisional or precautionary
measure does not in any way constitute a proceeding within the meaning of Article X
(2) and (3) of the BIT. Likewise, an action for injunctive relief (“medidas cautelares”)
is subordinate to an action for damages and, therefore, cannot constitute a condition
for the filing of an Article X proceeding. The procedural significance of such a
measure is materially different from the decision making of a local court under the
conditions of Article X (2) and (3) of the BIT. Even if, under extraordinary
circumstances a tribunal may sometimes award, according to Prof. Mata,
compensation for damages (as a temporary advance payment) when the award for
damages might not be payable when the final decision issues as happens in practice,”°
a tribunal shall refrain from thus proceeding “when it comes to contracts and
investments.”®*” In light of this expert testimony, such precautionary measures will
under any analysis not reach the substance of a dispute.

167. The same analysis and conclusion applies with respect to declaratory relief.”*
Declaratory relief is inapposite to the case before this Tribunal. Here Claimants seek
damages for past acts and not a decree proscribing future conduct. As Prof. Mata
stated at the hearing, such an action can be settled through an expedited procedure and
it serves to challenge the validity of actions undertaken by the administration, but it
cannot include an award of damages, which would have to be requested in another and
subsequent procedure.”°

168. Already when Claimants first gave notice of their dispute on December 21,
2005 and on January 24, 2006, they sought, inter alia, compensation for damages
caused as a result of the actions of the Respondent from 2002 onwards, which,
Claimants alleged, had breached the rights under the BIT. By the time that notice of
intention to commence arbitral proceedings was given on September 5 and 6, 2006,
Claimants referred in addition to the fact that, by decree, the Governor of the Province
of Buenos Aires had terminated the Concession Contract with AGBA. Thus, “the

°6 TR-E, Day 1, p. 98/12-21; Prof. Mata’s Report, No. 55.
°T TR-E, Day 1, p. 98/14 s.

°8 Cf. Prof. Mata’s Report, No 42-47.

°° Cf. TR-E, Day 1, p. 96/8-25 — 98/2.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
56

dispute” referred to in Article X was, from the outset, a dispute concerning
compensation for damages allegedly caused to the Claimants’ investments protected
under the BIT as a result of the actions of the Respondent. The dispute concerned
actions that had already been taken by the Respondent, which, if found to give rise to
breaches of the BIT, could only be redressed by compensatory damages and not by
precautionary or injunctive relief.

169. Equally of no relevance is the Amparo action for administrative default or
delay, which serves to accelerate an answer to be provided by the administration to the
requesting party. This has nothing to do with an investment dispute brought before
local courts and not before an administrative agency. Moreover, it requires prior
submission of a claim, which is not the subject matter of this case: a proceeding
relating to Article X of the BIT. As Prof. Mata confirmed at the hearing, it has nothing
to do with a judicial action. 100

170. Similarly, the principle of “useless step” is of no moment in this case. There is
no ordinary proceeding preceded by a prior administrative claim that then may be
circumvented by dint of asserting that it constitutes a “useless” procedural step. As
Prof. Mata very candidly acknowledged, this remedy has “nothing to do with a
judicial procedure,”!”! and “does not reduce the time required for judicial
procedures.” 102

171. A proceeding otherwise ancillary to an action brought by an investor is a
possessory action or action in rem, or quasi in rem which would be available for the
Concessionaire who has been deprived of its assets, but not to Claimants when
seeking compensation for damages and not recovering lost assets. As Prof. Mata
testified, such a proceeding “has nothing to do with compensation for damages.” !

172. Prof. Mata thus acknowledged that none of these so-called alternative remedies
is suitable to be tried by a foreign investor before the local courts of Argentina. The
Expert recognized the hypothetical nature of the alternatives he had identified. He
further admitted that they did not constitute a judicial proceeding capable of giving
rise to a judgment for compensatory damages, as here pursued by Claimants. The
Tribunal shares Prof. Mata’s conclusion.

10 TR-E, Day 1, p. 99/18-22.
'Ol-TR-E, Day 1, p. 94/12 s.

1 TR-E, Day 1, p. 94/18 s.

13 TR-E, Day 1, p. 95/25 - 96/1.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction

b) The “substance” cannot be reached pursuant to summary or expedited
proceedings.

173. The remedies mentioned above and noted in Prof. Mata’s oral and written
testimony are unavailing as to Article X(2) of the BIT because they are based on
expedited procedural rules requiring abbreviated procedural junctures that are inimical
to the complex configuration of most investment disputes. This fundamental
procedural incompatibility is particularly patent in proceedings for injunctive relief or
expedited summary actions. '04 Indeed, Prof. Mata testified:

“The action taken before court can be a very expedited action and the judges,
under article 36 of the judicial code, can simplify litigation and require little
evidence in fact.”!°

Referring to the same provision, Prof. Mata confirmed:

“that judges do have the possibility, and they have very powerful means at
their disposal to expedite matters.”

“They have the duty to provide for the economy of the procedure in all
99107
cases.

However, no explanation was given by the Expert on how such an accelerated
procedure would comply with a judicial examination of an investment dispute like the
one in the instant case, which requires an extensive trial stage and an important
amount of evidence. A decision “‘on the substance” as mandated in Article X(3)(a)
requires manifestly a full examination of the rights invoked upon penalty of limiting
the analysis of contested factual and legal issue to a surface treatment that would deny
the parties of the appropriate due process consideration.

c) The “substance” cannot be reached by a declaratory judgment.

174. The remaining question to be addressed is whether a decision on the substance
of the dispute may be reached where the judgment would only award declaratory
relief. Respondent vigorously answers this query in the affirmative in its Answer to
one of the questions raised by the Tribunal, asking whether “an action leading to a
declaratory judgment on the merits” complies with the requirements of Article X(2) of
the BIT. A motion under Article 322 of the Federal Code of Civil and Commercial
Procedure would allow an investor to submit to local courts the claim for a declaration

't For the examination of such actions, very short periods of time and few procedural acts are provided for, and the
dispute must require urgent judicial consideration. Cf. Prof. Mata’s Report, No. 27-30.

05 -TR-E, Day 1, p. 112/3-7. While this statement refers to lawsuits at the national level, similar solutions are to be
found in the procedural law of the Province of Buenos Aires; cf. Prof. Mata’s Report, No. 77.

196 TR-E, Day 1, p. 114/11-13.

1 TR-E, Day 1, p. 129/1-3.

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
58

that a given measure taken by the Government or one of its subdivisions adversely
affects its rights under the BIT, and that it requests a judicial decision on the
conformity of such measure with the BIT. When further explaining such proceeding,
Respondent refers, however, to situations where additional remedies, as compensation
for damages, are not claimed at that time because damages deriving from the
contested measures did not exist when the dispute was submitted to domestic courts.

175. To be sure a motion for a declaratory judgment would comply with the
stricture and objective of Article X(2) of the BIT where the motion seeks to prevent
damages from occurring. This would be the case e.g. when a declaratory judgment
claim is filed before damage has been caused as a result of the impugned
governmental action. Prof. Mata distinguished between two sets of proceedings. A
first set included all administrative and judicial remedies available to prevent damage.
A second set of three or four procedures were identified that contemplate
compensatory damages. '*

176. The prosecution of a cause seeking the prevention of damages, most likely in
the form of prohibitory injunctive relief is poles apart from the case sub judice. It does
not answer the question how such motion for a declaratory judgment on an alleged
violation of the BIT could comply with Article X(2) where the dispute, as pled by the
claimant, includes, as in the instant case, from the very beginning of the submission of
the notice of dispute, a claim for compensation of damages.

177. The Amparo action for the protection of constitutional rights (including
treaties) has been extensively cited and commented as a device most useful with
respect to Article X (2) and (3) of the BIT. Such a proceeding is of a purely
declaratory nature. According to the practice briefed to the Tribunal, it does not
encompass relief for damages or payments except in the cases where banks were
ordered to return funds to customers.!® The purpose of such an action is to avoid
harm and the risk of future damages. It in no way represents an actual claim for
pecuniary damages. By nature, proceedings for injunctive relief operate on short
notice and contemplate limited parameters for the development and presentation of
evidentiary issues.'!° The Tribunal has not found any material support for a more
expansive construction of Amparo actions in Respondent’s submissions on this issue,
as this shall be further explained below. Moreover, an Amparo action, if adopted, and
as stated in Section 43 of the Constitution, can go no further than to declare that a
particular law or legal rule is unconstitutional or that it breaches a treaty and violates

18 TR-E, Day 1, p. 111/25 - 112/10, 115/20-23.

' Cf. Prof. Mi ‘tatement at the hearing, TR-E, Day 1, p. 136/16 — 137/2.

"0 As Prof. Mata explained, this is an “extraordinary action, which is characterized by minimum procedural
requirements and little need for debate” (Report, No. 19).

 

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
59

for this reason the Constitution. Such a declaration does not include a statement in
regard of its effects on the legal relationship involved in the particular case.

178. In describing declaratory actions as suitable proceedings for purposes of
Article X, Respondent seems to distinguish between the claim asserting the prayer for
relief and the “dispute” representing the operative facts from which the actual claims
emerge. The Tribunal notes, however, that Article X of the BIT does not support such
an interpretation. The “dispute”, as referred to in paragraph 2, is the “dispute within
the meaning of paragraph 1”, and this definition remains the same in paragraph 3. It is
thus the dispute that is submitted by a Contracting Party or by the investor to the other
party in an attempt to reach an amicable settlement. When such a dispute includes a
request for compensatory damages, as it does in this case, the claim necessarily is
included in the subject matter of the dispute to be submitted to local courts if the effort
to reach an amicable settlement failed after six months.

179. Article X (2) and (3), when referring to “the dispute”, address the subject
matter of the contention in its entirety. It does not entail a reference only to a part of
the dispute. If it had referred only to part of the dispute, then, after maturation of the
18 month process before local courts based solely on a motion for a declaratory
judgment, Claimants again would find themselves in the awkward posture of having
to reinitiate anew the entire six month and 18 month process with the remaining parts
of the claim. In short, piecemeal submissions are not contemplated by the Article X
rubric and in any event would only be conducive to redundant and inefficient
proceedings. Article X, neither expressly nor implicitly, provides for this scenario.
Throughout its text, the dispute as the core concern of this Article is used in the
singular form and there is no suggestion whatsoever that a claimant would have to
submit claims to competent local tribunals on multiple occasions. In this case the
dispute has been articulated by Claimants in its broadest sense as early as the date of
the notices of dispute with emphasis placed on the losses suffered by Claimants. If
Article X(2) is to be accorded full force and effect, the entire dispute must be brought
before Argentine Courts in order to provide for a decision on the “substance.”

180. The Wintershall Tribunal noted, without further elaborating the matter, that the
18 month rule of the Argentina-Germany BIT does not mention the type of relief that
should be sought before domestic courts. The Tribunal also observed that the BIT
does not require that it should be the same or similar to the relief sought in
international arbitration.''' This general statement may be correct to a certain extent
only because procedural requirements may have the effect that the remedy sought
before a domestic judge may differ from an application to an arbitral tribunal. But this

"! Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID/ARB/04/14, Award of December 8, 2008, No.
118, 196.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
60

proposition is not the decisive point. The key-concept in Article X of the BIT is the
“dispute”, not the relief requested. There is no indication whatsoever that the investor
should not be entitled to present its dispute “in full” before a domestic court. The
Wintershall Tribunal therefore correctly noted that the 18 month rule is premised on
the submission of “the entire dispute for resolution in local courts,”

181. Likewise, a distinction may be made between the “dispute” and a claim or
cause of action. Article X of the BIT does not require that the same cause of action
must be brought before the domestic court and the subsequent international arbitral
tribunal. As the Maffezini Tribunal observed, the submission of a dispute does not
necessarily have to coincide with the presentation of a formal claim.''? It also has
been noted that the action brought before a local court need not allege a breach of the
BIT; it is sufficient that the dispute relates to an investment made under the BIT. The
claim before the local courts must be “coextensive” with a dispute relating to
investments made under the BIT.''* The nature of the “dispute” brought before
domestic courts may be broad. The objective of the judicial filing is indeed to provide
the domestic court with an opportunity to fashion a suitable remedy that may obviate
international arbitration. For such a result to be reached, it is not necessary for the
domestic court to adjudicate the claim within the framework of the BIT. What is
required, however, is that the cause of action to be adjudicated at the domestic level be
of such a nature as to allow for the resolution of the dispute to the same extent as if the
claim had been brought before an international arbitration under the BIT. As the
Wintershall Tribunal stated, it must be possible to bring the “entire dispute” before the
competent local court.

182. This Tribunal therefore concludes that to the extent the dispute as raised by a
party entails a request for compensatory damages, in addition to a claim for a
declaration on an alleged violation of the BIT, both categories of the claim constitute
part of the same dispute. When the investor is required to observe the obligation to
submit the dispute to local courts pursuant to Article X, this requirement only can be
met when both the declaratory and the compensatory claims are susceptible to
submission before the domestic courts of the Host State. This predicate does not
necessarily require that the same court would have to address both claims so long as it
can be reasonably expected that the 18 month timeframe will be respected.

 

'!2 Tpid., No. 160(2, in fine), emphasis added.
"3 Emilio Augustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, ICSID/ARB/97/7, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction
of January 25, 2000, No. 97.

"4 Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID/ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment of July 3, 2002, No. 55.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
61

d) What fora for claims for compensation of damages?

183. When asked to explain the relevance of the various remedies suggested in his
Report in light of the Article X(2) requirements, Prof. Mata acknowledged that for
purposes of securing an adjudication on a compensatory damages claim before
Argentine domestic courts, only an expedited summary action would be available.''°
He added an action based on the BIT and brought directly before the Supreme
Court. '1°
adding: “but truly I believe that in order to obtain compensation of their damages, the

most important remedies are the ones I mentioned.”'!8

He also noted that “perhaps a precautionary measure could be obtained,”!"”

184. When invited to address the issue of injunctive relief (precautionary measures),
Prof. Mata first mentioned the scenario where such a measure would be of a
preventive nature and that courts would be amenable to expediting a decision, but he
also admitted that such measure is subject to the final recognition of the claim by the
court.!!° Ultimately, such measure would still have to be followed by a proceeding on

the merits.

 

185. Second, another alternative would be for Prof. Mata to raise the precautionary
issue autonomously within the 18 month period.'”° With respect to the possibility of a
decision on the merits where damages are included, Prof. Mata testified that he
“would resort to the expedited procedural remedies.”'”! This alternative is not to be
understood as a type of provisional measure but rather as an expedited summary
action that would permit, in Prof. Mata’s words, “that the local court would have to try
and uphold the terms of the treaty and come to a decision through some sort of
expedited remedy.” 122

186. Prof. Mata acknowledged that his Report was not focused on the issue of
compensatory damages:

“Tn the range of different procedural avenues I referred to in my report, I was
not referring to things that are related specifically to damages, rather I was
referring to all of the different avenues of recourse available to the subjects of
public administration.”'”*

5 TR-E, Day 1, p. 85/1-23

"6-TR-E, Day 1, p. 85/13-23.

"7 TR-E, Day 1, 86/5-10.

US TR-E, Day 1, p. 86/10-13.

"Cf. TR-E, Day 1, p. 87/6 — 88/5.

20 TR-E, Day 1, p. 88/5-14.

2ITR-E, Day 1, p. 88/14-18. See also Prof. Mata’s Report, No. 27-30.
'2 TR-E, Day 1, p. 89/12-14.

23 TR-E, Day 1, p. 96/25 - 97/5.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
62

187. When asked to identify the remedies that would allow courts to settle on
damages, Prof. Mata testified:

“Tn a final decision, yes, the three I mentioned; in other words, very expedited
action, original action before the court, or even an ordinary judgment, with a
special requirement that the decision would have to be made within 18
months. The other remedies available are in order to prevent damages, but
there, as well as in the protection of constitutional rights, you can obtain
precautionary measures with a provisional setting of damages.”'*

188. An expedited action would be based on Article 321 of the Code of Civil and
Commercial Procedure, which requires a legal ground allowing for the prosecution of
the claim pursuant to this provision. In this connection, Prof. Mata referenced the
article of the BIT that mentions the 18 months, “which in any way points to an
expedited summary solution to obtain compensation for damages”. '° This premise
notwithstanding, Prof. Mata had to admit that the BIT neither provides for an
obligation to be placed on Argentina’s Courts to fashion a remedy within 18 months
nor does it require that an adjudication on the merits necessarily comprise
compensatory damages. '7° Therefore, Article X of the BIT cannot constitute a basis
for requiring local courts of the Host State to act through a summary or expedited
proceeding. The Tribunal has to conclude that the evidence is extremely weak to
support a position that there would have been a reasonable chance that the claims
brought by Claimants, as initially defined in the notices of dispute, would have been
adjudicated on the merits pursuant to an expedited summary proceeding. Moreover,
this conclusion is further bolstered when considering the nature and complexity of a
claim brought under a BIT and the investor’s fundamental right that its action be
processed consonant with due process. While insisting that Argentina’s courts enjoyed
the means with which to expedite a proceeding, Prof. Mata did not at all examine
whether such an approach was compatible with the requirement for proper and fair
handling of complex cases concerning international investment law. 27

189. When Prof. Mata referred to an “original action before the court,” !?8 he must
have referred to a direct action brought before the Supreme Court under Article 117 of
the Constitution.'?? This provision follows Article 116, which enumerates the cases
that the Supreme Court is empowered to hear and those proceedings arising “under the
treaties made with foreign nations.” According to the first part of Article 117, the
Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction in such actions. An appellate

24 TR-E, Day 1, p. 116/25 - 117/10.

25 TR-E, Day 1, p. 91/16-19.

26 TR-E, Day 1, p. 91/20 - 92/4.

7 Prof. Mata’s Report does not consider the dispute as it was brought before this Tribunal in relation to the
expedited procedural remedies under Argentine Law. In light of his definition of the purpose of the Report (No. 2),
he was not asked to do so.

PS TR-E, Day 1, p. 117/2 s., 138/1-6.

2 See also Prof. Mata, TR-E, Day 1, p. 85/19-23.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
63

submission of an investment claim to the Supreme Court would not constitute a
remedy pursuant to Article X(2) of the BIT. Article 117, however, contains an
exception in its second part, which reads:

“but in all matters concerning foreign ambassadors, ministers and consuls,
and in those in which a province shall be a party, the Court shall have original
and exclusive jurisdiction.”

Addressing the issue admittedly “over and beyond what I have written in my report”,
Prof. Mata explained:

“article 117 of our national constitution makes it possible for claims to be
submitted when a party is a province or a foreigner, and this is a possible path
which in my opinion was never resorted to in order to try to obtain the highest
court of the land in intervening.”'”

190. This statement is as clear as is Article 117 of the Constitution on the point that
on the sovereign’s side, only a province can form part of a proceeding. Such a direct
action before the Supreme Court cannot involve the State. Yet the State’s involvement
is precisely what Article X(2) requires. The record before this Tribunal is devoid of
any evidence suggesting precedent where an investor first filed a claim before
Argentine local courts as a predicate to bringing the claim before an international
arbitral tribunal. Prof. Mata’s testimony amply comports with the Tribunal’s
understanding of the evidence before it:

“Unfortunately, in Argentina’s judicial experience, there is no existence of
this direct claim brought by investors before Argentinian justice.”!*!

The Tribunal concludes that such an action before the Supreme Court is not a remedy
to be considered as satisfying the requirements of Article X. An ordinary action before
a competent local court is the only remedy available to a foreign investor seeking to
bring a claim against the Republic of Argentina who is seeking to meet a local court
jurisdictional predicate pursuant to a BIT. The question then remains whether such an
action has any likelihood to be adjudicated within 18 months in keeping with
Article X (2) and (3) of the BIT?

8° TR-E, Day 1, p. 66/22 — 67/4. See also a similar but less clear statement in TR-E, Day 1, p. 138/23 — 139/1,
stating that “you would have to ask the province and you would have to ask the national state, and both of them
would have to be brought before the court.”

S.TR-E, Day 1, p. 133/23-134/1.

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
64

e) The 18 month requirement with respect to ordinary court proceedings

191. It is not contested that Article X(3)(a) does not place on a competent tribunal
before whom an investment dispute is pending a requirement to render a decision on
the substance within 18 months. This proposition is settled. The rule merely states that
if an adjudication is not achieved within this time frame, either party (claimant or
respondent) may submit the dispute to an international arbitral tribunal. There is
uncertainty when the question is reformulated as whether such an adjudication on the
substance would comply with the 18 month rule where the case is on appeal. The
Tribunal is inclined to follow Respondent’s understanding that the 18 month rule is
limited to a first instance adjudication on the merits as a stricture extending to
appellate recourse would likely have included appropriate language. '* As to this
narrow proposition, this Tribunal confirms the view taken by the Maffezini
Tribunal. !** In any event, the “finality” of a domestic decision is, without more, not by
itself dispositive. Indeed, Article X(3)(a) provides for bringing the dispute to
international arbitration if it “persists” although a decision on the substance had been
reached at the domestic level. In other words, a decision rendered by a domestic court
has no res judicata effect on an arbitral tribunal notwithstanding compliance with the
test that would otherwise cause res judicata effect to attach under the domestic law of
the Host State.'**

192. The rule contains an additional element that is of consequence in this case. The
procedure to be set in motion when the dispute is submitted to the competent domestic
court should be of a nature that allows the issuance of a decision on the substance
within 18 months. If no such result can be reasonably expected, such a proceeding
would be of no moment because at the expiration of the 18 month period, the investor
shall be free to pursue its claim in an international arbitration. An investor would
certainly do so after not having reached an adjudication before local courts. Therefore,
as a matter of principle, the requirement of Article X(2) can only impose a duty on an
investor to the extent that the Host State can meet its obligation of making available a
competent court capable of meeting the target of rendering a decision on the substance
within 18 months.

193. However, this pronouncement must be coupled with the previously articulated
acknowledgement that Article X(3) does not set forth an obligation compelling local
courts to render a decision on the substance within 18 months. The plain language of
Article X(3)(a), providing for international arbitration “when” no decision on the
substance is reached within 18 months, clearly contemplates the possibility that

'2 Cf. TR-E, Day 1, p. 152/7-17.

'83 Emilio Augustin Maffezini v. The Kingdom of Spain, (CSID/ARB/97/7, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction
of January 25, 2000, No. 28.

'™ Cf. Ibid., No. 27, 29, 33.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
65

domestic courts may not dispose of the dispute within that timeframe.'*° Therefore,
the correct ruling is that the mechanism provided for in Article X (2) and (3) can be
required of an investor only to the extent that the investor is not excluded from filing a
claim before a competent tribunal of the Host State, which in turn functions pursuant
to rules and working conditions that under reasonable circumstances and given the
complexity of an investment dispute may reach a decision on the substance within an
18 month period. If, to the contrary, there is no likelihood that even under the most
favourable circumstances a decision on the merits shall not be forthcoming, even at
first instance, the requirement in Article X (2) and (3a) would be deprived of its
meaning and “effet utile.” If this latter outcome is one that an investor is to expect, it
would not make any sense to file a proceeding that presumably would require
evidentiary showings and extensive briefing. In this regard, the proceeding itself
would be inconsequential and the time passed similar to a waiting period. Even
Respondent admitted that the goal of the provisions in Article X (2) and (3) of the BIT
did not purport to be a waiting period.

194. The question that the Tribunal considers must be addressed in this regard is
quite different from an a priori assessment that the requirement of resort to local
courts is “pointless” — to use the term employed by the Hochtief Tribunal '*° — or lacks
utility. Rather, this Tribunal is seeking to determine the application of the Treaty
language in Article X (2) and (3), which contemplates the availability of a competent
tribunal of the Host State that may, upon the submission of the dispute to it, be
expected to render a decision on the substance of that dispute within 18 months. The
question whether there is such a tribunal is to be determined by this Tribunal on the
basis of the evidence presented to it. The principle of effectiveness or “effet utile” thus
mandates that this requirement be applied and not that it may be disregarded. With
that observation in mind, it is now possible to turn to the evidence.

195. By reference to the remedies available for compensatory damages, Prof. Mata
acknowledged that “we do not have any experience on compensation for damages
before Argentinean courts,” 137 Respondent also acknowledged:

“[...] it is quite true that there was never a case of any investor who brought a
claim under a BIT in order to comply with this requirement.”'**

as

As it was observed in Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction of
August 3, 2004, No. 104, the rule does not require a prior final decision of the courts, nor even a prior decision of a
court at any level. It simply requires the passing of time or the persistence of the dispute after a decision by a court.
°° Hochtief AG v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/07/31, Decision on Jurisdiction of October 24, 2011, No.

   

 

  
  

 

51.
87 TR-E, Day 1, p. 86/22-24. Prof. Mata also said that “in my professional experience I do [not] know that foreign
investors, on the basis of what is provided for in the investment treaty, in other cases, have resorted to Argentinian
justice within the deadline set in the treaty in order to submit a claim to local courts.” (TR-E, Day I, p. 66/2-8). The
Tribunal notes that the word “not” is to be added in the English version in light of the Spanish original: TR-S, Day
1, p. 79/13.

 

  

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
66

Thus, the debate about a filing of an investment claim before local courts becomes
theoretical.

196. The Tribunal finds that Claimants have furnished important evidence based
upon the results of a statistical study undertaken within the office of Argentina’s
Attorney General. Indeed, Mr. Rosatti commented on this study while serving as
Argentina’s Attorney General. The study covered about 1600 proceedings directed
against the Federal Government from 1985 to 2000 similar in nature and complexity
to investment disputes. The study yielded two significant propositions. First, the
average time in which a ruling on the merits took place was six years and one month.
Second, none of the cases considered was adjudicated on the merits at the trial court
level within 18 months. It is important to note here that this evidence is
uncontroverted. In fact, Respondent has not objected to its content. In addition,
Respondent has not disputed the factual basis or any assumption upon which the study
is premised. Respondent also has refrained from objecting to the study’s methodology,
content, conclusions, or quality. In this connection, Respondent did not offer a more
recent study or analysis that would somehow mitigate the 1985 to 2000 findings with
facts of more contemporary vintage. In light of this uncontested evidence, the Tribunal
can draw no conclusion other than to admit that the average duration of proceedings
involving the State far exceeds 18 months and that it is extremely rare, if not
altogether impossible, to have a proceeding of the nature of an investment dispute
conclude, even at the trial court level, within 18 months.

197. The Tribunal examined the collection of judgments filed by Respondent for
purposes of demonstrating that claims as in this case can be handled by Argentine
courts within 18 months. The Tribunal’s own analysis does not allow for such a
conclusion. In most copies of the original judgments the commencement date of the
proceeding is simply not specified. Respondent has indeed referenced such based
dates in the English language summary, but with no supporting information. Three of
the ninety cases contained in that summary went over 18 months.'* In four cases, the
claim was declared moot and in four others it was admitted by Respondent. These
cases are therefore useless to support Respondent’s demonstration. The only case
relating to a claim for damages appeared to be frivolous. That action lasted more than
16 months. The complaint concerned a dispute about a difference in the calculation of
a compensation payment. The case eventually was dismissed.'*°

 

88 TR-E, Day 1, p. 152/24 — 153/2. The proceeding referred to (but not exhibited) by Claimants in their Answer to
the Tribunal’s Questions dated March 20, 2012 at No. 59 does not affect this admission, as it sought declaratory
relief and not compensation for damages.

No. 3, 31, 32.

"No. 53.

  

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
67

198. A considerable number of the judgments have as their subject matter
precautionary measures, data protection, public employment, appeals, and Amparo
actions for delay, none of which can be compared to proceedings designed to reach a
(i) “decision on the substance” (ii) in an investment dispute as referred to in Article X
of the BIT. More than half of the judgments filed were Amparo actions on a great
variety of subjects, most of them involving requests for the enforcement and
regulations of laws and requests to declare particular statutes unconstitutional. None
of these represent cases at all comparable to the action sub judice. None of the
Amparo judgments relate to violations of international treaties or BITs. Respondent at
no time has averred that the cases submitted are comparable in complexity to the
proceeding before this Tribunal. Contrary to Respondent’s broad assertions, which are
nowhere supported by evidence pending before the Tribunal, the judgments thus filed
in fact confirm that there does not exist any evidence from which a Tribunal may
reasonably infer that an action would be capable of being processed in conformance
with the 18 month rule. To the contrary, the record supports Claimants’ contention
that it cannot. This Tribunal agrees with Claimants on this point and so holds.

199. The Tribunal also has the benefit of the experience arising from the judicial
action that AGBA filed in 2006. While Respondent contends that these proceedings
are of no relevance of reference and to the disposition of this case, it cannot deny that
they represent a point of comparison. AGBA’s action of December 4, 2006, filed with
the La Plata Contentious Administrative Court No. 2, primarily sought to have Decree
1666/06, which terminated the Concession Contract, declared null and void. The
action was for declaratory relief as causes of action seeking compensatory damages
were reserved for adjudication at a later time. Despite the very limited scope of that
proceeding, the action is still pending after five years. Respondent did not object to
this factual premise, nor did it attempt to demonstrate that this proceeding was
exceptional in any regard and that therefore it was hardly representative of the norm.
This “close to home” example demonstrates that a proceeding lasting 5 years is not to
be understood as being extraordinary or otherwise somehow exceptional.

200. In light of the inadequacies of the alternative remedies suggested by
Respondent and testified to by Prof. Mata in his Report, together with the lack of any
evidence rebutting the results of the study undertaken within the Office of Argentina’s
Attorney General (explicitly referenced in Mr. Rosatti’s article), the Tribunal must
conclude that the Republic of Argentina has not undertaken any steps to make
available proceedings before its domestic courts that would, even at a minimum level,
meet the requirements of Article X (2) and (3) of the BIT.

201. A further topic sheds light on this lack of appropriate handling of investment
disputes by domestic courts in the Argentine Republic. Actions where compensatory

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
68

damages are sought would be subject to a 3 per cent fee, as Prof. Mata testified,'!
which would correspond to an amount of US$ 6.3 million based on the claim before
this Tribunal.'"? The investor would have to pay this fee if the decision rendered by
the Argentine court is adverse to him." It follows for Prof. Mata that such liability
would become part of the investor’s claim for damages before an international
tribunal. + However, this assertion is far from self-evident, as such claim does not
find any legal support in any of the BIT provisions. Moreover, when asked about the
attribution of costs in a scenario where no ruling has issued within the 18 month
period, Prof. Mata testified that there is no legal text addressing the concern.'*> The
issue concerning the attribution of costs in specific cases governed by a BIT
containing an 18 month rule has been left unresolved. The absence of authority also
confirms that the Republic of Argentina itself had not provided for the appropriate
procedural framework to deal with claims to be submitted to its local courts under
Article X(2) of the BIT.

4. Conclusion

202. Based on the findings explained above, it appears that clearly none of the
various possible alternative means for litigating before the domestic courts of the
Argentine Republic, as presented by Respondent and supported by Prof. Mata, are
suitable to meet the requirements of Article X (2) and (3) of the BIT. An investor-state
dispute before the courts of Argentina would far exceed the 18 months fixed by
Article X(3) of the BIT for purposes of reaching a “decision on the substance.” A
proceeding that can in no reasonable way be expected to reach that target is useless
and unfair to the investor. Claimants were not required to engage in such a
“proceeding” pursuant to the provisions of Article X (2) and (3) of the BIT. This
conclusion is further supported by the Republic of Argentina’s position under
domestic law pursuant to which Claimants in any event would lack jus standi before
the Republic’s domestic courts because they are claiming rights allegedly belonging
exclusively to AGBA and not to its shareholders. This matter has also to be examined
in light of the Republic of Argentina’s second objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

203. In light of the foregoing conclusion, there is no need to examine whether the
Most Favoured Nation Clause (MFN clause) contained in Article IV(2) of the BIT is
here applicable. As Claimants were not required to comply with the 18 month rule
under the facts presented to this Tribunal, the question of the applicability of the MFN
clause is moot.

‘S| Cf. Prof. Mata’s Report, No. 71; TR-E, Day 1, p. 101/3-14.
“TRE, Day 1/9-14,

 
 

“TRE, Day 1p. 1H. 19, 128/13 s,

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
69

III. | Respondent’s Second Objection: Claimants have no legal standing
to bring claims for legal rights that belong to another entity

I. Respondent’s position

204. Respondent requests the Tribunal to reject Claimants’ claim because neither
general international law, the Argentina-Spain BIT, the ICSID Convention, nor
Argentine law provide for indirect or derivative actions. Respondent notes that
Claimants assert that both URBASER and CABB are shareholders of AGBA. These
parties allege a series of breaches of the regulatory framework. They also
acknowledge the contractual nature of the legal relationship on which their claims are
based. They additionally contend that their investment in the Republic of Argentina
consists of shares in AGBA. Claimants’ investment is limited to their shares in AGBA
and their claims must be confined to the protection of rights arising from those shares.
The rights they seek to enforce do not belong to either Claimant but rather to AGBA.
They are not parties to the Concession Contract.

205. Respondent also notes that Claimants assert that the investment is not limited
to mere shares in AGBA. Specifically, Respondent asserts that Claimants failed to
identify this additional part of the investment, simply because it does not exist.
Claimants only complain, so the argument goes, over a series of guidelines and
requirements established by the Government of the Provence of Buenos Aires. But the
resulting conditions were not imposed on Claimants. The purchase of Claimants’
shares and attendant undertakings were voluntary acts. No one forced bidders to
participate. Claimants knew and accepted the requirements and obligations in order to
participate in that Concession.

206. Claimants contend that the investment consisted of AGBA stock and
acknowledge that they are not asserting shareholder rights. Claimants’ rights as
Spanish investors persist. But they can only invoke their own rights. Claimants’
attempt to disguise their claim as a “Treaty claim” when, in fact, it is a contractual
cause of action over which this Tribunal has no jurisdiction. Respondent has prepared
a list of the rights invoked by Claimants and has shown that all of them belong to
AGBA. The only effort that Claimants have undertaken to demonstrate that their
claims are Treaty claims is to quote BIT provisions. This is not enough. Claimants
only have brought contractual claims that relate exclusively to AGBA’s Concession
Contract. Because they are claims concerning a Concession Contract to which
Claimants are not parties and that contains a special forum selection clause, this
Tribunal could not possibly have jurisdiction. The case submitted to an ICSID

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
70

Tribunal in Jmpregilo is largely identical to this case.'° In that case the objection to
jurisdiction in relation to contractual claims has been admitted. The Impregilo
Tribunal did not find any element involving the Republic of Argentina’s obligations
under the BIT, nor evidence of a pattern of acts by State entities aimed at causing
damage to Jmpregilo as an investor.

207. Respondent contends that Claimants are overlooking general international law
that has excluded legal disputes whose essential basis is the performance of a contract
as grounds for jurisdiction. A series of awards have confirmed this principle in the
context of investment arbitration. State responsibility for breach of international law is
distinct from the liability of a State for breach of contract.

208. Respondent understands Claimants’ position as disregarding one of the most
recognized and universally accepted general principles of law. All legal systems draw
a distinction between companies and shareholders. Whenever a corporate right is
undermined by a third party, it is the company, not the shareholder, that the law
understands to have been affected. Claimants bring their claims based on alleged
violations of rights that belong to AGBA. But they are legally separated from AGBA.
Claimants have no legal standing to exercise certain rights vested in AGBA, of which
they are but shareholders.

209. General international law does not provide for indirect actions. The rights
invoked must be clearly vested in those who claim them. Claimants are not vested
with the rights they claim because those rights belong to AGBA. A company’s
shareholders cannot complain of alleged violations of rights vested in the company in
which they only hold shares. They are limited to bringing claims regarding direct
damages to their specific rights. If this principle were not so, certain shareholders
would be able to take advantage of potential benefits from derivative actions, to the
detriment of other shareholders.

210. Respondent explains that the matter was considered in the Barcelona Traction
case before the International Court of Justice. Even though Barcelona Traction was a
diplomatic protection claim, Respondent submits that authority to be applicable to this
dispute. Assuming that a distinction between diplomatic protection and investment
protection is warranted, it bears no relation to the rights that can be asserted.
Shareholders may only claim rights to which they were entitled as shareholders under
domestic law. International tribunals have no jurisdiction over such rights. The
European Court of Human Rights also has rejected the admissibility of indirect
actions. Shareholders can only assert indirect where, in every single case, the claims
are predicated on an express provision authorizing the filing of such claims. Indirect

46 Cf. Impregilo S.p.A. v. The Argentine Republic, CSID/ARB/O7/17, Award of June 21, 2011

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
71

or derivative claims are prima facie inadmissible under general international law.
They may be specially allowed, but these allowances constitute exceptions.

211. The extraordinary nature of such claims is recognized in NAFTA in a specific
provision included in Art. 1117 NAFTA. Some BITs also include similar provisions.
Such a rule would allow Claimants to invoke their indirect control in order to assert
AGBA’s rights. The Argentina-Spain BIT has no comparable provision. This BIT
provides no room for modifying sub silentio the Host States’ corporate law principles.
While the BIT does protect shareholders, such protection does not imply that
shareholders may claim rights to which they are not entitled. No provision in this BIT
intends to modify the ownership of allegedly protected rights. The mere fact that the
BIT has shares in companies identified as protected investments cannot mean that the
corporate law of both States is being redrafted so as to allow shareholders to invoke
the rights of the companies in which they hold shares.

212. Respondent further observes that the ICSID Convention does not allow for
indirect or derivative claims to be filed. The scope of Article 25 may not be modified
by the parties. The matter was considered during the Convention’s negotiation, as
many investors operate through domestic companies. But direct access to ICSID for
controlling shareholders of domestic companies was rejected. Instead, Article 25(2)(b)
was included, which provides for an exception in the case of locally incorporated
companies under foreign control, in order to avoid leaving investors unprotected. If
Claimants’ claims were to be admitted, this provision would be futile.

213. In light of the referenced provision, the domestic company has legal standing if
it is subject to foreign control. This provision cannot be deprived of its meaning.
Indirect claims are thus contrary to the ICSID Convention. Claimants deny that this
provision is the basis of their claim and argue that the language of this provision is not
intended to preclude direct access to arbitration by shareholders. Respondent never
has alleged this proposition. The shareholders categorically are precluded from
invoking the rights of the company and Article 25(2)(b) does not provide for such
authorization.

214. The Argentina-Spain BIT does not protect foreign investors who have indirect
shareholdings in the companies on which the claim is based. The content of foreign
investments is determined by the laws of the Host Contracting State. Article (2) of
the BIT only includes property and rights acquired by foreign investors. This BIT does
not include indirect claims to be filed. Claimants may only rely on rights directly
owned by them. The BIT refers to shares of stock or other forms of participation in
companies. It does not protect mere shareholder interests in companies where they
have an indirect shareholding. According to Respondent, Claimants’ allegations are
not grounded on any right but on their mere interests in AGBA. The Republic of

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
72

Argentina did not undermine any rights held by URBASER and CABB in their capacity
as shareholders in AGBA. Claimants are insisting on rights not held by them but
vested in AGBA. The BIT does not consider indirect shareholdings, controlled
companies or owned by foreigners, or interests in companies to fall within the
category of investments. Claimants’ comments referred to cases that were not relevant
or to BITs that include the term “indirect.” The ICSID decisions on which Claimants
rely are either irrelevant or they have been so rendered under BITs where the indirect
shareholders and their interests in companies are expressly under the protection of the
BIT. The BIT expressly states that “the content and scope of rights corresponding to
the various categories of assets shall be determined by the laws and regulations of the
Party in whose territory the investment is situated” (Art. I[2.2]). Claimants claim
rights to which AGBA would be entitled, which would be derivative since they
involve claims for rights of third parties to this arbitration. Neither the ICSID
Convention nor this BIT provide for this type of action.

215. Respondent also argues that URBASER owns an indirect shareholding interest in
AGBA through Urbaser Argentina SA. The BIT does not provide for such indirect
shareholders or shareholder interests to be protected.

216. International law does not define shareholder rights. Resort should therefore be
made to domestic law, as stated in Barcelona Traction. Claimants’ shareholder
interests in AGBA allows them to exercise the rights arising from the ownership of
those shares, as defined by Argentine corporate law. But these rights do not comprise
rights vested in AGBA.

217. The relevance of Argentina’s law derives from Article 42 ICSID and Article
I(2) of the BIT, as well as the decisions of the International Court of Justice.
Argentine corporate law provides for a structural scheme of companies. The board of
directors is responsible for the management and representation of the corporation. The
board has legal standing to institute any proceeding that may be deemed fit to
safeguard corporate assets. And the proceeds of corporate actions become part of the
corporate assets. Only the corporation can defend its own interests. No provision of
Argentine corporate law provides for a shareholder to bring a claim on behalf of the
corporation. A derivative claim brought by a shareholder is an attempt to
misappropriate assets belonging to the company and, therefore, is contrary to the
interests of other shareholders and third parties. The ownership of shares in AGBA
does not authorize Claimants to bring any derivative action pursuant to the doctrine of
subrogation. Claimants’ interests cannot be equated with AGBA’s rights. Claimants
brought neither a corporate action on AGBA’s behalf, nor an individual action. Under
the laws of the Republic of Argentina, it is not possible for anyone to subrogate their
rights into the rights of another person, except under extraordinary circumstances.
Argentine law does not allow for indirect claims to be filed. Respondent submitted a

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
73

Legal Opinion authored by Prof. Nissen that serves as a further explanation of these
fundamental aspects of Argentine corporate law.

218. Respondent further argues that Claimants’ claim is based on alleged breaches
of contract that purportedly caused harm, mainly, to AGBA. But Claimants simply
cannot ignore the relationships created between AGBA and its creditors, debtors, and
third parties. AGBA’s creditors fall into a category of persons who have a preferential
right to be satisfied from corporate profits. Their claims are to be collected out of
AGBA’s assets. If Claimants’ claim were to succeed, all rights held by AGBA’s
creditors would be undermined. Therefore, the collection of profits demanded by
Claimants necessarily must go through a process where it is determined whether there
are net profits of the company. Also, the shareholders must decide whether dividends
must be paid from these profits. The principle that creditors have a preferential right to
collect their claims is applicable to all corporations in a free market economy.
Argentina’s bondholders also have a preferential right. Claimants’ strategy is to
circumvent these corporate law principles. Were they to prevail before this Tribunal,
Claimants would be allocated a share of those profits over which AGBA’s creditors
enjoy a preferential right. This would result in their unjust enrichment.

219. There is an actual risk that any amount recovered as a result of the claim would
be added to the indirect shareholders’ assets, resulting in direct harm to assets of
AGBA (and all of its creditors, including bondholders and employees). Claimants’
assets would increase, causing an unjust enrichment. Shareholders have no right to the
preservation of the value of their interests. There is also a risk of double or multiple
claims because AGBA was not precluded from filing an action before domestic courts
in addition to Claimants’ illegitimate claim. This could result in double recovery.
Argentina corporate law proscribes such situations.

220. Every treaty admitting a type of action permitting shareholders to claim rights
of a corporation in which they are serving as shareholders provides that both the
investor and the domestic corporation shall (i) waive any other venue, and (ii) that any
compensation awarded shall be payable to the domestic corporation. The Argentina-
Spain BIT does not contemplate such an action, as Claimants initiated. The Tribunal
must abide by the law applicable to this dispute, and only claims under such
legislation should govern the rights of the Parties. If compensation is granted to
Claimants, it will be detrimental to the rights of other shareholders. Claimants allege
that they are merely seeking their respective pro rata share based upon their individual
shareholder interest. This ad hoc solution does not comply with Argentine law.
Shareholders do not hold rights in rem on a pro rata basis in relation to corporate
assets. Claimants also argue that any detriment caused to an AGBA creditor give rise
to liability on the part of the Province and not Claimants. This proposition misses the
point that creditors’ rights can only be exercised against AGBA. Directly

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
74

compensating indirect shareholders as if they had a preferential right over creditors
has no legal ground. To the contrary, creditors have a preferential right to collect their
claims. In any event, Claimants can only claim rights corresponding to them as
shareholders under the Argentine law. This is not what they are doing in this case.

2. Claimants’ position

221. Claimants argue that they prosecute their claim in their own name and based
on the damage inflicted on their investment. The investment consisted of the
acquisition and subscription of shares in AGBA in its capacity as Concessionaire. In
most cases Claimants’ acquisitions were made by them, but for a small percentage of
URBASER’s shares, their interest was acquired through its fully owned subsidiary in
Argentina. The measures implemented by the Republic of Argentina had a detrimental
effect on the concession granted to AGBA. The performance of the Concession
Contract was AGBA’s sole corporate purpose. Claimants assert no claim for the
damages that AGBA itself sustained. Their claim arises from the damage they have
suffered because their investment was destroyed. This damage, although related to
AGBA, is separate and distinct from AGBA. Claimants’ standing to sue does not
exclude, nor is it incompatible with, a claim brought by the Concessionaire before a
competent court. The Government exercised good faith and best efforts to promote
privatization and investment. There can therefore be no dispute as to the standing of
the investors to bring claims. The requirement to set up a local corporation and the
corporation’s incentives to attract investors would result in a material inconsistency
were the shareholders not deemed to be investors for purposes of defending their
interests pursuant to a legal dispute. CABB and URBASER were directly involved in
the entire investment process. All stock subscriptions and acquisitions constitute one
single investment made by Claimants.

222. The rights Claimants assert arise from the BIT and, even though part of the
facts that have led to the filing of a claim also encompass breaches of contractual
obligations by the Grantor, they constitute violations of obligations undertaken by the
Republic of Argentina as a BIT signatory. Some of the actions that the Regulatory
Agency and the Grantor have intentionally and systematically undertaken, so it is
alleged, rise to the level of material breaches of contract. Additionally, they entail
clear violations of the governing Regulatory Framework. Other measures complained
of, as those arising from the Emergency Laws, are beyond the ambit of contractual
disputes and are directly expropriatory. These violations of internationally
acknowledged principles of protection are amply memorialized in the BIT.

223. In its analysis Respondent omits a significant part of the claims. The violations
of the Regulatory Framework were breaches of contract, but they were also violations

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
75

of the rights of the investors under the BIT. The alleged breaches include the
termination of the Concession Contract for political reasons and the adoption of
emergency measures, plus the amendment to the Regulatory Framework approved in
2003. Claimants allege that no single element in their claim is “just a contract claim.”
Respondent argues that a breach of contract may not be construed as a violation of a
BIT. Respondent, however, acknowledges that the operative contractual instrument,
the Concession Contract, forms part of the Regulatory Framework. This Framework
had been presented to the investors as an incentivizing feature intended to attract their
investment. Thus, the infringement of any of the contractual elements, so it is asserted,
necessarily includes the violation of the Regulatory Framework applicable to the
investment. Put simply, each forms part and parcel of one concept. It is hard to
understand how Respondent intends to treat as mere contract claims what has been
asserted as a material violation of the basic rights granted to the investors under the
Regulatory Framework.

224. Respondent argues that Claimants are acting on behalf of the Concessionaire,
AGBA. The investment was made in AGBA under the assumption and
acknowledgement that AGBA was the Concessionaire. These are the indivisible
elements of the same transaction. But Claimants do not fashion claims for the
protection of their rights as shareholders. They act in furtherance of their own rights in
their capacity as Spanish investors. Respondent refuses to acknowledge that Claimants
act on their own behalf and in furtherance of their individual rights. It also refuses to
note that Claimants’ legitimate expectations of benefits disappeared and that this
frustration of expectations triggers the application of the BIT. Respondent elects to
disavow all international awards that in similar circumstances have ruled for the
investor and against the Host State. Many ICSID tribunals indeed have found that a
breach of contract may as well be considered a breach of a BIT.

225. The Tribunal simply has to be satisfied that, if the Claimants’ allegations were
proven to be correct, then the Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider them. Claimants
have standing to bring an action under the BIT regardless of whether particular acts or
omissions may be classified also as breaches of the Concession Contract. The primary
classification of a dispute as an exclusively contract claim or referring to an
investment matter depends on the Claimants’ allegations, unless such classification is
prima facie unlikely. The facts as Claimants have presented them to this Tribunal
allow for a prima facie case qualifying those alleged violations as likely related to an
investment.

226. Respondent premises its allegations almost exclusively on the Jmpregilo
Award that decided jurisdiction jointly with the merits. The position of this Tribunal is
different. This Tribunal has to decide whether it has prima facie authority to hear the
matters submitted to arbitration. The Jmpregilo Award limits the acceptance of the

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
76

objection that the Claimants’ claim is only a contractual cause of action. Respondent
ignores an important material fact in analysing Jmpregilo that is not present in this
case. The Jmpregilo Award found that a jurisdictional clause in the Concession
Contract does not prevent the parties from resorting to arbitration under a BIT. The
existence of a jurisdiction clause in a contract in no way may affect the claims brought
by the investors against the Host State of investment (which are not usually parties to
that contract). The Jmpregilo Award resembles this case in as much as it states that the
Argentine Republic’s objection is upheld to the extent that contractual breaches do not
simultaneously concern violations of rights under the BIT. Claimants disagree with
Impregilo as to the existence of contractual claims separate and distinct from BIT
violations. In this case, the Host State’s conduct principally concerns violations of the
investors’ rights.

227. Claimants had no choice other than to purchase shares in a company organized
in the Republic of Argentina. Claimants were free, but their choice and decision to
invest were affected by the promises, representations, and commitments made to them
as investors. The formula on how to set up the investment was designed and
implemented by the Grantor. An Argentine corporation was to be incorporated within
the Host-State’s territory. This corporation’s shares would be subscribed by the
winning bidder. This procedure was so structured under the Bidding Terms and
Conditions, and it was reiterated in the Concession Contract. That contract prescribed
that the Concessionaire’s sole purpose would be to perform the Contract.
Respondent’s position is that such a structure deprives foreign investors of the rights
enshrined in the BIT signed by the Republic of Argentina. CABB took part in the
bidding process and became the awardee; it was required to invest through the
subscription of AGBA’s stock. URBASER was subject to the same promises,
representations, and commitments when it acquired stock. It did so at a very early
stage, before takeover by the Concessionaire on December 15, 1999. URBASER’s
investment also is protected by the BIT.

228. Respondent does not offer juridical support for its argument that the ICSID
Convention does not allow indirect or derivative claims to be filed. Respondent’s
reliance on Barcelona Traction is erroneous at its starting point, considering that the
investors’ claims for damage sustained directly by them in their investment are
indirect claims. Respondent argues that a general principle of customary international
law may not be repealed other than expressly, but it relies solely on Barcelona
Traction for this proposition. It does not acknowledge that these are precisely the
rights under the BIT. The purpose of Article 25(2) ICSID is to broaden the scope of
jurisdiction. The partial indirect investment is for 1.0687% of AGBA only, which
belongs to Urbaser Argentina SA. That entity in turn is entirely owned by URBASER.
Respondent’s position has been repeatedly rejected by other Arbitral Tribunals. For
Respondent, the only distinction is that for diplomatic protection the State of

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
71

nationality of the aggrieved party files the action, whereas in a case of investor
protection, it is the aggrieved party itself that does so. A doctrine exclusively based on
diplomatic protection does not apply.

229. The rights of investors are regulated in the BITs. The Argentina-Spain BIT
provides Claimants with their investor status. The BIT contains an international rule
which allows claims by shareholders, even where they hold a minority stake.

230. Claimants’ position is that the BIT protection applies to both direct and
indirect participations in companies. Claimants further assert that Respondent is
confusing indirect participations with indirect claims. When discussing derivative
claims, Respondent refers to damage caused to AGBA. When discussing indirect
participations, Respondent refers to Claimants’ indirect shareholding in AGBA.
CABB has a direct 20% interest, and URBASER 26.3425%, to which an indirect
interest of 1.0687% is to be added. All of these shareholder interests are BIT-
protected. Only this 1.0687% constitutes an indirect stake of URBASER, held by a
company that in turn is fully owned by URBASER. Indirect share interests also are
protected as investment. The word “directly” used in Article 25(1) ICSID refers to the
relationship between the dispute and the investment, not to the relationship between
the investment and the claimant investor. The language of Article 25(2)(b) is not
intended to preclude direct access to arbitration by shareholders. The language of the
Argentina-Spain BIT makes no such distinction. It leaves room for all types of assets
and all forms of participation in companies.

231. Respondent places considerable emphasis and weight on the definition of
investments in the Argentina-Spain BIT. Respondent argues that the BIT exclusively
refers to “shares and other forms of participation in companies” (Art. I[2]), whereas
Claimants’ indirect claim is not grounded on any right but on their mere interest in
AGBA. Claimants note, however, that the rule quoted above includes “other forms of
participations as investments” and the definition on top of that provision refers to “any
kind of assets.” No distinction between “direct claims” and “derivative claims” is
made or otherwise suggested by the operative BIT provisions. Respondent’s
distinction is, so say Claimants, consequently groundless.

232. Claimants emphasize that their claim is not based on their shareholder rights
but rather on their investor rights. Respondent denies shareholder standing to assert a
claim in its own name for rights that belong to the company in which the shares are
held. But as Claimants are not asserting shareholder rights and claims, then it follows
that the jurisdictional challenge cannot be based on arguments that relate to
shareholder rights and claims. Respondent chose to distort the terms of the claims.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
78

233. Respondent argues that stockholders or the creditors would sustain damages
were Claimants’ claim allowed to succeed. This proposition, however, rests on a slim
reed. The Republic of Argentina signed BITs. Respondent’s domestic law provisions
cannot preclude protection afforded by an international treaty or otherwise authorize
treaty violation pursuant to organic law or executive decree. Respondent cannot rely
on AGBA and the rights its mere existence creates as to third parties in order to
deprive the investors of their rights under an international treaty. These issues have no
bearing on jurisdiction. The fact that the Concessionaire was affected and harmed
does not keep the investors from filing a claim under a BIT. This Tribunal has
jurisdiction notwithstanding and without prejudice to the jurisdiction of the local
courts, over a different type of action that may be brought by other parties or by the
investors themselves but in their capacity as shareholders, asserting shareholder rights.
Thus, claims filed by other shareholders or actions based on preferential rights and the
avoidance of double recovery are issues to be dealt with in the framework of domestic
law, but they cannot be raised as obstacles to the investor’s protection as safeguarded
by the BIT and to be protected by the Host State.

234. Damages are not equal to dividends. Claimants seek damages from the person
who caused the damage. When assessing the losses sustained by the shareholders, the
Concessionaire’s obligations are to be taken into account, as with any other
responsibility regarding third parties, no differently. Claimants invested in the
Republic of Argentina under a Regulatory Framework that has been repeatedly
violated. They claim the strict repair of damage directly affecting their equity as
compensatory damages arising from breach of the commitments undertaken in the
BIT. Thus, Claimants conclude therefore that Respondent’s second objection must be
dismissed.

3. The Tribunal’s findings

235. The Tribunal notes at the outset that it is for Claimants to state the claims they
are submitting to this arbitral jurisdiction. It is for them to say what they consider to
be the “dispute” arising between them and the Republic of Argentina.

236. Claimants repeatedly have stated that they are prosecuting claims in their own
names and in their individual rights. They have denied — and this has been
acknowledged by Respondent — that they are asserting shareholder rights in AGBA of
any kind. This is confirmed in the presentation of their claim in the Memorial on the
Merits. Claimants’ Prayer for Relief seeking compensation for damages is exclusively
based on provisions of the BIT, i.e. Articles III(1), TV(1) and V.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
79

237. Claimants also deny that their claim is at all derived from claims AGBA may
have against the Republic of Argentina, the Province of Buenos Aires, or any other
third party. Respondent insists on the derivative or indirect nature of Claimants’ claim.
Respondent’s objection, however, is directed against a claim that is not before this
Tribunal. Claimants repeatedly have stated that their claim is not based on any legal
ground that would allow a shareholder of AGBA to raise a claim based on behalf of
AGBA or pursuant to a hypothetical legal title that would allow a shareholder to raise
in its own name a claim that is based on a relationship to which the company alone is
party, and not the shareholders. Claimants have not brought such a claim before this
Tribunal, nor did they assert any shareholder rights that would not be compatible with
Argentine corporate law. This renders moot Respondent’s extensively debated
argument of asserting that Claimants were lacking title to invoke their shareholder
rights for the purpose of bringing a claim before this Tribunal that belongs to AGBA
and not to them.

238. In as much as Respondent’s objection is taken as it stands, i.e. that Claimants
have no legal standing to bring before this Tribunal indirect or derivative actions
based on legal rights that belong to another person, as AGBA, it is sufficient to
acknowledge that Claimants do not raise such a claim and therefore dismiss the
objection.

239. Respondent’s explanations demonstrate, however, that its objection has a
broader scope. Respondent contends that Claimants not only have no title to claim
legal rights belonging to AGBA, but that they have no other title to bring any of their
claims before this Tribunal.

240. Respondent notes that Claimants’ arguments and evidence in support of their
claim show that their claim is entirely based on legal rights of a contractual nature
over which this Tribunal has no jurisdiction. These rights are arising from alleged
violations of the Concession Contract and/or based on changes in the Regulatory
Framework, all of them constituting rights that belong to AGBA. For Respondent, this
has been convincingly demonstrated in the Award rendered in the case brought by
Impregilo, another shareholder of AGBA, before an ICSID Tribunal, where
Impregilo’s claims were considered in most part as purely contractual and therefore
not under the Tribunal’s jurisdiction as it is determined by the ICSID Convention and
the Argentine-Spain BIT. M7

241. However, in this regard as well, Respondent objects to Claimants’ legal
standing as to a claim that is not before this Tribunal. Claimants accept that part of the

harm they have suffered and the corresponding relief to which they are entitled may

‘57 Impregilo S.p.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/07/17, Award of June 21, 2011.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
80

be of a contractual nature. However, they have also argued that such contractual
claims are not included in the relief requested from this Tribunal. Respondent objects
that Claimants have no legal standing to claim for legal rights based on contract while
Claimants have clearly stated that their claim does not comprise any such claim.
Respondent’s objection is therefore equally moot in this regard and dismissed by the
Tribunal.

242. This finding notwithstanding, Respondent’s objection has another facet that is
revealed when contending that Claimants’ claim is purely contractual. This objection
also means that because of its contractual nature, Claimants have no claim to submit
to this Tribunal in their alleged capacity as investors under the Argentina-Spain BIT.
Respondent submits that the investment made by Claimants comprises exclusively
rights and assets related to their shareholder interest and that, in addition, their rights
as shareholders do not include any title to claim for rights belonging to the company.
As no such right to which AGBA is entitled exclusively is submitted to this Tribunal,
Respondent concludes that Claimants are not holding any investment in relation to the
Concession which would allow a claim to be brought under the BIT.

243. Respondent’s position is that the Argentina-Spain BIT accepts as an
investment made by a foreign national in the form of an acquisition of shares only the
rights attached to shareholder status under the domestic laws of the Host State,
whereas the assets used for such an acquisition are not considered as an investment to
the extent they created rights and obligations to which the company is exclusively
entitled, but not the shareholders. In this connection the shareholders receive the
economic benefit of their funding, if any, pursuant to any increase in the value of their
shares and the dividends attached to them. This position, argued on the basis of
domestic corporate law, has the effect, however, that the foreign funder of the capital
provided to allow the Concessionaire to operate under the Concession is not included
in the range of the rules and guarantees for protection of the BIT because its funding
does not qualify as an investment.

244. The Tribunal notes that Respondent’s basis to argue this position is to be found
in its understanding of the role of domestic corporate law governing investments by
foreign partners, but modest consideration has been accorded to the purpose of the
BIT and the need for economic support that investments require if a Host State wants
to receive them. Indeed, setting aside black letter domestic corporate law, what is the
economic likelihood of success of a position requiring foreign investors to operate in
the Host State’s territory through an investment vehicle structured under domestic
corporate law, if this has the effect of taking the shareholders’ investment out of the
BIT’s protection?

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
81

245. The question that remains to be addressed in connection with Respondent’s
second objection is whether Claimants have, as they assert, a legal title to submit a
claim exclusively based on their status as investors under the BIT.

246. Article I(2) of the BIT is unequivocal in stating that an investment includes
(“such as”) “shares and other forms of participation in companies.” The Contracting
States did not limit the scope of this provision to cases where the foreign investor
holds a 100% or otherwise controlling shareholder interest in a company incorporated
in the Host State. This Article expressly states that any definition provided with
respect to particular items is listed as being understood “but not exclusively.”

247. In relation to Impregilo’s shares in AGBA, the Impregilo Tribunal concluded
from Article 1(1)(b) of the Argentina-Italy BIT'* that if AGBA was subjected to
expropriation or unfair treatment with respect to its concession “such action must also
be considered to have affected Impregilo’s rights as an investor, rights that were
protected under the BIT.” '49 as the Tribunal also noted, there is substantial case-law
establishing that claims such as those presented by Impregilo enjoy protection under
the applicable BITs. The issue before this Tribunal is identical to that case. And the
fact that the pertinent provision of the Argentina-Italy BIT mentions expressly that the
notion of “shares” and “participation in a company” includes “minority or indirect
interest,” does not appear in any way at variance compared with Article I(2) of the
Argentina-Spain BIT, which, while not mentioning “indirect interest” as being
included, clearly does not at all exclude such interest from the scope of the provision.
Moreover, it uses the words “but not exclusively” before listing the investments “in
particular.” This BIT is thus comparable with the Argentina~-Germany BIT that has
been interpreted by the Siemens Tribunal as covering a wide gamut of “investments”,
including “indirect investments”, further stating that the treaty does not require
intermediate entities between the investment and the ultimate owner of the

company.'*°

248. The fact that shares of a company represent legal rights and obligations in
relation to the corporation does not preclude them from having other vested rights.
Shares are qualified as a “kind of assets” and are therefore an investment which by
definition is not limited to nor even focused on rights under corporate law. Article I(2)
of the BIT does not restrict the rights attached to shares exclusively to shareholders’
rights concerning the company and other shareholders. It merely states that “shares”

8 This provision is slightly more explicit than the corresponding rule in the Argentina-Spain BIT and reads as
follows: “b) shares of stock, interests or any other form of participation, including minority or indirect interest, in a
company established in the territory of each Contracting Party.

‘9 Impregilo S.p.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/07/17, Award of June 21, 2011, No. 138 and further
No. 245 s.

'8 Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction of August 3, 2004, No.
137, 150.

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
82

are an “investment”, which means that they come under the protection guarantees of
the BIT. The rights under the BIT have a legal standing of their own, which are
governed exclusively by international treaty law and cannot be altered by the domestic
law of the Contracting States. Therefore, the definition of “shares” as an “investment”
holds irrespective whether under domestic law, the only rights attached to these titles
are related to the company’s standing and operation.

249. Many other ICSID Decisions and Awards have considered this type of
objection and rejected it. The leading ruling, often quoted in other decisions, appears
to be the statement made by the Siemens Tribunal with respect to the Argentina-
Germany BIT, which is on this point comparable to the Argentine-Spain BIT, as it
does not contain an explicit reference to direct or indirect investment. It would be of

little interest to repeat again what has been stated in all of these decisions, beyond of

what has been noted above. '*!

250. Such an indirect investment also may be held through a subsidiary company
holding shares in the local company that serves as the “investment vehicle” in
practice. 7 The Tribunal further observes that because Claimants’ investment as
shareholders of AGBA is covered by the BIT, this reasoning also must apply to
URBASER’s holding of 1,0687 % AGBA’s shares by Urbaser Argentina S.A., a
company which is under its 100% control. The Argentina-Spain BIT does not exclude
from indirect investments shareholder interest in companies incorporated in the Host
State that are holding in turn shares in another domestic company. '*

251. This being said, the Tribunal also notes that if the rights related to shares
include rights of their holders for protection of its investment under the BIT, they may

'5! Cf, among others, CEMEX Caracas Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID/ARB/08/15,
Decision on Jurisdiction of December 30, 2010 No. 149-158; Joseph Charles Lemire v. Ukraine,
ICSID/ARB/06/18, Award of March 28, 2011, No. 39; Sempra Energy International v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID/ARB/02/16, Decision on the Request for Annulment of the Award of June 29, 2010, No. 102 s.; loannis
Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, ICSID/ARB/05/18, Decision on Jurisdiction of July 6, 2007, No. 124; Continental
Casualty Company v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/03/9, Decision on Jurisdiction of February 22, 2006,
No. 76-86; Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. The Argentine
Republic, ICSID/ARB/03/19, Decision on Jurisdiction of August 3, 2006, No. 46-51; Gas Natural SDG S.A. v. The
Argentine Republic, CSID/ARB/03/10, Decision on Preliminary Questions on Jurisdiction of June 17, 2005, No.
34; Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/O1/3, Decision on
Jurisdiction of January 14, 2004, No. 38-49; CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID/ARB/O1/8, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of July 17, 2003, No. 36-68; Azurix Corp. v. The
Argentine Republic, \CSID/ARB/01/12, Decision on Jurisdiction of December 8, 2003, No. 59-66, 73 s., Decision
on the Application for Annulment of September 1, 2009, No. 76-130.
'S. Cf, CEMEX Caracas Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID/ARB/08/15, Decision on
Jurisdiction of December 30, 2010 No. 156-158; Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. The Argentine
Republic, 1CSID/ARB/O1/3, Decision on Jurisdiction of January 14, 2004, No. 50-56

° This makes a significant difference in comparison to the Award of April 21, 2006, Berschader v. Russian
Federation, Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, No. 080/2004, where foreign shareholders were holding their
shares in a foreign company which was itself entitled to claim protection under the BIT (No. 129, 135, 140-150).
This had been noted in CEMEX Caracas investments B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID/ARB/08/15,
Decision on Jurisdiction of December 30, 2010, No. 154.

 

 

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
83

include other rights that are of a nature purely based on domestic law, for which this
Tribunal has no competence. Claimants do not claim such rights. Indeed they assert
that their claims exclusively are based on the BIT. The crucial point here is that
Claimants are acting under their own rights as investors through shares acquired in
AGBA under the BIT, rights that are different from any rights attached to their shares
under domestic law.

252. The Tribunal equally dismisses this objection to the extent that it purports to
assert that Claimants’ claims are of a purely contractual nature and unrelated to rights
under the BIT, all the more as this BIT does not contain an umbrella clause. These
claims, if qualified as contractual in “nature”, could not be brought by Claimants as
they would involve matters dealt with in the Concession Contract to which neither
Claimant is a party. There would be no basis in the BIT for examining such claims by
this Tribunal and that is why Claimants contend that they are not raising any such
claims.'** Claimants also argue, however, that their investment had suffered from
unjustified or discriminatory measures, was not afforded fair and equitable treatment,
and was subject to illegal and discriminatory expropriation — all these concerns raising
issues under the BIT, to which the dispute resolution provision of Article X of the BIT
fully applies. BIT provisions are triggered even though certain issues may also raise
contractual rights or obligations under domestic law that are not within the
competence of this Tribunal. This finding also means that exclusively contractual
claims do not come under this Tribunal’s competence; however, such an issue, if
included in Respondent’s objection, is moot as it is admitted by Claimants that they do
not raise such claims before this Tribunal.

253. The Tribunal is aware of the risk that the proceeding in the instant case and the
parallel proceedings initiated by AGBA before domestic courts in the Republic of
Argentina could lead to a recovery for damages in both proceedings, which could
ultimately, at least theoretically, raise an issue of double recovery in favour of
Claimants as investors and shareholders of AGBA, as well as a conflict in interest
with AGBA’s other creditors who are not parties, at least, to any of the referenced
proceedings. Such a risk, however, is inherent in many investment disputes that also
raise, directly or indirectly, a possible option for recovery on the purely domestic
level. This configuration does not in any way constitute a restriction on the
jurisdiction of this Tribunal pursuant to the Argentina-Spain BIT. Hence, as stated by
the Impregilo Tribunal,'® if compensation were granted to AGBA at the domestic
level, this would affect the claims brought under the BIT, and conversely,
compensation under the BIT may affect claims submitted by AGBA before Argentine

'S The situation on this point is the same as for the Tribunal in Impregilo S.p.A. v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID/ARB/07/17, Award of June 21, 2011, No. 185.
'55 Impregilo S.p.A. v. The Argentine Republic, 1CSID/ARB/07/17, Award of June 21, 2011, No. 139,

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
84

courts. '°° The issue will, if necessary, be addressed at a later stage of this proceeding,
along with the merits of the dispute.

254. In reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal wishes to emphasize that while its
jurisdiction is limited to claims brought by Claimants under the BIT for damage
suffered by them arising from their investment in the form of shares in AGBA, the
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over any AGBA claims, any claims arising from
damage suffered by AGBA, or any claims premised on damages suffered by other
AGBA shareholders. Although AGBA is not a party to this proceeding, the Tribunal
has nevertheless jurisdiction to consider and issue factual findings regarding the
conduct of the parties to the Concession Contract, including AGBA, to the extent that
such findings may be relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration of arguments advanced
by either Claimants or Respondent.

IV. Respondent’s Third Objection: The investment invoked by
Claimants is not a protected investment under the Argentina-Spain
BIT

A. Preliminary matters

255. This last objection is divided into three parts. First, Respondent contends that
URBASER’s investment was not in compliance with the laws of Argentina when it
acquired all of Dycasa’s shares in AGBA through an agreement concluded on
September 28, 2001, although part of these shares had been classified as non-
transferable for a period of six years after the entry into force of the Concession
Contract, subject to authorization from the Grantor to that effect. Second, Respondent
stated in its Reply on Objections to Jurisdiction that it recently had learned that CABB
also had engaged in an illegal transfer of AGBA’s shares when it transferred its
shareholder interest to URBASER S.A., Aguas de Bilbao S.A., BBK and Sociedad para
Ja Promocién y Reconversion Industrial (SPRI) through participation agreements that
imply serious violations of the law governing the holding and transfer of shares in
AGBA. Third, Respondent objects that CABB had no standing to resort to ICSID
Arbitration without the prior express authorization of the Kingdom of Spain, which it
did not request nor obtain.

256. Claimants assert as a preliminary matter that these objections had been
untimely raised. While the first objection was raised in Respondent’s Memorial on
Objections to Jurisdiction, the other two objections were submitted in Respondent’s

'86 Cf. also Azurix Corp. v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID/ARB/01/12, Decision on Jurisdiction of December 8,
2003, No. 101, Decision on the Application for Annulment of September 1, 2009, No. 113 s.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
85

Reply on Objections to Jurisdiction only, in such a manner that their belatedness is
even more serious. Claimants note that Arbitration Rule 41(1) provides that objections
to jurisdiction must be raised as soon as possible. When the Parties agreed upon a time
frame for the filing of submissions on jurisdictional objections, according to
Claimants the Parties had stipulated and agreed that these submissions would relate to
the two objections Respondent had mentioned at an early stage in its response to the
Request for Arbitration and not for the purposes of raising new jurisdictional issues
for the first time. In Claimants’ view, these grounds suffice to dismiss all of these
objections as untimely according to Arbitration Rule 41(1).

257. The Tribunal observes that the Parties had agreed, with the Tribunal’s
approval, that this proceeding would be governed by the ICSID Convention, the
Arbitration Rules and the provisions of the Procedural Agreement, as well as any
other agreement that the Parties may reach in the future (No. 5 of the Procedural
Agreement). Claimants rightly observe that for Arbitration Rule 41(1) the primary rule
is that jurisdictional objections be made “as early as possible.” However, the
secondary rule is that such objections shall be raised no later than at the end of the
time-limit for the counter-memorial. This second rule overrides any possible sanction
of an objection for not having been raised as early as possible but still within this
second time-limit. In any event, the applicable rules in the instant case are those of the
Procedural Agreement, where, under Number 14, the sequence of the filing of the
Parties’ submissions is stated. It is provided in that paragraph of the Procedural
Agreement that the Republic of Argentina shall file its Memorial on Objections to the
Jurisdiction of the Centre sixty days following receipt of the Claimants’ Memorial on
the Merits (sub-para. 3). Further, “once the objections to the jurisdiction have been
raised,” Claimants may file a Counter-memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction (sub-
para. 4). No determination is made concerning which objections specified by
Respondent at an earlier stage shall be dealt with exclusively in the Memorial on
Objections to the Jurisdiction. It was therefore proper for Respondent to include in this
Memorial any jurisdictional objection it elected to raise.

258. The next question is then whether Respondent’s Reply could properly raise
new objections to jurisdiction not previously raised. The Procedural Agreement
provides that only upon the request of a party and after consultation with the other
party, will the Tribunal decide whether a second exchange of briefs shall take place at
the jurisdictional stage (sub-para. 5). In the absence of any further indication as to the
possible content of Respondent’s Reply, it cannot be concluded that the Procedural
Agreement did prevent Respondent from raising additional jurisdictional objections in
its second submission on this matter. Moreover, Respondent contends that it did find
support for parts of its objections in documents only very recently made available, that
triggers application of Arbitration Rule 41(1) in fine. All parts of Respondent’s Third
Objection are therefore to be examined by the Tribunal. It may be added that under

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
86

Arbitration Rule 41(2), in any event, “the Tribunal may on its own initiative consider,
at any stage of the proceeding, whether the dispute or any ancillary claim before it is
within the jurisdiction of the Centre and within its own competence.” !*”

259. Respondent’s basic position in this respect is that compliance with the laws of
the Host State is a fundamental requirement of the Argentina-Spain BIT, as contained
in Article I(2), which states that the term “investment” shall mean “any kind of assets,
such as property and rights of every kind, acquired or effected in accordance with the
legislation of the country receiving the investment.” Similar terms can be found in
Article III of the BIT. Respondent adds that the reference to its laws must include
administrative regulations, court decisions, as well as the Bidding Terms, the
Concession Contract, and the Regulatory Framework, which are all part of Argentine
law.

260. The Tribunal is fully aware of the basic requirement that an investment is
required to be made in compliance with the laws of the Host State in order to be
accorded the protection provided by the BIT. The Tribunal is also aware of the fact
that the illegal or irregular exercise of rights attached to assets representing an
investment under the BIT cannot lead to a disqualification as a valid investment, but
must be dealt with through the pertinent mechanisms for the resolution of disputes that
may be applicable under the circumstances. The requirement for compliance with the
laws of the Host State is focused on the entry and the initiation of the investment. The
subsequent conduct and operation of the investment is relevant within the framework
of the application of the BIT and comes under the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on the
merits. The borderline of the distinction to be drawn is not always easy. As the
explanations detailed below establish, this Tribunal does not need to develop
abstractly the analysis of this matter.

87 Cf. Azurix Corp. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID/ARB/01/12, Decision on Jurisdiction of December 8, 2003,
No. 68.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
87

B. The transfer of AGBA shares held by Dycasa S.A. to URBASER S.A.

 

I. Respondent’s position

261. Respondent explains that on September 28, 2001, URBASER acquired all of the
shares held by Dycasa S.A., a company governed by the laws of the Republic of
Argentina, in AGBA. URBASER accordingly became the holder of 27.42% of AGBA’s
shares, in violation of the legal provisions of the Concession. This Contract provided
in Article 2.3.3 as follows:

“Additionally, fifty-one per cent (51%) of the voting share capital of the
concessionaire, including the minimum percentage required to be owned by
the Operator and excluding the shares allocated to the ESOP, shall be
represented by nominative shares which may not be transferred during the
first six (6) years of the Concession, unless upon the prior and express
approval of the Executive Branch. This authorization shall not be granted,
however, for the transfer of the percentage of shares owned by the Operator
pursuant to Article 2.3.2. The aforementioned restrictions shall also apply to
any increases in the Concessionaire’s capital.”

A similar provision was contained in the Bidding Terms and in AGBA’s By-laws
(Art. 4.5 and 4.6). In Respondent’s view, Claimants’ argument that the shares were
transferable but subject to approval is misleading. The applicable provisions establish
the requirement of a prior and express approval. There is no reference to a tacit or
tolerated approval.

262. Respondent notes that URBASER acknowledged that it had purchased from
Dycasa 2,099,052 non-transferable shares and had informed the Grantor of said
transfer, while ORAB merely had been notified. There was thus no authorization
neither requested nor granted. AGBA’s letter to ORAB of September 30, 2002
explained that it was a mere reorganization of the same group, not requiring
authorization. This shows at least that URBASER was aware of the requirement, as
AGBA submitted the matter to ORAB for advice. On October 21, 2002, however, the
Rules and Regulations Department of ORAB rendered an opinion and did raise
objections. ORAB noted that prior and express approval should have been granted not
by ORAB but by the Executive Branch of the Province of Buenos Aires.

263. The transfer of these shares was supposed to be made no earlier than on
December 7, 2005, when the six year term had elapsed. The agreement with Dycasa
was completed on September 28, 2001. In Respondent’s view, URBASER was aware of
its illegal behaviour when it stated in a Note describing AGBA’s successive stock
transfers that Dycasa had to remain formally the shareholder of record of the
2,099,952 non-transferable shares. It is thus established for Respondent that this

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
88

transfer of shares took place in September 2001, when it was illegal. URBASER
increased its share interest in AGBA in an illegal and fraudulent manner. Respondent
concludes that the Tribunal should declare its lack of competence regarding a claim
arising from such an unlawful manoeuvre.

2. Claimants’ position

264. Claimants state in reply that there was no illegal transfer of Dycasa’s shares in
AGBA. Claimants note at the outset that Respondent wrongly states that URBASER
acquired Dycasa’s shares and thus became the holder of 27.42% of AGBA’s shares,
all of which were obtained in violation of the Concession. Before September 28, 2001,
URBASER already was the holder of 16.8748% shares; and from Dycasa’s shares,
2,641,878 were free-transferable and only 2,099,952 subject to authorization,
representing 4.66656% of AGBA’s equity. Therefore, the challenge only is limited to
4.66656%, leaving the remaining 22.74564% unaffected.

265. Claimants observe that Respondent focuses mainly on an opinion issued by the
Rules and Regulations Department of ORAB of October 21, 2002, stating that
approval was to be given by the Grantor and was still missing. But this opinion does
not say more than that approval is also required for transfers of shares among
companies of the same group. Respondent fails to make reference to other opinions
and documents that demonstrate that URBASER acted with diligence and transparency,
that there was a general opinion in favour of the transfer, and that any decision
became useless as after six years following the takeover shares could be freely
transferred.

266. Moreover, Claimants refer to a Report of the Under-Secretary of Public
Services dated February 5, 2003 (sic, not 2002 as stated in the document), 158 noting
that granting such request would not pose a problem. The Report of the Government’s
General Advisory Office dated February 28, 2003 159 explained that the Executive may
issue the relevant Decree. Claimants did find in AGBA’s file further documents
showing that no objection was raised regarding the transfer of shares, but merely that
information was requested. Consequently, ORAB’s Note of April 21, 2003 stated that
the Agency was aware that the transfer occurred and it requested information so that
the Grantor may assess whether the authorization should be granted. In response to
another Note from ORAB, dated November 10, 2003, further information was
supplied in AGBA’s Note of May 11, 2005. Through a Note of ORAB of July 29,
2005, the case was then filed with the Under-Secretary of Public Services. There was
no subsequent request for documentation or resolution. And six years after the

'8S Cf. TR-E, Day 2, p. 218/5-22, 280/16-25, 288/5-7, 289/4-10.
'S° On the corrected identification of that date, cf. TR-E, Day 2, p. 220/16-22, 280/11-13, 289/11-15.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
89

takeover, during which time the approval for the transfer was taking place, the
approval was no longer required. As such, the Grantor rendered no decision.

267. Ina Note of March 31, 2006, AGBA informed of this the Under-Secretary of
Public Services of the Province of Buenos Aires, identifying each of its shareholders
along with its share interest. CABB appeared holding 20%, URBASER 26.3434% and
Urbaser Argentina 1.0687%. The Concessionaire also stated that since January 4,
2006, the distinction between transferable and non-transferable stock was
inapplicable. The Under-Secretary agreed with this last remark in its Note to ORAB of
April 20, 2006, relating to Impregilo, stating that the original request has become
moot. The Grantor was fully aware of the transfer and ultimately concluded that the
approval was no longer required. The acquisition of shares of Dycasa by URBASER
was completely transparent. In Claimants’ view, Respondent’s challenge is
groundless.

3. The Tribunal’s findings

268. The Tribunal finds it important to distinguish clearly between the agreement
reached between Dycasa and URBASER, where Dycasa undertook to transfer its shares
in AGBA to URBASER, and the actual transfer of the same shares with the effect of
transferring shares from Dycasa to URBASER.

269. From the Parties’ submissions and the references contained in various
documents, it appears that the agreement on this transfer of shares as concluded
between these two companies is contained in a document dated September 28, 2001.
This document, however, has not been produced and does not form part of the
Tribunal’s record. The same transfer of shares is referred to in a letter sent to the
AGBA Board of Directors on November 28, 2001 by companies having share
interests in AGBA, according to which they represent that they consent to the transfer
of 4,741,829 class “D” shares from Dycasa to URBASER, and to another transfer of
class “C” shares from Impregilo S.p.A. and Iglys S.A. to Impregilo International
Infrastructures N.V. This letter has been submitted by Claimants. It necessarily
implies that the agreement between the shareholders involved had been reached prior
to this communication sent to AGBA on November 28, 2001.

270. The Expert Report presented by Prof. R.M. Mandévil also stated that on
September 28, 2001, URBASER and Dycasa entered into a stock purchase and sale
agreement concerning class “D” shares of AGBA (No 4.16). The Expert further
explained that the shareholders’ information concerning this transaction and other
transfers of shares was sent to AGBA on the same day (No. 4.18, 5.18). When faced
with the request to produce this document, Claimants explained that Prof. Mandévil in

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
90

fact actually intended to refer to the letter dated November 28, 2001, and that the
agreement in relation to the transfer of shares of September 28, 2001, albeit mentioned
in his Report, had not been provided to him. At the hearing, Prof. Mandvil
acknowledged the confusion'® but stated that it had no impact on his conclusions
because the mechanics involved are the same, i.e. the execution of a stock purchase
agreement being followed by the notification to the corporation of the transfer of

shares. '*!

271. Claimants also submitted to the Tribunal a “Letter describing AGBA’s
successive stock transfers.” This document does not present any letter format, as it
lacks any indication concerning the author, the addressee, and its date. It was declared
to be a summary prepared by Claimants.'® It contains a detailed listing of the changes
in AGBA’s share ownership between 1999 and 2006; its conclusions explain the
specifics of URBASER’s shareholder interest in AGBA and the fact that this company
qualifies as an investor. The document indicates that a stock purchase agreement was
signed on September 28, 2001 between URBASER and Dycasa for the transfer of
4,741,829 of AGBA’s class “D” shares, and that this document was followed by a
letter by AGBA’s shareholders dated November 28, 2001, informing of the transfer of
shares (which is then described).

272. Although the Tribunal did not see the agreement of September 28, 2001, there
is clear evidence that such agreement was concluded on that date and then followed by
a communication of the details of the transfer of shares agreed upon as addressed to
the company AGBA two months later, on November 28, 2001. This level of
knowledge also suggests that the Tribunal has not been presented with the details, if
any, of the agreed transfer of Dycasa’s shares and, in particular, the 2,099,952 shares
qualified either as non-transferable or as being subject to authorization, representing
4.66656% of AGBA’s equity. Other documents provide clarification.

273. In the letter sent by the shareholders to the Board of Directors of AGBA on
November 28, 2001, it was stated that it was the understanding of the undersigned:

“that the Authorization of the competent authority overseeing AGBA’s
Concession Contract (the ‘Concession Contract’) shall be solely required for
the transfer of the following shares subject matter of the transfers, subject to
the limitations set out in Article 4.7 of the Bylaws and Section 2.3 of the
Concession Contract, [...]: (i) with regard to the Transfer from DYCASA to
URBASER, 4.666560%; [...].” [The omitted parts relate to the transfer of
shares of Impregilo].

. 200/23-203/9, 203/21-205/2, 213/17-214/7, 237/11-246/11, 265/13-24.
. 212/15-17, 214/12-20.
. 257/1-20, 258/16-22.

 

sD

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
91

It was thus the understanding of the authors of the communication, including Dycasa
S.A. and URBASER, that the transfer of the 2,099,952 shares held by Dycasa was
subject to authorization within the limits contained in Section 2.3 of the Concession
Contract and Article 4.7 of the Bylaws. These facts also establish that the agreement
of September 28, 2001 could not on its own operate the transfer of these shares,
assuming that this would have been its content. As stated by Prof. Mandvil, such
authorization was a condition for the enforcement of the agreement, i.e. to have the
ownership of the shares actually transferred and rendered effective vis-a-vis the
corporation. 163

274. This was also the understanding of Mr. O. P. Biancuzzo, Executive Vice
President of AGBA, when he wrote on September 30, 2002 to the Agency (ORAB) to
inform it about the transfer of shares between Dycasa and URBASER. In this respect,
the letter drew a distinction, stating that Dycasa S.A. “(1) has transferred 2,641,877.2
non-endorsable nominative Class D shares [...]” and “(2) intends to transfer
2,099,952.1 non-endorsable nominative shares [...],” these latter shares being “subject
to an agreement to keep a non-transferable interest in AGBA.”' When describing the
details of the operation, the letter again explains that Dycasa had transferred to
URBASER all of its freely transferable shares, while URBASER “intends to acquire
Dycasa’s non-transferable interest,” represented by 2,099,952.1 shares. The letter
further states that the transfer of shares agreed upon by Dycasa and URBASER does not
amount to a change in AGBA’s share ownership, because it takes place as part of a
mere restructuring of the business group to which both of these companies belong.
The author of the letter concludes that he understands that the intended transfer of a
non-transferable interest is but the corollary of the transaction previously considered
and approved by the Bidder and that he believes that no subsequent authorization
under the Concession Contract should be required. AGBA’s representative did not
conclude, however, that he considered the transfer as authorized and thus to be
finalized. He stated that he did submit the matter to ORAB for its consideration, or
through it to the consideration of the body empowered to analyse the question.

 

275. In its reply dated October 21, 2002, ORAB stated that prior and express
approval of the transfer of these shares should be granted not by ORAB but by the
Executive Branch of the Province of Buenos Aires. Claimants quote various other
official statements, referred to above, which support, more or less clearly, the granting

163 TR-E, Day 2, p. 212/15-17, 214/15-20.

't The distinction between the given numbers of transferable and non-transferable shares of Dycasa S.A. has not
been disputed before the Tribunal. Under the Bidding Terms, the non-transferable shares had to represent 51% of
the voting capital stock (Sec. 3.2) and the details of the stock participation of each bidding member was to be
determined in a relationship agreement between the members, which had to be filed with the Prequalification Bid
(Sec. 4.2.1[h]) and listed in Annex 5 (Sec. 3.2). The respective portions of non-transferable shares were identified
in AGBA’s By-laws (Sec. 4.5). Dycasa S.A. became holder of a portion of such non-transferable shares when it
became shareholder of AGBA through the acquisition of the stockholding of Sideco Americana S.A., as authorized
by Decree No. 757 dated March 27, 2002 (cf. also the Report of Prof. Mandvil, No. 4.8-4.15).

 

 

 
 

    

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
92

of such authorization. However, none of them actually issued such authorization or
officially declared that it was not required. The certificate provided by AGBA
confirming that Dycasa and URBASER were part of the same economic group did not
produce such effect either, nor did the suggestion prevail, as supported by Prof.
Bianchi,'® that there did not exist a restriction on transfer of shares where it occurred
between those who were already AGBA’s shareholders.

276. The documents submitted to the Tribunal provide evidence that by letter dated
“November 2002” Dycasa S.A. informed AGBA that it had transferred 2.641.878
class “D” shares to URBASER and that it requested this transfer to be recorded in the
Shareholder Register. By virtue of decisions taken by AGBA’s Board of Directors and
recorded in its Minutes, this was done on December 4, 2003, when Stock Certificate
No. 12 was issued in favour of URBASER for 2,641,878 class “D” shares, while Stock
Certificate No. 11 was delivered to Dycasa S.A. for its remaining 2,099,951 shares.
Consequently, Stock Certificate No. 6, representing Dycasa’s initial holding of
4,741,829 shares was cancelled.

277. Hence, Dycasa S.A. in 2003 remained an owner of 2,099,951 shares that were
only transferable upon authorization. The Tribunal’s record is devoid of any evidence
that would show a change of the ownership structure of AGBA until 2006. Claimants’
Note describing AGBA’s successive stock transfers does not record any movement in
2004 and 2005S. It explains the events occurring in 2006, which are supported by the
documents submitted to the Tribunal. By letter of February 13, 2006, Dycasa S.A.
informed AGBA that it had transferred 2.099.952 class ““D” shares to URBASER and
that it requested this transfer to be recorded in the Shareholder Register. Based on the
Board of Directors instructions of March 14, 2006, Stock Certificate No. 11 was
revoked and Stock Certificate No. 13 issued in the name of URBASER, and
representing the same number of shares. Through its letter dated March 27, 2006,
AGBA informed ORAB accordingly, stating that the six year time limit provided for
in the Concession Contract had passed and that therefore, these 2.099.952 shares had
become freely transferable, raising URBASER’s participation in AGBA’s shareholding
to 26,34%. As well, Prof. Man6vil observed that in the registry of shares there was no
inscription or entry concerning the transfer of shares requiring authorization before the
time period of six years had elapsed, which means that no violation of a legal norm
occurred. '°°

278. The conclusion to be drawn from these factual findings is that the transfer of
these 2.099.952 shares from Dycasa to URBASER became effective on March 14, 2006
only. To the extent this transfer implies an increase in URBASER’s investment in

'65 Prof, Bianchi’s Second Opinion, No. 29-39; TR-E, Day 2, p. 294/8-295/10.
16 TR-E, Day 2, p. 224/18-225/3.

  

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
93

AGBA, it took effect not earlier than at this date. It follows that no violation of Article
2.3.3. of the Concession Contract and of the parallel provisions in the other
instruments relating to the Concession did occur, as the six year time limit had elapsed
when the transfer of these shares became effective. The Tribunal also finds that these
provisions did apply to the transfer of shares only; they did not in any way prohibit or
declare illegal a contractual undertaking concluded earlier in view of such transfer to
become operative when possible in the future.

279. In light of these factual elements relating to the transfer of shares and the
actual handling by the shareholders involved, the Tribunal finds that Respondent’s
objection based on an alleged abuse or fraud must fail. The transfers as realized and as
envisioned regarding the non-transferable shares of Dycasa was transparent and
known to AGBA and the Agency in the years 2001/02. No objection based on fraud or
similar grounds had ever been raised on anyone’s part or behalf. The Grantor was
entitled to invoke its right under Section 14.1.3(0) of the Concession Contract to
terminate the Contract by reason of a non-authorized transfer of shares. If it did not so
act it may be assumed that this omission was justified because there was no ground for
such termination and certainly no cause for any suspicion of fraud possibly committed
by AGBA’s shareholders.

280. In its descriptive Note on the AGBA’s shareholder changes, Claimants admit
that in relation to the transfer of shares agreed upon on September 28, 2001, “the truth
is that the transfer of only 2,641,878 shares — those that could be freely transferred —
was actually formalized, and ‘on paper’ Dycasa was required to keep title to the other
2,099,952 non-transferable shares until the restriction was no longer effective, that is,
until February 2006.” They add that because this “privately-executed agreement” was
“unenforceable against third parties (the Grantor and the ORAB, among others) in
terms of ownership of the non-transferable shares, Dycasa continued to appear as a
shareholder solely for formal corporate purposes, as stated in the duly submitted stock
purchase agreement.” The same Note adds as a legal interpretation not developed in
Claimants’ submissions that nevertheless, URBASER had acquired on September 28,
2001 Dycasa’s whole interest in AGBA, on the basis of an agreement governed by
Section 35 of the Corporate Law whereby Dycasa S.A. brings in as a third party a
partner with respect to the interest that this shareholder owns in the company. In
Claimants’ view, this statutory concept of a “partner’s partner” would make possible
the qualification of URBASER as an investor in terms of Article I(2) of the BIT, which
includes in the concept of investment “shares and any other form of participation in a
company.” Proceeding on this same line of argument, Prof. Mandévil referred to the
concept of the partner’s partner!” and to a sort of internal partnership (“sociedad

'S7 Report No. 5.26-5.32; TR-E, Day 2, p. 251/19-22.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
94

accidental o en participacién’”),'* with the effect that the transfer of shares was

actually carried out between the parties, while with regard to AGBA, it had to be
completed by an authorization, the notification of this authorization to the company,
and its inscription in the registry of shares. 1

281. The Tribunal does not share this view. As it is admitted in the same Note, the
share transfer concerning the 2,099,952 shares was unenforceable against third parties
and it could not, therefore, constitute an investment in the relation to the Republic of
Argentina as Host State under the BIT, as long as the transfer did not become legally
valid and effective. And for such transfer to take place, the registration on the
shareholders’ registry was required. '”° Even if one would qualify URBASER as
“partner” of Dycasa S.A. when this company was still holding its second package of
shares, such partnership would exclusively relate to the internal relations between
these two companies, but not create any “form of participation” in AGBA for which
such agreement would be, based on Claimants’ own admission, unenforceable.
Further, the legal construction presented in the above mentioned Note necessarily
supports the ill-advised conclusion that it would be possible for the same group of
shares to be held by two different investors, one who is holding the property and
another who appears as its “partner.” This scenario certainly is not one that Article
I(2) of the BIT intends to cover. There is no language whatsoever in the BIT that
regards this scenario as an asset within the meaning of Article I(2), which asset has to
be acquired by a prospective and not-yet confirmed transferee of AGBA’s shares.
Therefore, URBASER S.A. cannot be considered to be a shareholder in relation to
shares in which it had an “economic interest” only, as long as their transfer had not
been undertaken legally and effectively. As Prof. Nissen told the Tribunal, there is no
distinction between shareholder rights that are undisclosed and formal shareholders in
Argentine corporate law.!7!
reasoning is moot because the stock purchase agreement that would constitute the
legal basis for such a transfer of an “economic interest” has not been submitted to the
Tribunal.

In any event, Claimants’ argument on this line of

282. The Tribunal thus arrives at two conclusions. First, the acquisition of the
shares of Dycasa S.A. by URBASER was legally carried out. No illegal act was
committed regarding the transfer of the initially non-transferable 2,099,952 shares,
because such transfer became effective in March 2006 only, after the moment when
the six year term during which an authorization was required had elapsed. In this
respect, Respondent’s objection must be dismissed.

168 TR-E, Day 2, p. 269/17-271/13.

© Report No. 5.15-5.21, TR-E, Day 2, p. 246/17-247/19, 250/2-25 1/18, 272/9-20, 333/18-335/7.
' Cf. Prof. Manévil and Nissen, TR-E, Day 2, p. 333/24-335/14.

‘Tl TR-E, Day 2, p. 174/1-11.

  

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
95

283. Second, the fact that this transfer occurred in March 2006 only also means that
the increase in the investment of URBASER that was represented by these 2,099,952
shares became effective after the January 24, 2006 date, when URBASER’S Notice of
the dispute was filed with the Government of the Republic of Argentina, but still more
than a year before the Request for Arbitration was filed in July 2007. The Tribunal
finds that the relevant date for determining the assets composing the investment is the
filing of the Request for arbitration. The fact that URBASER had chosen to commit
itself contractually with a third party to make such an investment at an earlier stage in
no way affects this point, which is concerned with the date on which the investment
was actually made for the purpose of Article X of the BIT. This means that the
2,099,952 shares transferred to URBASER in March 2006 are part of the latter’s
investment and, consequently, included in the scope of this Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
Whether, and if so, to what extent, there were thereafter alleged breaches of the BIT
that did actually have an effect on the value of these shares, as registered in March
2006, and caused harm to URBASER is to be determined at the merits phase of this
proceeding.

Cc. CABB’s shareholder interest in AGBA and its participation agreements
concluded with third parties

I. Respondent’s position

284. Respondent notes that CABB was the Technical Operator of the Concession
granted to AGBA. The identity of the Operator was very important because it was
holding a key-position in the operation of the Concession. It was in line with this role
that the Operator was required to hold a 20% interest in the capital and voting rights,
and that its shares were absolutely non-transferable, no authorization being possible
for any transfer. The share interest of the Operator is addressed in Section 2.3.2 of the
Concession Contract, which reads:

“Operator is required to be the holder of a minimum 20% of the nominative
shares and voting rights of the Concessionaire, which shall be non-
transferable for the first six (6) years. After the expiration of said term,
Operator may reduce its holding with the prior approval of Grantor, provided
Operator holds no less than 10% of the nominative shares and voting rights of
the Concessionaire. After the first 12 (twelve) years of the Concession,
Operator may freely transfer its holding. The restrictions set forth herein shall
also apply in the event of increases in Concessionaire’s capital.”

For Respondent, the importance of the intuitu personae of the Technical Operator’s
identity cannot be sufficiently stressed. Its unique standing is the reason why its

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
96

shares must represent a 20% minimum holding that shall not be transferred during the
first 6 years of the Concession.

285. Respondent was thus surprised when it learned that CABB had proceeded to
arrange transfers by means of participation agreements in favour of Urbaser, Aguas de
Bilbao SA, the Consorcio Bilbao Bizkaia (BBK), and Sociedad para la Promocién y
Reconversién Industrial (SPRI). In Respondent’s view, CABB acted in blatant bad
faith when entering into such agreements with companies of unknown technical
competence behind the Agency and the Grantor. On the basis of the information
recently discovered, Respondent declares to have sufficient grounds to assert that
CABB violated the laws applicable to the Concession. Respondent further avers that
CABB concealed those agreements. The documentation that Claimants have yet to
submit, in Respondent’s view, shall confirm these illegal transfers.

286. Respondent learned that these agreements had been concluded by a publication
in El Pais of January 9, 2006, where BBK and SPRI were named as shareholders in
AGBA. Respondent concluded from this information that CABB transferred its
responsibility to pension funds, thus emphatically violating all its commitments.

287. Respondent also discovered in the 2001 Audit Report of the Basque Court of
Accounts on Consorcio de Aguas Bilbao-Bizkaia (“Informe de Fiscalizacién”), issued
on March 17, 2003, that the Consortium’s budgets have contemplated no allocation of
funds to complete the referenced acquisitions:

“[...] los presupuestos del Consorcio no han contemplado consignacién
presupuestaria alguna para hacer frente a la citada toma de participacién.”
(page 55)

Thus, more than two years after the Concession was granted, CABB still had not
allocated any funds. This hiatus is reflected in the Minutes of CABB’s General
Assembly of February 22, 1999 where it was decided that no funds from the
Consortium would be allocated in the event the concession were to be granted:

“indica el Presidente que, tal como se acordé por la Asamblea, en ningtin caso
se aportard capital procedente del Consorcio en la sociedad a constituir en
caso de resultar adjudicatarios.”

The Audit Report explains that CABB entered into 10 participation agreements with
various companies for a total amount of 3,735 million pesetas. Respondent complains
that these transactions were not disclosed to the Province of Buenos Aires for
information nor authorized by CABB’s General Meeting (as this should have been
done under CABB’s bylaws). It further explains that the Audit Report states that
CABB had subscribed for 22.2% of the stock capital, which, in violation of the

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
o7

Concession, was transferred in full to third parties, such as URBASER, Aguas de Bilbao
SA, BBK, and SPRI, to such an extent that CABB’s actual participation was zero.

288. Respondent explains that the Report demonstrates that CABB never paid for
its shares in AGBA. CABB explained to the Court of Accounts that the acquisition
was made by means of participation agreements, with no funds coming from the
Consortium’s budget. The acquisitions were formal, all rights and obligations being
assigned to companies that were notably solvent. CABB admitted before the highest
regulatory agency of the Basque Country that it made no contribution in connection
with its shareholder interest in AGBA regarding its interest in AGBA as a matter of
mere formality, while the actual shares were in the hands of “other companies.”
Respondent submits that this conduct violates Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 of the
Concession Contract. CABB also incurred in significant legal irregularities. The
Basque Agency noted that CABB’s activities in Argentina were not accompanied by
the compulsory legal and economic reports, the participation agreements were not
approved by the General Meeting, and that CABB was banned from participating in
the bidding process for the Concession in question because it could only act within
the scope of the municipal districts it comprises.

289. Respondent complains that CABB intentionally withheld from the Republic of
Argentina and this Tribunal the existence of side agreements with Urbaser, Aguas de
Bilbao SA, BBK, and SPRI. CABB did not have its holding of 20% that it assigned to
third parties, without informing the authorities in Argentina. Claimants’ failure to
submit the documentation requested on July 27, 2011 evidences their deliberate
intention of concealing these participation agreements and shows their bad faith.
CABB overtly infringed the laws applicable to the Concession, committing wilful
fraud against the Grantor. Had CABB’s violations risen to the Grantor’s attention, it
would have constituted sufficient grounds for termination of the contract because of
the Concessionaire’s fault (Section 14.1.3).

290. Respondent concludes that CABB manifestly acted in violation of the laws of
the Republic of Argentina and the provisions of the Concession Contract. Respondent
thus objects to CABB’s alleged standing as an investor protected by the BIT.

2. Claimants’ position

291. Claimants reject Respondent’s objection by stating that CABB did not transfer
its shares in AGBA. Respondent’s whole argumentation fails because accounts in
participation agreements, governed by Spanish law, do not require the transfer of
shares, which are held by the managing partner who is the only person to have a
relationship with respect to the other shareholders and the Concessionaire. These

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
98

types of agreements represent just another kind of financing that belongs to CABB’s
internal affairs. The operation based on such agreements was held legally valid and it
did not have the effect of transferring CABB’s shares in AGBA to any third party.
Respondent’s objection is therefore totally inadmissible.

292. Claimants explain that accounts in participation agreements are a means of
financing and a legitimate practice expressly admitted and governed under Spanish
Laws, recognized by Spanish courts, and widely used in business. Such an agreement
is entered into by a managing entity and a non-managing entity pursuant to which the
former receives capital contributions from the latter, for purposes of dedicating them
to its business or commercial activity. There are at least two parties, a manager or
managing partner, and a participant. Based on Sections 239-243 of the Spanish
Commercial Code, the key elements of the legal regime are: (i) contributions of funds
that become the property of the managing partner; (ii) no formal or material type of
publicity; (iii) the managing partner retains the ownership of its business; (iv) a right
of the participant to share in the profits earned in such percentage as may be agreed.
Essential is the existence of one single managing partner who retains ownership of the
business. It follows from this that such participation agreements do not grant to the
participant management powers or any capacity to act as a shareholder. It does not
take part in the decision-making process of a company at any level. The participant
has the same relation with the company as that of a bank that grants a loan to one of
the company’s shareholders, which means that it has no relation at all.

293. Claimants have submitted one account in participation agreement, concluded
between CABB and URBASER on May 23, 2000, retaining all others because they
involve third parties (presumably Aguas de Bilbao SA, BBK, and SPRI). It is
submitted that this agreement is sufficient to demonstrate that it is nothing more than a
source of financing.

294. Referring to Respondent’s position, which leads to the idea that the purpose of
such agreement was to maintain formal ownership of shares, while its true title has
been transferred to a third party, Claimants note that quite to the contrary, the
participation agreement between CABB and URBASER expressly states that the
management of the activity shall be exclusively vested in CABB. Participants (like
URBASER) are not allowed to participate in the management of the business. They may
have a share in the profits/losses of the business, but not in the business itself. No
transfer of ownership or change in the shareholder’s identity is contemplated. The
participant does not take part in the decision-making process. The business remains in
the hands of the manager-owner.

295. Claimants note that CABB always has remained the owner of its shares in
AGBA. The agreement concluded with URBASER S.A. refers to CABB’s actual

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
99

ownership and states in Recital 2 that CABB’s actual interest in AGBA is of 22.22%
(which corresponds to 20% when ESOP is excluded). CABB had made direct
contributions to AGBA’s capital out of its bank accounts. CABB took an active role in
the Concessionaire by serving on its Board of Directors and as Operator. Claimants
note that since 2000, the annual accounts of CABB evidence this shareholder interest
(Sec. 6.3, 6.4).

296. Claimants observe that Respondent’s challenge is based on the Audit Report of
the Basque Court of Accounts dated March 17, 2003, which had to be prepared in
compliance with Spanish law. The BIT only provides that the investment be made in
accordance with the legislation of the Host State. Respondent is therefore not entitled
to go beyond the requirements of that legislation. The irregularities to which
Respondent pointed were not considered important. In the Report of 2008 it was stated
that the gaps and deficiencies noted earlier had been reduced to a significant extent.
Moreover, CABB’s auditors raised no objections concerning the investment and the
relevant records in CABB’s accounts.

297. Claimants further underscore that CABB’s General Assembly, at a special
meeting dated February 24, 1999, approved CABB’s participation in the bidding
process. The acquisition of AGBA’s shares has been authorized by CABB’s General
Assembly.

298. When Respondent refers to the February 1999 Assembly where it was said that
no funds pertaining to CABB should be allocated to the Company, it referred to a
remark of the President, which in fact meant that CABB would finance its
contribution in AGBA with external funds. Accordingly, the contribution was not to
be made out of CABB’s budget. As of December 31, 2001, it was accounted as extra-
budgetary funds. Starting in 2002, it was also recorded as budgetary funds.

3. The Tribunal’s findings

299. This second part of Respondent’s third objection concerns CABB’s title as
shareholder in AGBA, which is among other things (in Respondent’s view) a
prerequisite for its legal standing in this proceeding. Both Argentine authorities and
AGBA acknowledge that CABB operated since the beginning of its involvement as
one of AGBA’s shareholders, and, even more specifically, as its Technical Operator.
The dispute relates to the conclusion drawn by Respondent from the accounts
participation agreements that had, in Respondent’s view, the effect of causing
CABB’s shareholder interest to be transferred to the beneficiaries of these agreements
who also assumed the burden of financing CABB’s participation in AGBA. As to the
actual payment for CABB’s shareholder interest tendered to AGBA, Respondent has

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
100

not in any way rebutted Claimants’ statement and evidence that CABB had tendered
this contribution to AGBA’s capital from its own bank account.

300. While Respondent mentioned ten such agreements, the Tribunal recognizes
only two of them, and expresses its regret that Claimants were not willing to submit
more than one of those exemplars. The figure of ten agreements was gleaned from the
2001 Audit Report issued by the Tribunal Vasco de Cuentas Ptiblicas of March 17,
2003. That Report referred to all of CABB’s involvements based on such agreements,
also covering participations relating to CABB’s investment in Uruguay. The part of
the list relating to AGBA mentions only two such participation agreements, one with
URBASER, presented to this Tribunal, and the other with Aguas de Bilabao S.A., a
company in which CABB kept a 51% shareholder interest. In light of the presentation
of these participation agreements, which can be found in various other similar reports,
the Tribunal finds that they certainly contain the same financial and legal
characteristics, and that from the two agreements concerning CABB’s involvement in
AGBA, the one submitted to the Tribunal and executed with URBASER can be
construed as offering sufficient evidence of the content of such agreements, in
addition to the information contained in CABB’s financial statements.

301. The surprise that Respondent voiced does not seem fully realistic to the extent
that it relates to the simple fact that CABB’s financing with respect to its shareholder
interest was sourced by third parties. Indeed, this outsourcing of CABB’s participation
in AGBA was expressly stated in the Minutes of the General Assembly of CABB
dated February 24, 1999, which are of public record. The same Assembly was
expressly mentioned in the recitals of AGBA’s By-laws, which were set up on
December 2, 1999, making clear that it was at this Assembly that CABB’s
participation in AGBA was decided. The Board of Directors of AGBA, the Agency as
AGBA’s controlling authority, and the Grantor were at liberty to request access to
those Minutes for consultation.

302. There could be no surprise either regarding the existence of legal arrangements
that CABB undertook as to this third party funding. When submitting to strict scrutiny
the accounts participation agreement concluded with URBASER, it appears clearly that
the undertakings agreed upon related primarily to the financial contribution of
URBASER S.A. as participant (“Cuentaparticipe”), including both the provision of
funds and the sharing of benefits in proportion to 11.11% of CABB’s involvement
(Art. 1 and 2). This participation also includes the sharing of losses in the same
proportion (Art. 6.3). CABB was not permitted to encumber its shareholder interest in
any way without URBASER S.A.’s authorization, CABB was bound to have the shares
deposited with URBASER S.A.. To the extent that the deposit was legally impossible,
the deposit was to be made with a third-party that URBASER S.A. was to designate
(Art. 4.2).

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
101

303. Contrary to Respondent’s allegations, this agreement does not contain any
provision providing for a full or even partial transfer of shares in AGBA to URBASER
S.A. as the funding participant. Respondent’s submissions do not contain any analysis
of that agreement. Similarly, Respondent has not directed the Tribunal to any specific
provision that might be in conflict with CABB’s position as investor and Operator.

304. In particular, Respondent’s assertion that all of CABB’s rights and obligations
had been assigned to third parties and that the actual shares were in the hands of
“other companies”, and that therefore CABB had violated Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 of
the Concession Contract, finds no support in the accounts participation agreement.
Indeed Respondent does not point the Tribunal to any provision that would have had
such effect. There has been no indication either that CABB in this regard had violated
an obligation to disclose information, which would have provided the Grantor with the
right to terminate the Concession Contract (Sec. 14.1.3[i]), as sustained by Prof.
Mata.!”” This Expert did not mention any such provision, nor that CABB was not a
party to this Contract.

305. Moreover, the agreement expressly provided that any management activity
remained exclusively in CABB’s hands (Art. 5.1). Under AGBA’s by-laws, the
exercise of such activity, in particular when related to its position as Technical
Operator, required CABB to hold a minimum 20% interest in AGBA’s shares. CABB
had never abandoned even a part of such an interest in AGBA and Respondent does
not go as far in arguing its objection that CABB had released its “actual stockholding”
to any third party. Further, even if it were assumed that there was a hidden third party
governing CABB’s participation in AGBA, as seems to be Respondent’s
understanding, this Tribunal has found no factual support whatsoever for such
contention: Respondents contention is all the more implausible because any activity
within AGBA was expressly defined as CABB’s responsibility. !7*
no possible comparison with the case submitted to the Jnceysa Tribunal where the
investor engaged in fraudulent conduct.! Likewise, this case can be meaningfully
distinguished from the facts before the Fraport Tribunal. The cases are materially
distinguishable and, therefore, inapposite. In that proceeding, the investor secretly

There is therefore

'?-TR-E, Day 1, p. 79/11-80/1.

‘3 Tt may be noted that the “intuitu personae” determination of the Technical Operator is not as strongly confined
to CABB as contended by Respondent when taking account of the provisions of Section 3.3.4 of the Bidding
Terms allowing the requirements to be met by the Operator to be fulfilled by other member companies of its same
economic group.

'™ Iceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador, ICSID/ARB/03/26, Award of August 2, 2006, No. 240-
244,

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
102

arranged for the management and control of the investment and this conduct was
deemed egregious and in violation of the laws of the Host State. 175

306. For these reasons, Respondent fails in its objection that CABB had arranged
transfers of its shares to third parties by means of participation agreements. As no
such transfer of shares had been undertaken, be it de facto or de jure, Respondent also
fails in its contention that CABB had violated Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 of the
Concession Contract. While it asserts that CABB acted in violation of the laws of the
Argentine Republic, Respondent does not refer to any provision, other than rules of
the Concession Contract governing the transfer of shares. Indeed, this Contract,
AGBA’s by-laws and the Bidding Terms do not contain any provision precluding
arrangements made by shareholders concerning the funding and sharing of benefits or
losses in connection with their respective shares. Consequently, Respondent’s
objection based on an allegedly concealed transfer of shares by CABB to third parties
must be dismissed.

307. As to the mere funding of capital supporting CABB’s shareholder interests, it
may be added that neither the BIT nor the ICSID Convention contain any restriction
requiring any qualifying the origin of funds. Article I(2) of the BIT covers “any kind
of assets,” irrespective of whether the asset was the product of outsourcing. The
ICSID Convention does not require either an “investment” to be financed from capital
of any particular origin.

D. CABB’s_ legal standing as_a_public entity not acting with the
authorization of the Kingdom of Spain

I. Respondent’s position

308. Respondent states that CABB is a constituent subdivision or agency of the
Kingdom of Spain. It follows that, according to Article 25 (1) and (3) ICSID
Convention, Spain as a Contracting State had to consent to submit this controversy to
arbitration, if it had not notified the Centre that previous consent was not necessary.
Both appointment and State approval requirements must be met if a constituent
subdivision or agency is acting as claimant or respondent in an ICSID arbitration. In
case of an agency acting as a separate entity but entrusted with official governmental
functions, what matters is whether the agency performs public functions on behalf of
the Contracting State or of one of its constituent subdivisions.

"5 Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. The Republic of the Philippines, ICSID/ARB/03/25,
Award of August 16, 2007, No. 394-404. This Award, referred to by Respondent, has been annulled on December
23, 2010.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
103

309. Respondent contends that CABB is included in these two concepts and falls
under Article 25(3) ICSID. It should have been appointed by Spain and must have its
approval. Because neither condition ripened, CABB’s claim is fatally compromised.

310. Respondent further explains that under the special territorial organization of
the Spanish State, municipalities enjoy autonomous self-government as to their
respective interests and have full legal capacity. Their autonomy is guaranteed.
Municipalities are territorial public administrations and more than just geopolitical
subdivision. Thus, they are vested with a public character that is autonomous or quasi-
autonomous. As stated in Section 25.2.1 of Law No. 7/1985, their ambit of
autonomous authority includes water supply and sewerage and waste water treatment.
Section 85 of Law No. 7/1985 provides that municipalities may adopt different forms
of organization. Here, the limited consortium form has been chosen (Sec. 87 of Law
No. 7/1985).

311. Regional Law No. 3/1995 for Bizkaia governs the nature of consortia as public
agencies, and their purpose, which is to pursue public interest by performing public
functions (Sec. 2.1). Consortia have legal personality (Sec. 2) and administrative
powers (Sec. 4). CABB was created in 1967 between a series of municipalities of the
Bizkaia territory for the installation and management of the local interest services. In
1972 its objectives were broadened. Ultimately, the by-laws were governed by
Regional Law No. 3/1995. The by-laws state that the consortium is formed by a series
of municipalities and that it will remain a local entity as it has been since its inception
(Sec. 1). It includes a long list of administrative powers (Sec. 4) and its economic
regime is subject to the rules of local entities (Sec. 31).

312. Respondent adds that municipalities have the obligation to provide supply and
sewerage public services within their territory. They may provide such services
directly or by creating a series of entities contemplated in Section 85 of the Law on
Basis of Local Regime. In this case, it was decided to create a consortium as an
administrative cooperation mechanism to join efforts in order to reduce costs that
could not have been assumed by small municipalities. The consortium adopted the
legal form enunciated in Section 87 of Law No. 7/1985 and Section 110 of Decree No.
781/1986 and it was admitted territorially in Bizkaia through Regional Law No.
3/1995. Such rules highlight its nature as a local public entity with territorial and
administrative organizational purposes, focusing on a group of municipalities and
consequently integrated in the organization of the Spanish State.

313. CABB is a local public entity created for inter-municipality administrative
cooperation purposes and integrated in the territorial organizational structure of the
State. It is not a private entity driven by trade, commerce, or other business purpose,
or by a profit motive. Therefore, concludes Respondent, it is not admitted to ICSID

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
104

arbitration without the previous approval of the Kingdom of Spain. The lack of
approval is hardly controverted. Its normative status as a condition precedent is also
not questions. It must of necessity follow that because there was no such approval
forthcoming, CABB has no legal standing in this proceeding.

2. Claimants’ position

314. Claimants explain that CABB’s participation in this arbitration cannot be
framed under the concept or characterization of a political subdivision or public
agency within the meaning of Article 25 (1) and (3) of the ICSID Convention, as
Respondent argues. The political subdivisions and public agencies that are subject to
consent under Article 25 (1) and (3) are those of the Host State. As Article 25(1)
expressly states, these provisions only apply to subdivisions/agencies of the Host
State. They refer to subdivisions or agencies of the Host State as opposed to those of
the Claimant’s investor state. The “national of another Contracting State” is the
investor. The fact that the same provision applies to claimant and to respondent does
not mean that it applies equally when a political subdivision or public agency
participates in a dispute as an investor. The cases where the prior authorization of the
State is required are those where subdivisions/agencies wish to initiate proceedings
against an investor.

315. Claimants note that Respondent’s objections are based on other considerations
concerning CABB that are not correct. CABB is a public agency as stated in the
Request for Arbitration. Its by-laws so state. Until it submitted its Reply, after five
years, CABB’s public nature had never caused Respondent a problem. The public
nature of CABB does not preclude it from taking part as Claimant in this case, as it is
acting as subject to private law. CABB is not integrated in the territorial structure of
Spain. Municipalities are so integrated, but consortia are not. CABB did not act as an
agent of Spain but on an equal footing with any other private individual or legal entity.
This status had been examined and confirmed by several reports prepared in relation
to the investment in Uruguay. The Report submitted by Prof. D. Tomas Ramén
Fernandez in this proceeding equally confirms this nature of CABB’s activity. Indeed,
CABB pursues a private activity subject to the same law as applies to other private
persons with whom it may compete. CABB acted within the scope of private law and
did not act in the exercise of any public duty or as an agent of Spain.

316. Claimants note that in order to determine an investor’s standing it is not its
nature that matters, but the capacity in which it acts. CABB has standing in this
arbitration. It is an entity with legal personality which is distinct and separate from
that of its constituents, the municipalities and the Basque Government. Its activities
coincide with those of private entities. The fact that the Concessionaire’s activity

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
105

meets a public interest does not prevent private entities from being awarded the
concession. Moreover, award of the concession does not foist on the activities a public
nature. What is relevant are the concrete actions giving rise to this arbitration. CABB
is entitled to carry out activities of this type outside the territory of the member
municipalities provided that it does so under private law. To such extent, CABB’s
actions in Argentina are the same as those of any individual investor. Therefore,
CABB appears in this arbitration with the same rights and duties as any other private
investor.

317. Claimants further explain the regularity and legality of the investments made
by CABB abroad. They note that the same issue was raised when CABB took part in a
bidding process in Uruguay, when CABB’s capacity to operate outside its territory
was challenged by other companies. CABB followed the advice of legal experts at that
time and was then convinced that it had the required capacity also to invest in
Argentina. In fact, its participation was never questioned in the bidding process in the
Republic of Argentina or by the Province. A recent expert opinion filed by Claimants
with this Tribunal and prepared by Prof. Tomas Ram6n Fernandez confirms the same
position.

318. Claimants also affirm the regularity of CABB’s consent to submit the dispute
to arbitration. In its submission of July 27, 2011, Respondent requested documents on
this point, i.e. the Minutes of the General Assembly approving the decision to submit
the dispute to arbitration and to grant powers of attorney to the undersigned lawyers.
Claimants complain that the Republic of Argentina did so more than four years after it
received the Request for Arbitration. The requested document already was attached to
this Request as Exhibit 2. CABB’s by-laws were attached to the Memorial on the
Merits. Further approvals to form part of this arbitral proceeding can be gleaned from
the Minutes of the Meeting held by CABB’s Board of Directors on December 20,
2005, the Minutes of the General Assembly of October 30, 2006, and from an official
Decree included in the notary document issued on December 5, 2006. The Annual
Report for fiscal year 2006 also refers to the arbitration. Claimants reassert that both
CABB’s Assembly and Board of Directors are acquainted with this arbitration
proceeding.

3. The Tribunal’s findings

319. Respondent’s objection places great weight on what it understands to be the
public nature of CABB’s principal purpose and activities, i.e. the installation and
management of the local interest services in the Bizkaia region. The Parties admit that
CABB’s legal personality and capacity to act are governed by the rules of private
international law of the Republic of Argentina and Spanish Law. CABB’s roles as

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
106

shareholder of AGBA and as its Technical Operator were subject to the laws of the
Republic of Argentina. However, these facts hardly give rise to the full picture.
Indeed, in order to understand CABB’s legal status in the Republic of Argentina, there
must be acknowledgement of actions undertaken in connection with acts made and the
recognition of CABB’s legal status in this country. The Tribunal first refers to
AGBA’s by-laws contained in a notary’s deed dated December 2, 1999, 17° where the
capacity of CABB’s representative and its authority to incorporate AGBA as a
domestic investment vehicle was amply recognized. The validity of this legal
document and its content concerning CABB never has been contested or made the
subject of an annulment proceeding: It is not included in Respondent’s objection
relating to CABB’s authority to participate in this proceeding. Second, the Tribunal
also takes note of the notary certificate of May 26, 1999 recognizing CABB as a legal
entity admitted for registration in conformity with Article 123 of Law 19.550 in the
Province of Buenos Aires. The Tribunal has no reason to doubt the authenticity of this
document. If this document were illegal or otherwise deprived of its legal effect, it
would seem that it should become the object of a proceeding leading to its annulment.
It retains its legal status unless otherwise decreed by a competent authority. No such
proceeding has been reported to the Tribunal or otherwise forms part of this cause.
Moreover, Respondent did not object to the existence or to the validity of this
document. Therefore, these two legal documents, both drawn up as authentic
instruments administered by notaries admitted to act under the laws of the Republic of
Argentina provide legal confirmation based on Argentine Law that CABB had and
still has the legal capacity to act under the laws of Argentina and particularly as
shareholder of AGBA and, at all times material to this proceeding, as Technical
Operator of this corporation.

320. The Tribunal further observes that Respondent never raised objections to the
capacity of CABB to be involved within the national territory of the Republic of
Argentina and in particular as a shareholder and Technical Operator of AGBA. When
CABB acted as bidder, it could do so only when it had full legal capacity to undertake
commitments under the terms of the Bidding Conditions (Sec. 3.1.1) and to contract in
the Province of Buenos Aires (Sec. 3.4.2): The documentation of the Bid had to
include a certified copy of the current by-laws or corporate charter (Sec. 4.2.1[i]), as
well as evidence of the decision to participate in the bidding competition made by the
competent corporate representatives in accordance with the by-laws (Sec. 4.2.1[k]), all
these requirements being applicable “separately and independently” (Sec. 4.2.1,
opening part) to each member of a group of bidders filing a joint application.
Moreover, for foreign companies or entities acting as members of the Awardee, it was
required that they demonstrate that they had followed the procedure as required in

 

"76 Tt can be assumed that AGBA’s were recorded in a public registry and tht cessible to the public, as
this is standard procedure for all by-laws of companies (cf. Prof. Nissen, TR-E, Day 2, p. 191/16-192/1).

 

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
107

Article 123 of Law No. 19.550 (Sec. 7.2.2[a] and 8.1). This was the purpose of the
notary certificate recognizing CABB as a legal entity admitted for registration as
mentioned above. Thus, at that time already, Respondent had the opportunity to
receive full documentation to ensure that CABB was acting within its own statutory
framework. CABB’s bid for its becoming part of the Licensee and its role as the
Technical Operator was accepted. This acceptance could not have taken place if the
Granting Authority had not received all of the required confirmations or validations.
CABB’s selection was then confirmed in Decree No. 2907 of October 22, 1999 of the
Executive Branch of the Province of Buenos Aires, where the joint attribution of
Region B of Concession Area No. 2 to CABB and three other companies was decided.

321. In light of this overwhelming evidence, there is no room left to argue, from the
perspective of Argentine law, that CABB had somehow acted “ultra vires” and
illegally to the extent it engaged in activities outside the territory of its member
municipalities. CABB’s legal capacity to do so was fully recognized and effective
within the territory of the Republic of Argentina. If it has been contested, it was so for
the single purpose of this arbitral proceeding only.

322. In any event, the Tribunal observes that even if at its inception CABB’s
activities may have been wholly focused on services to be provided to its member
municipalities, there does not exist any legal prohibition for CABB to develop
activities beyond such territorial scope. Respondent argues on the general level of the
public nature of CABB’s main purpose and activity and confers to this entity a strictly
territorial and state-integrated function concerning water supply. But Respondent does
not demonstrate that, and if so in which manner, the Spanish Government was
involved in this activity as part of CABB.'” Also, it does not establish nor contend
that as a matter of international law CABB appears from a structural as well as a
functional point of view, as a company placed under the control and management of
the Kingdom of Spain. 178

323. Even a surface glance at CABB’s by-laws shows a different picture. Thus,
while Article 6 on CABB’s General Purposes defines in paragraph | that the provision
of water supply and sewerage to the member municipalities constitutes its “primary
mission,” the same Article goes on to say that it can also do so for the benefit of
“other local public services” (para. 2). It further states that CABB also can carry out
supplementary or derivative activities that may enhance the effective fulfilment of the
general purposes (para. 3) and that are subject to the General Assembly’s approval
(Art. 19 No. 15). Article 8 includes in the list of “competencies” services in non-

‘7 An involvement that has been firmly denied by Prof. Fernandez, cf. TR-E, Day 2, p. 353/8-354/10.

"8 Cf, on this matter, Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
ICSID/ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction of November 9, 2004, No. 30-35; Emilio Augustin Maffezini v. The
Kingdom of Spain, CSID/ARB/97/7, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of January 25, 2000, No. 71-89.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
108

member municipalities (No. 10) and “the provision of advisory and assistance services
and the construction, implementation, and running of facilities, the drawing up of
reports and similar actions concerning the matters of water supply and sewage at the
request of any public or private entity under conditions set up by the Director’s
Committee” (No. 11). 9 While one may insist, as Respondent does, on CABB’s focus
on the local scale of operation to the benefit of its member municipalities, it does not
constitute a ban for services provided above that range, including those performed
abroad, as this had been done in Uruguay and Argentina. The Legal Opinion filed by
Respondent and written by Attorneys Ana-Maria Fernandez Rico and José Manuel
Gomez Pifieda, states “with total respect and consideration to any dissenting view,”
and does not offer a different proposition. The authors insist on CABB’s public nature
and affirm that CABB is “integrated into the organization of the Spanish State,” but
they do so merely by referring to the fact that the municipalities forming the entity
belong to a territory that is part of Spain. They neither mention nor discuss Articles 6
and 8 of the by-laws, which address the standing of the entity to provide services
outside its main sphere of activity. '*° These provisions are examined in the Expert
Opinion of Prof. Tomas Ramén Fernandez, filed by Claimants.

324. This Opinion also focuses on a different aspect, excluded by Respondent and
its Experts. Indeed, even when admitting, arguendo, that CABB’s representatives
would have acted above the range of activities based on its by-laws, this conduct does
not demonstrate that CABB would lack legal capacity to participate in legal
undertakings concerning such activities above its competencies as defined in the by-
laws. CABB’s full legal personality and capacity to engage in commitments as stated
in Article 3 with reference to Spanish Law is not restricted to activities and contracts
covered by the objectives defined in its by-laws. Article 3.2 of Regional Law No.
3/1995 for Bizkaia, to which Article 3 of CABB’s by-laws refer, does not contain any
such restriction. If its representatives are acting beyond CABB’s legitimate scope,
they may have to assume responsibility within the entity, but it would not affect the
validity of the undertakings made with third parties. This issue need not be further
discussed, as Respondent did not address it, nor did Respondent affirm that it raised
concerns in relation to the validity of CABB’s undertakings. In any event, as
demonstrated above, CABB’s legal personality and capacity to enter into agreements
relating to its shareholder configuration and the technical operation of the Concession
have been fully recognized in the Republic of Argentina. This is all that matters.

' As Prof. Ferndndez explained at the hearing, it is
assigned to the consortium” (TR-E, Day 2, p. 350/19 s.)
'89 Prof. Mata’s explanations contained in his Report do not go beyond what has been stated in the Opinion
provided by these two Spanish Attorneys (cf. No. 132-135). He confirmed at the hearing that he does not qualify as
an Expert as to the issues raised under Spanish Law (cf. TR-E, Day 1, p. 105/5-16). He nevertheless testified orally
that he had no doubt that a public agency can act under of private law (TR-E, Day 1, p. 107/12-14), but that, when
doing so, its identity as a public agency remains (TR-E, Day 1, p. 123/21-23).

‘an additional activity or derived from the main mission

 

 

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
109

325. When Respondent’s objection to CABB’s legal standing is interpreted more
narrowly as contesting CABB’s capacity to participate and to be represented in this
proceeding as governed by the ICSID Convention, the rules pertaining to the conduct
of such a proceeding have to be examined.

326. In this regard, Respondent’s objection implies a most singular reading of
Article 25(3) of the ICSID Convention, that is strictly based on the literal
understanding of the terms “constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State,”
which, taken in isolation, could refer to such subdivision or entity irrespective of
whether it belongs to the Host State or to the State of the investor. However, as the
provision also sets forth, it applies to the “consent” of such subdivision or entity. The
basic rule on consent to ICSID jurisdiction is Article 25(1), where the expression
“constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State” is related exclusively to the
Host State. In relation to the Contracting State of the investor, the same rule does not
use these terms and merely refers to “a national.” It results clearly from the combined
reading of both provisions that the approval requirement set out in Article 25(3) can
relate only to subdivisions and entities of a Contracting State involved in an ICSID
arbitration as Host State of an investment. If such approval is required it is because the
subdivision or agency concerned will become a party to the proceeding in addition or
instead of the Contracting State to which it belongs. This scenario has no parallel
setting on the investor side

327. Therefore, this Tribunal finds that the requirement of prior approval as stated
in Article 25(3) does not apply to CABB. This interpretation also must have been
Respondent’s position when it received the Notice of Arbitration and did not object
that it contained no mention of an approval based on Article 25(3) as this would have
been required by Article 2(1)(c) Institution Rule if Respondent’s more recent
understanding were correct.

328. This does not mean that CABB’s standing generally is such that it need not
secure approval to participate in ICSID arbitration. It is less than clear whether
Respondent’s objection addresses CABB’s purported failure to receive authorization
to bring an arbitration claim before ICSID also concerns this aspect of the question
relating to CABB’s legal standing. If it does, it would be deprived of any basis on the
face of the act dressed up by the Notary Public of Bilbao recording the Board of
Directors’ decision to submit the dispute involving CABB to arbitration under the
ICSID Convention and to grant the necessary power of attorney. This document was
filed with the Secretary-General of ICSID together with the Request for Arbitration. It
had as its objective the compliance with Institution Rule 2(1)(f) and 2(2), which
provides, in case the requesting party is a juridical person, that it has taken all
necessary actions to authorize the request and to deliver the supporting documentation
together with the Request. The decision of the Board of Directors of April 24, 2007

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
110

was attached to the notaries act exhibited with the Request for Arbitration. Neither at
that time nor at any time later did this document attract any opposition, be it from the
Secretary-General under its scrutiny in view of the registration of the Request, nor
later by Respondent. Therefore, Respondent’s objection also fails in this issue.

329. The Tribunal therefore arrives at the conclusion that CABB has legal standing
in this ICSID proceeding and that the third objection raised by Respondent
accordingly must be dismissed.

ICSID/ARB/07/26 - Decision on Jurisdiction
111

Vv. Decision
330. Based on the reasons stated, the Tribunal decides:

lL To reject all of Respondent’s objections and to assert that the Centre has
jurisdiction and the Tribunal has competence over this dispute.

 

2 The determination and attribution of costs in ‘tion with this Decision is
reserved for a decision made by this Tribunal at a later’ s ing.
fo. Mahle?

Professor Campbell McLachlan QC Professor Pedro J. Martinez-Fraga
Arbitrator Arbitrator

hf Cre,

Professor Andreas Bucher
President of the Tribunal

