Date of dispatch to the parties:
February 16, 1994

International Centre for Settlement
of Investment Disputes
Washington, D.C.

In the Matter of the Arbitration

between
VACUUM SALT PRODUCTS LIMITED
Claimant
against
GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF GHANA
Respondent
Case No. ARB/92/1

Award

1. The Tribunal below sets forth first the history of the proceedings in
this case, and then its reasons for this Award, followed by a provision on costs
and the dispositif.

A. HISTORY OF THE PROCEEDINGS

2. On 28 May 1992 the International Centre for Settlement of Invest~
ment Disputes (“ICSID” or “the Centre”) received the Request for Arbitra-
tion (“the Request”) in this case submitted by “Thacher Proffitt & Wood As

72

CASES 73

Attorneys for Claimant Vacuum Salt Products Limited” (“Vacuum Salt” or
“Claimant”). The Request essentially alleged that Vacuum Salt had suffered
both a breach and progressive expropriation of its contractual rights to develop
a salt production and mining facility in the Ada~Songor Lagoon in the Repub-
lic of Ghana (“‘Ghana” or “Respondent”). In particular, the Request alleged
“continual violation” by Ghana of a lease agreement between Vacuum Salt and
Ghana dated 22 January 1988 “‘and a predecessor agreement,” “ultimate repu-
diation of the [1988] Lease Agreement” by Ghana by decision of 24 April 1992
and “its expropriation of the business and property of Vacuum Salt.” The
Request asserted that the parties had consented to ICSID arbitration in para~
graph 36(a) of the said lease agreement:

Any dispute or difference between the parties arising out of or in
connection with this Agreement or any agreed variation thereof or
in respect of the interpretation or enforcement of the provisions of
this document or any agreed variation or as to the rights, duties or
liabilities of either party shall unless the parties agree to submit to
any procedures available in Ghana for the settlement of such dispute
be submitted at the instance of any party to the jurisdiction of the
International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes for
settlement by reconciliation [sic] or arbitration pursuant to the Con-
vention of [sic] the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of other States.

The Request premised jurisdiction ratione personae on the fact that Ghana is a
State Party to the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes be-
tween States and Nationals of Other States (“Convention” or “ICSID Con-
vention”) and that although Vacuum Salt is “a corporation organized under
the Companies Code, 1963 (Act 179), of Ghana,” “[i]n the [1988] Lease
Agreement, the parties agreed that because Vacuum Salt is controlled by a
Greek national, it should be treated as a foreign corporation for the purposes
of the Convention... .” The second clause of Article 25(2)(b) of the Conven-
tion provides:
“National of another Contracting State” means:

. . . any juridical person which had the nationality of the Con-
tracting State party to the dispute on that date [‘the date on
which the parties consented to submit such dispute to... arbi-
tration”] and which, because of foreign control, the parties have

! ‘The Request identified the Greek national as Gerassimos Alexis Panagiotopulos, who, it
is not disputed, held 20 percent of the shares of Vacuum Salt on 22 January 1988.

74 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting
State for the purposes of this Convention.

As relief the Request sought

“A declaration that the illegal acts of [Ghana]... are null and void ab
initio;”

An order for restitutio in integrum, or, alternatively, “damages mea-
sured according to the value of the [1988] Lease Agreement for the
remainder of its term and all other property seized or damaged by”
Ghana;

“Damages... for the... breaches of contract, illegal acts and expro-
priation of Vacuum Salt’s property;”

“Lost profits, including loss of investment opportunities in the Son-
gor Lagoon;”

“Interest; and”
“Costs and expenses including attorneys’ fees.”

3. Pursuant to Rule 5 of the Rules of Procedure for the Institution of
Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (‘Institution Rules”), the Secretary-
General of ICSID (“Secretary-General”) by letters dated 29 May 1992 sent an
acknowledgment of the Request to the Claimant and transmitted a copy of the
Request and of the accompanying documentation to Ghana.

4. The Secretary-General by letter dated 11 June 1992 notified the
parties of his registration of the Request on that date pursuant to Convention
Article 36(3). With that letter the Secretary-General transmitted to Ghana “a
copy of a Power of Attorney and a copy of an Extra-Ordinary General Meeting
Resolution, both received this week by the Centre from counsel for the Claim-
ant,” from which it is evident that the Request was registered only after a copy
of the said Power of Attorney (which was notarized 28 May 1992) and of the
Extra-Ordinary General Meeting Resolution (which copy was dated 9 June
1992) had been received by ICSID.

5. By letter dated 17 June 1992 counsel for Claimant proposed that one
arbitrator be chosen by each party and the third (to serve as President) be ap-
pointed by the Secretary-General. In addition, counsel for Claimant suggested
that the President be “an English speaking international lawyer familiar with
the common law system”; that English be the language to be used in the pro-
ceeding; and that New York City, or, alternatively, Washington, D.C., be the
place of the arbitral proceedings.

6. By letter dated 7 July 1992 the Attorney-General of Ghana advised
that Ghana was in agreement that the Arbitral Tribunal (“the Tribunal”) be

CASES 75:

comprised of three arbitrators, but proposed that one arbitrator be chosen by
each party and the third be appointed by agreement between the two arbitra-
tors thus selected, failing which he should be appointed by the Secretary-
General. In addition, the Attorney-General advised that Ghana agreed to
English as the exclusive procedural language and to Washington, D.C. as the
place of arbitration.

7. By letter dated 17 July 1992 counsel for Claimant confirmed agree-
ment to these procedures.

8. By letter dated 11 August 1992 the Claimant appointed the Honor-
able Charles N. Brower as arbitrator. By letter dated 1 September 1992 Ghana
appointed the Honorable Dr. Kamal Hossain as arbitrator. Each promptly con-
firmed his acceptance to serve on the Tribunal.

9. By letter of 2 October 1992 Judge Brower and Dr. Hossain advised
ICSID of their agreement to the appointment of His Excellency Judge Sir
Robert Y. Jennings, President of the International Court of Justice, as President
of the Tribunal.

10. By letter dated 9 October 1992 Judge Jennings advised ICSID that
he had been able to accept appointment only on the condition that, so long as
he was President of the International Court of Justice, i.e., until 7 February
1994, it would not be possible for him to preside over an oral hearing, other
than the brief initial one that had to be held pursuant to Rule 13(1) of the
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (‘Arbitration Rules”) within
60 days of the constitution of the Tribunal, and which could be held in the
Peace Palace, The Hague. By letter of the same date the Centre notified the
parties of such condition.

11. On 22 October 1992 Claimant filed with ICSID a Request for Pro-
visional Measures. It was followed on 4 November 1992 by Claimant’s submis-
sion of affidavits and a Memorial in Support of Claimant’s Request for
Provisional Measures. Claimant protested, in particular, that the enactment on
31 August 1992 and subsequent implementation of Provisional National
Defence Council Law No. 287 (“Law No. 287”), which formally cancelled
the 1988 lease agreement with effect from 24 April 1992, derogated from the
jurisdiction of ICSID by requiring Claimant at the same time to submit to mu-
nicipal proceedings relating to compensation for the cancelled lease. Claimant
also expressed concern, inter alia, over the preservation of its corporate records.

12. On 26 October 1992 the Centre received a letter dated 8 October
1992 from the Attorney-General of Ghana, inter alia, objecting to the jurisdic-
tion of ICSID on the ground that Claimant “essentially is a Ghanaian
Company” which “is not foreign controlled and there has been no agreement

76 ICSID REVIEW-—-FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

between the parties that it should be treated as a national of another contracting
state.” The Attorney-General’s letter indicated it was copied to Claimant but
Claimant’s counsel advised ICSID it had not been informed of such correspon-
dence prior to its receipt by the Centre and the Centre’s prompt notification
thereof to the parties.

13. On 27 November 1992 Ghana opposed Claimant’s Request for Pro-
visional Measures and both confirmed and expanded its objections to jurisdic-
tion by submitting Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction and Observations
in Opposition to “Claimant’s” Request for Provisional Measures. In that sub-
mission Ghana asserted that ICSID jurisdiction over the dispute was absent in
that (1) the conditions of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention were not
satisfied; (2) submission of the Request had not been duly authorized by or on
behalf of Claimant; and (3) Claimant had agreed “to submit to... procedures
available in Ghana for the settlement of such dispute” pursuant to Law No. 287
and under the terms of paragraph 36(a) of the 1988 lease agreement thereby
waived any right it might otherwise have had to ICSID arbitration.

14. On 1-3 December 1992 the Tribunal held its first session with the
parties and their counsel at the seat of the Permanent Court of Arbitration in
the Peace Palace at The Hague, The Netherlands in accordance with Arbitra-
tion Rule 13 (1). At the same time the Tribunal considered the Request for
Provisional Measures submitted by the Claimant and also entertained prelimi-
nary submissions by Ghana and Vacuum Salt with regard to the jurisdictional
objections interposed by Ghana.

15. Under those circumstances, in view of the condition upon which
Judge Jennings had accepted to serve as President of the Tribunal he was unable
to take part in the first session. In his absence, in accordance with Arbitration
Rule 14(2) the session was conducted by the other members of the Tribunal,
Judge Brower and Dr. Hossain, and Judge Brower presided over it as provided
by Arbitration Rule 17. A complete tape recording of the session was made and
minutes (30 pages) transcribed by the Secretary of the Tribunal which were
submitted to the parties and the Tribunal for their review and then issued in
final form on 7 June 1993.

16. At its first session the Tribunal issued on 3 December 1992 its De-
cision No. 1 on Request for Recommendation of Provisional Measures con-
taining the following operative paragraphs:

The Tribunal takes note of the fact that at that session the Govern-

ment of the Republic of Ghana made the following voluntary un-

dertakings:

CASES 77

1) The Government of the Republic of Ghana voluntarily un-
dertakes to negotiate with the duly authorized representatives
of Vacuum Salt Products Limited the latter’s claim relating to
the cancellation of its lease and for the purchase of certain re-
lated assets, and to defer formal procedures under Law 287, un-
til (a) uncontested mutual agreement on such claim and
purchase arrangements, (b) uncontested mutual agreement to
continue formal procedures under Law 287, or (c) ICSID Case
No. ARB/92/1 is disposed of or results in a determination that
procedures under Law 287 are consistent with applicable con-
tractual arrangements.

2) The Government of the Republic of Ghana assures the Tri-
bunal that it will not deny Vacuum Salt Products Limited (in-
cluding its duly authorized officers and its external auditor)
access to its records, including any which are required for its
compensation claim in this proceeding as well as in any nego-
tiations referred to above.

The Tribunal further takes note of the fact that at that session Vac-

uum Salt Products Limited acknowledged and accepted these un-

dertakings as satisfying the concerns expressed in its Request for

Provisional Measures and thereby disposing of the same.

17. At its first session, after consultations with the parties, the Tribunal
also issued on 3 December 1992 its Decision No. 2 on Procedures Relating to
Objections to Jurisdiction and Related Matters. In accordance with Decision
No. 2, Claimant and Respondent submitted their Observations on the Ques-
tion of Jurisdiction under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention on 24 De-
cember 1992 and 7 January 1993, respectively. Pursuant to the same Decision
No. 2, as later modified, Claimant on 1 February 1993 submitted Observations
of Vacuum Salt Products Company Limited on the Company’s Authorization
of this Arbitration, which also addressed Law No. 287 and, on a limited basis,
further addressed ICSID Convention Article 25(2)(b), and Respondent on 1
March 1993 submitted its Observations on the Question of the Capacity and
Standing of “Claimant,” on the Question of P.N.D.C. Law 287 and on the
Question of Jurisdiction.

18. By letter dated 23 March 1993 Claimant renewed its Request for
Provisional Measures in relation to Law No. 287 and requested to be heard in
support of it. Ghana responded by letter dated 19 April 1993, to which
Vacuum Salt replied by letter dated 30 April 1993.

19. On 7-10 June 1993 the Tribunal held its second session with the
parties and their counsel at the seat of the Permanent Court of Arbitration in
the Peace Palace at The Hague, The Netherlands.

78 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

20. As Judge Jennings continued unable to act as Presides: at that
session, in accordance with Arbitration Rule 14(2) it was conducted by the
other members of the Tribunal, Judge Brower and Dr. Hossain, and Judge
Brower presided over it as provided by Arbitration Rule 17. Also present and
taking part in the session were:

Counsel for Vacuum Salt:

Mr. Joel B. Harris

Mr. Gerald J. Ferguson

Mr. E. Kwasi Mensah

Mr. Andrew G. McCormick

Counsel for Ghana:
Mr. Joe Reindorf

Mr. Kwabena A.A. Mate
Mr. Samuel A. Stern

The Secretary of the Tribunal:
Mr. Antonio R. Parra

Witnesses presented by Vacuum Salt:

Mr. Leon Appenteng
Mr. Robert John Hayfron-Benjamin

Witnesses presented by Ghana:

Mr. Kwabena A.A. Mate
Mr. Kabutey Olaga
Mr. Gerassimos Alexis Panagiotopulos

Witness whose presence was requested by the Tribunal:
Mrs. Leone de Graft

21. Atthe second session testimony was heard from witnesses in the fol-
lowing order: Mr. Mate, Mr. Panagiotopulos, Mr. Olaga, Mr. Hayfron-Ben-
jamin, Mr. Appenteng and Mrs. de Graft. Questions were asked of the
witnesses by Mr. Harris and Mr. Ferguson on behalf of the Claimant and by
Mr. Mate and Mr. Stern on behalf of the Respondent. Questions also were
asked of the witnesses by the members of the Tribunal. Following the witness
testimony counsel made oral submissions on the issues regarding Article
25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, whether or not submission of the Request
had been duly authorized by or on behalf of the Claimant, the relationship to
this arbitration of procedures under Law No. 287, and the renewed Request

CASES, 79

for Provisional Measures. Such submissions were made by Mr. Harris, Mr. Fer-
guson and Mr. Mensah on behalf of the Claimant and by Mr. Stern, Mr. Mate
and Mr. Reindorf on behalf of the Respondent. Questions were put to counsel
by the Tribunal after the submissions. A complete tape recording of the session
was made and extensive minutes (519 pages) transcribed by the Secretary of the
Tribunal which were submitted to the parties and the Tribunal for their review
and were issued in final form on 30 September 1993.

22. Following its second session the Tribunal issued on 14 June 1993 its
Decision No. 3 on Request for Recommendation of Provisional Measures
which declined to recommend such measures.

23. On 1 October 1993 the parties were notified by the Secretary of the
Tribunal that Judge Brower and Dr. Hossain had met in London, England on
17 September 1993; that they had proposed to Judge Jennings that the Tribunal
proceed to hold its deliberations on the questions before it and that Judge Jen-
nings participate in those deliberations and in the decision of the Tribunal on
those questions; and that Judge Jennings had signified his agreement to this
proposal. In said notification the Secretary of the Tribunal noted that for the
sake of good order the Tribunal would appreciate the parties acknowledging to
him their concurrence in this procedure. Claimant and Respondent expressly
so concurred by letters dated 1 and 15 October 1993, respectively.

24. The Tribunal (including all three of its members) accordingly held
its deliberations at The Hague, The Netherlands, 9-12 November 1993 and 31
January—1 February 1994.

B. REASONS FOR THE AWARD

25. The Tribunal is confronted wath the necessity of considering Re-
spondent’s three objections to jurisdiction.” The Tribunal turns to the first one,
ie., that the conditions of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention have not
been satisfied,

26. On its face the Request is of such a nature as to attract jurisdiction
under Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.” Ghana is a State Party to the

2 They are set out at paragraph 13, supra.
3 Article 25(1) provides as follows:
The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal | dispute arising directly out of an
between a Contracting State (or any ision or agency of a
Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another Con-
tracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre.
When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

80 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Convention, the dispute as pleaded in the Request is a legal one arising directly
out of an investment, and paragraph 36(a) of the 1988 lease agreement embod-
ies the parties’ written consent to submit such dispute to the Centre.4

27. The parties diverge, however, on the threshold jurisdictional issue
posed first by the Attorney-General of Ghana regarding whether “because of
foreign control, the parties have agreed [that Vacuum Salt] should be treated as
a national of another Contracting State [Greece] for the purposes of [the] Con-
vention,” specifically Article 25(2)(b). It is crucial to ICSID jurisdiction in this
case and it is to this issue that the Tribunal first must turn.

28. Since it is agreed that Vacuum Salt is and has at all material times
been a corporation organized under the 1963 Companies Code of Ghana and
hence could not be regarded as “a national of another [ICSID] Contracting
State” within the definition of the first clause of Article 25(2)(b) of the Con-
vention, the Tribunal can have jurisdiction ratione personae in regard to Vacuum
Salt only if in respect of it the requirements of the second clause of Article
25(2)(b) of the Convention are satisfied. It would be convenient to cite here the
entire Article 25°:

4 Respondent argues, as previously noted, at paragraph 13, supra, that Claimant has waived
any right it might otherwise have had to ICSID arbitration of the instant dispute by agreeing to
pursue the compensation procedures of Law No. 287, i.e., “the parties agree[d] to submit to [the
Law No. 287] procedures available in Ghana for the settlement of such dispute” within the mean-
ing of that exclusion in paragraph 36(a) of the 1988 lease agreement. Claimant thus raises an issue
of the scope of consent, however, rather than an issue of its existence vel non.

> The French text and the Spanish text of Article 25 of the Convention, being “equally
authentic” with the English text pursuant to the signature clause of this Convention, are as follows:

French text:

(1) La compétence du Centre s’étend aux différends d’ordre juridique entre un Etat con-
tractant (ou telle collectivité publique ou tel organisme dépendant de lui qu’il désigne au
Centre) et le ressortissant d’un autre Etat contractant qui sont en relation directe avec un
investissement et que les parties ont consenti par écrit A soumettre au Centre. Lorsque
les parties ont donné leur consentement, aucune d’elles ne peut le retirer unilatéralement.
(2) “Ressortissant d’un autre Etat contractant” signifie:

(a) toute personne physique qui posséde la nationalité d’un Etat contractant autre que
Etat partie au différend 4 la date a laquelle les parties ont consenti 4 soumettre le
différend 4 la conciliation ou 4 l’arbitrage ainsi qu’a la date 4 laquelle la requéte a été
enregistrée conformément 4 I’Article 28, alinéa (3) ou 4 I’Article 36, alinéa (3), 4
exclusion de toute personne qui, a l'une ou a l'autre de ces dates, posséde égale-
ment la nationalité de I"Etat contractant partie au différend;

(b) toute personne morale qui posséde la nationalité d’un Etat contractant autre que I'Etat
partie au différend 4 la date 4 laquelle les parties ont consenti a soumettre le différend
Ala conciliation ou 4 l’arbitrage et toute personne morale qui posséde la nationalité de
Y'Etat contractant partie au différend 4 la méme date et que les parties sont convenues,
aux fins de la présente Convention, de considérer comme ressortissant d’un autre Etat
contractant en raison du contréle exercé sur elle par des intéréts étrangers.

CASES,

Article 25

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State
(or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State
designated to the Centre by the State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writ-
ing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their con-
sent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

(2) “National of another Contracting State” means:

(3) Le consentement d'une collectivité publique ou d’un organisme dépendant d’un Etat

contractant ne peut étre donné qu’aprés approbation par ledit Etat, sauf si celui-ci in-

dique au Centre que cette approbation n'est pas nécessaire.

(4) Tout Etat contractant peut, lors de sa ratification, de son acceptation ou de son ap-

probation de la Convention ou 4 toute date ultérieure, faire connaitre au Centre la ou

les catégories de différends qu’il considérerait comme pouvant étre soumis ou non 4 la
compétence du Centre. Le Secrétaire Général transmet immédiatement la notification 4
tous les Etats contractants. Ladite notification ne constitue pas le consentement requis aux

termes de I’alinéa (1).
Spanish text:

(1) La jurisdiccién del Centro se extender a las diferencias de naturaleza juridica que sur-
jan directamente de una inversién entre un Estado Contratante (o cualquiera subdivision

politica u organismo piblico de un Estado Contratante acreditados ante el Centro por

dicho Estado) y el nacional de otro Estado Contratante y que las partes hayan consentido
por escrito en someter al Centro. El consentimiento dado por las partes no podrd ser uni-

lateralmente retirado.
(2) Sc entenderé como “nacional de otro Estado Contratante”:

(@) toda persona natural que tenga, en la fecha en que las partes consintieron someter la
diferencia a conciliacién o arbitraje y en la fecha en que fué registrada la solicitud

prevista en al apartado (3) del Articulo 28 o en el apartado (3) del Articulo 36, la

nacionalidad de un Estado Contratante distinto del Estado parte en la diferencia;
pero en ningtin caso comprenderd las personas que, en cualquiera de ambas fechas,

también tenjan la nacionalidad del Estado parte en la diferencia; y

(b) toda persona juridica que, en la fecha en que las partes prestaron su consentimiento
a la jurisdiccién del Centro para Ja diferencia en cuestién, tenga la nacionalidad de
un Estado Contratante distinto del Estado parte en la diferencia, y las personas ju-
ridicas que, teniendo en la referida fecha la nacionalidad del Estado parte en la difer-
encia, las partes hubieren acordado atribuirle tal cardcter, a los efectos de este

Convenio, por estar sometidas a control extranjero.

(3) El consentimiento de una subdivision politica u organismo piblico de un Estado
Contratante requerird la aprobacién de dicho Estado, salvo que éste notifique al Centro

que tal aprobacién no es necesaria.

(4) Los Estados Contratantes podrin, al ratificar, aceptar 0 aprobar este Convenio 0 en
cualquier momento ulterior, notificar al Centro Ia clase o clases de diferencias que
aceptarian someter, 0 no, a su jurisdiccién. El Secretario General transmitird inmediata-
mente dicha notificacién a todos los Estados Contratantes, Esta notificatién no se en-

tenderé que constituye el consentimiento a que se refiere el apartado (1) anterior.

82 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

(a) any natural person who had the nationality of a Contracting
State other than the State party to the dispute on the date on
which the parties consented to submit such dispute to concili-
ation or arbitration as well as on the date on which the request
‘was registered pursuant to paragraph (3) of Article 28 or para-
graph (3) of Article 36, but does not include any person who
on either date also had the nationality of the Contracting State
party to the dispute; and

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Con-
tracting State other than the State party to the dispute on the
date on which the parties consented to submit such dispute to
conciliation or arbitration and any juridical person which had
the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute on
that date and which, because of foreign control, the parties have
agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting
State for the purposes of this Convention.

(3) Consent by a constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting
State shall require the approval of that State unless that State notifies
the Centre that no such approval is required.

(4) Any Contracting State may, at the time of ratification, accep-
tance or approval of this Convention or at any time thereafter, no-
tify the Centre of the class or classes of disputes which it would or
would not consider submitting to the jurisdiction of the Centre.
The Secretary-General shall forthwith transmit such notification to
all Contracting States. Such notification shall not constitute the
consent required by paragraph (1).

Unless the requirements of the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) have been
fulfilled the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction. The Tribunal therefore must
focus on this point.

29. The Tribunal discerns from the text of Article 25(2)(b) that the con-
ditions of the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) must be fulfilled, at least ini-
tially,® on the date of consent, in this case 22 January 1988. The antecedent to

© Respondent has argued (and Claimant has disputed) that the requirements of Article
25(2)(b) also must be satisfied “on the date on which the request was registered pursuant to... para-
graph (3) of Article 36,”as indubitably is the case under Article 25(2)(a) in respect of natural persons:
“National of another Contracting State” means:
any natural person who had the nationality of a Contracting State other than the State party
to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit such dispute to... ar-
bitration as well as on the date on which the request was registered pursuant to paragraph
(3) of Article 28 or paragraph (3) of Article 36, but does not include any person who on
either date also had the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute... .

CASES, 83

the phrase “on that date” in the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) necessarily is
the reference in the first clause to “the date on which the parties consented to
submit such dispute to... arbitration.” The Tribunal therefore considers the sit-
uation as of 22 January 1988.

30. The issue, then, is whether at that date, “because of foreign control,
the parties... agreed [that Vacuum Salt] should be treated as a national of

It appears, however, that application of the principle of expressio unius est exclusio alterius would
¢ against such dual requirement in the case of juridical persons; that all reported ICSID decisions
under Article 25(2)(b) have considered only the date of consent (although the point Claimant now
raises was not in issue), see Amco Asia et al. v. Indonesia, \CSID ARB/81/1 (decision on jurisdiction
dated 25 Sept. 1983), para. 14(ii), reprinted in 23 LL.M. 351, 361 (1984) (nationality under Article
25(2)(b) determined as of the date the parties concluded their agreement in the form of an approval
ofa foreign investment license application containing an ICSID arbitration clause); Klickner v. Cam-
eroon, ICSID ARB/81/2 (decision on jurisdiction dated 21 Oct. 1983), excerpts reprinted in 10 Y.B.
Com.Arb. 71, 76 (1985) and in 111 J.D.1. 409 (1984) (nationality under Article 25(2)(b) determined
as of the date the parties concluded an Establishment Agreement that contained an ICSID arbitration
clause); Liberian Easter Timber Corp. (LETCO) v. Liberia, (CSID ARB/83/2 (award dated 31 March
1986), reprinted in 26 I.L.M. 647, 653-54 (1987) (nationality under Article 25(2)(b) determined as
of the date the parties concluded a Concession Agreement containing an ICSID arbitration clause);
and SOABI v. Sénégal, ICSID ARB/82/1 (decision on jurisdiction dated 19 July 1984), para. 38,
reprinted in 6 ICSID Rev. — EI.LJ. 217, 225 (Spring 1991) (nationality under Article 25(2)(b) de-
termined as of the date the parties concluded an Establishment Agreement containing an ICSID ar-
bitration clause); and that the travaux préparatoires of the Convention support the single requirement,
see Documents Concerning the Origin and the Foundation of the Convention (‘Convention His-
tory”), Vol. II, 287, 400-01 and 868 (1968). The dual requirement is strongly rejected by Ameras-
inghe. C.F, Amerasinghe, Jurisdiction Ratione Personae Under the Convention On The Settlement
Of Investment Disputes Between Sets and Nationals Of Other States, 1974-1975 we Y.B. Int'l
L, 227, 266-67; see also C.F The Centre for
Disputes and Development Through the Multinational Corporation, 9 eet L. 793,
809-10 (1976) (“any change in the nationality of a juridical person after th{e] date of consent] is
immaterial for the purposes of ICSID’s jurisdiction, regardless of how inappropriate such an align-
ment would have been initially”). But see Delaume, who, albeit in the different context of an assign-
ment, suggests the dual requirement “might”exist. G. Delaume, ICSID Arbitration: Practical
Considerations, 1 J.Int’l Arb. 101, 115 (1984). See also G. Delaume, Le centre international pour le
réglement des différends relatifs aux investissements (CIRDI), 109 J.D.I. 775, 797 (1982).

Also the Centre itself arguably has authoritatively interpreted Article 25(2)(b) (including its
second clause) as needing to be satisfied only as of the date of consent. Rule 2(1)(d)(ii) of its In-
stitution Rules requires that a request for arbitration submitted by an individual “shall... indi-
cate”in addition to his “nationality on the date of consent”

(A) his nationality on the date of the request; and
(B) that he did not have the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute ei-
ther on the date of consent or on the date of the request.

Institution Rule 2(1)(4) (iii), however, separately provides as to juridical persons that in ad-
dition to indicating “nationality on the date of consent”

if the party is a juridical person which on the date of consent had the nationality of the
Contracting State party to the dispute, [the request for arbitration shall indicate] the
agreement of the parties that it should be treated as a national of another Contracting
State for the purposes of the Convention... .

84 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

another Contracting State [Greece”} for the purposes of this Convention.” This
divides into two parts: First, whether there was such agreement, and, second,
whether such agreement was indeed “because of foreign control” within the
meaning of the second clause of Article 25(2)(b).

31. Turning to the issue of agreement vel non, Ghana points out that the
parties nowhere have referred to, let alone recited in haec verba, the second
clause of Article 25(2)(b). Paragraph 36(a) of the 1988 lease agreement nowhere
alludes to it. Certainly the better practice, as reflected in ICSID Model Clause
7,8 would be for the parties at least to make some reference to foreign control.?
The reported cases suggest, however, that such has not been the practice. See
Armco Asia et al. v. Indonesia, ICSID ARB/81/1 (decision on jurisdiction dated

 

Note J to Institution Rule 2 expressly confirms that “For a juridical person the only date
relevant for nationality is that on which the parties consented to the jurisdiction of the Centre.”
Thus ICSID itself, for the registration of a case premised on the second clause of Article 25(2)(b),
requires information as to nationality only as of the date of consent.

Moreover, a quite plausible justification exists for requiring continuous nationality (at least
to the date of registration of a request for arbitration) of an individual but not ofa juridical person:
An individual has substantial control over his nationality, and thus an involuntary change of it,
with consequent loss of a right to ICSID arbitration, is improbable; a municipal éorporation of
the host State which is granted foreign status under the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) of the
Convention, however, could be deprived involuntarily of all foreign ownership through expro-
priation, and thus, were there a requirement of continuous nationality, could be deprived of its
right to ICSID arbitration by the very act which it presumptively would wish to challenge in such
a proceeding. See Convention History, Vol. II, 400-01.

It cannot be denied, on the other hand, that the prospect would be deeply unsettling, for
example, of a State being required to submit to international arbitration under the auspices of IC-
SID a dispute with a municipal corporation all of whose shares had been freely transferred from
aliens to nationals of that State in the interim between the conclusion of an investment agreement
including an ICSID clause premised on the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) and the registration
of a request for arbitration. In that circumstance the issue is raised as to whether in light of the
object and purpose of the Convention an interpretation of the second clause of Article 25(2)(b)
permitting the Centre to exercise jurisdiction would lead to a result which is “manifestly absurd
or unreasonable.” See Arts. 31(1) and 32(b) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,
signed at Vienna on 23 May 1969, entered into force on 27 January 1980, U.N. Doc. A/Conf.
39/27, Fourth Annex. See also W.M. Tupman, Case Studies in the Jurisdiction of the Internation-
al Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes, 35 I.C.L.Q. 813, 836 (1986).

The Tribunal need not resolve this troubling issue, however, given the further terms of this
Award.

7 Greece was a party to the Convention at that date, it having entered into force with re-
spect to Greece on 21 May 1969.

8 Ie is hereby agreed that, although the Investor is a national of the Host State, it is con-
trolled by nationals of name(s) of other Contracting State(s) and shall be treated as a national of [that)/
[those] State[s] for the purposes of the Convention.

ICSID Model Clauses, ICSID Doc. 5/Rev. 2 (1 Feb. 1993).

9 This would facilitate, inter alia, identification of the State Party (or States Parties) to the
Convention required by Article 27(1) to forego giving diplomatic protection in the circumstances.

CASES 85

25 Sept. 1983), para. 14(ii), reprinted in 23 LL.M. 351, 361 (1984); Klockner v.
Cameroon, ICSID ARB/81/2 (decision on jurisdiction dated 21 Oct. 1983),
excerpts reprinted in 10 Y.B. Com.Arb. 71, 76 (1985) and in 111 J.D.I. 409
(1984); Liberian Eastem Timber Corp. (LETCO) v. Liberia, ICSID ARB/83/2
(award dated 31 March 1986), reprinted in 26 I.L.M. 647, 653 (1987). Further,
the Tribunal in the particular circumstances of each of those cases concluded
that the very agreement by parties to an ICSID arbitration clause in circum-
stances such that ICSID jurisdiction can exist only on the basis of the second
clause of Article 25(2)(b) necessarily implied their agreement to apply that
clause. Thus the Tribunal in Amco Asia v. Indonesia found that it was

crystal clear that [Indonesia] agreed to treat P.T. Amco as a national
of another Contracting State, for the purpose of the Convention.

23 LL.M. at 361, para.14 (ii). Similarly, the Tribunal in Kléckner v. Cameroon,

expanding on that decision, stated:
The insertion of an ICSID arbitration clause by itself presupposes
and implies that the parties were agreed to consider SOCAME at the
time to be a company under foreign control, thus having the capac-
ity to act in ICSID arbitration. This is an acknowledgement which
completely excludes a different interpretation of the parties’ intent.
Inserting this [ICSID arbitration] clause in the Establishment Agree-
ment would be nonsense if the parties had not agreed that, by reason
of the control then exercised by foreign interests over SOCAME,
said Agreement could be made subject to ICSID jurisdiction.

10 Y.B.Com.Arb. at 76. In Liberian Eastem Timber Corp. (LETCO) v. Liberia
the Tribunal reached the same result:
[I]t could be argued with some force that the mere fact that Liberia
and LETCO included an ICSID arbitration clause in the Conces-
sion Agreement constitutes an agreement to treat LETCO as a “na-
tional of another Contracting State.” To conclude otherwise would
be tantamount to stating that Liberia never intended to honour this
part of the Concession Agreement; that Liberia, by agreeing to the
ICSID clause, acted in bad faith and contrary to the tenor and pur-
pose of the ICSID Convention.

When a Contracting State signs an investment agreement, contain-
ing an ICSID arbitration clause, with a foreign controlled juridical
person with the same nationality as the Contracting State and it
does so with the knowledge that it will only be subject to ICSID
jurisdiction if it has agreed to treat that company as a juridical per-
son of another Contracting State, the Contracting State could be
deemed to have agreed to such treatment by having agreed to the
ICSID arbitration clause. This is especially the case when the Con-

86 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

tracting State’s laws require the foreign investor to establish itself lo-
cally as a juridical person in order to carry out an investment.

26 LL.M. at 653.!° These cases are distinguishable from the instant case
in that in none of them was the issue of consent separated from that of
foreign control. In each of them the objective existence of foreign con-
trol was presumed, in particular because the foreign shareholding was
100 percent (or, in one case, 51 percent). Amco Asia et al. v. Indonesia, su-
pra (100 percent foreign ownership); Kléckner v. Cameroon, supra (51 per-
cent foreign ownership); LETCO v. Liberia, supra (100 percent foreign
ownership).

32. In any event there is in this case further evidence which might be re-
garded as supporting the conclusion that the parties intended to agree to the ap-
plication of the second clause of Article 25(2)(b). Paragraph 23 of the 1988 lease
agreement, headed “Government Participation,” recited that

Government shall participate in the Company’s operations in accor-
dance with the provisions of section 8 of the Minerals and Mining
Law P.N.D.C.L. 153.

Section 8 of Law No. 153, found in “PART I—OWNERSHIP OF MIN-
ERALS AND GOVERNMENT RIGHT OF PRE-EMPTION,” in turn
expressly mandates an initial ten percent host State interest in all mineral
rights, “in respect of which no financial contribution shall be paid,” and, in
any case “where the operation is for the mining of salt,” establishes an “‘op-
tion to acquire a further forty-five percent interest in the salt operations,”
without prejudice to “further participation... under such terms as the parties
may agree.”

10 Ghana relies on Holiday Inns v. Morocco, \CSID ARB/72/1 (discussed in P. Lalive, The
First “World Bank” Arbitration (Holiday Inns v. Morocco) — Some Legal Problems, 51 Brit. Y.B.
Int'l L. 123 (1980)), as a contrary precedent. The Tribunal in that case did address Article 25(2)(b)
and said:
[O]ne would expect that parties should express themselves clearly and explicitly with re-
spect to such a derogation... . An implied agreement would only be acceptable in the
event that the specific circumstances would exclude any other interpretation of the in-
tention of the parties, which is not the case here.
It was not the case there because the consent to arbitration was signed by Morocco, Holiday
Inns S.A. (a Swiss subsidiary of an American company) and a then unnamed subsidiary of Occi-
dental Petroleum Corporation (an American company) but not by any of the four Moroccan sub-
sidiaries of Holiday Inns S.A. on whose behalf, inter alia, the request for arbitration alleged it was
submitted, In each of the cases referred to above the company subject to Article 25(2)(b) was itself
a signatory to the ICSID clause (or, in one case, the assignee of such a signatory) and thus “the
specific circumstances [did] preclude any... interpretation of the intention of the parties”other
than that they agreed to apply Article 25(2)(b).

CASES 87

Where a mineral right is for reconnaissance, prospecting or mining
of minerals, the Government shall acquire a ten per cent interest in
the rights and obligations of such mineral operations in respect of
which no financial contribution shall be paid by Government.

Law No. 153, section 8(1).
The Government shall have the option to acquire on such terms
as shall be agreed upon between the holder of a mining lease and
the Government a further twenty per cent interest in the rights
and obligations in any mining operations where any mineral is
discovered in commercial quantities except that where the oper-
ation is for the mining of salt, the Government shall have the op-
tion to acquire a further forty-five per cent interest in the salt
operations.

Id., section 8(2).
The provisions in subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall not ex-
clude the Government from further participation in any mineral
operations and any further participation shall be under such terms
as the parties may agree.

Id., section 8(4). Section 8 also provides, in subsection (3), that
Where the parties fail to agree on the terms of the acquisition by
Government of any interest in any mineral operations under this
section, the matter shall be referred to arbitration in accordance
with section 31 of this Law.

Id., section 8(3).

33. The referenced section 31 of the Minerals and Mining Law, appear-
ing in “PART IV—TAXES, INCENTIVES AND BENEFITS,” provides as

follows:

(1) Where any dispute arises between a holder of a mineral right
and the Government in respect of any matter under Part IV of this
Law all efforts shall be made through mutual discussion to reach an
amicable settlement.

(2) Where any dispute arises between a holder who is a citizen of
Ghana and the Government in respect of any matter under Part IV
of this Law which is not amicably settled as provided in subsection
(1) of this Section, the dispute may be submitted to arbitration for
settlement in accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration Act,
1961 (Act 38).

(3) Where any dispute arises between a holder who is not a citizen
of Ghana and the Government in respect of any matter under Part
IV of this Law which is not amicably settled as provided under

88 ICSID REVIEW—-FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

subsection (1) of this Section the dispute may be submitted to
arbitration—
(a) in accordance with the rules of procedure for arbitration of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law;
or

(b) within the framework of any bilateral or multilateral
agreement on investment protection to which the Govern-
ment and the country of which the holder is a national are
parties; or

(c) in accordance with any other international machinery for
the settlement of investment disputes agreed to by the parties.

(4) The Secretary on the advice of the Minerals Commission may

specify the particular mode of arbitration to be resorted to in the

case of a dispute relating to any matter under Part IV of this Law

and such specification shall constitute the consent of the Govern-

ment or the Agency thereof and of the holder to submit to that

forum.

34. The Minerals and Mining Law, in section 84(1), also defines “citizen
of Ghana:”

(a) in relation to an individual, an individual who is a citizen of

Ghana by virtue of any law for the time being in force in Ghana;

(b) in relation to a partnership or association of individuals, a part-
nership or association which is composed exclusively of individuals
who are citizens of Ghana;
(c) in relation to a body corporate other than public corporation, a
body corporate which is incorporated in Ghana under the Compa-
nies Code, 1963 (Act 179), and
(i) which is certified by the Secretary to be controlled by Gov-
ernment; or
(ii) whose membership is composed exclusively of persons who
are citizens of Ghana; or
(iii) whose directors are exclusively citizens of Ghana; or

(iv) which is controlled by individuals who are citizens of
Ghana;
(d) in relation to a public corporation, a corporation that is estab-
lished in Ghana by or under any enactment... .
35. Reading section 31(3) in light of subsection (c)(iv) of the definition
of “citizen of Ghana” in section 84(1), a question arises as to whether at the

‘CASES 89

date of the 1988 lease agreement Vacuum Salt was “a holder who is not a
citizen of Ghana,”!! and, more specifically, not “controlled by individuals who
are citizens of Ghana.” Be that as it may, the Tribunal’s decision on the matter
before it ultimately must turn on whether or not “foreign control” as contem-
plated by the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) existed as a matter of fact on the
date of consent.'?

36. The Tribunal therefore turns to consider that question, for the
parties’ agreement to treat Claimant as a foreign national “because of foreign
control” does not ipso jure confer jurisdiction. The reference in Article 25(2)(b)
to “foreign control” necessarily sets an objective Convention limit beyond
which ICSID jurisdiction cannot exist and parties therefore lack power to
invoke same no matter how devoutly they may have desired to do so. See

11 Section 84(1) of the Minerals and Mining Law defines “holder”as “the holder of a min-
eral right under this Law.”

12 No suggestion has been made here that Vacuum Salt was ever “certified by the [Provi-
sional National Defence Council] Secretary {for Lands and Natural Resources} to be controlled
by Government,"and the parties concur that as of 22 January 1988 neither subsection (c)(ii) nor
subsection (c)(iii) of the definition of “citizen of Ghana”in section 84 (1) would apply. See para
graphs 41-42, infra.

13 Claimant has cited two other Ghanaian statutory provisions. Section 60(1) of the Min-
erals and Mining Law, in effect, prohibits the corporate holder of a mining lease from transferring
shares or entering into any “agreement, arrangement, or understanding... with any particular
person, if the effect of doing so would be to give to that particular person or any other person,
control of the company,”and section 60(3)(a)(i) provides that “[fJor the purposes of this section...
a person is deemed to have control of a company... if that person... holds a total of twenty per-
cent or more of the issued equity shares of the company.” Since, as previously was noted at para~
graph 2, footnote 1, it is uncontested that a Greek national held 20 percent of the shares of
Vacuum Salt as of 22 January 1988, Claimant argues that it thus was deemed under the Minerals
and Mining Law to be controlled by him. Respondent counters with some cogency, however,
that in logic the presumed purpose of such transfer restrictions is not necessarily related to the
jurisdictional concerns now addressed.

Claimant also cites “the Investment Code of 1985, P.N.D.C.L.116, section 21(2)(b)"as “re-
quirfing] Ghanaian participation in certain foreign investments and establish[ing] 20 percent as
the minimum Ghanaian participation in such ventures.” Claimant argues that “this 20 percent
threshold requirement again suggests that Ghanaian Law recognizes that a 20 percent shareholder
can meaningfully participate in and potentially control a company’s activities.” The Tribunal has
not been provided with the text of the cited law, however, and hence is not able properly to eval-
uate this argument.

On balance the Tribunal does not give weight to the points thus advanced.

The Tribunal likewise is disinclined to find persuasive, as also urged by Claimant, the fact
that the 1988 lease agreement in paragraph 11(b) permits engagement of a limited number of
non-Ghanajans in skilled positions while requiring training of Ghanaian employees “‘in all cate-
gories”and in paragraph 32 bars both Claimant and any non-Ghanaian employees from engaging
in “political activity of any kind in Ghana.” The Claimant argues that such limitations imply that
the corporate entity so restricted has a foreign character. The Tribunal, however, considers that
they could with equal logic be imposed on a purely municipal enterprise.

90 ICSID REVIEW—-FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of In-
vestment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, ICSID Doc. 2,
18 March 1965, para. 25, at 9 (“While consent of the parties is an essential pre-
requisite for the jurisdiction of the Centre, consent alone will not suffice to bring
a dispute within its jurisdiction. In keeping with the purpose of the Convention,
the jurisdiction of the Centre is further limited by reference to the nature of the
dispute and the parties thereto.”).!4 As one commentator has noted:

One reason for the restrictive jurisdictional requirements is that the
Convention was designed precisely to fill a particular gap in the ar-
ray of earlier fora available to settle investment disputes... . It is only
in the special asymmetrical situation of a dispute between an inves-
tor and a foreign government that no convenient forum was previ-
ously available... .

 

While the limited purpose of the Convention made it possible to de-
fine restrictively the jurisdiction it was to create, the jealous concern
of States for their sovereign prerogatives made it necessary that these
restrictions be actually imposed.... It had been agreed from the be-
ginning that the jurisdiction of the Centre with regard to any dispute
would always have to be based on the mutual agreement of the parties
c d: heless, the of particularly the developir
States... wished to preclude a priori any possibility that they might later be
pressured into settling disputes under the Centre with another government,
or with one of their own nationals, or which did not relate to an invest-
ment or did not involve a legal claim... .

Because of their restrictive purpose, the several jurisdictional limita-
tions cannot be waived by the parties... .

P. Szasz, A Practical Guide To The Convention On Settlement of Investment
Disputes, 1 Cornell Int’l LJ. 1, 9-10 (1968) (emphasis added).!> See also E.

14 Tn this respect the Convention differs from regimes to which parties may submit disputes
based on their consent alone. Compare Rule 1 of the Internal Rules of the International Court of
Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce:

The International Court of Arbitration may accept jurisdiction over business disputes not
of an international business nature, if it has jurisdiction by reason of an arbitration
agreement.

15 ‘Thus even though he concurs that “there is no need to give a strict definition to the
term ‘investment’ since in any case both parties must consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre
with respect to the dispute” Szasz concludes that “[iJt is easy to conceive of disputes that so ob-
viously do not relate to an investment that in spite of the desire and express stipulation of the par-
ties, a... Tribunal would have to decide that the Centre lacks jurisdiction.” Szasz, supra, at 14. The
same can be no less true of agreements under Article 25(2)(b)..

CASES 1

Gaillard, Some Notes on the Drafting of ICSID Arbitration Clauses, 3 ICSID
Rev. - ELL J. 136, 140 (1988) (the parties may not modify the limitations set
forth in Article 25(2)(b)); A. Broches, The Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, 136 Re-
cueil des Cours 331, 360-61 (1972); C.F Amerasinghe, Jurisdiction Ratione
Personae Under The Convention On The Settlement Of Investment Dis-
putes Between States And Nationals of Other States, 1974-1975 Brit.Y.B.
Int’l L. 227, 264-66. In addressing the present claim of jurisdiction grounded
on the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) it is the task of the Tribunal thus to
determine whether or not the Convention limit has been exceeded.

37. Inundertaking this task the Tribunal first must ascertain where that
Convention limit lies. Here, too, consistent with the travaux préparatoires of
the Convention, the authorities are unanimous in placing great weight on the
fact of the parties’ consent. Convention History, Vol. II, 579 (comment of Dr.
Broches). No detailed definition of “foreign control” has been developed
either in the travaux préparatoires of the Convention or in ICSID jurispru-
dence. See id. at 359, 361, 447-48, 538; see also SOABI v. Sénégal, ICSID
ARB/82/1 (decision on jurisdiction dated 19 July 1984), para. 29, reprinted
in 6 ICSID Rev.—FI.LJ. 217, 223 (Spring 1991). As the consent of the
parties is in broad principle the “cornerstone of the jurisdiction of the
Centre” (Report of the Executive Directors on the Convention on the Set-
tlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States,
ICSID Doc.2, 18 March 1965, para. 23, at 8), it is accorded considerable
respect and is not lightly to be found to have been ineffective. Thus the ac-
knowledged authority on the Convention states in specific regard to Article
25(2)(b) that “‘any stipulation... based on a reasonable criterion should be ac-
cepted” and that jurisdiction should be declined “only if... to do so would
permit parties to use the Convention for purposes for which it was clearly not
intended” (A. Broches, The Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, 136 Recueil des
Cours 331, 360-61 (1972)). In like vein it has been stated that the agreement
of the parties “on a foreign nationality based on foreign control would raise
a strong presumption that there was adequate foreign control on which to
predicate a foreign nationality.” C.F. Amerasinghe, Jurisdiction Ratione Per-
sonae Under The Convention On The Settlement Of Investment Disputes
Between States And Nationals Of Other States, 1974-1975 Brit. Y.B. Int’l L.
227, 264-66.16

16 But see M. Hirsch, The Arbitration Mechanism of the International Centre for the Set-
tlement of Investment Disputes 102 (1993).

92 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Then it is “only... where such foreign control cannot be postulated on the
facts on the basis of the application of any reasonable criterion that a tribunal...
would not [accept jurisdiction], because in such a case the parties would pur-
port to use the Convention for purposes for which it was not intended.” Id.

38. Nevertheless the words “because of foreign control” have to be
given some meaning and effect. These words are clearly intended to qualify an
agreement to arbitrate and the parties are not at liberty to agree to treat any
company of the host State as a foreign national: They may only do so “because
of foreign control.” The Tribunal concludes that the existence of consent to an
arbitration clause such as paragraph 36(a) of the 1988 lease agreement in cir-
cumstances such that jurisdiction could be premised only on the second clause
of Article 25(2)(b) raises a rebuttable presumption that the “foreign control”
criterion of the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) has been satisfied on the date
of consent.

39. Before addressing the specific facts and circumstances of the instant
case it remains for the Tribunal to state its understanding of the object and
purpose of the Convention. Initially they are framed in its Preamble:

Considering the need for international cooperation for economic

development, and the role of private international investment there-

in...

Recognizing that while [“disputes... in connection with... invest-

ment between Contracting States and nationals of other Contract-

ing States”] would usually be subject to national legal processes,

international methods of settlement may be appropriate in certain

cases

 

In submitting the Convention to governments for consideration the Execu-
tive Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Develop-
ment cited “a larger flow of private international investment” as “the primary
purpose of the Convention” and noted that the “creation of an institution de-
signed to facilitate the settlement of disputes between States and foreign in-
vestors can be a major step toward... stimulating [such] flow.” Report of the
Executive Directors on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States, ICSID Doc.2, 18
March 1965, paras. 9, 12, at 4. The Executive Directors simultaneously “rec-
ognize[d] that investment disputes are as a rule settled through administrative,
judicial or arbitral procedures available under the laws of” the host country.
Id., para. 10, at 4. They noted in summary that “the provisions of the Con-
vention maintain a careful balance between the interests of investors and
those of host States.” Id., para. 13, at 5.

CASES 93

40. The Tribunal proceeds to a review of all of the relevant facts and cir-
cumstances presented in the parties’ written and oral submissions including the
written and oral evidence.

41. The facts initially relevant to the issue of foreign control as regards
Vacuum Salt are not in dispute. It is conceded that as of 22 January 1988 Mr.
Gerassimos Alexis Panagiotopulos, a Greek national resident in Ghana since
1942, held 20 percent of the shares of Vacuum Salt. It is agreed that on that date
three banks owned by Ghana, i.e., National Investment Bank, Development
Finance and Holdings Limited and National Savings and Credit Bank, held ten
percent each, and that the remaining 50 percent was held by private Ghanaian
nationals (including one company) as follows:'7

Albert Adamako 10%
Appenteng Mensah & Co. 31%
Kwesi Efuna (also known as

Robert John Hayfron-Benjamin) 2.5%
Kabutey Olaga 1.5%
Ernest Orgle 5.0%

As Claimant observed, 20 percent of the company’s shares could combine
with the shareholding Ghanaian state banks to block any action by the Gha-
naian private shareholders or, conversely, could join with those private Gha-
naian shareholders to override any objections by those state bank interests.!8

42. The genesis of these shareholdings likewise is not in dispute.
Vacuum Salt was incorporated on 4 November 1966 by Mr. Panagiotopulos

17 As noted at paragraph 42, infra, Vacuum Salt’s shares have been held by the same persons
in the same percentages since 11 November 1976.

18 Were the Tribunal to consider the situation also as of the date of registration of the Re-
quest (or even later, as urged by Ghana) it would be required to address contested issues regarding
the shareholdings in Vacuum Salt. It is common ground that starting in 1984 Ghana announced
its intention to acquire a total of 51 percent of the shares by acquiring 30 percent of each private
shareholding and that the 70 percent private shareholders then agreed in principle to sell 30 per-
cent each for value, It is further undisputed that it was agreed that until such shares would be
transferred management would remain with the private shareholders but the board of directors
would be evenly divided with six seats being filled by the three banks and six by the private share-
holders. The parties differ on whether the contemplated transfer in fact was ever made with legal
effect. (Since Ghana does not contend it was made prior to 22 January 1988 it has not been nec-
essary for the Tribunal to resolve this issue.) Ghana further contends that in January 1993 Mr. Pa~
nagiotopulos transferred his 20 percent to the three banks and that Mr. Olaga similarly has
transferred one percent since the Request was registered (the obvious implication being that Gha-
na now controls 51 percent even absent effectuation of the transfers previously announced).
Claimant denies that either of those transfers has become legally effective.

94 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

and his brothers, !? and it was issued a Certificate to Commence Business on
20 December 1966. All shares were transferred, however, on 2 November
1971 to Samuel Christian Appenteng, a Ghanaian national who appears to be
the dominant person in Appenteng Mensah & Co. and has served as Managing
Director of Vacuum Salt since that time. Thereafter, on 12 June 1975, Mr. Ap-
penteng, while apparently retaining 20 percent for himself, transferred 80
percent of the shares to precisely the same persons (and in exactly the same per-
centages) as held them on 22 January 1988 (excluding Mr. Panagiotopulos).
Then, on 1 November 1976, Mr. Appenteng transferred his remaining 20
percent back to Mr. Panagiotopulos. Mr. Panagiotopulos became a director of
Vacuum Salt upon its establishment in 1966, his wife joined him in this capac-
ity in 1978, and they both remained directors on 22 January 1988. It is perhaps
relevant, too, that both parties acknowledge that at least until sometime
roughly proximate to the date of consent Mr. Panagiotopulos and Mr. Appen-
teng (and their families) had a quite friendly and cooperative, if not indeed
close, personal relationship.

43. The Tribunal notes, and itself confirms, that “foreign control”
within the meaning of the second clause of Article 25(2)(b) does not require,
or imply, any particular percentage of share ownership. Each case arising under
that clause must be viewed in its own particular context, on the basis of all of
the facts and circumstances. There is no “formula.” It stands to reason, of
course, that 100 percent foreign ownership almost certainly would result in
foreign control, by whatever standard, and that a total absence of foreign share-
holding would virtually preclude the existence of such control. How much is
“enough,” however, cannot be determined abstractly. Thus, in the course of
the drafting of the Convention, it was said variously that “interests sufficiently
important to be able to block major changes in the company” could amount
to a “controlling interest” (Convention History, Vol. II, 447);20 that “control
could in fact be acquired by persons holding only 25 percent of” a company’s
capital (id., 447-48); and even that “51% of the shares might not be control-
ling” while for some purposes “15% was sufficient” (id., 538). As Amerasinghe
has said, “the concept of ‘control’ is broad and flexible... . [T]he question is...
whether the nationality chosen represents an exercise of a reasonable amount
of control to warrant its choice on the basis of a reasonable criterion.” C.F. Am-
erasinghe, Jurisdiction Ratione Personae Under The Convention On The Set-

19 Te appears that in 1956 they had formed another salt mining company known as
Panbros.

20 Claimant has not argued, and the Tribunal has not discovered any basis in the 1963
Companies Code of Ghana for concluding, that 20 percent of the shares of a Ghanaian company
can block any corporate action.

CASES 95

tlement Of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals Of Other States,
1974-1975 Brit. Y.B. Int'l L. 227, 264-65.

44. Nonetheless, it must be true that the smaller is the percentage of
voting shares held by the asserted source of foreign control, the more one must
look to other elements bearing on that issue. As one authority has said, “a tri-
bunal... may regard any criterion based on management, voting rights, share-
holding or any other reasonable theory as being reasonable for the purpose.”
Amerasinghe, supra, paragraph 43 (emphasis added). It is on this basis that
Claimant has strongly advanced, and Respondent has sharply contested, argu-
ments as to control based on the role Mr. Panagiotopulos personally played in
Vacuum Salt on 22 January 1988.

 

45. At this point a word is in order regarding the Tribunal’s approach to
the parties’ evidence and to their submissions on the issue of control. Respon-
dent strongly urged the Tribunal both at and following its first session to rule
on the issue of Article 25(2)(b) without holding a hearing. In view, however,
of the importance of the issue, its novelty in ICSID proceedings,“ the request
of the Claimant for oral proceedings and a certain preference in the Arbitration
Rules for such proceedings,” as well as the potential importance of the Tribu-
nal observing the witnesses,“” the Tribunal determined to hold oral proceed-
ings. It finds that in regard to the issue under Article 25(2)(b) this decision
proved to be justified, for both the evidence developed at such hearing and the

21 The Tribunal acknowledges that an issue may exist as to whether “foreign control"with-
in the meaning of Article 25(2)(b) means exclusive control, or whether it allows for the possibility
that more than one shareholder or group of shareholders may enjoy control. The Tribunal need
not address that issue here, however.

22 This case is one of first impression in ICSID proceedings so far as the Tribunal is aware.
‘As previously noted, at paragraph 31, supra, all previous cases arising under the second clause of
Article 25(2)(b) involved a conceded 100 percent (or, in one case, 51 percent) foreign ownership.

23 Ordinarily, “a written procedure followed by an oral one” is required by Rule 29 unless
“the parties otherwise agree.” Rule 41(4), however, gives the Tribunal discretion, in considering
objections to jurisdiction, to “decide whether or not the further procedures relating to the objec-
tion shall be oral.”

24 I was significant, for example, that affidavits were filed in the written proceedings by
Respondent signed by Mr. Panagiotopulos, on whose 20 percent shareholding and allegedly key
role in Vacuum Salt Claimant was relying, advising that since registration of the Request he, so
far as he was concerned, had transferred all of his shares to the three shareholding Ghanaian state
banks (as later also did Mr. Olaga with regard to one percent of his 1.5 percent holding), and sup-
porting on various points the contentions of Ghana. (At the second session both Mr. Panagiotopu-
los and Mr. Olaga were presented as witnesses by Respondent.) In addition, it should be noted,
the written submissions on the issue of whether or not filing of the Request was duly authorized
by or on behalf of Vacuum Salt increasingly compelled the Tribunal to hear the affiants in person.
As the Tribunal did not find it possible absent such hearing to determine which issue it should
first proceed to decide, oral proceedings became, in fact, unavoidable.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

extensive oral submissions by counsel have illuminated the issue significantly
more fully than would have been the case had the parties been restricted to a
written, procedure.?> Indeed, the hearing was essential to a full elaboration and
understanding of the issue.

46. That being said, the Tribunal wishes to make clear, however, that as
to all facts regarding which there has been testimony it has relied in reaching
its decision here on the version most favorable to Claimant. It is not required
to do so, and, indeed, were its Award different, it would not have been able to
do so; in that event it would have been compelled to dispose one way or the
other of any number of contested issues of fact, including any hinging on a de-
termination of credibility of witnesses. In the event, however, the Tribunal is
able to reach its result even on the basis of construing the testimonial record
most favorably to Claimant.?6

47. A poignant statement of Mr. Panagiotopulos’ relationship to Vacuum
Salt is found in a letter he wrote on 3 May 1991 regarding “MY RETIRE-
MENT SERVICE BENEFITS.” In that missive he stated “for the records that
Commercial salt winning through the solar system was introduced into this
country by me.” After reiterating “my pioneering role in the salt industry and
hence my love for this industry” he continued “that I have an overriding inter-
est to see to the success of the operations of the company.” He ended by noting
again that it was he who had “created Vacuum Salt... which is my brain child.”

48. Consistent with this relationship, Mr. Panagiotopulos from the start
served continuously in a significant technical capacity with Vacuum Salt, i.e.,
as Technical Director, a position which he held on 22 January 1988 (on which
date, however, he was in Greece). According to the terms of the only written
contract of his employment as Technical Director that is in evidence, which
covered the calendar year commencing 1 March 1986 (but the terms of which
appear to have been applicable also on the date of consent), Mr. Panagiotopulos

25 Ie thus goes without saying that the Secretary-General, whose “screening” of the Re-
quest is conducted exclusively “on the basis of the information contained in the request,” hardly
could find it to be “manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the Centre”and was compelled to reg-
ister it. See Convention, Article 36(3).

Consequently, in particular, the Tribunal is not required to judge the testimony, for ex-
ample, of Mr, Panagiotopulos (or Mr. Olaga). This should allay any fears that otherwise might be
entertained that Claimant's asserted entitlement to ICSID arbitration has in any way been im-
paired by the very acts which are the subject of the Request.

CASES 97

‘was to receive (1) 2,500 cedis per month?” (2) two months’ home leave in
Greece for each ten months’ employment (including free return passage for
himself and his wife), (3) free use of a furnished house, (4) free medical care for
himself and his wife, and (5) use of a chauffeur driven automobile. Under such
contract Mr. Panagiotopulos was obligated to “devote the whole of his time,
skill and energy to the smooth and efficient running of any business under his”
charge.

49. Claimant also has placed before the Tribunal corporate board of di-
rectors minutes dating from 24 October 1973 through 2 December 1982 (as
well as minutes of a staff meeting of 19 August 1985) that, as stated by Mr.
Samuel Christian Appenteng, show “how the board gave Mr. Panagiotopulos
broad authority to develop the salt manufacturing capability of the Songor
Lagoon and routinely agreed to implement his proposals.” It is also true that
certain of those minutes, without further explanation, refer to Mr. Pana-
giotopulos as “General Manager” (listed following Mr. Appenteng as Manag-
ing Director), i.e., minutes of 11 November 1976, 9 December 1976 and 18
February 1977, and that in those instances Mr. Panagiotopulos (in addition to
his usual technical report) gave the financial report theretofore given by the
Managing Director. In later minutes, i.e., those of 16 February 1979, 27 June
1979, 3 December 1980 and 2 December 1982, Mr. Panagiotopulos, again
without explanation, is listed as Deputy Managing Director. His role in these
minutes predominantly is to report on technical issues. The substance of these

27 At the rate of U.S.$ 1/90 cedis prevailing at the commencement of that period (see In-
ternational Financial Statistics, 246 (IMF, Dec. 1993)) this was the countervalue of U.S.$ 27.80
per month. By 22 January 1988 an exchange rate of U.S.$ 1/176 cedis prevailed (see id.), reduc-
ing the value to US.$ 14.20 per month. (Those figures are to be considered in comparison to
the annual per capita income in Ghana during that time period, which according to World Bank
statistics was approximately U.S.$ 400. See The World Bank Annual Report 1990 at 105.) Mr.
Panagiotopulos’s testimony differs somewhat from those figures, In response to questions by Mr.
Stern Mr. Panagiotopulos testified that in 1987 he “was assigned like 1,835 per month.” Mr.
Stern asked whether that was “substantially less in those days than 100 dollars a month,” to which
Mr. Panagiotopulos responded, “[lJater on, yes.”

The evidence before the Tribunal also indicates that when Mr. Panagiotopulos concluded
an agreement to serve as a technical consultant for Ghana in July 1992 (see paragraph 52, infra)
he was to be paid “‘the Cedi equivalent of U.S.$2,000... per month” in addition to other benefits
similar to those he had received earlier. The difference in salary, however, could be explained by
the ultimate loss of Mr. Panagiotopulos’s status as shareholder, As a 20 percent shareholder in the
company, Mr. Panagiotopulos would have been entitled to collect potentially significant dividend
income. (According to the Minutes of the Annual General Meeting of the Company held on 21
October 1992, for example, the members “resolved that the Dividend of {cedis] 150 million that
is, [cedis] 150 per share in respect of the period ended 31st December, 1991, recommended by
the Board be approved.” Under the exchange rate prevailing at the end of 1992, U.S.$ 1/520 ce-
dis (see International Financial Statistics, 246 (IMF, Dec. 1993)), this dividend was the counter~
value of approximately U.S.$ 289,000.)

98 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

minutes is consistent throughout with Mr. Appenteng’s description of them.
No minutes are submitted for any period during the five years from 2 Decem-
ber 1982 to 22 January 1988.

50. The undeniable importance to Vacuum Salt of Mr. Panagiotopulos’
technical involvement in its operations is underscored by the admitted fact that
throughout the events of which Claimant complains, the Government of
Ghana apparently has found it necessary to ensure his continued involvement
in its operations. While it is his status as of 22 January 1988 that is determina-
tive, subsequent events arguably are relevant as bearing on his status at that date.

51. Itis asserted by Claimant that in the latter part of 1989 actual man-
agement of Vacuum Salt was assumed by an Interim Management Team in-
serted into its operations by the Government of Ghana. For a time, at least, Mr.
Panagiotopulos continued nonetheless as Technical Director. Thereafter, in
frustration, it is alleged, he resigned that post. Clearly he then was engaged as
“technical consultant” to train a successor. It was in the context of a request to
the Interim Management Team “to extend [that] engagement with the
company to the end of December, 1991” that he wrote the letter conceming
“MY RETIREMENT SERVICE BENEFITS” to which reference was made
previously (paragraph 47, supra). The minutes of a board of directors meeting
of 12 March 1992 record that by then “a new contract agreement had been
signed with” Mr. Panagiotopulos as “the Technical Consultant.”

52. Later, following action commencing 24 April 1992 by which Claim-
ant alleges that its 1988 lease agreement has been breached and it and other
assets expropriated, the Interim Management Team was replaced by a Salt De-
velopment Project Task Force of Ghana. A Government of Ghana notification
of 21 September 1992 regarding that Task Force lists Mr. Panagiotopulos, de-
scribed as “Government Consultant for Salt Development in Ghana,” among
its seven members as the “Technical Member.” Such employment is memori-
alized in correspondence exchanged by Mr. Panagiotopulos with the “PNDC
Secretary for Lands and Natural Resources” dated 27 and 30 July 1992 encom-
passing contractual terms similar to those under which he had been employed
as Technical Director by Vacuum Salt.

53. _Itis significant that nowhere does there appear to be any material ev-
idence that Mr. Panagiotopulos either acted or was materially influential in a
truly managerial rather than technical or supervisory vein. At all times he was
subject to the direction of the Managing Director, Mr. Appenteng, who
himself apparently controlled the largest single block of shares (31 percent held
by Appenteng Mensah & Co.), and who in turn responded to the board of di-
rectors, of which Mr. and Mrs. Panagiotopulos were but two members.
Nowhere in these proceedings is it suggested that Mr. Panagiotopulos, as

CASES 99

holder of 20 percent of Vacuum Salt’s shares, either through an alliance with
other shareholders, through securing a significant power of decision or manage-
rial influence,?8 or otherwise,?? was in a position to steer, through either positive
or negative action, the fortunes of Vacuum Salt. The fact that it was truly his
“brainchild” and, if such be the case, that his technical advice generally was
heeded,?° and even proved to be indispensable, does not fuse with his 20 percent
shareholding to render him capable of strongly influencing critical decisions on
important corporate matters.>! This is reflected in the board minutes under
review, where he invariably delivered the “technical report,” and, while tempo-
rarily styled General Manager or Deputy Managing Director, also reported on
the company’s financial status. In the end, the entire proceedings, even viewed
in the light most favorable to Claimant, are instinct with the sense that Mr. Pa-
nagiotopulos, for all his admitted talents, was not in any sense “in charge.”

54. The Tribunal is constrained to conclude that the presumption from
the fact of consent that the requirements of the second clause of Article 25(2)(b)
were satisfied in this case on 22 January 1988 is rebutted. Admittedly, “it would

28 Claimant noted the pronouncement of A.A. Berle that “The holder of control is not so
much the owner of a proprietary right as the occupier of a power position.” A.A. Berle, “Con-
trol” in Corporation Law, 58 Col. L. Rev. 1212, 1215 (1958). Here Mr. Panagiotopulos is not
shown to have occupied such a “power position.”

2) ‘The Tribunal is mindful of Claimant's reference to the statement of the United States
Supreme Court in North American Co. v. S.E.C., 327 U.S. 686, 693 (1946) that

Historical ties and associations, combined with strategic holdings of stock, can on occa~
sion serve as a potent substitute for the more obvious modes of control... . Domination
may spring as readily from subtle or unexercised power as from arbitrary imposition of
command.

In this case the Tribunal fails to discern any such “subtle or unexercised power.”

Mr. Leon Appenteng, the son of Vacuum Salt’s Managing Director and himself a sub-
stitute director of the company, summed up Mr. Panagiotopulos’ role as follows in answer to the
question “[D]id he have the capacity or the ability to impose decision making at the company at
that time [‘1988 and 1989’]”:

Absolutely, I mean the company board members... had always relied entirely on him for

technical expertise in all production, construction, maintenance of plant and equipment

at the site. I mean that was his role and the company always relied on him for that.

31 One would think that a person having “control” in any sense of Vacuum Salt would
have played a role in the decision to commence this arbitration. The Tribunal notes, however, that
according to the evidence of both parties Mr. Panagiotopulos did not even participate in (either
in support of or in opposition to) that decision. Claimant alleges that an Extra-Ordinary General
Meeting of the shareholders held 14 May 1992 to discuss Ghana's compulsory acquisition of Vac-
uum Salt’s leasehold interest in the Ada-Songor Lagoon and attended’by all shareholders but Mr.
Olaga validly delegated the decision as to whether or not to arbitrate to the private shareholders
by unanimously resolving:

The Minority Shareholders could reserve the right to take whatever steps they wanted

to protect their interest in the Company.

100 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

be difficult to challenge later such a stipulation [under Article 25(2)(b)] agreed
to by the Contracting State concerned, regardless of the objective situation.” P.
Szasz, A Practical Guide To The Convention On Settlement Of Investment
Disputes, 1 Cornell Int’l LJ.1, 20 (1968). The Tribunal finds the Request here,
however, to be such a case. Simply stated, accepting jurisdiction in the partic-
ular circumstances of this case, in our view, “would permit parties to use the
Convention for purposes for which it was clearly not intended.” We do not
find here indications of foreign control of Vacuum Salt such as to justify regard-
ing it as a national of an ICSID Contracting State other than Ghana. In our es-
timation, the drafters of the Convention, and specifically of the second clause
of Article 25(2)(b), cannot have contemplated that a case such as this one would
bring into play an international dispute settlement regime designed to promote
greater private international investment by providing a forum for the resolution
of any ensuing disputes between a State and a national of another State.

55. For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal finds that it lacks jurisdic-
tion and, accordingly, the Request for Arbitration herein must be dismissed.>

C. COSTS

56. Article 61(2) of the Convention provides as follows:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as
the parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the par-
ties in connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and
by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of

Claimant further alleges that at a meeting held that same evening at the home of Mr. S.C.
Appenteng, Vacuum Salt’s Managing Director, attended also by Mr. Hayfron-Benjamin and Mr.
Orgle (collectively representing a majority of the privately held shares), as well as by Mr. Leon
Appenteng, it was decided to submit the Request. (The Tribunal notes that the Extra-Ordinary
General Meeting Resolution provided to counsel here for Vacuum Salt and submitted by them
to ICSID as set forth in paragraph 4, supra, included as its resolving clause only the resolution
adopted at this second meeting.) (Alternatively, Claimant alleges Mr. S.C. Appenteng validly au-
thorized filing of the Request within his powers as Managing Director.) The evidence is con~
flicting as to whether Mr. Panagiotopulos had notice of this latter meeting. The fact remains,
however, that one reasonably could have expected that a person exercising “foreign control”
within the contemplation of Article 25(2)(b) necessarily would have become involved, or would
have involved himself, one way or another, in the process whereby such an important decision
was made. The Tribunal is conscious, of course, that the date as of which the existence or absence
of “foreign control"'initially is to be determined is 22 January 1988 and not 14 May 1992. None-
theless, in the context of the entire record in this case the Tribunal finds the events of 14 May
1992 pertinent. See paragraph 50, supra.

32 It thus is unnecessary for the Tribunal to consider further the other objections pleaded
by Ghana. See paragraph 13, supra.

CASES 101

the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Cen-

tre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.
Arbitration Rule 47(1)(j) requires that this Award contain “any decision of
the Tribunal regarding the cost of the proceeding.”

57. It does not appear that “the parties otherwise agree” within the
meaning of Article 61(2).

58. The Tribunal decides that each party shall bear the expenses in-
curred by it in connection with the proceedings, and that the fees and expenses
of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of
the Centre shall be paid by them in equal shares.

59. Inasmuch as the parties have advanced to the Centre equal deposits
in respect of such fees, expenses and charges adequate to pay them, no mone-
tary award is required.

D. AWARD

60. For the reasons set forth above
THE TRIBUNAL AWARDS AS FOLLOWS:

1. The Request for Arbitration herein registered 11 June 1992
is dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.

2. Each party shall bear the expenses incurred by it in connec-
tion with the proceedings.

3. Each party shall pay one half the fees and expenses of the
members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the fa-
cilities of the Centre.

Done at the Peace Palace, The Hague
The Netherlands

1 February 1994

 

/s/
Sir Robert Y. Jennings
President
/s/ /s/
Charles N. Brower Dr. Kamal Hossain

Member Member

