International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Washington, D.C.
DECISION ON JURISDICTION

in the matter of an arbitration
between

Vannessa Ventures Ltd.
and
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6)
Members of the Tribunal
Dr. Briner, President
Professor Brigitte Stern

Judge Charles Brower

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson

ON BEHALF OF THE CLAIMANT ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT

Mr. John Laski
Mr. John Terry
Torys LLP
Suite 3000
Toronto, ON
Canada MS5K 1

in Dra. Gladys Gutiérrez Alvarado
Procuradora General de la Reptblica
Avenida Lazo Marti
Edificio Procuraduria General de la Republica
Piso 8, Santa Monica

N2 Caracas, Venezuela
AND
Dr. Ronald E.M. Goodman
Mr. Paul S. Reichler
Foley & Hoag LLP
1875 K Street, N.W., Suite 800
Washington, D.C. 20006
U.S.A.

August 22, 2008

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANESSA VENTURES LTD. V. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 2.
Decision on Jurisdiction
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. BACKGROUND 3
2. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 6
3. JURISDICTION 11
3.1. Introduction 11
3.2. Acquisition Exception 15
3.2.1. Introduction 45
3.2.2. _ Position of the Respondent 16
3.2.3. _ Position of the Claimant 17
3.2.4. | The Tribunal’s Decision 17
3.3. The Venezuelan Law Issue 20
3.3.1. Introduction 20
3.3.2. _ Position of the Respondent .. 20
3.3.3. Position of the Claimant 21
3.3.4. The Tribunal’s Decision 22
3.4. The Waiver Issue 23
3.4.1. Introduction 23
3.4.2. _ Position of the Respondent 25
3.4.3. Position of the Claimant 26
3.4.4. | The Tribunal’s Decision 27
3.5. Copper Concessions Claim. 28
3.5.1. Introduction 28
3.5.2. Position of the Respondent 29
3.5.3 Position of the Claimant 30
3.5.4 The Tribunal’s Decision 30

 

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. V. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 3.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

1. BACKGROUND

In order to understand the main events which led up to this dispute and to identify the various
Parties directly or indirectly involved, the Arbitral Tribunal felt it useful to briefly describe the
background and the occurrences which led to this Arbitration.

The Las Cristinas property is located in the south eastern corner of Venezuela in the State of
Bolivar. It consists of a number of mining concessions held by Venezuela through the
Ministry of Energy and Mines. It contains what is reported to be one of the largest gold
reserves in the world.

Corporacién Venezolana de Guayana (“CVG”) is a Government agency created in 1960 to
oversee the economic development of the Guayana Region in Bolivar State, where the Las
Cristinas (“Las Cristinas”) property is located.

Placer Dome, Inc. (“PDI”) was a Canadian corporation with its head office in Vancouver. It
was listed on various stock exchanges and described as one of the largest gold mining
companies of the world. In 2006, it was acquired and absorbed into by Barrick Gold
Corporation which has its headquarters in Toronto, Canada and is quoted on the Toronto
and New York stock exchanges. After a selection process, PDI was selected for the
development of the gold mines in the Las Cristinas concessions 4, 5, 6 and 7. For this
purpose, CVG entered on 25 July 1991 into a Shareholders Agreement (“Shareholders
Agreement 1991”)' with PDI. According to this Agreement, two mining companies were
formed, Minera Las Cristinas (“MINCA”) and Relaves Mineros Las Cristinas (“REMINCA’).
The purpose of MINCA was to initially explore and, if economic feasibility is established,
produce gold in Las Cristinas 4, 5, 6 and 7. REMINCA was to evaluate and, if economic
feasibility is established, process existing tailings on Las Cristinas 4 and 5. REMINCA is
apparently not directly at issue in this Arbitration.

Seventy percent of the shares of the capital stock of MINCA were subscribed by Placer
Dome de Venezuela, C.A. identified as the “PDI Investor’, a domestic Venezuelan company
(‘PDV’). Apparently for tax purposes, the shares of PDV were not held directly by the

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. V. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 4.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Canadian parent company PDI, but through an intermediary company Placer Dome Ltd.
(Barbados) (“PD Barbados”). CVG in turn held 30% of the shares of MINCA.

On 4 March 1992, CVG and MINCA entered into a Work Contract to explore and exploit Las
Cristinas (“Work Contract)’. This contract designated MINCA as the sole and exclusive
operator for the exploration, development and exploitation of Las Cristinas 4, 5, 6 and 7 for
an initial period of twenty years with extensions of additional ten year periods so long as the
project remained economically feasible.

Upon the discovery of the presence of copper on the Las Cristinas property, the Ministry of
Energy and Mines issued copper concessions to CVG for Las Cristinas 4, 5, 6 and 7 on
30 December 1996°. These copper concessions were transferred to MINCA on 28 January
19994.

Between 1995 and 1998, Pre-Feasibility Studies, Feasibility Studies and Updates thereto
were prepared’.

The July 1996 Feasibility Study Update was approved: (i) by the MINCA Board of Directors
at a meeting held on 1 August 1996°; and (ii) by the Ministry of Energy and Mines by letter
dated 26 June 1997’:

In view of the increased financial needs for the construction phase, the shareholders of
MINCA in August 1996 agreed to a re-organization of the corporate structure whereby PDV’s
shareholding would be increased from 70% to 95% and CVG’s shareholding reduced from
30% to 5% with an option for CVG to increase its ownership to 30% in the future through
cash and non-cash contributions®. This re-organization was formalized in the 1997 Amended
Shareholders Agreement entered into on 31 July 1997 (Shareholders Agreement 1997)°.

CD-20.
CD-39.
CD-40.
CD-29.
CD-32.
CD-33.
CD-43.
CD-30.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. V. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 5.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

For various reasons and from 1999 onwards, mainly because of the important decline of the
price of gold, exploitation was apparently never really commenced and at a Board of
Directors Meeting of MINCA held on 15 July 1999 the Project was suspended"°.

After MINCA had made the decision to further suspend its activities, CVG, PDI, PDV and
MINCA entered into an agreement on 8 August 2000" according to which the suspension of
the performance of the Work Contract was extended for a further year from 15 July 2000.

During this time, attempts were made to review the strategic options for the property with the
help of an investment advisor and to find a third-party investor to become involved in the
project. PDI also made a formal proposal to CVG to sell its interest in MINCA in exchange for
future royalty payments to it. No agreements were reached between the Parties regarding
the future direction of the project.

In October 2000, General Rangel Gomez became President of CVG. He wrote a letter on
11 July 2001 to the Minister of Energy and Mines informing him that CVG intended to
assume total control of MINCA’.

On 13 July 2001, the “Original Transaction Agreement (PBV)” was entered into which
provided among other things for Vannessa Ventures Ltd., a company organized under the
laws of the Province of British Columbia, Canada (“Vannessa” or “the Claimant”) and its
wholly-owned subsidiary IHC Corp., a corporation organized under the laws of Barbados and
PD Barbados to acquire the PDV shares and certain loans.

General Rangel Gomez, President of CVG, was informed in writing by William M. Hayes,
Executive Vice President — United States and Latin America, about this transaction which
was publicly announced the same day".

On 14 July 2001, General Rangel Gomez wrote a letter to PDV according to which CVG did
not acknowledge or agree with this share sales agreement".

CD-57.
CD-60.
CD-90.
CD-95.
CD-97.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. V. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 6.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

The transaction was closed on 25 July 2001 when the Original Transaction Agreement (PBV)
was replaced by the Transaction Agreement (PBV)'® between PD Barbados, Vannessa and
Vannessa Holdings Corporation, a corporation organized under the laws of Barbados
(“Vannessa Barbados”). PDV later changed its name to Vannessa Venezuela C.A.

On 6 August 2001, CVG proceeded to rescind the Work Contract upon 90 days notice of
breach to MINCA"®.

On 6 November 2001, 90 days after CVG’s notice of breach, CVG issued a formal notice of
termination of the Work Contract and granted MINCA an additional seven days to vacate Las
Cristinas'”.

On 16 November 2001, CVG forcefully took possession of the Las Cristinas mine site.

On 8 March 2002, the Ministry of Energy and Mines issued two Resolutions, Resolution 35"
transferring to the Republic the Las Cristinas gold concessions and Resolution 36'° declaring
MINCA’s concession to the Las Cristinas copper concessions expired.

On 29 April 2002, President Chavez issued a Presidential Decree reserving Las Cristinas
gold concessions for direct exploitation by the Government of Venezuela”. This Decree was
published on 7 May 2002.

On 10 September 2002, President Chavez issued a further Presidential Decree reserving the
copper concessions for direct exploitation, which Decree was published on 12 March 20037".

2. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

2.1. Arbitration Agreement and Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal

cD-4.
CD-109.
cD-148.
CD-166.
» CD 167.
CD-172.
D-173.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. V. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 7.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

On July 9, 2004, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or
“the Centre”) received an arbitration request from Vannessa Ventures S.A. (“the Claimant’)
against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (“the Respondent” or “Venezuela”) under the
ICSID Additional Facility Mechanism provided by the 1996 Agreement Between the
Government of Canada and the Government of the Republic of Venezuela for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments (“BIT”).

By letters of August 23 and September 15, 2004, the Claimant supplemented its Request for
Arbitration.

On October 28, 2004, the Secretary-General informed the Parties of his approval to access
the Additional Facility Mechanism pursuant to Article 4(5) of the Additional Facility Rules. On
the same day, the Secretary-General registered the request and invited the Parties to
proceed with the constitution of an arbitral tribunal pursuant to Article 5(a) and (e) of the
Additional Facility Arbitration Rules.

In the absence of an agreement between the Parties on the constitution of the Arbitral
Tribunal, it was decided that pursuant to Article 6(1) of the Additional Facility Arbitration
Rules, the Tribunal would be composed of three arbitrators, with one appointed by each
party, and the third, who would be the President of the Tribunal, appointed by agreement of
the Parties.

On January 27, 2005, the Claimant appointed the Honorable Charles N. Brower, a national of
the United States of America, as arbitrator. On February 15, 2005, the Respondent
appointed Mr. Jan Paulsson, a national of France, as arbitrator.

On May 20, 2005, the Parties informed the Centre that they had jointly appointed Mr. V.V.
Veeder, a British national, as the third and presiding arbitrator.

On June 7, 2005, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID notified the Parties and the above-
mentioned arbitrators that the Tribunal had been constituted and the proceeding deemed to
have begun on that day in accordance with Article 13(1) of the Additional Facility Arbitration
Rules. On the same date, the Parties were informed that Mr. José Antonio Rivas, ICSID
Counsel, had been appointed as Secretary of the Tribunal in this case. Later on, Mr. Rivas
was replaced by Dr. Claudia Frutos-Peterson, ICSID Counsel.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. V. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 8.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

2.2. Proceedings

On July 29, 2005, the Tribunal held its first session with the Parties in London. Present at the
session were:
- The Members of the Tribunal,
- The Secretary of the Tribunal,
- On behalf of the Claimants: Messrs. John Terry and Ms. Julie
Maclean of Torys LLP, and
- On behalf of the Respondent: Mr. Ronald Goodman of Winston &
Strawn LLP.

During the session, the Tribunal decided on several procedural matters and, in agreement
with the Parties, set a timetable for the Parties’ respective submissions and production of
documents. This timetable was later amended on several occasions per the Parties’
requests.

On January 13, 2006, in accordance with the amended timetable, the Claimant submitted its
Memorial.

On February 28, 2006, the Claimant submitted an amendment to its Request for Arbitration.
After hearing the Respondent's objections to this request, the Tribunal decided, pursuant to
Articles 35 and 47 of the Additional Facility Arbitration Rules, to grant the Claimant’s request
and to introduce the amendment as an ancillary claim.

2.3. Proceeding on Jurisdiction

On July 5, 2006, the Respondent raised objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and
requested a suspension of the proceedings in accordance with Additional Facility Arbitration
Rule 45(4). On July 10, 2006, the Claimant objected to the Respondent's challenge and
request.

On July 14, 2006, the Centre informed the Parties that the Tribunal had suspended the
proceeding in accordance with Article 45(4) of the Additional Facility Arbitration Rules and
set out a schedule for the Parties’ respective submissions on jurisdiction. The schedule was
modified twice subsequently per the Parties’ requests.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. V. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 9.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

In accordance with the revised schedule, the Respondent on August 28, 2006, submitted its
Memorial on Jurisdiction. On December 16, 2006, the Claimant submitted its Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction. On February 16, 2007, the Respondent filed its Reply on
Jurisdiction, and on February 16, 2007, the Claimant submitted its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction.

On April 25, 2007, the Tribunal was provided with a revised list of participants for the
upcoming hearing on jurisdiction. Among the persons listed as representing the Claimant
was Prof. Christopher Greenwood. On April 27, 2007, the Centre transmitted to the Parties
further declarations by two Tribunal members with respect to Prof. Greenwood. On May 3,
2007, the Respondent submitted its observations on the further declarations. On May 4,
2007, the Tribunal invited the Claimant to provide any observations which it might have with
respect to the Respondent's letter in this matter. The Claimant provided its observations the
same day.

As agreed, on May 7, 2007, the hearing on jurisdiction took place in London. At the hearing,
the following persons appeared as legal counsel and representatives for the Claimant:
Messrs. John Laskin and John Terry and Mesdames Julie Maclean and Ruth Anne Flear of
Torys LLP, as well as Prof. Greenwood of Essex Chambers. Ms. Marianna Almeida and
Messrs. John Morgan and Ross Melrose, all of Vanessa Ventures Ltd., also appeared as
representatives of the Claimant.

The following persons appeared on behalf of the Respondent as its legal counsel and
representatives: Messrs. Ronald Goodman, Dmitri Evseev, Bonard Molina-Garcia and Kelby
Ballena and Mesdames Cristina Sorgi and Margarita Sanchez, all of Winston & Strawn LLP;
Mr. Paolo Di Rosa and Ms. Gaela Gehring Flores of Arnold & Porter LLP, and Messrs.
Gustavo Alvarez and Tulio Cusman of the Procuraduria General of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.

During the session, after hearing the Parties’ positions regarding the participation of Prof.
Greenwood in the case, the President of the Tribunal submitted his resignation. His
resignation was accepted by his two co-arbitrators, Judge Brower and Mr. Paulsson, in
accordance with the Additional Facility Arbitration Rules. Before the session ended, Mr.
Paulsson also submitted, with the Parties’ consent, his resignation for personal reasons. The

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 10.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

proceeding was consequently suspended until the vacancies on the Tribunal were filled
according to Additional Facility Arbitration Rule 17(1).

2.4. _ Reconstitution of the Tribunal and Resumption of the Proceeding on Jurisdiction

On June 21, 2007, the Respondent appointed Prof. Brigitte Stern, a national of France, as an
arbitrator to replace Mr. Paulsson. On October 18, 2007, the Respondent and the Claimant
separately informed the Centre that the Parties had agreed to appoint Dr. Robert Briner, a
national of Switzerland, as the third, presiding arbitrator to replace Mr. Veeder.

On October 29, 2007, after Dr. Briner had accepted his appointment, the Tribunal was
deemed to have been reconstituted and the proceeding to have resumed.

On November 29, 2007, the Tribunal informed the Parties that the hearing on jurisdiction
would be held in Paris on February 14 and 15, 2008. On December 28, 2007, the Tribunal
confirmed these dates, and noted that February 16 could be added if necessary. On January
31, 2008, the Parties informed the Tribunal of their agreement on a proposed schedule for
the hearing. On February 7, 2008, the Tribunal informed the Parties of its approval of the
proposed schedule.

The hearing on jurisdiction was held in Paris on February 14 and 15, 2008. At the hearing,
the following persons appeared as legal counsel and representatives for the Claimant:
Messrs. John Laskin and John Terry and Ms. Ruth Anne Flear of Torys LLP, and Prof.
Christopher Greenwood of Essex Chambers. The following persons also appeared as
representatives of the Claimant: Ms. Marianna Almeida and Messrs. John Morgan and Ross
Melrose, all of Vanessa Ventures Ltd.

The following persons appeared as legal counsel and representatives for the Respondent:
Messrs. Ronald Goodman and Paul Reichler and Mesdames Janis Brennan, Geraldine
Fischer and Angélica Villagran-Agiiero of Foley Hoag LLP, Ms. Gaela Gehring Flores and
Messrs. Dmitri Evseev, Bonard Molina-Garcia and Kelby Ballena of Arnold & Porter LLP, and
Mr. Gustavo Alvarez of the Procuraduria General of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Messrs. Carlos Mourifio Vaquero, Luis Garcia Montoya and Gustavo Grau Fortoul also
appeared as independent experts/advisers for the Respondent.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 11.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

3. JURISDICTION

3.1. Introduction

The Respondent in the letter of its counsel to ICSID of 5 July 2005 raised four jurisdictional
objections:

  

Summary of O. ions

1. This dispute arises directly out of the Republic’s decision not to permit
the acquisition of an existing business enterprise by Claimant, and therefore
falls squarely within the exclusion from investor-state arbitration agreed by the
Contracting Parties under the Agreement Between The Government of Canada
and the Government of The Republic of Venezuela for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments (“BIT”), Annex Article II(3)(b) (the “acquisition
exception”).

The investor-state dispute resolution provisions pursuant to which this
case has been registered with ICSID are contained in Article XII of the BIT.
However, Annex Article II(3)(b) of the BIT states:

Decisions by either Contracting Party not to permit establishment
of a new business enterprise or acquisition of an existing business
enterprise or a share of such enterprise by investors or prospective
investors shall not be subject to the provisions of Article XII of this
Agreement.

Clearly, a dispute that arises directly out of a Contracting Party’s
decision not to permit the acquisition of an existing business enterprise is outside
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. As the Republic will demonstrate, the present dispute
fits squarely within the jurisdiction exclusion of Annex Article II(3)(b), because it
stems from the Republic’s refusal to permit Claimant's takeover of MINCA, the
business enterprise at issue in this proceeding.

2. Claimant has never acquired any rights to Las Cristinas or did so in a
manner contrary to the Republic’s laws.

Vannessa’s alleged rights to Las Cristinas stem from the 25 July 2001
Transaction Agreement with Placer B-V, an offshore subsidiary of Placer Dome.
Under that agreement, Vannessa, contrary to the Amended Shareholder’s
Agreement, purported to assume all obligations of Placer Dome under the
Amended Shareholders’ Agreement and all other related documents. (See Cl. Ex.
4, § 2.02(b)). At the same time, Placer B-V disclaimed any warranties as to the
nature, validity or assignability of any of the rights purportedly being transferred.
(See id. At § 2.04(a)). In fact, Placer B-V’s attempted assignment of any rights to

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. V. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Las Cristinas to Vannessa was invalid. As a result, Claimant has never possessed
any legitimate rights to Las Cristinas under the Amended Shareholders
Agreement or related documents, and has no standing to bring such claims before
this Tribunal.

Furthermore, even if Vannessa did acquire rights to MINCA, such rights
were acquired in a manner that prevents them from being classified as an
“investment” under the BIT. Article I(f) of the BIT requires that an “investment”
in the territory of a Contracting Party be “in accordance with the latter’s laws.”
It therefore flows that an acquisition that takes place in circumvention of explicit
statutory and contractual prohibitions cannot serve as the basis of any claims
under the BIT because it does not meet the BIT’s definition of an “investment”, to
which the substantive protections of the BIT attach.

Here, the 25 July 2001 Transaction Agreement and surrounding events
point to a scheme devised by Placer Dome and Vannessa in an unlawful attempt
to force CVG and the Republic to accept a new and unknown own entity in place
of Placer Dome, just as the final extension of the MINCA work contract was set to
expire. It can hardly be doubted that the Contracting Parties intended to exclude
from the scope of their consent to arbitrate disputes concerning alleged rights
acquired under such circumstances.

3. Vannessa has not waived its right to initiate or continue proceedings in
relation to the subject matter of this dispute in the courts of Venezuela, and has
therefore failed to comply with an essential jurisdictional requirement of Article
XII (3)(b) of the BIT.

Article XII (3)(b) of the BIT states that an investor may refer a dispute to
arbitration under the BIT only where

The investor has waived its right to initiate or continue any other
proceedings in relation to the measure that is alleged to be in
breach of this Agreement before the courts or tribunals of the
Contracting Party concerned or in a dispute settlement procedure
of any kind.

Article XII (12) (a) of the BIT confirms that the waiver constitutes a
jurisdictional requirement

Where an investor brings a claim under this Article regarding loss
or damage suffered by an enterprise the investor directly or
indirectly owns or controls, the following provisions shall apply:

..(ii) both the investor and the enterprise must give the waiver
referred to in subparagraph (3)(b) ....

On 8 July 2004, Vannessa filed its Request for Arbitration in the present
case. On that date, Vannessa also submitted statements on behalf of itself,
Vannessa Venezuela and MINCA, purporting to waive the right to initiate or
continue any proceedings within the meaning of Article XII(3)(b). At the time,

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. V. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

however, MINCA and Vannessa had no fewer than ten cases pending before the
Political-Administrative Chamber of the Venezuelan Supreme Court based on the
same facts as its ICSID claims (“related proceedings”), and had taken no
affirmative steps to withdraw many of them.

In one such case, the Political-Administrative Chamber of the
Venezuelan Supreme Court rendered a final judgment against MINCA a week
after Vannessa filed its Request for Arbitration. Then, on 15 September 2004,
MINCA filed a new claim, seeking extraordinary review and nullification of that
decision by the Constitutional Chamber of the Venezuelan Supreme Court.

Over the next two months, in the context of Venezuela’s opposition to the
registration of Vannessa’s Request for Arbitration (partly on the basis of Article
XII(3)(b)), Vannessa and MINCA filed motions to discontinue the related
proceedings (except the case mentioned in the preceding paragraph). These
motions, however, specifically reserved the right to initiate future proceedings
based on the same claims.

Venezuelan law recognizes two forms of voluntary withdrawal of a claim,
one of which is with prejudice to future suits and the other without prejudice.
Depending on the stage of the proceeding, withdrawal without prejudice may
require consent of the opposing party and/or of the court. Withdrawal with
prejudice does not. As of today, none of the related proceedings has been
withdrawn with prejudice by Vannessa.

The BIT, however, is unequivocal in its requirement that an investor must
renounce its right not only to continue ongoing litigations, but also to initiate new
ones, before its Request for Arbitration can be validly submitted. In other words,
the BIT requires a legally binding waiver of claims, which must be with prejudice
to the filing of future claims. Venezuela first drew attention to Vannessa’s non-
compliance with Article XII(3)(b) shortly after the filing of the Request for
Arbitration. Nevertheless, Vannessa has failed to take sufficient steps to follow
through on the waivers submitted to the Tribunal. To the contrary, Vannessa’s
and MINCA’s conduct in the courts of Venezuela subsequent to the filing of the
Request for Arbitration demonstrates that it is unwilling to act in accordance with
the waivers submitted to the Tribunal. Because the waivers are an essential
jurisdictional requirement under Article XII of the BIT, Claimant’s case must be
dismissed forthwith.

4. In its Request for Arbitration, Claimant failed to assert a claim under
the BIT with respect to the cancellation of MINCA’s copper concessions.

In accordance with Article XII(3)(d) of the BIT,

An investor may submit a dispute as referred to in paragraph (1) to
arbitration in accordance with paragraph (4) only if:

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. V. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

(d) not more than three years have elapsed from the date on which
the investor first acquired, or should have first acquired,
knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that the investor
has incurred loss or damage.

MINCA’s copper concessions were officially cancelled by the MEM on 8
March 2002, by means of a public resolution, and with notice of the same to
MINCA. Thus, MINCA and Vannessa became aware of the alleged breach no
later than 8 March 2002. To the extent that Vannessa brings forth claims for “loss
and damages suffered by Vann and its in VK Ve I
and ... MINCA” (Cl. Memorial § 1) on the basis of the cancellation of the copper
concessions, it is barred under Article XII(3)(d) from asserting a claim based on
such cancellation as of 8 March 2005. Nonetheless, Vannessa first articulated a
claim based on the cancellation of the copper concessions in its Memorial dated

13 January 2006 — ten months afier the deadline imposed by Article XII(3)(d) of

the BIT.

As the Republic first noted in its correspondence of 7 October 2005,
Vannessa’s Request for Arbitration (dated 8 July 2004), failed to articulate a
claim of treaty breach based on the cancellation of the copper concessions.
Neither Vannessa’s list of alleged breaches of the BIT (paragraphs 91-100), nor

its list of remedies requested (paragraphs 101-02) mentions the cancellation of

MINCA’s copper concessions as the basis for a claim under the BIT. Vannessa’s
subsequent attempts to expand the scope of this arbitration to include claims
regarding the cancellation of the copper concessions are out of time; in
accordance with the BIT, such claims cannot be considered by this Tribunal.

* OK OK
For the foregoing reasons, the Republic submits that the present dispute

is not within the competence of the Tribunal and requests that this arbitration be
dismissed accordingly.

The Respondent therefore raised four objections, namely

the Acquisition Exception, i.e., that the Republic had decided not to permit the

acquisition of the MINCA shares by the Claimant;

the Venezuelan Law Issue, i.e., that the Claimant never acquired any rights to Las

Cristinas or did so in a manner contrary to the Republic’s laws;

the Waiver Issue, i.e., that the Claimant had not in a definite fashion waived its right to

initiate or continue proceedings in the courts of Venezuela in relation to the subject

matter of this dispute; and

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 15.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

- the Copper Concessions Claim, i.e., that the Claimant had not in a timely fashion
commenced arbitration with respect to the Copper Concessions.

These objections were further developed in the two Submissions of the Respondent of
28 August 2006 and 16 February 2007 and answered by the Claimant in its Submissions of
15 December 2006 and 16 April 2007.

Although the Arbitral Tribunal considers that it is presently not in a position to decide the
second issue which it therefore joins to the merits, it is in a position to decide the three other
defenses raised by the Respondent regarding the competence of this Tribunal. It will
therefore in the following paragraphs explain it decision regarding the arguments of the
Parties to the extent that this is needed.

3.2. Acquisition Exception

3.2.1. Introduction

The Agreement between the Government of Canada and the Government of the Republic of
Venezuela for the Promotion and Protection of Investments (BIT) provides in Article XII:

Settlement of Disputes between an Investor

And the Host Contracting Party

1. Any dispute between one Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party, relating to a claim by the investor that a measure
taken or not taken by the former Contracting Party is in breach of this
Agreement, and that the investor or an enterprise owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the investor has incurred loss or damage by
reason of, or arising out of, that breach, shall, to the extent possible, be
settled amicably between them.

However, the Annex to the BIT provides in II(3)(b):

(b) Decisions by either Contracting Party not to permit establishment of a
new business enterprise or acquisition of an existing business enterprise
or a share of such enterprise by investors or prospective investors shall
not be subject to the provisions of Article XII of this Agreement.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 16.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

The meaning of the word “Decisions” is disputed.

3.2.2. Position of the Respondent

The Respondent points to a long line of letters and actions taken by CVG objecting to the
transfer of the PDV shares commencing immediately after it was informed on 13 July 2001 of
the transaction between PDI and the Claimant.

e 14 July 2001 The CVG states to Placer Dome that the CVG
“does not acknowledge or agree with the
share sales agreement with the
aforementioned company, or any other
company.

e 16 July 2001 The CVG-appointed directors of MINCA
refuse to attend a meeting of the MINCA board
of directors called at the request of Claimant.

e =§=20 July 2001 The CVG asks Placer Dome to reconsider its
negotiations “behind the back” of the
Republic.

e 6 August 2001 The CVG, faced with Placer Dome’s

repudiation and impossibility of accepting
Claimant’s acquisition, decides to rescind the
Work Contract and gives notice of rescission.

e 17 August 2001 Vannessa seizes control of MINCA; the CVG
representatives reject “illegitimate transfer by
Placer Dome of shares in Placer Dome
Venezuela” to Claimant and refuse to attend
further meetings.

e =29 August 2001 The CVG-appointed directors advise MINCA
that they will not attend the board meeting on
30 August pursuant to their objection to the
transaction.

e = 26 October 2001 The CVG director attends — Special
Shareholders’ Meeting of MINCA and
declares that the CVG does not recognize
Vannessa acquisition.

e 6 November 2001 The CVG gives final notice of termination of
the Work Contract.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 17.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

e 16 November 2001 The CVG takes possession of Las Cristinas.

e = 20 November 2001 The CVG writes the MEM to inform it of the
CVG’s actions and to reiterate that
cancellation of the Work Contract was
motivated by Placer Dome’s illegitimate
attempt to have Claimant acquire its rights
and obligations.

e 8 March 2002 The MEM cancels copper concessions
associated with the project. 7°

3.2.3. Position of the Claimant

According to the Claimant, the Respondent took no actions which could be qualified as
“Decisions” not to permit the Claimant's acquisition of the shares of PDV. When terminating
the Work Contract with letter of 6 August 2001%°, Mr. Angel Gomez in his capacity as
President of CVG qualified the conduct of PDI stating that the transfer of the MINCA shares
constituted violations of the Work Contract, of the Shareholders Agreement of 1997 and of
the Extension Agreement of 8 August 2000. However, this letter and the final termination of
the Work Contract on 6 November 2001 were measures terminating the investment of the
Claimant but not “Decisions” by Venezuela “not to permit ... acquisition of an existing
business enterprise or a share of such enterprise by the Canadian investor Vannessa”.

3.2.4. The Tribunal’s Decision

The term “Decision” is not defined in the BIT, it therefore needs to be interpreted by the
Tribunal.

The Parties have not drawn the attention of the Tribunal to any travaux préparatoires which
might cast some light on the meaning of the term “Decisions”. Mr. Greenwood of behalf of

the Claimant stated that “there are no travaux préparatoires of which we are aware. We have

asked Venezuela if there are any travaux préparatoires but we have not been given any”.

Memorial on Jurisdiction of 28 August 2006, pages 42 and 43.

CD-109.

CD-148.

Hearing Transcript, Day 1, page 208, 19-22; see also: Mr. Terry, Transcript, Day 2, page 128, 14-25 &
129, 1-6.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 18.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

The Arbitral Tribunal is also not aware that the interpretation of the word “Decisions” ever
gave rise to any dispute between the Contracting Parties involving the procedure provided
for in Article XIV of the BIT.

The BIT is a treaty between two States and is therefore governed by international public law.
With respect to the interpretation of treaties, Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties of 1969 provides:

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its
object and purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise,
in addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the parties
in connection with the conclusion of the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with
the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the other parties as an instrument
related to the treaty.

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation
of the treaty or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes
the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between
the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the parties
so intended.

The Arbitral Tribunal is not aware of any elements listed from paragraphs 2 through 4 which
could be taken into consideration. It bases its analysis therefore only on paragraph 1 taking
into account the text, including the preamble and annexes.

The Parties have adduced definitions contained in a number of legal and general
dictionaries. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the Respondent has quoted the definition in

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 19.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

Black’s Law Dictionary, but from the abridged 6" Edition of 1991°°. The definition in the 8"
Edition of 2004, however, reads as follows:

Decision, n. 1. A judicial or agency determination after consideration of the facts
and the law; esp., a ruling, order, or judgment pronounced by a court when
considering or disposing of a case.

It is obvious from the file that CVG from the beginning did not recognize the transfer of the
shares. It is also not contested that CVG took a number of measures demonstrating its
opposition to the transfer of the shares, finally culminating in the termination of the Work
Contract.

The Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the ordinary meaning of the term “Decision”
necessitates, as indicated in Black’s Law Dictionary (8" Edition), a determination in the form
of a ruling or an order. Leaving aside the question whether or not CVG would at all have
been empowered to render any such ruling or order, it is obvious from the file that it never
ruled on the permissibility or lack thereof of the share transfer. What it complained of and
acted accordingly was that it considered the behavior of PDI and the Claimant to constitute a
breach of the agreements binding PDI to the Las Cristinas Project. It, however, never stated
that it did not authorize the transfer of the shares which, after all, were transferred and have
remained with the Claimant.

The Respondent did not draw the attention of the Arbitral Tribunal to any other measures of
an official Venezuelan body which could be characterized to constitute a “Decision”.

The context of the term “Decision” in the Treaty and an interpretation in the light of its object
and purpose in no way affect this interpretation based on the ordinary meaning to be given to
the term “Decision”.

The Arbitral Tribunal therefore holds that Annex II(3)(b) of the BIT does not apply and that
this defense of the Respondent is denied.

6 Respondent's Reply on Jurisdiction, page 14, footnote 49.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 20.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

3.3. | The Venezuelan Law Issue

3.3.1. Introduction

This issue deals with two intermingled questions. Firstly, whether the Claimant through the
Transaction Agreement (PBV) was legally able to acquire the rights which PDI (indirectly)
held in the Las Cristinas project and, secondly, assuming that it was able to acquire these
rights, if this acquisition was in conformity with the BIT.

According to Article I(f) of the BIT,

“investment” means any kind of asset owned or controlled by an investor of one
Contracting Party either directly or indirectly, including through an investor of a
third State, in the territory of the other Contracting Party in accordance with the
latter’s laws.

3.3.2. Position of the Respondent

The position of the Respondent may be summarized as follows:

- The successive Shareholders Agreements (1991 and 1997) should be considered as
creating a joint venture between PDI and CVG;

- Due to the nature of the agreement between the Parties, there are intuitu personae
obligations;

- PDV is not a real party to the two Shareholders Agreements, but has to be
considered as an investor of PDI;

- The 1991 Shareholders Agreement provides that (Article V. D.);

[...] the parties cannot assign their rights or delegate their obligations hereunder
without the other party’s prior consent [...].

- PDI sold its affiliated company PDV to the Claimant in breach of the above quoted
provisions;

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 21.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

3.3.3.

Article 9 of the MINCA Bylaws states that:

“Stockholders shall have a preferential right to acquire the shares which other
Stockholders wish to sell [...].

Any transfer made in violation of this Article shall be void and without any effect
upon the company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, transfers of shares to related
companies wholly-owned by Shareholders, directly or indirectly, or by the
Shareholders’ parent company are hereby authorized.[...]

By selling PDV to the Claimant, PDI also breached Article 9 of the MINCA Bylaws;

The breach of the Shareholders Agreements and of the MINCA Bylaws rendered the
assignment of the shares to Vannessa null and void and the Claimant therefore never
acquired property of the MINCA shares;

Furthermore, as a result of said breaches, the Claimant made no investment within
the meaning of the BIT as the investment was not made in accordance with ... the
laws of Venezuela insofar as a violation of a contract is ipso facto a violation of
Venezuelan law pursuant to Article 1159 of the Venezuelan Civil Code, which
provides that “Contracts shall have the force of Law between the Parties”;

In addition, the Claimant did not make the investment in good faith. For this reason
also, no investment in accordance with the law of Venezuela, embodying the principle
of good faith occurred;

The Respondent furthermore considers that the investment, if an investment was ever
made, was achieved in bad faith, which would also constitute a violation of
international public law and would therefore deny jurisdiction for the Arbitral Tribunal
to decide any alleged claims of the Claimant arising from the alleged breach of the
BIT.

Position of the Claimant

The Claimant respected all the formalities imposed by Venezuelan law with regard to
the transfer of the shares of PDV;

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 22.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

- PDI did not breach the Shareholders Agreements as neither Article 10.01 of the 1997
version nor Article V.D. of the 1991 version restricted PDI’s ability to sell its shares in
its subsidiaries to a third party;

- PDI did not breach Article 9 of the MINCA Bylaws. This Article only provided a right of
first refusal relating to the sale of MINCA shares, but contained no requirement with
respect to the sale of PDV shares;

- Even if a breach of the above-mentioned provisions would have occurred, said
breach cannot be considered to constitute a violation of Venezuelan law;

- No intuitu personae obligations on PDI existed, which could have prevented the
transfer of shares to the Claimant;

- A transfer of shares could only be deemed to be null and void ab initio under
Venezuelan law if it violated an express rule of law, which was not the case.
Moreover, a contract must be considered as valid until a court declares its nullity.

3.3.4. The Tribunal’s Decision

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the main defense of the Respondent, namely that the transfer
of the PDV shares constituted a breach of the Shareholders Agreements and of the MINCA
By-Laws and therefore rendered this transfer null and void with the result that the Claimant
never acquired property in the MINCA shares is likely to constitute a defense on the merits of
the case. At the same time, the Respondent alleges as a jurisdictional objection that this
transfer was unlawful under Venezuelan law within the meaning of the BIT according to
which the investment must be “in accordance with the laws of Venezuela’.

The Arbitral Tribunal has received a great number of expert opinions on questions of
Venezuelan law, but it has not had the benefit of the examination of such experts by the
Parties, nor have the members of the Arbitral Tribunal been able to put questions to the
experts.

Based on the record presently before it, the Arbitral Tribunal therefore does not consider
itself to be in a position to determine in a final way at the present time whether or not the

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 23.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

MINCA shares are owned or controlled by the Claimant in accordance with Venezuelan law
as is required for this Arbitral Tribunal to have jurisdiction (Article 1(f) BIT).

The Arbitral Tribunal has considered whether it would therefore be more rational from a
procedural viewpoint to re-open the procedure on jurisdiction and ask for further filings and
an oral hearing with examination of experts. The Tribunal, however, is conscious of the fact
that the possible breach by the original investor PDI of agreements with CVG is an element
that might be relevant for the jurisdictional issue, but might also have consequences on the
merits. On balance, the Arbitral Tribunal therefore considers that justice is better served if
this objection to the competence of the Tribunal is joined to the merits and that new time-
limits be fixed for the further procedures (ICSID Additional Facility Arbitration Rule 45(5)).

3.4. | The Waiver Issue

3.4.1. Introduction

Article XII(3)(b) of the BIT states that an investor may submit a dispute to arbitration under
the BIT only if

the investor has waived its right to initiate or continue any other proceedings in
relation to the measure that is alleged to be in breach of this Agreement before
the courts or tribunals of the Contracting Party concerned or in a dispute
settlement procedure of any kind.

Article XII(12)(a) of the BIT further confirms that the waiver must be made not only by the
investor, but also by any enterprise in which the investor has invested:

Where an investor brings a claim under this Article regarding loss or damage
suffered by an enterprise the investor directly or indirectly owns or controls, the
following provisions shall apply:

.. (ii) both the investor and the enterprise must give the waiver referred to in
subparagraph (3)(b) ...

In a letter to the ICSID Secretary-General dated 8 July 2004, filed with the Request for
Arbitration, John Morgan, President of Vannessa, stated:

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. V. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
Decision on Jurisdiction

24.

 

I, John Morgan, on behalf of Vannessa Ventures Ltd., consent to arbitration in
accordance with the procedures set out in the Agreement Between the
Government of Canada and the Government of the Republic of Venezuela for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments (the “Bilateral Investment Treaty”), and
waive the right of Vannessa Ventures Ltd. to initiate or continue any other
proceedings in relation to the measures of the Government of Venezuela that are
alleged to be in breach of the Bilateral Investment Treaty before the courts or
tribunals of Venezuela or in a dispute procedure of any kind.

Vannessa also filed with the Request for Arbitration:

(a)

a Resolution of the Vannessa Board of Directors dated 18 June 2004, that
stated, among other things:

Vannessa waives its right to initiate or continue any other proceedings in
relation to the measures that are alleged to be in breach of the Bilateral
Investment Treaty before the courts or tribunals of Venezuela or in a
dispute settlement procedure of any kind;

a letter to the ICSID Secretary-General dated 8 July 2004 from Marianna
Almeida, legal representative of Vannessa Venezuela, declaring, together
with the consent to arbitration, that Vannessa Venezuela,

... renuncio al derecho a iniciar o continuar cualquier otro procedimiento en
relacién con las medidas del Gobierno de la Republica Bolivariana de
Venezuela que se pretende que constituyen incumplimiento del Tratado
Bilateral de Inversiones ante las cortes o tribunales de Venezuela o en
cualquier otro tipo de procedimiento de arreglo de controversias.

a letter to the ICSID Secretary General dated 8 July 2004 from Marianna
Almeida, legal representative of MINCA, declaring, together with the
consent to arbitration, that MINCA,

... renuncio al derecho a iniciar o continuar cualquier otro procedimiento en
relacién con las medidas del Gobierno de la Republica Bolivariana de
Venezuela que se pretende que constituyen incumplimiento del Tratado
Bilateral de Inversiones ante las cortes o tribunales de Venezuela o en
cualquier otro tipo de procedimiento de arreglo de controversias.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 25.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

According to the Claimant,

The filing by Vannessa of these waivers with the Request for Arbitration fulfilled
the requirements of Articles XII(3)(b) (the requirement that the investor
(Vannessa) file the waiver) and Article XII(12)(a)(ii) (the requirement that the
investments (Vannessa Venezuela and MINCA) file the waiver).

3.4.2. Position of the Respondent

According to the Respondent, the purpose of the waiver requirement is to ensure that the
Claimant as well as the companies affiliated to the Claimant should not later on, possibly
after the close of the investment dispute, be in a position to commence actions against the
State arising from claims which were the object of the BIT procedure. The Respondent states
that the Claimant had a choice in its form of withdrawal from Venezuelan court proceedings,
namely either withdrawal with prejudice or withdrawal without prejudice. According to the
Venezuelan Civil Procedure Code, the act by which a party withdraws from a case is termed
“desistimiento”, which can be effected in one of two ways: (a) withdrawal with prejudice to
future suits (“desistimiento de la demanda’) or (b) withdrawal without prejudice to future suits
(“desistimiento del procedimiento’):

There are critical differences between these two methods of withdrawal.
Withdrawal with prejudice (“disistimiento de la demanda”) forecloses a given
claimant from filing suit again on the same claim or claims. In other words, the
claimant does not retain the right to re-initiate its claim in the same forum. As
Venezuelan administrative law expert Dr. Gustavo Grau explains,

... the object of the withdrawal of Article 263 (withdrawal with prejudice) is
the claim itself ... the term “claim” in this context must be understood as
the equivalent of a cause of action or the right that is claimed against the
other party. In accordance with the provisions of Article 263 of the CCP,
the effect on the proceedings of a withdrawal with prejudice is like res
judicata, like that of a ruling handed down by judicial authority, i.e., once
approved by the judge, it terminates the suit definitively, without any
possibility of a new suit being field by means of an identical claim, with the
same parties and the same purpose.

On the other hand, if a claimant withdraws without prejudice effecting a
“desistimiento del procedimiento”, that claimant may re-file the same suit on the
same claim and retains the right to re-initiate his cause of action in domestic
courts. As expert Dr. Grau notes, this type of withdrawal without prejudice refers
to “the possibility that the claimant may limit the scope of its withdrawal to

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 26.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

simply not continuing with the proceedings [“withdrawal without prejudice”]
initiated by its filing of the claim.” Additionally, Dr. Grau explains that “the
object of the withdrawal stated by the claimant is limited to a termination of the
procedural stage, that is, the claimant has the option of not continuing with the
process, without prejudice to the same party re-filing said claim subsequently,
after a period of ninety (90) days following approval of the withdrawal.

As indicated above, the difference between the two forms of withdrawal is
significant because depending on which of the two forms the claimant chooses,
the outcome will be substantially different. Dr. Grau notes,

... this distinction, far from being a merely dogmatic or trivial, represents
an element of summary importance, in order to be able to determine the
consequences of each type of withdrawal, and specifically to determine
whether a claimant may bring the same claim against the same counterparty
and within the same scope, even after having filed a withdrawal. 7”

The Respondent furthermore states that the Claimant and its affiliated companies in the
various cases pending before Venezuelan courts did not immediately withdraw pending
actions with the competent court, as on 15 September 2004, one month after the Claimant
filed its Request for Arbitration, MINCA filed a new claim before the Constitutional Chamber
of the Venezuelan Supreme Court seeking extraordinary review and nullification of a decision
of that Court.

According to the Respondent, the purpose of the waiver provisions in the BIT is clear in that
a Party cannot circumvent the BIT by alleging that it had waived its right to initiate or continue
its right to bring a claim while at the same time preserving its right to re-initiate it at a later
date.

3.4.3. Position of the Claimant

According to the Claimant, the desistimiento was drafted by Hernandez-Breton, the head of
the Administrative Law Litigation Department of the Caracas Office of Baker & McKenzie.
The Claimant furthermore submitted reports from two Venezuelan experts, Dr. Ramén
Escovar and Professor Luis Ortiz Alvarez who opine that the desistimiento filed was
appropriate and that the Constitutional Chamber's decision definitively prevents Vannessa
from re-opening any of its court actions.

7 Memorial on Jurisdiction of 28 August 2006, pages 70 and 71.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 27.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

According to the Claimant, the form of the desistimiento chosen was in order to not be
deemed to have waived the rights to the Additional Facility Procedure before ICSID or
possible enforcement actions of an award. The action before the Supreme Constitutional
Court did not relate to any claim advanced in these ICSID proceedings but only concerned a
previous decision on costs which MINCA considered to be wrong.

3.4.4. The Tribunal’s Decision

This Arbitral Tribunal is confronted with the question as to what might occur in the future if
the Claimant or one of its affiliated companies seizes a Venezuelan court. The statements of
the experts presented by the Parties come to opposing conclusions.

The Arbitral Tribunal has read with attention the Decision of the Constitutional Chamber of
the Supreme Court of Justice of 28 October 2005 where this court of highest instance had
held as follows:

In this regard, the Chamber must note that Article XII (3)(c) of the Agreement
between the Government of the Republic of Venezuela and the Government of
Canada for the Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed in Caracas on
July 1, 1996, and incorporated to our legal system through the corresponding
approbatory law (Special O.G. No. 5,207 of 01.20.98) “an investor may submit a
controversy [...] to arbitration according to paragraph (4) if: [...] (b) the investor
has waived its right to bring or continue any proceeding regarding the measure
that it purports to be a default on this agreement before the courts by the
contracting party or in any type of proceeding for the settlement of disputes.”

Having seen the contents of that rule, this Chamber deems that it cannot be
sustained that the revision requested is in no way related to the controversy arisen
with regard to the exploration, development and exploitation of alluvial and vein
gold in the area named Las Cristinas, between the parent company of the plaintiff
and the Republic and Corporacién Venezolana de Guayana, because the
sentencing to pay court costs that is now being impugned had its origin, precisely,
on a request for formalization of arbitration regarding the same dispute, but made
to our national jurisdiction by way of the Political-Administrative Chamber of this
Supreme Court.

From this perspective, the Chamber cannot make a thorough examination
regarding this review, not assessing the fairness of the monetary sentence against
the petitioner, because by having requested the [International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes] to settle the conflict arisen, it undoubtedly
waived filing or continuing any proceeding related — either indirectly or directly —

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 28.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

to the so-often referred to controversy. For this reason, this Chamber must
declare that it dismisses the review requested. So it is decided.” *°

It would therefore seem to this Tribunal that it need not try to analyze the opinions of the
experts called upon by the Parties regarding the question of what the difference between the
various waivers under Venezuelan procedural law is and whether or not the Claimant and its
affiliated companies chose the proper version. The Supreme Court has clearly stated that the
waiver prevents Venezuelan courts from deciding claims regarding the Las Cristinas Project.
In its Decision, the Supreme Court not only refers to the proceedings pending before it
regarding the petition to review a cost decision of a previous judgment, but the Constitutional
Chamber went on to state

.. because by having requested the [International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes] to settle the conflict arisen, it undoubtedly waived filing or
continuing any proceeding related — either indirectly or directly — to the so-often
referred to controversy.

In view of the fact that the question of the scope of the waiver, if this issue should in the
future arise, is a matter to be decided under Venezuelan law by the Venezuelan Courts, this
Tribunal considers that the Supreme Court of Venezuela is best qualified to interpret
Venezuelan law. The Tribunal therefore holds that the waiver fulfils the requirements of the
BIT and that this defense of the Respondent is denied.

3.5. | Copper Concessions Claim
3.5.1. Introduction
Article XII, paragraph 2 of the BIT provides:

If a dispute has not been settled amicably within a period of six months from the
date on which it was initiated, it may be submitted by the investor to arbitration in
accordance with paragraph (4). For the purposes of this paragraph, a dispute is
considered to be initiated when the investor of one Contracting Party has
delivered notice in writing to the other Contracting Party alleging that a measure
taken or not taken by the latter Contracting Party is in breach of this Agreement,

Decision of the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice, 28 October 2005, V V 321A/7.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 29.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

and that the investor or an enterprise owned or controlled directly or indirectly by
the investor has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that
breach.

Article XII, paragraph 3 of the BIT provides:

An investor may submit a dispute as referred to in paragraph (1) to arbitration in
accordance with paragraph (4) only if:

a.

b.

c.

d. not more than three years have elapsed from the date on which the investor
first acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach
and knowledge that the investor has incurred loss or damage.

The question which arises is whether the Claimant when delivering its notice in writing
regarding the alleged breach of the BIT with respect to the Copper Concessions held by
MINCA did so within the three-year period provided for in Article XII(3)(d) of the BIT.

3.5.2. Position of the Respondent

The Respondent holds that the Copper Concessions Claim was not pleaded prior to the
expiry of the statute of limitations contained in the BIT and is therefore time barred. The
Respondent considers that when the Claimant submitted the dispute to investor-state
arbitration on 8 July 2004, the date on which it presented its Request for Arbitration to ICSID,
this Request did not include the Copper Concessions Claim. The date on which the Claimant
first became aware of the potential BIT breach was, at the latest, 8 March 2002, but the
Claimant first presented its Copper Claim in January 2006 as part of its Memorial, therefore
more than three years after 8 March 2002. According to the Respondent, the Claimant's
Request for Arbitration contained no allegations of a breach of the BIT or a request for relief
in relation to the cancellation of MINCA’s Copper Concessions and the references in the
Request for Arbitration to the Copper Concessions either fail to constitute any such claim or
are so vague that they shed no light on the Claimant's alleged Copper Claim.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 30.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

3.5.3 Position of the Claimant

According to the Claimant, its claim arising from the cancellation of the Copper Concessions
is not time-barred:

The mining of, and contracts and concessions in respect of, gold and copper at
Las Cristinas have always been intertwined.

Vannessa makes two claims in this arbitration that involve the copper
concessions. The first claim is about Resolution 36 of the Ministry of Energy and
Mines dated March 8, 2002, which revoked MINCA’s concession to the Las
Cristinas copper concessions. The second claim is about Presidential Chavez's
Decree 1962, published March 12, 2003, that reserved the copper concessions for
direct exploitation by the Government of Venezuela. These are the only two claims
that Venezuela asserts are time-barred.

Vannessa’s first claim about Resolution 36 was clearly pleaded at paragraphs 74,
88(v), 95 and 102 of the Request for Arbitration. Vannessa sets out these
paragraphs at paragraph 212 of its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction. Venezuela
has never set out any proper basis for concluding that Vannessa’s pleading of this
claim in its Request for Arbitration is deficient. The Request for Arbitration
setting out this claim was filed on July 9, 2004, less than three years after
Resolution 36 was issued on March 8, 2002. This claim is therefore not time-
barred.

While Vannessa did not make a specific reference to Decree 1962 in its pleadings
until it filed its memorial on Merits on January 13, 2006, it amended its Request
for Arbitration to include this claim, with the Tribunal’s consent, effective
February 28, 2006. This claim was pleaded in both the Memorial and the Request
for Arbitration less than three years after Presidential Decree 1962 was published
on March 12, 2003. This claim too is therefore not time-barred. 9

3.5.4 The Tribunal’s Decision

On 8 March 2002, the Ministry of Energy and Mines issued Resolution 36°° declaring
MINCA’s concession to the Las Cristinas Copper Concessions expired.

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction of 16 April 2007, pages 81 and 82.
* cD-167.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 31.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

For the Arbitral Tribunal, only this date is relevant regarding the commencement of the
statute of limitation period. The Presidential Decree of President Chavez of 10 September
2002 published on 12 March 2003 reserving the Copper Concessions for direct exploitation
by the Government of Venezuela is of no relevance in this context as already the previous
Resolution of 8 March 2002 of the Ministry of Energy and Resources had deprived MINCA of
any right to exploit the Copper Concessions which CVG had transferred to it on 28 January
1999.

The relevant document regarding the interruption of the statute of limitation is therefore the
Request for Arbitration filed on 8 July 2004.

According to Article XII, paragraph 2 of the BIT in order to initiate the dispute the Investor
must deliver a

notice in writing to the other Contracting Party alleging that a measure taken or
not taken by the latter Contracting Party is in breach of this Agreement, and that
the investor or an enterprise owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the
investor has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach.

The Arbitral Tribunal considers that the purpose of such a statute of limitation provision is to
require diligent prosecution of known claims and insuring that claims will be resolved when
evidence is reasonably available and fresh, therefore to protect the potential debtor from late
actions.

The Tribunal keeps in mind that this dispute between the Parties mainly concerns the gold
mining rights which had been granted to MINCA with the Work Contract in 1992, whereas the
copper rights were only granted in 1999 and that little, if any, mining activity regarding copper
exploitation is recorded. As long as the Respondent was given notice with the filing of the
Request for Arbitration that its claims under the BIT not only concerned the gold mining rights
but that the alleged treatment by the Respondent regarding the MINCA Copper Concessions
also constituted a subject matter of this dispute, the purpose of the prescription provision is
fulfilled.

In this context, the Arbitral Tribunal notes that in paragraph 13 of the Request for Arbitration,
the Las Cristinas Project is described as “a gold and copper mining project’. In paragraph 74,

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 32.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

the Claimant states (i) “in cancelling the copper concessions, the Ministry did not follow the
administrative procedures with which it was required to comply under Venezuelan law’.

In paragraph 88, the Claimant recited the written notice of breaches of the BIT which on
5 June 2002 was given to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Government of Venezuela in
accordance with Article XII(2) of the BIT. In this list, it mentioned under (v) “the expropriation
of MINCA’s mining rights in Las Cristinas through resolutions of the Ministry of Energy and
Mines in March 2002 reassuming the rights to Las Cristinas and canceling the Las Cristinas
copper concessions held by MINCA.” (Emphasis added).

In the Chapter of the Request for Arbitration dealing with the breaches of the BIT, in
paragraph 91, the Claimant in a general way refers to the alleged expropriation of the
Claimant’s investments in the Las Cristinas project and the lack of fair and equitable
treatment and full protection and security with respect to MINCA and in paragraph 95,
reference is made to “the actions taken by the Ministry of Energy and Mines”.

From an objective viewpoint, the Request for Arbitration must be understood to have
included the alleged violations of MINCA’s rights (and therefore of the Claimant) relating to
the Copper Concessions and the Respondent was therefore, upon receipt of the Request,
aware of the fact that the dispute also concerned the termination of the Copper Concessions.

The Arbitral Tribunal therefore holds that the Copper Concessions Claim is not time-barred
and that this defense of the Respondent is denied.

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/04/6 — VANNESSA VENTURES LTD. v. BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA 33.
Decision on Jurisdiction

 

NOW THEREFORE,
THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL DECIDES AS FOLLOWS :

a) The defense raised by the Respondent that the Arbitral Tribunal lacks

jurisdiction because the Claimant has never acquired any right to the Las

Cristinas or did so in a manner not in accordance with the laws of Venezuela,

as required by Article 1(f) of the applicable bilateral investment treaty, is joined

to the merits.

b) The other three objections to jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal are denied.

c) The allocation of the costs of this phase of the proceeding is reserved for

later.

d) The Arbitral Tribunal, after consultation with the Parties, will issue an Order

for the further procedure.

The Arbitral Tribunal

[Signed] [Signed] [Signed]

 

Professor Brigitte Stern Dr. Robert Briner Judge Charles N. Brower

Arbitrator President Arbitrator

