INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

VANNESSA VENTURES LTD.
(CLAIMANT)

AND

THE BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/04/6)

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Vaughan Lowe QC, President
Hon. Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator
Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms Ann Catherine Kettlewell

Representing Claimant Representing Respondent

Mr John B. Laskin Dra Cilia Flores

Mr John A. Terry Procuradora General de la Republica
Torys LLP Paseo Los Ilustres c/e Av. Lazo Marti
79 Wellington Street West, Suite 3000 Ed. Sede Procuraduria General de la
Toronto, Ontario MSK 1N2 Republica, Piso 8

Canada Urb. Santa Monica

Caracas 1040

Venezuela

and

Mr Ronald E.M. Goodman
Ms Janis H. Brennan

Mr Alberto Wray

Ms Mélida Hodgson

Foley Hoag LLP

1875 K Street, N.W., Suite 800
Washington, DC 20006
United States of America

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: January 16, 2013

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page
TABLE OF CONTENTS i
TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS iii
L PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 1
Il. THE FACTS 10
Ill. JURISDICTION 31
A. Definition of “Investment” Step One: “any kind of asset...” ....c.ccseceeeseeeeeeee 33
1. Respondents Position........ccccsecseseesesecseseeeseeeseeeseesseessessseeseeeeseneees 33
2. Claimant’s Position 33
3. The Tribunal’s Decision .............cccesseesesseessessesseeseeseeseeseeseseeseseeneeneenees 34
B. Definition of “Investment” Step Two: “asset owned or controlled . . . in
accordance with” the host State’s laws 36
1. Respondent’s Position
2. Claimant’s Position
3. The Tribunal’s Decision
C. Constraints on the Transfer of the Shareholding under Venezuelan
Contract Law. 39
1. Respondents Position........ccccsecseseesesecseseeeseeeseeeseesseessessseeseeeeseneees 39
2. Claimant’s Position Al
3. The Tribunal’s Decision .............cccessesseeseessesesseeseeseesessessesseeesseneeneenees 43
D. In Accordance with the Law on Public Procurement and Administrative
Contracts 46
1. Respondents Position.........ccccesecseseeseseeseseeseseeeseeeseeseeesseeseeeeeeeeseeeees 46
2. Claimant’s Position 47
3. The Tribunal’s Decision .............cccessesseeseessesesseeseeseesessessesseeesseneeneenees 47
E. In Accordance With Good Faith and Public Policy.........csccsesseeseseeseeeeeeeeeees 48
1. Respondents Position.........ccccesecseseeseseeseseeseseeeseeeseeseeesseeseeeeeeeeseeeees 48
2. Claimant’s Position 49
3. The Tribunal’s Decision .............cccesseesesseessessesseeseeseeseeseeseseeseseeneeneenees 50
F. In Accordance With Venezuelan Decree 2095 ..........ceccecseseeeesessesseeseseeeeseenee 50
1. Respondents Position........ccccsecseseesesecseseeeseeeseeeseesseessessseeseeeeseneees
2. Claimant’s Position
3. The Tribunal’s Decision
G. The Tribunal’s Conclusion on Jurisdiction..........0.cecescesseceeseesesseeseseeeeeeseenee 51
IV. MERITS 52
A. Expropriation 52

 

VI.

VIL.

  
  

 

 

 

 

1. Claimant’s Position: Gold Rights 52
2. Claimant’s Position: Copper Rights 54
3. Respondent’s Position: Gold Right
4. Respondent’s Position: Copper Rights .
5. The Tribunal’s Decision
B. Fair and Equitable Treatment and Full Protection and Security ............ccse 66
1. Claimant’s Position 66
2. Respondents Position........ccccsecseseesesecseseeeseeeseeeseesseessessseeseeeeseneees 67
3. The Tribunal’s Decision .............cccesseesesseessessesseeseeseeseeseeseseeseseeneeneenees 68
CONCLUSION 71
COSTS 71
DISPOSITIF 72

 

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

 

Additional Facility Rules

Rules Governing the Additional Facility for the
Administration of Proceedings by the
Secretariat of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes in effect
from January 1, 2003

 

Arbitration Rules

Schedule C to the Additional Facility Rules (as
defined above)—Arbitration (Additional
Facility) Rules

 

Canada-Venezuela BIT or the BIT or the
Treaty

The Agreement Between the Government of
Canada and the Government of the Republic of
Venezuela for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments dated July 1, 1996, which entered
into force on January 28, 1998

 

Claimant or Vannessa

Vannessa Ventures Ltd.

 

Claimant’s Memorial

Memorial on the Merits of Vannessa Ventures
Ltd., January 13, 2006

 

Claimant’s Reply

Reply on the Merits of Vannessa Ventures
Ltd., August 21, 2009

 

Copper Concessions

Concessions for the exploitation of copper on
the Las Cristinas sites issued in 1996

 

CVG

Corporacién Venezolana de Guayana.

 

Decision on Jurisdiction

Decision on Jurisdiction of August 22, 2008

 

Ex. C-

Exhibit filed by Claimant

 

Ex. R-

Exhibit filed by Respondent

 

Extension Agreement

Agreement between Corporacion Venezolana
de Guayana, Placer Dome, Inc., Placer Dome
de Venezuela, C.A. and Minera Las Cristinas,
C.A. of August 8, 2000

 

FET

Fair and equitable

 

 

First Pinedo Witness Statement

First Witness Statement of José Antonio
Pinedo, January 10, 2006

 

First Rauguth Witness Statement

First Witness Statement of Erich Rauguth, July
22, 2009

 

FPS

Full protection and security

 

 

ICSID or the Centre

 

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

 

iii

 

 

MEM

Ve la’s Ministry of Energy and Mines

 

 

MINCA

Minera Las Cristinas C.A.

 

MINCA Bylaws

Minera Las Cristinas C.A. Bylaws dated
August 28, 1997

 

Original Transaction Agreement

Transaction Agreement between Placer Dome
B-V Limited, Vannessa Ventures Ltd. and
Vannessa Holdings Corporation dated July 25,
2001

 

PBV

Placer B-V Limited

 

PDV

Placer Dome de Venezuela, C.A.

 

Phoenix Project

Las Cristinas Project Staged Development
Feasibility Study dated April 2000

 

Placer Dome or PDI

Placer Dome Inc.

 

REMINCA

Relaves Mineros Las Cristinas S.A.

 

Respondent or Venezuela

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

 

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial

Counter-Memorial on Merits and Jurisdiction
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
March 13, 2009

 

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction

Memorial on Jurisdiction of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, August 28, 2006

 

Respondent’s Rejoinder

Rejoinder on Merits and Jurisdiction of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, February 1,
2010

 

Scotia

Scotia Capital Inc.

 

Second Patines Witness Statement

Second Witness Statement of Franqui Patines,
March 3, 2009

 

Tr. [day:page: line]

Transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction and
merits held from October 3 to 6, 2011

 

Work Contract

Work Contract entered by CVG and MINCA
on March 3, 1992

 

1991 Shareholders Agreement

Shareholders Agreement between Corporacion
Venezolana de Guayana and Placer Dome, Inc.
of July 25, 1991

 

 

1997 Amended Shareholders Agreement

 

Amended Shareholders Agreement between
Corporacién Venezolana de Guayana and
Placer Dome, Inc. of July 31, 1996

 

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. On July 9, 2004, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or the “Centre”) received a request from Vannessa Ventures Ltd. (the “Claimant” or
“Vannessa”) for arbitration against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (the “Respondent” or
“Venezuela”) (jointly, the “Parties”) under the Rules Governing the Additional Facility for the
Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (Additional Facility Rules) in effect as of January 1, 2003 (the “Additional
Facility Rules”). The proceeding was brought under the Agreement Between the Government
of Canada and the Government of the Republic of Venezuela for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments dated July 1, 1996 (the “Canada-Venezuela BIT” or the “BIT” or the “Treaty”),

which entered into force on January 28, 1998.

2. By letters dated August 23, 2004, and September 15, 2004, Claimant

supplemented its Request for Arbitration.

3. On October 28, 2004, the Secretary-General of ICSID approved Claimant’s
access to the Additional Facility in accordance with Article 4 of the Additional Facility Rules.
On the same day, the Secretary-General registered the Request for Arbitration in accordance with
Article 4 of Schedule C to the Additional Facility Rules—the Arbitration (Additional Facility)
Rules (the “Arbitration Rules”)—and pursuant to Article 5 of the Arbitration Rules invited the

Parties to constitute an arbitral tribunal.

4. No agreement was reached between the Parties on the constitution of the tribunal.
Accordingly, Claimant invoked Article 6(1) of the Arbitration Rules according to which the
tribunal would be composed of three arbitrators—one appointed by each party, and the third, the

presiding arbitrator, appointed by agreement of the Parties.

5. By letter dated January 26, 2005, Claimant appointed Judge Charles N. Brower, a
national of the United States of America, as arbitrator. On February 15, 2005, Respondent

appointed Mr Jan Paulsson, at that time, a national of France, as arbitrator.

6. On May 20, 2005, the Parties informed the Centre that they had jointly appointed
Mr V.V. Veeder, a national of the United Kingdom, as the third and presiding arbitrator.

7. On June 7, 2005, the ICSID Secretary-General notified the Parties and the
arbitrators that the Tribunal had been constituted and that the proceeding was deemed to have
commenced on that date in accordance with Article 13(1) of the Arbitration Rules. On the same
date, the Parties were informed that Mr José Antonio Rivas, ICSID Counsel, had been appointed

as Secretary of the Tribunal.

8. On July 29, 2005, the Tribunal held its First Session with the Parties in London,

U.K. The following individuals were present at the First Session:

Members of the Tribunal

Mr V.V. Veeder, President
Judge Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator
Mr Jan Paulsson, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat
Mr José Antonio Rivas, Secretary of the Tribunal

Representing Claimant

Mr John Terry, Torys LLP

Ms Julie Maclean, Torys LLP

Representing Respondent

Dr Ronald E.M. Goodman, Winston & Strawn LLP

9. During the First Session, the Tribunal decided on several procedural matters and,
with the Parties’ agreement, set a timetable for the Parties to make their submissions and produce
documents. This timetable was later amended on several occasions in accordance with the
Parties’ requests. It was also confirmed that Additional Facility Arbitration Rules in effect from

January 1, 2003 were applicable to the proceeding.

10. On December 23, 2005, the Centre informed the Tribunal and the Parties that
Mr Martin M. Serrano, ICSID Counsel, had been appointed as Secretary of the Tribunal in

replacement of Mr José Antonio Rivas.

11. On January 13, 2006, Claimant submitted its Memorial.

12. On February 28, 2006, Claimant submitted an amendment to its Request for
Arbitration. By letter dated March 3, 2006, Respondent stated its opposition to Claimant’s
request to introduce an amendment. After considering the Parties’ observations on the matter,
the Tribunal decided on March 15, 2006, pursuant to Articles 47 and 35 of the Arbitration Rules,
to grant Claimant’s request and to introduce the amendment as an ancillary claim and to treat it

as having been made and pleaded on February 28, 2006.

13. On April 4, 2006, the Centre informed the Tribunal and the Parties that
Ms Claudia Frutos-Peterson, ICSID Counsel, had been appointed as Secretary of the Tribunal in

replacement of Mr Martin M. Serrano.

14. On July 5, 2006, Respondent raised objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and
requested a suspension of the proceedings in accordance with Article 45(4) of the Arbitration

Rules. On July 10, 2006, Claimant objected to the suspension of the proceedings.

15. On July 14, 2006, the Centre informed the Parties that the Tribunal had suspended
the proceeding in accordance with Article 45(4) of the Arbitration Rules, and had established a
schedule for the Parties’ submissions on jurisdiction. The schedule was modified twice

subsequently pursuant to requests by the Parties.

16. Pursuant to the revised schedule, on August 28, 2006, Respondent submitted its
Memorial on Jurisdiction. On December 15, 2006, Claimant submitted its Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction. On February 16, 2007, Respondent filed its Reply on Jurisdiction. On April 16,

2007, Claimant submitted its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction.

17. On April 25, 2007, the Tribunal was provided with a revised list of individuals
who would participate in the hearing on jurisdiction. Among the persons listed as representing
Claimant was Professor Christopher Greenwood. On April 27, 2007, the Centre transmitted to
the Parties declarations by two Tribunal members with respect to Professor Greenwood. On
May 3, 2007, Respondent submitted observations on the further declarations. On May 4, 2007,
the Tribunal invited Claimant to provide its comments on Respondent’s observations. Claimant

provided its observations on May 4, 2007.

18. | On May 7, 2007, the hearing on jurisdiction took place in London, U.K. The

following individuals were present at the hearing:

Members of the Tribunal

Mr V.V. Veeder, President
Judge Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator
Mr Jan Paulsson, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat
Ms Claudia Frutos-Peterson, Secretary of the Tribunal
For Claimant

Mr John Laskin, Torys LLP

Mr John Terry, Torys LLP

Ms Julie Maclean, Torys LLP

Prof. Christopher Greenwood, Essex Court Chambers
Ms Marianna Almeida, Vannessa Ventures Ltd.

Mr John Morgan, Vannessa Ventures Ltd.

Mr Ross Melrose, Vannessa Ventures Ltd.

For Respondent

Dr Ronald E.M. Goodman, Winston & Strawn LLP

Mr Paolo Di Rosa, Arnold & Porter LLP

Ms Gaela Gehring Flores, Arnold & Porter LLP

Mr Dmitri Evseev, Winston & Strawn LLP

Ms Cristina Sorgi, Winston & Strawn LLP

Mr Bonard Molina-Garcia, Winston & Strawn LLP

Mr Kelby Ballena, Winston & Strawn LLP

Ms Margarita Sanchez, Winston & Strawn LLP

Mr Gustavo Alvarez, Asesor adjunto al Despacho de la Procuradora General de la
Reptiblica

Mr Tulio F. Cusman, Asesor externo de la Procuraduria General de la Republica

19. During the hearing, having heard the Parties’ positions regarding the participation
of Professor Greenwood in the case, the President of the Tribunal submitted his resignation. His
resignation was accepted by his two co-arbitrators, Judge Brower and Mr Paulsson. Before the
session ended, Mr Paulsson also submitted, with the Parties’ consent, his resignation for personal
reasons. The proceeding was suspended in accordance with Article 16(2) of the Arbitration

Rules.

20. On June 21, 2007, Respondent appointed Professor Brigitte Stern, a national of
France, as arbitrator to replace Mr Paulsson. On October 18, 2007, Respondent and Claimant
separately informed the Centre that the Parties had agreed to appoint Dr Robert Briner, a national

of Switzerland, as the presiding arbitrator to replace Mr Veeder.

21. On October 29, 2007, after Dr Briner had accepted his appointment, the Tribunal

was deemed to have been reconstituted and the proceeding resumed.

22. On November 29, 2007, the Tribunal informed the Parties that a hearing on
jurisdiction would be held in Paris, France on February 14 and 15, 2008. On December 28,
2007, the Tribunal confirmed these dates, and noted that a further date, February 16, 2008, would
be made available for the hearing, if necessary. On January 31, 2008, the Parties informed the
Tribunal of their proposed agreed schedule for the hearing. On February 7, 2008, the Tribunal

confirmed its approval of the Parties’ proposed agreed schedule.

23. The hearing on jurisdiction was held in Paris, France on February 14 and 15,

2008. The following individuals were present at the hearing:

Members of the Tribunal

Dr Robert Briner, President
Judge Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator
Prof. Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat
Ms Claudia Frutos-Peterson, Secretary of the Tribunal
For Claimant

Mr John Laskin, Torys LLP

Mr John Terry, Torys LLP

Ms Julie Maclean, Torys LLP

Prof. Christopher Greenwood, Essex Court Chambers
Ms Marianna Almeida, Vannessa Ventures Ltd.

Mr John Morgan, Vannessa Ventures Ltd.

Mr Ross Melrose, Vannessa Ventures Ltd.

For Respondent

Dr Ronald E.M. Goodman, Foley Hoag LLP

Mr Paul Reichler, Foley Hoag LLP

Ms Janis Brennan, Foley Hoag LLP

Ms Geraldine Fischer, Foley Hoag LLP

Ms Angélica Villagran-Agiiero, Foley Hoag LLP

Ms Gaela Gehring Flores, Arnold & Porter LLP

Mr Dmitri Evseev, Arnold & Porter LLP

Mr Bonard Molina-Garcia, Arnold & Porter LLP

Mr Kelby Ballena, Arnold & Porter LLP

Mr Gustavo Alvarez, Procuraduria General of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Mr Tulio F. Cusman, Asesor externo de la Procuraduria General de la Republica

24. On August 22, 2008, the Tribunal issued its decision on jurisdiction. It held that:

a) The defense raised by the Respondent that the Arbitral Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction because the Claimant has never acquired any right to the Las
Cristinas or did so in a manner not in accordance with the laws of Venezuela,
as required by Article 1(f) of the applicable bilateral investment treaty, is
joined to the merits.

b) The other three objections to jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal are
denied.

c) The allocation of the costs of this phase of the proceeding is reserved for
later.

d) The Arbitral Tribunal, after consultation with the Parties, will issue an
Order for the further procedure."

25. By letter dated August 27, 2008, the Tribunal invited the Parties to consult

regarding a timetable for the organization of the merits phase.

26. By letter dated October 16, 2008, the Centre informed the Tribunal and the Parties

that Ms Katia Yannaca-Small, ICSID Counsel, had been appointed as Secretary of the Tribunal

in replacement of Ms Claudia Frutos-Peterson. The same day, the Tribunal informed the Parties

that the hearing on the merits would take place from December 7 through 17, 2009.

27. By letter dated February 12, 2009, Claimant informed the Tribunal that the Parties

had reached an agreement regarding the schedule for the submission of written pleadings. By

Vannessa Ventures Ltd. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, (CSID Case No ARB(AF)/04/6, Dec. on

Jurisdiction (“Decision on Jurisdiction”), August 22, 2008, p. 33.

letter dated February 18, 2009, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it had no objection to the

proposed schedule for the submission of written pleadings.

28. On March 13, 2009, Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial on Merits and

Jurisdiction.

29. By letter dated July 7, 2009, Claimant informed the Tribunal that the Parties had
reached an agreement to amend the schedule for the submission of written pleadings. The

Tribunal informed the Parties on July 8, 2009 that it accepted the schedule as amended.

30. By letter dated July 28, 2009, the Centre informed the Parties of the resignation of
Dr Briner as arbitrator and president of the Tribunal due to ill health, and confirmed that the
proceeding was suspended pursuant to Article 16 of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules.
The Parties were invited to consult in order to proceed with the appointment of another presiding

arbitrator.

31. On August 21, 2009, Claimant submitted its Reply on Merits and Jurisdiction.

32. As two months had elapsed since the resignation of Dr Briner as President of the
Tribunal, by letter dated October 1, 2009, the Centre reminded the Parties that arrangements had
been made for the hearing on the merits to take place from December 7 through 17, 2009, and
requested that the Parties furnish an update regarding their discussions concerning the

appointment of a presiding arbitrator by October 5, 2009.

33. The same day, Claimant informed the Centre on behalf of both Parties that the
discussions for the replacement of Dr Briner were on going and, therefore, that it would be
impossible to hold the hearing from December 7 through 17, 2009. Claimant requested that the
arrangements for the hearing be cancelled. On October 2, 2009, the Centre informed the Parties
that it would cancel the hearing arrangements and would notify the other Tribunal members

accordingly.

34. By email dated December 15, 2009, Claimant informed the Centre that the Parties

continued to seek agreement on a new presiding arbitrator.

35. | Respondent submitted its Rejoinder on Merits and Jurisdiction on February 1,

2010.

36. By letter dated May 4, 2010, Respondent requested the discontinuance of the
proceeding pursuant to Article 50 of the Arbitration Rules alleging a lack of interest on
Claimant’s part to continue its claims. By letter of even date, Claimant objected to the

discontinuation of the proceeding.

37. By letters dated May 7, 2010, Claimant and Respondent indicated their renewed
intention to seek agreement on appointment of a presiding arbitrator. On May 27, 2010,
Claimant advised the Centre, on behalf of both Parties, that an agreement had been reached to
appoint Professor Vaughan Lowe QC, a national of the United Kingdom, as President of the

Tribunal.

38. By letter dated June 25, 2010, the Centre informed the Parties that Professor

Lowe had accepted his appointment and that the proceeding was resumed.

39. By letter dated September 9, 2010, the Centre informed the Tribunal and the
Parties that Ms Janet Whittaker, ICSID Counsel, had been appointed as Secretary of the Tribunal

in replacement of Ms Katia Yannaca-Small.

40. On November 3, 2010, the Tribunal made a proposal to the Parties to hold a two-
week hearing from September 26 through October 7, 2011. On January 12, 2011, the Tribunal
invited the Parties to confirm their availability for the hearing during the proposed dates. By
correspondence dated January 18, 2011, and January 26, 2011, the Parties informed the Tribunal
of their availability for a hearing on the proposed dates in Washington, D.C., United States of

America.

41. From September 2010 to February 2011, the Parties exchanged observations
regarding Claimant’s request to submit additional evidence in response to evidence submitted by
Respondent with its Rejoinder on Merits and Jurisdiction. On February 23, 2011, the Tribunal
issued a decision regarding Claimant’s request. On March 14, 2011, the Tribunal accorded

Respondent the opportunity to respond to the additional evidence submitted by Claimant.

42. By letter dated March 25, 2011, Respondent objected to the admission of an
expert report submitted by Claimant on March 21, 2011. By letter of June 2, 2011, the Tribunal,

having considered the submissions of the Parties, permitted Claimant to submit the expert report.

43. On July 27, 2011, the Tribunal provided the Parties with an indication of areas
where the Tribunal considered that it would have a particular interest in hearing further

submissions or might wish to put questions to the Parties.
44. On September 20, 2011, the Tribunal held a pre-hearing call with the Parties.

45. The hearing on the merits was held in Washington, D.C., United States of
America from October 3 to October 6, 2011. The following individuals were present at the

hearing:

Members of the Tribunal

Prof. Vaughan Lowe QC, President
Judge Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator
Prof. Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat
Ms Janet M. Whittaker, Secretary of the Tribunal
For Claimant

Mr John Laskin, Torys LLP

Mr John Terry, Torys LLP

Mr Yousuf Aftab, Torys LLP

Ms Rita Villanueva Meza, Torys LLP
Ms Marianna Almeida, MINCA

Mr Eric Rauguth, MINCA

Mr John Morgan, Infinito Gold

Mr John Amunrud, Infinito Gold

For Respondent

Dr Ronald E.M. Goodman, Foley Hoag LLP
Ms Janis Brennan, Foley Hoag LLP

Mr Alberto Wray, Foley Hoag LLP

Ms Mélida Hodgson, Foley Hoag LLP

Ms Tafadzwa Pasipanodya, Foley Hoag LLP
Ms Analia Gonzalez, Foley Hoag LLP

Mr Diego Cadena, Foley Hoag LLP

Dr Constantinos Salonidis, Foley Hoag LLP

Mr Yuri Parkhomenko, Foley Hoag LLP

Ms Diana Tsutieva, Foley Hoag LLP

Ms Oonagh Sands, Foley Hoag LLP

Ms Martha Madero, Foley Hoag LLP

Mr Timothy H. Hart, Credibility Consulting LLC

46. On November 22, 2011, the Parties filed their submissions on costs.

47. By letter dated November 16, 2012, the Centre informed the Tribunal and the
Parties that Ms Ann Catherine Kettlewell, ICSID Counsel, had been appointed as Secretary of
the Tribunal in replacement of Ms Janet Whittaker. By letter dated December 18, 2012, the

Tribunal declared the proceeding closed in accordance with Article 44 of the Arbitration Rules.
48. The Tribunal, having deliberated fully, makes the determinations set forth below.
THE FACTS

49. In 1990, Corporacién Venezolana de Guayana (“CVG”), a Venezuelan
Government agency which had been created in 1960 to oversee development of the Guayana
region in Bolivar State, wrote to Placer Dome Inc. (“Placer Dome” or “PDI”’), a Canadian
corporation. The letter, dated March 30, 1990, was addressed to Placer Dome in Toronto,

Canada; and it said:

Please be informed that CORPORACION VENEZOLANA DE GUAYANA
is interested in developing a mining prospectus of low law and high tonnage
located in the concessions of Las Cristinas 4, 5, 6 and 7, State of Bolivar,
Venezuela.

In order to develop this prospectus, we will work with a joint public-private
company with the participation of a company of recognized experience in
similar exploitation, which must be commercially and financially solvent,
and it must provide the technology for the open pit and underground
exploitation and metallurgical processing of ores.

We believe that the potential of the LAS CRISTINAS deposits (stockworks
and major veins) is more than 50,000,000 tons > 3 g/t of gold.

If this proposal is of interest to you, please notify us and send credentials, in
order to consider your prequalification for the referenced project. The
deadline for receipt of notification will be April 30, 1990, and you may
notify us via fax, as indicated below.

This invitation shall not create any obligation on the part of
CORPORACION VENEZOLANA DE GUAYANA or its subsidiary
companies.

Very truly yours,
[Illegible signature]

Dr Vicente Mendoza
Vice President — Mining Sector

CREDENTIALS REQUIRED:

1. LEGAL ASPECT:
- Legal registration of the Company.

2. TECHNICAL ASPECT:
- Report regarding experience in exploiting and processing metallurgical
ores, similar to that proposed above.

3. COMMERCIAL ASPECT:
- Commercial and financial aspects of the company
- profit and loss statements of the company for the past three (3) years.”

50. Placer Dome was among the companies that submitted pre-qualification
information and was one of four companies (the other three being Venezuelan)’ that participated
in a meeting with CVG in July 1990.4 Those four interested companies were subsequently
narrowed down to two by CVG, and those two were the subject of a detailed evaluation report by

CVG dated November 14, 1990.5

51. In the evaluation report, the companies were rated according to a weighted scale,
in which 25% of the points were allocated on the basis of “general information” concerning the
company. That 25% was broken down under the headings of: 1) Technical Capacity —
Research, Technicians / professionals, proprietary technologies; 2) International Experience — in
mining, in gold (underground and open pit exploitation), other; 3) Exploration and Development

/ Gold Exploitation — exploration investments, development investments, production and trends;

“ Ex. R-1.
Memorial of Vannessa Ventures Ltd., January 13, 2006 (“Claimant’s Memorial”) 4 27.

Counter-Memorial on Merits and Jurisdiction of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, March 13, 2009
(“Respondent’s Counter-Memorial”) { 23.

Ex. R-3. Cf, Respondent's Counter-Memorial §[ 29.

4) Level of Company Integration; 5) International Assoc. Method (Joint Public-Private
Companies); 6) Financial Aspects — consolidated capital, revenue from sales of gold, profits,
indebtedness, investments in new development, production costs; and 7) Motivation to Invest in

Venezuela.°

52. The remaining 75% of the points available to be awarded in the evaluation report
were allocated in respect of “relevant aspects of the offer.” That 75% was broken down under
the headings of: 1) Conditions — offer vs. contract, requirements and conditions; 2) Evaluation-
Exploration Programs of Lodes, Alluvia and Veins — schedule, estimated amount of investments,
proposed activities; 3) Expectations from Exploitation and Benefit from Lodes, Alluvia and
Veins; 4) Environmental Recovery Program; 5) Financial Support; 6) Project Management

Method; and 7) Special Benefits.’

53. Out of a possible 100 points, Placer Dome scored 86.55, and the other company

scored 76.75, in the evaluation report.

54. On November 30, 1990, CVG awarded the bid to Placer Dome.* Placer Dome’s
understanding of the relationship into which it was entering with CVG was recorded in a letter

from Placer Dome to CVG dated May 17, 1991. Placer Dome wrote as follows:

In regards to the position of chairman, we have been guided by our
understanding that CVG chose Placer Dome as the majority partner for its
proven technical and commercial capacity to develop large-scale mines and
not as a provider of technical services under contract, or as a simple technical
adviser. If this is the case, it seems logical and normal that Placer Dome
would take on the majority of the operational decisions. In January we
agreed that CVG would appoint the Director of Human Resources, the
Controller and the Secretary, but we reserved the right to appoint the general
manager, the primary finance officer and the mine manager. We assume that
CVG would like to appoint the chairman, although the operational authority
of this position is, to a certain extent, only a formality, because for the joint
company public relations and lobbying will be of great importance, and we

believe that these tasks could be best carried out by a Venezuelan appointed
by CVG?

There is no suggestion or indication that CVG disagreed with this view.

55. In April 1991, a Venezuelan company, Placer Dome de Venezuela, C.A. (“PDV”)
was incorporated by Placer B-V Limited (“PBV”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of PDI
incorporated in Barbados.'° PDV was to act as the vehicle for PDI’s investment and

participation in the exploitation of Las Cristinas.

56. On July 25, 1991, CVG and PDI entered into the 1991 Shareholders
Agreement,'' in which they agreed to form two Venezuelan companies. One, Minera Las
Cristinas C.A. (“MINCA”), was to explore and, if economically feasible, produce gold from Las
Cristinas 4, 5, 6, and 7. The other, Relaves Mineros Las Cristinas S.A. (“REMINCA”), was to

evaluate and, if economically feasible, process existing tailings at Las Cristinas 4 and 5.'”

57. The 1991 Shareholders Agreement entered into between CVG and Placer Dome
provided that 70% of the MINCA shares would be subscribed by PDV and 30% of the MINCA
shares by a wholly-owned subsidiary of CVG. In the case of REMINCA, 51% of the shares
would be subscribed by PDV and 49% by CVG. In the case of both MINCA and REMINCA,
each of PDI and CVG was stipulated to be “jointly and severally liable for the obligations of its

investor.”"?

58. The 1991 Shareholders Agreement included the following provision, in Article V:

D. Assignment; Binding Effect

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither party may assign
any of its rights or delegate any of its duties under this Agreement without
first obtaining the prior written consent of the other party which shall not be
unnecessarily withheld. This Agreement shall enure to and be binding upon

LRA,

.R-117. Cf, Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, 39.
Ex. C-5A.

2 Ex. C-5A, Preamble and Art. I.

Ex. C-SA, Art. I.A.2 and Art. 1.B.2.

each of the parties hereto and their respective successors and permitted
assigns."

59. On March 3, 1992, CVG and MINCA entered into a contract (the “Work
Contract”) under which CVG agreed that MINCA exclusively would explore, develop, and
exploit, under MINCA’s “own account and risk,” Las Cristinas 4, 5, 6, and 7.5 Clause Twenty
Eighth of the Work Contract provided that: “The parties may not assign in any manner this
agreement, except by prior written approval of the other party."

60. The Work Contract was stipulated to continue in full force for 20 years,

extendable in specified circumstances for additional 10 year terms.'7

61. In 1996, concessions for the exploitation of copper on the Las Cristinas sites (the
“Copper Concessions”) were issued by Venezuela’s Ministry of Energy and Mines (the
“MEM”) to CVG.'* This was necessary because the recovery of copper was an integral part of
the commercial plan for, and the commercial viability of, the recovery of the gold. The Copper
Concessions were subject to detailed conditions in respect of matters such as reporting to the
MEM, the training of Venezuelan personnel, the improvement of the physical, cultural, social,
and economic conditions of the population in the neighbourhood of the concessions, and the
protection and renewal of the environment. It was understood that the holding of copper rights
in the legal form of copper concessions was necessary in order that Placer Dome could arrange
guarantees for loans necessary for the exploitation of Las Cristinas.'? Rights under the Copper
Concessions were transferred to CVG in 1996, and then transferred in turn to MINCA”? in

19997!

Ex. C-5A, Art. V.D.

Ex. C-20A, Clause First.

Ex. C-20A, Clause Twenty Eighth,

Ex. C-20A, Clause Thirty First.

Ex. C-39A.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial 4] 55-56.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial {f] 73-76. See also Ex. R-67; First Witness Statement of José Antonio
Pinedo, January 10, 2006 (“First Pinedo Witness Statement”) { 51.

* Ex. C-40A.

62. Between 1992 and 1998, PDV, on behalf of MINCA, prepared a number of
feasibility studies.” By August 1, 1996, PDV had spent over US$ 50 million on the exploratory
phase and feasibility studies, and in July 1996 it estimated that the total cost for the construction

and exploitation of the Las Cristinas mine would be US$ 536.5 million.

63. CVG, which had committed to provide a power transmission line for Las
Cristinas at a cost to Venezuela of US$ 45 million, and which was due to contribute another US$
40 million, was unable to contribute further funds. Accordingly, in 1997, the 1991 Shareholders
Agreement was revised in order to increase the financial commitment and shareholding of PDV

and decrease that of CVG.

64. | MINCA was reorganized, so that PDV’s share was increased to 95% and CVG’s
share was reduced to 5%, though CVG had the option to increase its share up to 30% in the
future by making contributions. The reorganization was formalized in the 1997 Amended
Shareholders Agreement™ entered into by CVG, PDI, and PDV “in its capacity as PDI’s

i 92!
investor.”

65. — Article X of the 1997 Amended Shareholders Agreement read as follows:

ASSIGNMENT; BINDING EFFECT

Section 10.01. Assignment_of Amended Agreement: Unless otherwise
provided herein, the parties cannot assign their rights or delegate their
obligations hereunder without the other party’s prior written consent. This
Amended Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of each
contracting party, and their permitted assignees.

66. The Canada-Venezuela BIT entered into force on January 28, 1998.

67. After time spent arranging further financing, large-scale construction at Las

Cristinas was inaugurated at a ceremony attended by President Hugo Chavez on May 2, 1999.

~ First Pinedo Witness Statement { 8.
First Pinedo Witness Statement 4 16, 31.
- Ex. C-30.

“ Description of PDV given in the Preamble to the Amended Shareholders Agreement, see Ex. C-30.

At that time the price of gold had fallen to under US$ 300 per ounce.”* The falling gold price
affected the profitability of the Las Cristinas project.

68. Six weeks later, on July 15, 1999, a meeting of the MINCA Board of Directors,
which had been called by PDV, resolved to suspend the Las Cristinas project in accordance with
the 1997 Shareholders Agreement and the MINCA Bylaws (the “MINCA Bylaws”). The CVG-
appointed director voted against the suspension and MEM officials expressed their displeasure at

the decision.” It appears that exploitation of the mine never in fact began.

69. In the view of CVG, because the suspension was a unilateral, unauthorized step,
CVG had the contractual right to rescind the Work Contract if the suspension continued for more
than one year,”* i.e., beyond July 15, 2000. This view of the Work Contract appears to have been
shared by MINCA.”

70. Placer Dome sought to devise alternative plans, including a ‘staged development
plan’ (the “Phoenix Project”), for the development of Las Cristinas,*” and discussed the matter

with CVG. CVG did not accept the staged development plan. No new plan was agreed.

71. Placer Dome regarded the exploitation of the mine as not economically viable
and, according to a Placer Dome press release dated June 14, 2000, decided to suspend the
project until technology or market conditions improved. That press release also stated that
“Placer Dome will write off the carrying value of its investment in Las Cristinas, totalling $116
million, and will reclassify the property’s 7.4 million ounces of gold reserves as resources. >”

72. | MINCA sought the agreement of CVG to the extension of the suspension for a

further year, and CVG gave its agreement. An Extension Agreement was concluded by CVG,

First Pinedo Witness Statement f] 54-58.
First Pinedo Witness Statement 4 60.
See Ex. C-20A, Clause Nineteenth.

See “Las Cristinas Project. Staged Development Feasibility Study. Volume 4 — General Matters. April
2000,” prepared by MINCA in collaboration with Placer Dome Technical Services Limited, Ex C-277: p.
4.2, “The Work Contract allows MINCA to suspend the project for a period of up to 12 months. After such
period, CVG can unilaterally rescind the Work Contract.”

See, for example, Ex. R-10.
See Ex. R-15.

PDI, PDV, and MINCA on August 8, 2000 (“Extension Agreement”).*” Under the Extension
Agreement, the property would be maintained and the social programs in the Guyana region
undertaken, and the Las Cristinas project would continue; however, the mining project would be
suspended until July 14, 2001.°° CVG considered that, under this agreement, it would again be
entitled to exercise its right to cancel the Work Contract on July 15, 2001, because of the earlier

unauthorised suspension.**

73. The MINCA Board retained Scotia Capital Inc. (“Scotia”), an investment bank, in
order to locate an investor by January 31, 2001 that would complete the transaction by June 30,
2001, i.e., before the expiry of the agreed extension. The process was not smooth. In November
2000, Scotia submitted a list of 28 possible investors (Vannessa’s name was not on that list).**>
PDV considered that CVG was failing to cooperate in this effort°° CVG considered that Scotia
was insisting upon the offering of incentives to investors that were beyond CVG’s powers to
offer and that were, in CVG’s opinion, unnecessary to attract an investor.*’ Scotia suspended its
activities on March 18, 2001, and its contract was cancelled on May 18, 2001 38

74. | Subsequent events need to be read against the background of Article 9 of the
MINCA Bylaws, which established a right of pre-emption in the event that one of the
shareholders wished to sell all or part of its shareholding in MINCA. It provided that:

[...] The Shareholders shall have a preferential right to purchase the shares
that other Shareholders wish to sell for a consideration, in the proportion
which the number of shares held by each shareholder at the time the sale
offer is known bears to the total number of shares of the Company. For these
purposes, the selling Shareholder shall send a letter to the Board of Directors
of the Company informing it of the number of shares it wishes to sell, the
name of the intended buyer and the purchase price. The Board of Directors

Ex. C-60A.
First Pinedo Witness Statement 4 62-68.

Second Witness Statement of Franqui Patines, March 3, 2009. (“Second Patines Witness Statement”)
q19.

Second Patines Witness Statement 24.
First Pinedo Witness Statement 4 69-73.
Second Patines Witness Statement 4] 24-26, 32.

First Pinedo Witness Statement | 73.

shall give immediate notice of the offer to the other Shareholders, who shall
have a term of thirty (30) calendar days to exercise their preferential right.

If the other Shareholders do not exercise their preferential right, or exercise it
partially, the selling Shareholder may sell the remaining shares for a price no
lower than the price informed to the Board of Directors.

Any transfer made in violation of this Clause shall be deemed to be void and
without any effect upon the Company. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
transfers of shares to related companies, wholly-owned by Shareholders,
directly or indirectly, or by the Shareholder’s parent Company are hereby
authorized.”
75. The need to bring a new investor into MINCA remained. Mr José Antonio
Pinedo, the in-house counsel for PDV at the time and now Vice-President, General Counsel, and

Secretary of Placer Dome America, testified that:

Placer Dome decided that while it still wanted to retain an interest in Las
Cristinas and maintain the possibility of re-entering the project at some future
date, it could no longer feasibly develop the project on its own in Venezuela.
Placer Dome decided that it would seek an investor to purchase its shares in
Placer Dome Venezuela while still retaining back-in and royalty rights to the
[Las Cristinas] project.*°

Before entering into negotiations with any third party, Placer Dome offered
to sell its interest in Las Cristinas to CVG...

76. On April 17, 2001, William Hayes [sic then Placer Dome’s Executive Vice
President — United States & Latin America] attended a meeting with the president of CVG,

General Rangel Gomez, to propose the sale.*”

77. One week later, on April 25, 2001, Mr Hayes wrote to the President of CVG as

follows:

[...] I would like to confirm the interest of Placer Dome (Placer) in exploring
the possibility of an agreement with the Corporation that you preside (CVG)
to transfer to CVG the economic interest of Placer in MINCA.-

Ex. C-6A.
First Pinedo Witness Statement 4 74.
First Pinedo Witness Statement {| 75.

Id.

Ex. C-74A.

As a preliminary step, we have anticipated a viable alternative to facilitate a
transition of the Project in the form of a sale or transfer of the economic
interest of Placer in MINCA to CVG, so that CVG would become the sole
owner of MINCA.-

Placer has thought that the sale of the economic interest could be for a
determined amount which would be paid in deferred payments with the
income from the Project, if it is indeed developed by CVG, on its own, in
combination with third parties, by third parties related to it, or completely on
its own. The calculation and payment of said amount would be on the basis
of a percentage of the income from the Project, the value of the mineral
extracted, or a similar formula. To this end, Placer proposes that it be paid
5% of the income from the sale of the Project mineral, in quarterly
payments.-

It is very important that, in the event that this proposal should prove feasible,
and once both parties have defined the proposal in all its conditions
(including the approval by the respective corporate entities of CVG and
Placer), it be executed before July 15, 2001, the date on which the suspension
period of the Project expires. Beyond this date, Placer cannot continue to
cover the cost of infrastructure, facilities and social programs of the Project.-

In order for it to be completed within the desired time period this proposal
requires joint, full time, diligent and sustained work by the negotiation teams
of the parties. The Project involves many legal aspects and businesses that
need to be taken into consideration in order to resolve the aforementioned
proposal. Therefore, if CVG is interested in pursuing conversation on the
proposal, we think that the best way to do so is to immediately designate the
negotiation teams and instruct them on the need to give priority to the
discussion on this subject in order to close it on the date that we spoke of,
next May 31.-

Placer is at the disposal of CVG to initiate the negotiation of this alternative.
The aforementioned notwithstanding, Placer would like to leave other Project
negotiation options open until such a time as this operation is concluded.-

As we have stated, Placer believes that current conditions do not allow the
development of the Project as it was conceived and, as you know, MINCA
contacted Scotia Capital in search of alternatives for developing the Project,
but the results of this search were negative. However, these conditions could
change in the future. Therefore, Placer wants to offer the possibility that if no
mining project is developed in Las Cristinas after a certain period of time
past the date of the Placer interest in MINCA to CVG, Placer could reacquire
this interest for the same price as was negotiated with CVG.*

78. CVG was interested in considering Placer Dome’s proposal. On May 14, 2001,
CVG replied to Placer Dome, stating that it would create a team to evaluate the offer.* There is
no evidence that a sale price or other precise terms of sale were at any time proposed by Placer
Dome to CVG. On June 7, 2001, Placer Dome wrote again to CVG, noting that the extended
suspension would soon expire (on July 15, 2001) and proposing a meeting in Venezuela on June

14 or 15, 2001, to discuss the matter.**

79. On July 11, 2001, the president of CVG wrote to the Minister at the MEM to
make it aware of the situation with MINCA. He observed that Placer Dome had a 70% stock
participation in MINCA, and that CVG had 30%. He noted that: (i) CVG had invested US$ 110
million in the project; (ii) Placer Dome had notified CVG of its intention not to continue with the
project (including the cost of the electric transmission lines); and (iii) CVG and the MEM had
held meetings in search of an institutional consensus on ways to preserve and reactivate the
project. He noted the imminent expiry of the extended deadline, which would occur on July 15,
and said that “we find ourselves in urgent need of continuing the execution of the Las Cristinas

Mining project through the company MINCA, assuming total stock control of said company.”*°

80. On the same day, July 11, 2001, Mr Pinedo, for PDV, met Mr Franqui Patines,
then President of MINCA. Mr Patines testified that the purpose of the meeting was to inform
Placer Dome of CVG’s decision to consider Placer Dome’s proposal. He said that he was
“astonished” when he “heard Mr Pinedo’s news, that Placer Dome was about to sign an
agreement with a third party,” and that he was unaware that Placer Dome was negotiating with a

third party.*”

81. | Mr Pinedo testified that a Scotia representative had suggested that a deal with

Vannessa might be possible, that Vannessa had contacted Placer Dome with a potential offer in

First Pinedo Witness Statement 4 75.
Ex. C-76A.

Ex. C-90A (stating in Spanish at Ex. C-90: “nos vemos en la imperiosa necesidad de continuar con la
ejecucién del proyecto Minero Las Cristinas a través de la empresa MINCA, asumiendo el control
accionario total de la misma”).

Second Patines Witness Statement 35.

20

April 2001, and that Placer Dome and Vannessa had met that month in New York. He wrote

that:

We met for the entire day and by the end of the meeting we had worked out
the essential elements of a deal for Placer Dome to transfer its shares in
Placer Dome de Venezuela to Vannessa. Placer Dome understood that once
the deal was in place Vannessa would begin work on the Las Cristinas
Project immediately through a $50 million staged development plan.
Vannessa had a workable plan that could be implemented immediately. ...
Placer Dome had confidence in Vannessa because Placer Dome had entered
into a deal with it in the past for a mine in Costa Rica....

During this negotiation period, Placer Dome maintained its offer with the
CVG. Placer Dome told Vannessa that until a deal was finalized between
Placer Dome and Vannessa, the CVG retained its option to accept Placer
Dome’s offer. Placer Dome told the CVG that it was considering offers from
third parties and, as a result, the CVG should act upon its offer quickly. But
it did not specifically advise the CVG of its negotiations with Vannessa and
was not required to do so under any of its agreements with the CVG.

There is no evidence in the record of any detailed technical or financial

presentation made by Vannessa to Placer Dome before July 2001. Indeed, there is no document

in evidence that records Vannessa’s detailed technical or financial plans for the Las Cristinas

project at all. Questioned by the Tribunal, counsel for Claimant was unable to identify any such

presentation or plans.

The only document in evidence that indicates even the possibility of financial

backing for Vannessa is a letter dated May 25, 2001, from Mr L. B. Gordon, President of Coril

Holdings Ltd, a Canadian global investment and management company, which had received

assets worth in excess of $2 billion in 1998 and 1999.” The letter, which contains no firm

undertaking to finance Vannessa, read as follows:

To Project Owner
Dear Sirs,

Re:__Vannessa Ventures Ltd (Vannessa’

First Pinedo Witness Statement {ff 80-81.

Ex. R-18, see also Respondent's Rejoinder § 959.

21

84.

Coril Holdings Ltd (“Coril”) is interested in providing financing to Vannessa
regarding the development projects of Vannessa ranging from US$ 15
million and higher, in accordance with a feasibility study acceptable to Coril
and on terms satisfactory to Coril.

Coril, through predecessor subsidiary companies, has a lengthy and
successful history in the mining industry in North America and has the
experience and financial capacity to invest in mining development projects.

Coril is a major shareholder of Vannessa and as such is very interested in
providing support to Vannessa in its initiatives to develop resources. In an
agreement with Vannessa, Coril has a right of first refusal to provide any
future debt, equity or other financing proposed to be undertaken by
Vannessa. Coril remains committed to maintaining this position in
Vannessa.

Should you require any further information, please do not hesitate to contact
me at [telephone number].

Yours truly,
[sgd]

L.B. Gordon
President™®

July 13, 2001 was a Friday and the last business day before the expiry of the

extended suspension on July 15, 2001. On July 13, 2001, Placer Dome finalized its agreement

with Vannessa in the Original Transaction Agreement. According to Section 1.01 of this

Agreement, all of the shares of PDV held by PBV, together with loans of over $68,000,000 made
by PDV to MINCA, were bought for a total of US$ 50.*! Section 2.04 of the Agreement

recorded that:

85.

[E]ach of the Vannessa Signatories acknowledges that the purchase of the
PBV Interests is on an ‘as-is/where-is’ basis and ‘with all faults’ and that the
consideration for the purchase of the PBV Interests is a reasonable and
adequate valuation thereof.”

In the Original Transaction Agreement, Vannessa agreed that it would

“automatically assume all obligations of Placer, PBV, and all other Indemnified Persons” (i.e.,

Id.

Ex. C-4, Art. II, Section 2.02(a). To be precise, the shares were bought for US$ 25, and the loans advanced
by PDV to MINCA, totaling over £68m, were bought for US$ 25.

Ex. C-4, Art. II, Section 2.04,

22

all past, present and future Subsidiaries and Affiliates of PDI other than PDV and MINCA, and

all officers, directors, shareholders, counsel, etc.)

86. The Original Transaction Agreement made provision for a number of possible
scenarios. It provided for payment of a percentage of revenues to PBV if Vannessa exploited
Las Cristinas.** It gave PBV irrevocable options to repurchase the MINCA interests in certain

circumstances, including (according to Section 4.01 (a)(i)):

(B) the occurrence of any of the following, other than as a result, direct or
indirect, of any act or omission by Vannessa or any of its affiliates
(including, without limitation, MINCA, PDV and Vannessa Barbados) and
provided that Vannessa is not then using its best efforts to cure or to
vigorously contest the validity or consequence of such matter, or is not
pursuing or exercising all rights and remedies with respect thereto to the best
of its ability: any loss or material breach of the Work Contract or the Copper
Concession, or any cancellation, revocation, rescission or termination
thereof, or any determination or claim that the Work Contract or the Copper
Concession was void ab initio, unconstitutional, invalid, unenforceable,
illegal or ultra vires, or any notice, claim or allegation of any of the
foregoing; (C) a Change of Control or proposed Change of Control of
Vannessa ....*°

87. The Original Transaction Agreement also gave PBV an irrevocable right of first

refusal in the event of a proposed sale by Vannessa of its interests.*°

88. The final section of the Original Transaction Agreement contemplated, not
exploitation of Las Cristinas under the Work Contract, but rather suing Venezuela for breach of
the Work Contract. It provided for the division between Vannessa and PBV of any damages

recovered by Vannessa in litigation such as the present. It read as follows:

Section 8.19 Distribution of Recovery Proceeds. If Vannessa (or any of its
Affiliates) is permitted to contest or otherwise exercise rights or pursue
remedies with respect to any Action referred to in Section 4.01 (a)(i)(B), the
Parties hereby agree that (a) no settlement or compromise with respect
thereto shall be made except with the prior consent of PVB; (b) Vannessa (or

Ex. C-4, Art. II, Section 2.02(b).
Ex. C-4, Art. III, Section 3.01.

Ex. C-4, Art. IV, Section 4.01(a)(i). The term “Change of Control” is defined in great detail in Art. I of the
Original Transaction Agreement.

Ex. C-4, Art. IV, Section 4.01(a)(ii).

23

its Affiliates) shall be solely responsible for all legal and other costs and
expenses relating to the conduct of such contest, exercise of rights or pursuit
of remedies, as the case may be (collectively, “Action Costs”); and (c) all
damages, settlement or compromise amounts, costs and expenses
(collectively, the “Recovered Amounts”) recovered by Vannessa and all of
its Affiliates with respect to such Action shall be applied in the following
order of priority: (i) to pay all Action Costs, (ii) any Recovered Amounts
remaining thereafter shall be shared equally between Vannessa and PBV;
provided that the aggregate amount of all Recovered Amounts applied in the
manners described in sub-clauses (i) and (ii) shall not exceed U.S. $
10.000.000 and (iii) any remaining Recovered Amounts remaining thereafter
shall be shared between Vannessa and PBV ina ratio equal to 1:3.°7

The broad aim of the Original Transaction Agreement appears to have been that

PDI would transfer its responsibilities in respect of Las Cristinas to Vannessa, but retain a right

to resume its participation in the project or to share in any profits from the Project or to share in

any damages resulting from the present case or similar litigation.

with Vannessa by fax.*

8

Vannessa’s letter read as follows:

37

58

Mr Alvaro Silva Calderén

Minister of Energy and Mines,

His Office.

Greetings from the company directors.

We hereby wish to introduce ourselves. We are a Canadian public company,
with investments in Venezuela since 1993, and we are very pleased to
expand our interests in the country through the purchase of the Placer Dome
de Venezuela company by Vannessa Ventures.

We made this purchase for the purpose of developing the Las Cristinas
project, and make it profitable, sustained and sustainable in time, adapting
ourselves to the disadvantages of the current economy.

Our company has not been heavily promoted in the country. However, we
have the necessary technical and financial capability, in addition to the
corporate mentality, to develop the project and reach the required levels. We

Ex. C-4, Art. VIIL, Section 8.19.
First Pinedo Witness Statement {ff 83-85.

On the same day, July 13, 2001, Placer Dome informed CVG of the transaction
Again on July 13, 2001, Vannessa Ventures Ltd. wrote to the MEM.

24

are sure that you will be satisfied with our achievement of the social and
economic interests in the region.

Although Vannessa Ventures is a young company, our directors have more
than thirty (30) years experience in ‘large scale’ mining in several countries
around the world.

We would like to set up, through this channel, a meeting with you and some
of your directors,* in order to present our company, and acquaint you with
our work plans.

We are sure that we can rely on your support to achieve the proposed goals
and benefits.

Sincerely
[Sed]

91. Aslightly more detailed account appeared on Canada Newswire on the same day:

Placer Dome Inc. is pleased to announce that its indirect wholly owned
subsidiary, Placer B-V Limited (PBV), has entered into an agreement to sell
all of the shares of Placer Dome de Venezuela C.A. (PDV) to a subsidiary of
Vannessa Ventures Ltd. of Vancouver, Canada. PDV holds a majority
interest in Mineras Las Cristinas (MINCA), the corporation formed to
develop the Las Cristinas property in Bolivar State, Venezuela.

PBV will retain an interest in the gold and copper revenues generated by the
Las Cristinas property and will, under certain circumstances, have the right to
re-acquire the shares. If PBV re-acquires the shares, Vannessa will be
entitled to an interest in the gold and copper revenues. MINCA suspended
construction on Las Cristinas in 1999 due to low metal prices and Placer
Dome wrote off the carrying value of its investment in mid-2000."'

92. On Saturday July 14, 2001, Mr Rauguth, for Vannessa, wrote to CVG. The letter

read as follows:

I respectfully write to you in order to notify you that, in addition to the
content of the correspondence sent this past Friday, in which we state our
decision to develop the mining concession Las Cristinas, Kilometer 88, State
of Bolivar. I would also like to apologize for the delay in making you aware

The Tribunal notes that the English translation provided by Respondent of Ex. R-145 is different as to the
reference to “your directors” in the Spanish original which says “Nos gustaria, a través de esta
comunicacién, concretar una reunién con su persona y algunos de nuestros directivos,...” (emphasis
added). Therefore, this part should be translated as “our directors.”

 

Ex. R-145.
Ex. C-93.

25

of our existence and intention vis-a-vis the project of the aforementioned
mining concession. The delay in signing the negotiation between our parent
company Vannessa Ventures Ltd., and the selling company Placer Dome,
which was totally out of our control, prevented us from any public statement.

Therefore, we are asking for a vote of confidence toward our company and
offer the assurance of our wish for a peaceful and prosperous coexistence
between Vannessa Ventures Ltd. and the national community at large.

[Sgd]
Erich Rauguth.

93. On the same day, July 14, 2001, Mr Rangel Gomez of CVG wrote to Mr Hayes of

Placer Dome. The letter read as follows:

TO: Board of Directors, Placer Dome de Venezuela, Caracas.

In relation to communication WMH-C-072/2001 of July 13 of this year,
signed by Mr. William M Hayes, President of Placer Dome for Latin
America, in which he informs this Corporation of a transaction between
Placer Dome de Venezuela and ICH [sic. sc. IHC] Corp., the latter a
subsidiary of Vannessa Ventures Ltd. I would like to inform you that the
Venezuelan Guyana Corporation does not acknowledge or agree with the
share sales agreement with the aforementioned company, or any other
company, that may have taken place in violation of the terms and conditions
established in the Modified Shareholders Agreement, the Extension
Agreement and the legal norms that regulate the matter and, therefore, the
relations in our country of this transnational company could be seriously
impaired.°

94. On July 16, 2001, Mr Rauguth, for Vannessa, wrote to Mr Pinedo, for MINCA, as

follows:

Please undertake to inform the CVG that MINCA has made, subject to
approval of the MINCA Board of Directors, a management decision on
request of IHC Corp, a subsidiary of Vannessa Ventures Ltd and the new
owner, the shares of Placer Dome de Venezuela, to undertake all necessary
steps to place the Cristinas Property in commercial production with financing
arranged by Vannessa Ventures Ltd. [sic].

Ex. C-96A.
Ex. C-98.

Ex. C-100 and cf, Ex. C-101A (communicating MINCA’s decision by Mr Pinedo to the Principal and
Alternate MINCA Directors).

26

95. Mr Pinedo summoned members of the MINCA Board to hear the IHC Corp
proposal, but Mr Patines and Mr Madeo, the Directors representing CVG, did not attend “since
CVG does not acknowledge and rejects the sale agreement of shares regarding the

aforementioned company.”*

96. On July 20, 2001, Mr Rangel Gémez wrote to Mr Hayes, saying that: (i) he had
met MINCA representatives that morning; (ii) he considered that “Placer Dome unilaterally, and
in our opinion, behind the back of the Republic ... negotiated in an indirect and biased manner
with third parties” to sell its shares in MINCA “without informing [CVG] or making any formal

and legal offers;” and (iii) “it would be desirable for Placer Dome to take a look at such an

unpleasant and insincere negotiation so that we may resume conversations, if you so desire, in a

more transparent manner.”°°

97. Later in July 2001, further agreements were made by Placer Dome and Vannessa
to complete the sale of Placer Dome’s interests to Vannessa, and PDV was renamed Vannessa de

Venezuela C.A.°”

98. On August 6, 2001, CVG gave 90 days’ notice of its intention to rescind the Work
Contract with MINCA. CVG’s letter enumerated various acts and omissions that it considered
to be justifications for this rescission, including: (i) the failure to file reports as required by
Clause Ninth of the Work Contract; (ii) MINCA’s failure to end the suspension of work at Las
Cristinas in accordance with Clause Nineteenth of the Work Contract and the subsequent
extension, which expired on July 15, 2001; and (iii) the transfer by Placer Dome of its shares in
PDV to Vannessa Ventures Ltd, without the written authorization of CVG, which CVG said was

required by the Work Contract.”

Ex. C-103A.

Ex. C-284A.

Ex. C-4; Ex, C-286A; Ex. R-21; Ex. R-138; Ex. R-139; and Ex. R-140.
Ex. C-109A. See also Ex. C-20A, Clause Twenty Sixth.

Ex. C-20A, Clause Ninth.

The letter refers to Clause Twenty Fifth of the Work Contract, which deals with waiver of breaches and the
voiding of contractual provisions. The requirement for written authorization in fact appears in Clause

27

99. There were several exchanges of views between the interested parties, but the
dispute was not settled. In one such exchange, Mr Rauguth, writing as President of MINCA,
requested arbitration of the dispute under Clause Twenty Sixth of the Work Contract; but that

request was not taken up.”! It is not necessary to rehearse those exchanges in detail here.

100. On November 6, 2001, CVG formally notified MINCA of the termination of the
Work Contract and gave it seven days to vacate the Las Cristinas site.” On November 16, 2001,

CVG took physical possession of the site and of certain associated physical assets.”

101. In 2002, various measures were taken under the law of Venezuela to cancel the
concessions and transfer control of the rights under them to the Government of Venezuela. It is

not necessary to rehearse them in detail.”

102. In May 2002, the MEM authorized CVG to enter into operation agreements with
third parties for the exploitation of Las Cristinas. In July 2002, CVG considered bids from five
companies and, in September 2002, CVG announced that it had reached an agreement with

Crystallex, a Canadian company, for the exploitation and development of Las Cristinas.”

103. | MINCA, now controlled by Vannessa, brought ten sets of legal proceedings in the
Venezuelan courts to protect its rights to Las Cristinas and to nullify the CVG-Crystallex

agreement as follows:

(i) a constitutional petition filed on September 11, 2001, to protect
MINCA’s property and enforce the arbitration provisions in the work
contract. On November 8, 2001, the court held the application inadmissible;
and on March 19, 2002, that decision was confirmed by the Supreme Court.

(ii) a constitutional petition filed on November 16, 2001, to prevent CVG
taking over the Las Cristinas site. On February 19, 2002, the court held that

 

Twenty Eighth, which stipulates that “[t]he parties may not assign in any manner this agreement, except by
prior written approval of the other party.” See Ex. C-20A, Clause Twenty Eighth.

Ex. C-145,
Ex. C-148A.

First Witness Statement of Erich Rauguth, July 22, 2009 (“First Rauguth Witness Statement”) {| 87.
Ex. C-166A; Ex. C-167A; Ex. C-172A; and Ex. C-173A.

Claimant’s Memorial $f] 180-84.

28

it was the wrong forum; and on April 30, 2002, the second court declined to
admit the application.

(iii) a constitutional petition filed on January 18, 2002, challenging
MINCA’s termination of the Work Contract and seeking an injunction to
prevent CVG disposing of MINCA’s rights. On March 20, 2002, the court
held the application inadmissible because it was a contractual and not a
constitutional matter. An appeal was rejected on February 26, 2003.

(iv) an action filed on May 3, 2002, with requests for interim relief, seeking
nullification of CVG’s decision to terminate the Work Contract. The case
was withdrawn in July 2004, by which time it had proceeded to the
evidentiary stage.

(v) an action filed on May 13, 2002, with requests for interim relief, seeking
nullification of a MEM decision of March 8, 2002, reassuming rights to the
Las Cristinas gold concessions. The case was admitted by the court on July
7, 2004.

(vi) an action filed on May 15, 2002, with requests for interim relief, seeking
nullification of the Presidential Decree of April 2002 relating to the gold
concessions. The case was admitted on July 17, 2002. On May 11, 2004, the
court decided that the case should proceed to the evidentiary stage.

(vii) an action filed on May 30, 2002, seeking to compel CVG to attend
arbitration. On July 15, 2004, the court declined to admit the application.

(viii) an action filed on September 26, 2002, with requests for interim relief,
seeking nullification of an MEM decision of March 8, 2002, cancelling
MINCA’s copper concession. The court had made no decision on
admissibility by the time that Vannessa filed its Request for Arbitration on
July 9, 2004.

(ix) an action filed on November 14, 2002, seeking to nullify the
CVG/Crystallex agreement. The case was admitted by the court on March
27, 2003. An appeal by Crystallex had not been dealt with by the time that
Vannessa filed its Request for Arbitration on July 9, 2004.

(x) an action filed on September 11, 2003, seeking nullification of the
Presidential Decree of March 2003 relating to the Copper Concessions.”°

104. | Between December 2001 and 2003, MINCA also made a series of requests to the

Venezuelan National Assembly and to the Fiscalia (Prosecutor’s Office)” to investigate various

16

Claimant’s Memorial {fj 185-200.

See Respondent’s Counter-Memorial {¥] 221f, 489f. Claimant refers to the “Fiscalia” as the “Attorney

General.”

29

aspects of the Las Cristinas matter.’* None led to any report or action that Vannessa regarded as

an impartial and satisfactory upholding of its rights.

105. On July 9, 2004, Vannessa filed its Request for Arbitration. It claimed monetary

damages in an amount not less than US$ 1,045,000,000 plus compound interest.”
106. In paragraph 344 of its Memorial, Claimant requested:

(a) a declaration that Venezuela had unlawfully expropriated Vannessa’s
investments in Venezuela contrary to Article VII of the BIT;

(b) a declaration that Venezuela had failed to accord investments of
Venezuela [sic. sc. of Vannessa] fair and equitable treatment and full
protection and security contrary to Article II(2) of the BIT;

(c) restitution of its unlawfully expropriated investments as well as monetary
damages for deterioration or loss of those assets, for lost profits caused by
delay of the development of Las Cristinas, and for expenses incurred by
MINCA, Vannessa Venezuela and Vannessa to defend their rights and
interests, plus compound interest;

(d) in lieu of restitution, monetary damages in an amount to be determined
plus compound interest;

(e) all of its costs, including tribunal costs, in bringing these proceedings; and

(f) such further and other relief that Vannessa may claim and the Tribunal
grant.

107. Similarly, in paragraph 639 of its Reply, Claimant reiterated

[...] its requests for relief set out at paragraph 344 of its Memorial, including
its request for restitution of MINCA’s right to mine gold and copper at Las
Cristinas, or, in lieu of restitution, an award equal to its past and future losses
as at the date of the Tribunal’s award, calculated by reference to current
information, for the damages caused by Venezuela’s breaches of the Bilateral
Investment Treaty described in this Reply. Vannessa also claims all of its
costs, including Tribunal costs, in bringing these proceedings.

108. In paragraph 588 of its Counter-Memorial, Respondent requested that “Claimant’s

claims should be dismissed in their entirety and Venezuela should be awarded compensation for

% Claimant’s Memorial 4] 209-30.

” Request for Arbitration | 102.

30

all the expenses and costs associated with defending against these claims.” The same request

was made in paragraph 1013 of Respondent’s Rejoinder.
I. JURISDICTION
109. In its Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal (then differently constituted):

[N]ote[d] that the main defense of the Respondent, namely that the transfer
of the PDV shares constituted a breach of the Shareholders Agreement of the
MINCA By-Laws and therefore rendered the transfer null and void with the
result that the Claimant never acquired property in the MINCA shares is
likely to constitute a defense on the merits of the case. At the same time, the
Respondent alleges as a jurisdictional objection that this transfer was
unlawful under Venezuelan law within the meaning of the BIT according to
which the investment must be “in accordance with the laws of Venezuela.”

For convenience, we refer to the requirement set out in the italicized words as the “legality
requirement.” The requirement derives from Article I(f) of the BIT, which stipulates that:
‘[I]Jnvestment’ means any kind of asset owned or controlled by an investor of
one Contracting Party either directly or indirectly, including through an

investor of a third State, in the territory of the other Contracting Party in
accordance with the latter’s laws.

110. In light of the complexity of the issues of Venezuelan law involved and the
possible relevance of Venezuelan law to both jurisdictional and merits questions, the Tribunal
concluded in its Decision on Jurisdiction that “justice is better served if this objection to the

competence of the Tribunal is joined to the merits.”*!

111. The present Tribunal has considered the position in light of the law applicable to
each of the instruments relevant to its decision. The Tribunal is satisfied that it is the law of
Venezuela that is the governing law of the Shareholders’ Agreement, of the Amended
Shareholders’ Agreement, of the Work Contract and of the Extension Agreement, as well as of
the MINCA By-Laws. It was not argued that any other legal system operated as the governing

law in respect of these instruments. The BIT is governed by public international law.

so Decision on Jurisdiction, p. 22.

st Id., p. 23.

31

112. The Tribunal is unanimous in deciding that Claimant’s claims are to be rejected in
their entirety. As is explained below, the Tribunal finds that Placer Dome’s sale and Claimant’s
acquisition of its interest in MINCA was incompatible with the legal relationship between PDI
and Venezuela, reflected in the Shareholders’ Agreements of 1991 and 1997, and confirmed by
Article 9 of the MINCA Bylaws (set out above.).** The termination of the Work Contract and
the taking of the associated steps to terminate PDI’s interests in Las Cristinas were measures
justified by PDI’s breach of its agreements with CVG, from which Claimant’s legal interests in
this case derived, and in particular from PDI’s breach of the Extension Agreement. None of the

steps taken by Venezuela amounted to a breach of the BIT.

113. | While the Tribunal is unanimous in holding that Claimant’s claims are to be
rejected in their entirety, it is not unanimous in all of the steps in the reasoning that lead to that
conclusion. The majority of the Tribunal considers that the Tribunal has jurisdiction in this case
and that the claims fail because, on the facts of this case, Respondent’s treatment of the
investment does not constitute a breach of the Treaty. One of us considers that, on the facts of
this case, there was no good-faith investment and that the BIT does not cover investments not
made in good faith, and accordingly the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction. The majority accepts that
good faith has an important role in the analysis but considers that, in the absence of a treaty
provision ascribing some different effect to the principle of good faith, it is only in circumstances
where the application of good faith as a principle of national law invalidates the acquisition of
the investment that a lack of good faith means that there is no “investment” for jurisdictional
purposes. In other circumstances, the question of good faith does not go to jurisdiction but is a
matter to be considered by the Tribunal when exercising its jurisdiction and to be applied in the
context of admissibility and/or the application of the substantive protections of the Treaty at the

merits phase.

114. | These divergences in view are reflected in the following paragraphs. However,
all members of the Tribunal have subscribed to this Award, on the basis that the decision on
jurisdiction is carried by the majority, and that the member who dissented on the question of

jurisdiction considers that, on the premise that jurisdiction exists, Claimant’s claims are to be

See 474 above.

32

rejected in their entirety for the reasons that are set out below in the section of the analysis that

addresses the merits of this case.

115. The analysis begins by addressing the jurisdictional issues. It addresses the
question whether there was an investment within the meaning of the BIT, and it does so in two
steps, starting with the question whether there was an “investment” in “any asset”, and then
moving to the question whether the alleged investment was “owned or controlled . . . in

accordance with the [host State’s] laws.” The merits of the claim are considered afterwards.
A. Definition of “Investment” Step One: “any kind of asset...”
1. Respondent’s Position

116. At the outset, Respondent considers that the issue of the existence of an
“investment” has not yet been decided by the Tribunal. It also takes the view that the definition
of an “investment” in the ICSID Convention can be applied in this particular arbitration. It says
that while the Additional Facility Rules differ from the ICSID Convention in important respects
(particularly regarding ratione personae jurisdiction), the Additional Facility Rules do not bar,
and in fact require, the application of the definition of “investment” that is applicable under the
ICSID Convention. It says that Claimant’s investment does not satisfy the so-called “Salini”
criteria for an investment to exist:** i.e., “contributions, certain duration of performance of the
contract and a participation in the risks of the transaction ... [and a] contribution to the economic

development of the host State.”*4

2. Claimant’s Position

117. Claimant argues that the definition of “investment” under the ICSID Convention
is irrelevant for the present arbitration, which is conducted under the Additional Facility Rules.
It emphasises the legal and conceptual distinctiveness of arbitration under the ICSID Convention

and arbitration under the Additional Facility Rules, which it says precludes the transposition of

8 Rejoinder on Merits and Jurisdiction of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, February 1, 2010

(“Respondent’s Rejoinder”) §| 600-50. See also Respondent’s Counter-Memorial {| 368-80; Tr. Day
3:722-31 (Goodman).

Salini Costruttori S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4, Decision on Jurisdiction, July
23, 2001, 452. Cf, Schreuer et al, The ICSID Convention. A Commentary, 2"! ed. (2009), | 152-74.

33

the definition of “investment” from the former regime to the latter. In any event, Claimant

asserts that its investment would satisfy even the strictest version of the definition.*°
3. The Tribunal’s Decision

118. The question whether there is an “investment” within the meaning of the BIT is a

question that must be answered by reference in the first place to the BIT.

119. There is no doubt that Claimant, a Canadian company, bought shares in PDV, a
Venezuelan company, for the price of US$ 50 and “owned or controlled” those shares in PDV
within the meaning of Article I(f) of the BIT. Ownership or control of shares is listed in Article
I(f)(ii) of the BIT as one of the examples of an asset whose ownership or control can constitute

an investment.

120. Accordingly, it appears on the face of it that Claimant’s ownership of shares in
PDV could amount to an “investment” in PDV. There are, however, other aspects of Claimant’s
interest that must be considered before the question of the existence of jurisdiction under the BIT

in respect of the claim in this case is definitively answered.

121. The Tribunal had serious concerns about the nature and extent of Claimant’s
interest in Venezuela, and about the distinction between the making of an investment and the
buying of a legal claim against the host State. The purely nominal purchase price (US$ 50) of its

shareholding in PDV and its interest in the loans to MINCA® is a notable feature of this case.

122. The nominal purchase price does not of itself necessarily indicate that there was
no real investment by Claimant. It is not unusual for the bulk of costs and benefits of an
investment in a licence or concession to arise after the date of the licence or concession contract,
in the form of contractually-obligated expenditure on the investment and of royalty and tax
payments. (That possibility does, however, underline the importance of the continuing
confidence of the contracting partners in one another, and emphasizes the great importance of the
identity of the contracting partners.)

85

Claimant’s Reply Memorial 4 479-85; Tr. Day 2:370-77 (Terry); Tr. Day 4:837 (Terry).

* See fn. 51 above.

34

123. In the present case, however, Claimant’s nominal payment for the shareholding
occurred in a context that included the terms of the Original Transaction Agreement (and, in
particular, Section 8.19 thereof, providing for the distribution between Vannessa and PBV of any
proceeds recovered in this litigation),*’ and the absence of any concrete technical or financial
preparations on the part of Claimant such as could have enabled it at least to begin the
resumption of operations at the Las Cristinas site promptly after its acquisition of the shares in
PDV. Taken together, these factors make it debatable whether Claimant can properly be

regarded as having made an investment in mining in Venezuela.

124. Consideration of the commercial stature and position of Vannessa at that time
does not assuage this concern. Claimant says that Mr Rauguth, the founder of Vannessa, was a
mining engineer with knowledge and experience of the mining industry in Venezuela. It says
that Vannessa, while a small company lacking in-house financial and technical capabilities, and
having no track record of commercially-successful mining, did possess experience and contacts
that could have made it possible for it to draw together the resources required to exploit the
opportunities in Las Cristinas. Respondent, on the other hand, viewed Vannessa as a small,
speculative enterprise, noting that it had not been included among the 28 potential investors
identified by Scotia in November 2000, and that it was lacking in mining and processing
experience and had no operating revenues, cash flow, or relevant technical expertise.** It was
accepted by both sides that Vannessa had put forward no detailed plans of work whatever for Las
Cristinas, and had secured neither the funding nor the equipment necessary to begin immediate

work at the site in the summer of 2001.

125. There is more than one way in which these factors might be addressed, and more
than one way in which any lack of good faith might put a putative “investment” outside of the
scope of BIT protections. The “reality” or “genuineness” of the investment and the good faith of
the investor are matters that might bear upon questions of jurisdiction, upon questions of

admissibility, and upon questions of merits.

"7 See 4 88 above.

Memorial on Jurisdiction of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, August 28, 2006 (“Respondent’s

Memorial on Jurisdiction”) { 6.

35

126. Article I of the BIT requires that in order to qualify as an “investor” a national or
enterprise of one BIT Contracting Party must own or control, directly or indirectly, an asset of
any kind (including shares or any other form of participation in a company, business enterprise
or joint venture) in the territory of the other Contracting Party in accordance with the latter’s
laws. Article I does not explicitly assert that there is, beyond the requirement that the asset be
owned or controlled in accordance with the host State’s laws, a further requirement that the
putative investment must qualify as a “genuine” or “substantial” investment in order to fall

within the definition in Article I(f) of the BIT.

127. The Tribunal considers that the requirement in Article I(f) of the BIT that the
asset be “owned or controlled ... in accordance with the latter’s laws” is the next focus of
attention in the analysis. As was explained above,” one of us would have rejected the claim on
the ground that there was no good-faith investment made by the Claimant in this case—good
faith being a principle of Venezuelan law—and that the alleged investment fell, therefore,
outside the scope of Article I of the BIT. The majority considers that the claim should not be
rejected on the ground that the Claimant's investment was not made in good faith, because good

faith is not an independent element of the definition of a protected investment in the BIT.

B. Definition of “Investment” Step Two: “asset owned or controlled ... in
accordance with” the host State’s laws

1. Respondent’s Position

128. Respondent considers that Claimant’s interpretation of Article I(f) (see below) as
a provision that is concerned only with the ownership of the asset is contrary to the duty to
interpret the Treaty in good faith. Respondent argues that investments that are “unlawful” under
domestic law cannot be protected under international investment law, and that the entitlement of
investments to MEN treatment does not affect the prior question of the definition of the term

“investment” itself.°? Respondent further emphasises that the ‘legality requirement’ demands

* See 4113 above.

Respondent's Rejoinder 460-71. See also Tr. Day 3:706-10 (Goodman on why the argument about
investments “owned” rather than “made” should be rejected); Tr. Day 3:710-12 and Tr. Day 3:715-16
(Goodman on the MEN treatment argument).

36

conduct in good faith, both under Venezuelan Civil Law and, more broadly, as a paramount

principle governing contractual relations.”!

129. In the oral proceedings, Respondent argued that the expression “laws of
Venezuela” is not restricted to the type of legal rules formally defined as law (i.e., statutes,
decrees, efc.), which is what Claimant had submitted, but includes “all of the legal system.”
That inclusive view would extend to contractual obligations in instruments such as the
Shareholders’ Agreement and Amended Shareholders’ Agreement, the Work Contract, and the
August 8, 2000 agreement (Extension Agreement) to suspend the performance of the Work

Contract for one year beginning on July 15, 2000.
2. Claimant’s Position

130. In Claimant’s Reply on Merits and Jurisdiction, two preliminary points are raised
regarding the requirement under Article I(f) of the Canada-Venezuela BIT that the investment be
“in accordance with the latter’s [the other contracting party’s] laws.” Claimant points out that
the BIT requires the investment to be “owned”, rather than “made”, in accordance with the laws
of the host State,”’ and argues that this requirement was satisfied in this case by the registration
with the Venezuelan Mercantile Registry of the books of the company recording the transfer of
shares in Placer Venezuela to Vannessa Barbados and the renaming of Placer Venezuela as

Vannessa Venezuela, without any objection by Venezuela, in July 2006.”

131. | Moreover, Claimant invokes the MFN treatment rules in Article III(1) and (2) of
the Canada-Venezuela BIT to rely on what it says is the more favourable treatment in the
Venezuela-UK BIT, which does not have the “legality requirement” in its definition of an

“investment.”

Respondent's Rejoinder §f] 472-79; Tr. Day 3:713-15 (Goodman).
Tr. Day 2:478-79 (Wray).

Claimant’s Reply $f 287-91.

Claimant’s Reply $f] 292-96. See also Tr. Day 1:29-33 (Laskin).

Claimant’s Reply $f] 297-98. See also Tr. Day 1:33-37 and 1:67-69 (Laskin).

37

132. At the oral proceedings, in response to a question by the Tribunal, Claimant
argued specifically that “a violation of a contract is not, ipso facto, a violation of the law.””°
Claimant also argued that the “legality requirement” is limited in its application to breaches of
fundamental principles of law and of laws concerning foreign investments, and that it does not
apply so as to bar the existence of jurisdiction in circumstances where that would be a
disproportionate response to a breach of the law.”’ An example might be late compliance with a
requirement for registration of a share transfer that is not otherwise forbidden by the local law:

such a breach, in Claimant’s view, should not necessarily bar jurisdiction under the BIT.
3. The Tribunal’s Decision

133. As far as the MFN provision is concerned, the Tribunal considers that the MFN
treatment under the Canada-Venezuela BIT is promised to investments as defined in Article I of
the BIT. The benefit of the MFN provision in Article III of the Canada-Venezuela BIT can only
be asserted in respect of investments that are within the scope of Article I(f) of the Canada-
Venezuela BIT to begin with. The MFN clause cannot be used to expand the category of

investments to which the Canada-Venezuela BIT applies.

134. The Tribunal considers that the reference to a host State’s “laws” (“lois de
[l'autre partie contractante],” “leyes de [la otra Parte Contratante]”) in Article I(f) of the BIT
is a reference to the laws and regulations made by, or under the authority of, the public
authorities of the State, and does not extend to purely contractual obligations. The Tribunal
reaches this conclusion by giving the term “laws” / “lois” / “leyes” its plain and ordinary
meaning, in circumstances where Respondent did not demonstrate that the term should be given

a different meaning.

135. That ordinary meaning points to laws made by the host State, and not to
obligations created under the law by private persons. The Tribunal accordingly decides that,

even if the transfer of shares in PDV to Claimant involved a breach of the contractual

*° Tr. Day 1:38 (Laskin). See generally Tr. Day 1:37-43 (Laskin).

” Tr. Day 1:43-47 (Laskin).

38

stipulations in the Shareholders Agreement, such breaches would not constitute a violation of

Venezuela’s “laws” for the purposes of BIT Article I(f).

136. The arguments relating to the “legality requirement” were developed further by
the Parties in the specific contexts of: (i) constraints applicable as a matter of Venezuelan
contract law and the doctrine of intuitu personae contracts; (ii) Venezuelan law on public
procurement and administrative contracts; (iii) the principles of good faith and public policy; and
(iv) Venezuelan Decree 2095. We address these in turn, in light of our decision on the meaning

of “[host State] laws.”

Cc. Constraints on the Transfer of the Shareholding under Venezuelan Contract
Law
1. Respondent’s Position

137. For Respondent, the starting point of the analysis of the contractual issues is that
Placer Dome was “selected as a result of a private bid process [and] signed several instruments
with the CVG to achieve a common public objective ... All of these agreements are instrumental
to the objective pursued, that is, they were signed as a means of achieving the expressed public
objective — a joint venture to develop Las Cristinas.”°* One of the consequences of this joint
venture, as a matter of Venezuelan law, is the legal indivisibility of related contracts; namely,
that all of the contracts instrumental to the development and exploitation of Las Cristinas have an

identical objective, are interrelated, and cannot be considered in isolation.”

138. | Respondent argues that, as a matter of Venezuelan law, the contracts instrumental
to the development of Las Cristinas were of an intuitu personae nature and that “this is a
characteristic inherent to the economic operations in which all of the contracts are related and
which therefore must be considered in interpreting them.”!° It emphasises that Placer Dome

“was chosen specifically because of its characteristics to be the partner of CVG and, with CVG’s

Respondent's Rejoinder § 486. See generally Respondent's Rejoinder {ff 480-87. See also Tr. Day 2:404-
33 (Brennan).

 

Respondent’s Rejoinder fj 489-501. With respect to indivis
Day 2:452-57 (Brennan); Tr. Day 2:485-504 (Wray).

lity, see Tr. Day 2:435-43 (Brennan); Tr.

100 Respondent’s Rejoinder 4 503.

39

consent it participated in MINCA through PDV, its vehicle, through which Placer Dome was
going to exercise and perform its intuitu personae rights and obligations.”'°' PDV is not the real

party in this matter; it is the continued participation by Placer Dome that is critical.

139. | Respondent rejects Claimant’s argument that the 1991 Shareholders Agreement
was superseded by the 1997 Amended Shareholders’ Agreement. According to Respondent, the
1997 Agreement cancelled only the provisions of earlier agreements relating to its purpose (i.e.,
the amendment of the financing terms), rather than the whole of the earlier agreements. In any
event, the 1997 Amended Shareholders Agreement was itself an intuitu personae agreement and
could not be assigned or delegated without the consent of CVG. Further, PDV is described in
the preamble to the 1997 Amended Shareholders Agreement as being a party to that 1997

> 102

agreement “in its capacity as PDI’s investor. Finally, the participation of Placer Dome was

so intertwined with that of PDV that, for Claimant to argue that they were different legal entities,
would be to ignore reality.!°°

140. | Respondent argues that the Original Transaction Agreement breached Venezuelan
law by violating the intuitu personae nature of the obligations of Placer Dome with respect to the
development of Las Cristinas. The rights and obligations acquired intuitu personae could not be
transferred to Claimant without the express consent of CVG.'" The practice of CVG regarding
changes of control in other mining companies, to which Claimant referred, is irrelevant: in those
cases, unlike in this one, the “creditor” (in casu, CVG) was satisfied with the personal
qualifications of the third party.'°> Moreover, the transfer to Claimant of the shares effectively

106

constituted an unauthorised transfer of the contract,” in breach of the rules of Venezuelan

contract law on non-assignment.'”

Respondent’s Rejoinder 4513.
we Ex. C-30.

Respondent's Rejoinder f 489-515. On the relationship between the 1991 and 1997 agreements, see Tr.
Day 4:895-921 (Brennan).

Respondent's Rejoinder | 776. See also Respondent’s Counter-Memorial | 232-46.
Respondent's Rejoinder §] 535.

Respondent's Rejoinder if] 536-41.

Respondent's Rejoinder if] 542-46.

40

2. Claimant’s Position

141. As far as the restraints arising under Venezuelan contract law on the transfer of
the shares in PDV are concerned, Claimant starts from the proposition that “[i]t is a fundamental

principle of both Venezuelan commercial and public law that shares of companies are freely

9108 109

transferable, and that restrictions on transferability must be explicitly provided for.

Claimant argues that a provision that prohibits the assignment of contractual rights held by a
company should not be presumed to prohibit the transfer of shares in that company or a change
in the control of that company. Accordingly, the transfer of ownership or change of control of
the company (MINCA) does not amount to a violation of the prohibition on the assignment of
the company’s contractual rights. Further, Claimant says that the application of these principles

is not changed by labelling the relationship between CVG and PDV in MINCA as a “joint

venture”, as Respondent does.'!°

142. Claimant says that there were no explicit prohibitions applicable to the share
purchase. While the Work Contract!'' and the 1997 Amended Shareholders’ Agreement!’

contained non-assignment provisions, neither they nor the MINCA Bylaws!" contained change

10s Claimant’s Reply 4308. See also Tr. Day 1:51-52 and 1:136-37 (Laskin).

109 Tr. Day 1:51-55 (Laskin).

no Tr. Day 1:60-61 (Laskin).
Ex. C-20A, Clause Twenty Eighth (“The parties may not assign in any manner this agreement except by
prior written approval of the other party.”).

Ex. C-30, Art. X (Assignment; Binding Effect) (“Assignment of Amended Agreement: Unless otherwise
provided herein, the parties cannot assign their rights or delegate their obligations hereunder without the
other party’s prior written consent. This Amended Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the
benefit of each contracting party, and their permitted assignees.”).

The Bylaws did, however, give a right of first refusal. See Ex. C-6A, Art. 9 (“[...]:The Shareholders shall
have a preferential right to purchase the shares that other Shareholders wish to sell for a consideration, in
the proportion which the number of shares held by each shareholder at the time the sale offer is known
bears to the total number of shares of the Company. For these purposes, the selling Shareholder shall send
a letter to the Board of Directors of the Company informing it of the number of shares it wishes to sell, the
name of the intended buyer and the purchase price. The Board of Directors shall give immediate notice of
the offer to the other Shareholders, who shall have a term of thirty (30) calendar days to exercise their
preferential right.

If the other Shareholders do not exercise their preferential right, or exercise it partially, the selling
Shareholder may sell the remaining shares for a price no lower than the price informed to the Board of
Directors.

4l

of control clauses, unlike certain other contracts concluded by Venezuelan governmental
agencies in the mining and oil sector which do include specific provisions on change of

control.''4

143. Claimant, challenging the view that these were intuitu personae contracts, says
that the information provided in the private bidding process that led to the choice of Placer Dome
was incomplete, and that there was accordingly nothing unique about Placer Dome.'!® Counsel
for Claimant submitted in the oral proceedings that “[bJoth the bidding process and the fact of
the broad assignment provision really are inconsistent with any suggestion of intuitu

personae.”' 6

144. Further, Claimant rejects even the possibility that the intuitu personae nature of
the Las Cristinas contracts (which it denies) could render the share transfer to Vannessa contrary
to Venezuelan law. In Claimant’s view, “[t]he doctrine of intuitu personae ... provides that some
obligations under a contract are so personal in nature that they can only be performed expressly
by the party that has assumed the obligations under the contract.”''’ However, the doctrine has
no broader implications regarding other related contracts by the same party or contracts by its

shareholders.'!*

145. In terms of the contractual obligations, Claimant says that at the time of the
transfer of shares from Placer Dome to Claimant (i.c., on July 13, 2001) Placer Dome itself was
(and continued to be) bound only by the 1997 Amended Shareholders’ Agreement, and further
that it only had one narrow obligation under that agreement, namely, to assist in resolving

financial issues.''? The 1991 Shareholders’ Agreement was not applicable because it had been

 

Any transfer made in violation of this Clause shall be deemed to be void and without any effect upon the
Company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, transfers of shares to related companies, wholly-owned by
Shareholders, directly or indirectly, or by the Sharcholder’s parent Company are hereby authorized.”).

Claimant’s Reply {¥ 308-12. See also Tr. Day 1:55-56 (Laskin). With respect, in particular, to the general
practice on change of control clauses, see Tr. Day 1:118-21 (Laskin).

Tr. Day 1:58-59 (Laskin) and Tr. Day 1:69-76 (Laskin).

Tr. Day 1:123 (Laskin). See generally Tr. Day 1:123-27 (Laskin).
Claimant’s Reply 41319. See also Tr. Day 1:121 (Laskin).
Claimant’s Reply {ff 316-21.

Claimant’s Reply ff 322-26.

42

120

replaced by the 1997 Shareholders’ Agreement (and not merely amended by it), ~" as is stated in

the 1997 Amended Agreement itself'”!

and confirmed by the practice of CVG, Placer Dome, and
PDV.'” In any event, even the 1991 Shareholders’ Agreement did not contain any restrictions

on ownership of the shares of PDV.'*

146. Claimant also rejects the argument that Placer Dome could have been jointly
liable for the obligations of PDV. While conceding Placer Dome’s ownership and factual
involvement in the affairs of PDV, it says that, in the absence of explicit contractual language to
the contrary, Placer Dome and PDV maintained their separate personalities for the purposes of
the analysis of their legal rights and obligations.'* Finally, the acquisition by Claimant of the
shares of PDV accorded with the general practice of other mining companies that had

exploration agreements with CVG.'?°
3. The Tribunal’s Decision

147. In the view of the Tribunal, the evidence demonstrates that as a matter of fact the
identity of Placer Dome was a material element in the conclusion of the contracts relating to the
exploitation of the Las Cristinas mines, and in particular of the 1991 Shareholders Agreement
and the 1997 Amended Shareholders Agreement, the 1992 Work Contract, and the Copper
Concessions. It cannot plausibly be argued that CVG was indifferent to the identity of the other

party to the concessions and the Work Contract.

148. | Two key indicators point to this conclusion. The first is the process by which
Placer Dome was selected from among the companies that had expressed an interest in Las

Cristinas. It is evident that PDI was selected after a deliberate, detailed, and careful

120 Claimant’s Reply {{[ 340-42. On the relationship between the 1991 and 1997 agreements, see generally Tr.

Day 1:127-33 (Laskin).
Claimant’s Reply 4 328-34 (citing Art. XIII (Entire Agreement) of the 1997 Amended Agreement).

122

Claimant’s Reply 4 335-39.

123 Claimant’s Reply 4 343.

124

Claimant’s Reply 9] 344-55.

125

Claimant’s Reply $f 356-64.

43

consideration of its technical and financial capacity and experience, and which had been planned

in advance.'*°

149. Second, it is apparent that the Parties themselves considered that Placer Dome had
been chosen, not as an anonymous or generic supplier of services, but for its own particular
qualities. Placer Dome wrote to CVG on May 17, 1991, not long after it had succeeded in the
private bid process, on the subject of the organization of the project through what became

MINCA:

In regards to the position of chairman, we have been guided by our
understanding that CVG chose Placer Dome as the majority partner for its
proven technical and commercial capacity to develop large-scale mines and
not as a provider of technical services under the contract, or as a simple
technical advisor. If this is the case, it seems logical and normal that Placer
Dome would take on the majority of the operational decisions. In January we
agreed that CVG would appoint the Director of Human Resources, the
Controller and the Secretary, but we reserved the right to appoint the general
manager, the primary finance official and the mine manager. We assume
that CVG would like to appoint the chairman, although the operational
authority of this position is, to a certain extent, only a formality, because for
the joint company public relations and lobbying will be of great importance,
and we believe that these tasks could be best carried out by a Venezuelan
appointed by CVG.'?”

It is no less clear that CVG understood the relationship to have an intuitu personae character. It
had the same view as Placer Dome, as evidenced by a memorandum to the President of
Venezuela dated November 30, 1990, before the approval of the overall scheme by the cabinet in
July 1991, in which the CVG stated: “[nJone of the parties can transfer their rights or delegate
obligations without prior consent by the other party, in writing, which cannot be denied without
justifiable cause.”!”*

150. All of the evidence that the Tribunal has seen is consistent with this view of the
relationship between CVG and Placer Dome. While it may be true that CVG’s description of the

relationship as a “joint venture” could not change the legal nature of the relationship, the

126

See $f] 50-54 above.

127

Ex. R-4.

128 Ex. C-I7A. The original Spanish version provided by Claimant does not include the following phrase

which is included in the English version of the document, also provided by Claimant: “which cannot be
denied without justifiable cause”.

44

description could reflect the clear and consistent understanding of CVG and Placer Dome as to
the nature of the enterprise that Placer Dome had applied to undertake with CVG, and for which

it had been selected. The Tribunal finds that it did reflect such an understanding.

151. In that context, the Tribunal was assisted by the expert evidence of Professor Luis

Garcia Montoya concerning the intuitu personae nature of the relationship and the contracts.'””

152. Further, it is plain that PDV was regarded as Placer Dome’s vehicle for the
purposes of this investment, so that it stood in the same relationship to CVG as did Placer Dome
itself. Indeed, the preamble to the 1997 Amended Shareholder Agreement records explicitly that
its provisions are the product of the agreement of “CVG, PDI, and PDVEN, in its capacity as
PDI’s Investor” (emphasis added).'*°

153. It is also evident that Vannessa had a radically different technical and financial
profile from that of Placer Dome. Placer Dome was a very large mining company, specializing
in gold mining, with mining operations in several countries. At the time when the transfer to
Vannessa took place, within hours of the expiry of the agreed suspension period, Vannessa, in
contrast, had no firm financial or technical capacity in place which could have made immediate
resumption of operations at Las Cristinas even a possibility. When it took over the shares in
PDV, Vannessa was not in a position to discharge the obligations that Placer Dome had assumed
in respect of Las Cristinas. Moreover, the “staged development plan”, which Vannessa was
apparently contemplating into 2001, appears to have been essentially the same as the staged
development plan that CVG had refused to accept when it was proposed by Placer Dome in

2000."*!

154. Nonetheless, the intuitu personae character of the contracts does not itself put
Claimant’s ownership of shares in PDV outside the scope of the Canada-Venezuela BIT. As was

132

indicated above, ~~ the Tribunal has decided that the ordinary meaning of the reference to “the

a See the Expert Reports of Professor Luis Garcia Montoya dated August 10, 2006, February 14, 2007,
March 10, 2009, and January 27, 2010.

Be Ex. C-30. PDI is defined as Placer Dome Inc., and PDVEN is defined as Placer Dome de Venezuela C.A.
See 70 above.

2 See 4] 133 above.

45

[host State’s] laws” is a reference to laws imposed by public authority. It is a corollary of this
decision that obligations created by persons in the exercise of their powers under the general
laws of contract are not “laws”, and should not be treated as creating “requirements” which, if
not satisfied, will automatically place ownership of an asset outside the scope of the definition of
an investment in Article I(f) of the Canada-Venezuela BIT. The Tribunal’s view that the
participation of Placer Dome, rather than any other company, was an essential part of the
contractual arrangements in respect of Las Cristinas does not, therefore, preclude Claimant’s
ownership of shares in PDV from satisfying the BIT’s definition of “investment.” That is not,
however, to say that the intuitu personae character of the contracts relating to Las Cristinas is
without any legal effect, as is explained below.'* The point is plainly relevant to the question

whether Claimant acquired an interest in MINCA and Las Cristinas that is protected by the BIT.

D. In Accordance with the Law on Public Procurement and Administrative
Contracts

1. Respondent’s Position

155. | Respondent takes the view that Claimant’s investment was made in violation of
the Venezuelan law of public procurement. That law limits a private party’s ability to transfer
rights and obligations under a contract awarded in a bid process so that they would not wind up
in the hands of unreliable third parties (as indeed happened, in Respondent’s opinion, in this

particular instance).'*4

156. Respondent notes Claimant’s recognition that the Work Contract is an
administrative contract.'** Respondent rejects the argument by Claimant that the Shareholders’
Agreements and MINCA Bylaws, in contrast, are not administrative contracts. In Respondent’s
view, the test is whether the contract has a “public purpose”, and there is no requirement under
Venezuelan public law for an administrative contract to have a direct, rather than an indirect,
public purpose. In any event those Shareholder Agreements and MINCA Bylaws would, in

Respondent’s view, satisfy even a “direct purpose” requirement, because they address the

133 See 4 164 below.

14 Respondent’s Rejoinder {| 547-51.

135 Respondent’s Rejoinder 4 362.

46

adoption of provisions concerning the mining operations at Las Cristinas.'** Respondent argues
that the transfer of rights and obligations arising under an administrative contract would breach
Venezuelan public law, by rendering meaningless the bidding process and the nature of

administrative contracts. '°”

2. Claimant’s Position

157. Claimant challenges the assertion by Respondent that Placer Dome had been
selected for the Las Cristinas project through a public bidding process. Claimant disagrees with
Respondent’s argument on two levels: first, as a general matter, the bidding process was
conducted in private and not in public;'** second, in any event, the public nature of the bidding
process could not turn the contracts into administrative contracts, or make the conditions of the

bid an inherent part of the contract, or give greater rights of revocation to CVG.'?

158. Claimant accepts that the Work Contract could be considered to be an
administrative contract, because its purpose was directly to carry out mining activity (assuming

140

that mining is a public service under Venezuelan law). However, the Shareholders’

Agreements and MINCA Bylaws do not themselves satisfy the cumulative criteria under

141

Venezuelan law which identifies administrative contracts. Further, the administrative nature

of the Work Contract would not have any effect on the transferability of the shares in PDV.'*
3. The Tribunal’s Decision

159. The Tribunal recalls that in Section 3.2.4 of the Decision on Jurisdiction, the

(differently-constituted) Tribunal in this case said that:

Respondent's Rejoinder $f] 516-23.
Respondent's Rejoinder {ff 547-51.
Claimant’s Reply $f 367-73.
Claimant’s Reply $f 374-77.
Claimant’s Reply 4 387.
Claimant’s Reply $f 388-93.
Claimant’s Reply $f 395-96.

47

[I]t is obvious from the file that [the Respondent] never ruled on the
permissibility or lack thereof of the share transfer. What it complained of
and acted accordingly was that it considered the behaviour of PDI and the
Claimant to constitute a breach of the agreements binding PDI to the Las
Cristinas Project. It, however, never stated that it did not authorize the
transfer of the shares which, after all, were transferred and have remained
with the Claimant.

160. That observation was made in the context of Section II(3)(b) of the Annex to the
Canada-Venezuela BIT, according to which decisions of a Contracting Party not to permit
establishment of a new business enterprise or acquisition of an existing business enterprise or a
share of such enterprise by investors or prospective investors are not subject to the dispute
settlement provisions of Article XII of the BIT. Though the transfer of shares had not been
barred for the purposes of that provision, it is necessary to consider here whether the (legally
effective) transfer of the shares constitutes a breach of Venezuelan law on public procurement
and administrative contracts that would take the shareholding outside the scope of the definition
of an investment in Article I(f) of the BIT so as to deprive the Tribunal of jurisdiction in this
case. The Tribunal finds that the public procurement law does not impact whether Claimant’s
shareholding amounts to an “asset owned or controlled . . . in accordance with” Venezuelan law
as required to satisfy the BIT’s definition of “investment.” Respondent does not deny that
Vannessa Barbados legally owned, and continues to own, the shares in question in accordance
with the Venezuelan Commercial Code, as recorded in the Venezuelan Mercantile Registry.'*?
The question whether the acquisition by Claimant of that shareholding also had the legal effect
of validly transferring to Claimant an interest in MINCA and in Las Cristinas that is protected by
the BIT is a question that relates to the stage at which the Tribunal considers the admissibility

and the merits of the claim.
E. In Accordance With Good Faith and Public Policy
1. Respondent’s Position

161. | Respondent argues that Claimant violated both Venezuelan and international law

by consciously engaging in conduct equivalent to fraud on the law, i.e., “a performance of

Ms Respondent’s Rejoinder, §§] 465-564; Claimant’s Reply, { 293.

48

actions that are legitimate in form or appearance, but are illicit in their object and purpose.”!4

Respondent says that the agreements were concluded behind CVG’s back, against its opposition
and ignoring its interests.'*° Respondent argues that bad-faith investments are not protected by
the BIT as a matter of international law. It says that Claimant’s bad-faith conduct fits the
characteristics identified in earlier arbitral decisions, in that it involved: acting in secrecy or
without transparency; misrepresentation and false statements; disavowal of obligations and

circumvention of agreements; and the abuse of legal process for improper purposes.'*°

2. Claimant’s Position

162. Claimant argues that the acquisition of shares took place in good faith. It says
that it is up to Respondent to prove Claimant’s bad faith, that the burden of proof is a demanding
one, and that Respondent has not met it.'*” In terms of arbitral decisions addressing fraud and
good faith, Claimant distinguishes this particular dispute as not involving any of the aspects
considered decisive in other decisions (e.g., falsification of documents, breach of domestic law
against the advice of the investor’s counsel, or misrepresentation).'** In factual terms, Claimant
rejects the argument that Placer Dome acted in bad faith, arguing that Placer Dome met and even
exceeded its contractual obligations, and that it had reasonable prudential business reasons not to
disclose the identity of the prospective purchaser of shares to CVG.'”” It says that, in any event,
Placer Dome is not a claimant in this case, and its possible bad faith should not affect the

Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction.'?

163. Claimant also challenges Respondent’s argument that, as a matter of fact,
Vannessa had no capacity to develop the Las Cristinas property and only acquired the shares to

bring this arbitral claim. Claimant acknowledges that it is a small company but argues that it was

Respondent's Rejoinder §] 552.
Respondent's Rejoinder if] 553-64.
Respondent's Rejoinder if] 565-99.
Tr. Day 1:140 (Laskin).
Claimant’s Reply {f] 408-10.
Claimant’s Reply ff 412-25.

150

Claimant’s Reply 4 411; Tr. Day 1:140-41 (Laskin).

49

able to undertake that particular project, and that it had taken the mining project seriously.'*!
Claimant also noted in the oral proceedings that Crystallex, an investor that subsequently signed
an agreement with CVG regarding Las Cristinas, appeared not to be substantially better qualified

than Claimant.’
3. The Tribunal’s Decision

164. In the view of the majority of the Tribunal, the arguments about good faith and
public policy that have been advanced in this case are not determinative of whether Claimant’s
shares in PDV were owned or controlled in accordance with Venezuelan law. Instead, good faith
and public policy bear upon the question whether the acquisition by Claimant of its shareholding
in PDV was effective to transfer to Claimant an interest in MINCA and in Las Cristinas that is
protected by the BIT. Accordingly, the majority of the Tribunal does not consider that in the
circumstances of this case the principles of public policy and good faith place Claimant’s

ownership of shares in PDV beyond the BIT’s definition of investment.
F. In Accordance With Venezuelan Decree 2095
1. Respondent’s Position

165. Respondent argues that Claimant failed to give notice of the transfer of the shares
in PDV, and also to register the investment (which had apparently not been registered by the
original owner, Placer Dome), as required under Venezuela’s Decree 2095, and that the failure to
comply with this mandatory legal requirement means that the investment was not in accordance

with law.'?
2. Claimant’s Position

166. Claimant takes the view that it did in fact comply with the requirements for

providing notice about share purchases to the Foreign Investments Commission, as required by

Claimant’s Reply $f 427-50.
2 ‘Tr. Day 4:746-54 (Laskin).
Respondent's Rejoinder $f] 284-87.

50

the Venezuelan Decree 2095.'™ In any event, the failure to comply with the Decree would not
make the transfer of shares invalid, as demonstrated by the lack of Venezuela’s response to

widespread failures of notification during the 1990s.'°°
3. The Tribunal’s Decision

167. | The Tribunal considers that reporting obligations concerning the registration of
foreign investments, which do not entail any application for permission or approval and which
are not expressed as conditions of the making of an investment, are not relevant to the question
whether the investment exists. Further, the jurisdictional significance of the “legality
requirement” in the definition of an investment in Article I(f) is exhausted once the investment
has been made. It accordingly rejects the jurisdictional challenge based on the provisions of

Decree 2095.
G. The Tribunal’s Conclusion on Jurisdiction

168. For the reasons stated above, the majority of the Tribunal is satisfied that
Claimant has an “investment” within the meaning of Article I of the Canada-Venezuela BIT, and
that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide the merits of this dispute. While the majority of the
Tribunal rests its decision on that ground, it recognizes that there are different ways in which the
principle of good faith might be applied in the context of decisions on jurisdiction and

admissibility.

169. One of us takes the view that if an investment is acquired in bad faith, this is a
factor that goes to the existence of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. That member would have rejected
the claim on the basis that it falls outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal because the investment
was not made in good faith. As was noted above (and is explained further below), however, all

three members agreed that, in light of the manner in which Vannessa was substituted for Placer

154

Claimant’s Reply ff 451-60.

155

Claimant’s Reply f] 451-58; Tr. Day 1:144-46 (Laskin).

Sl

156

Dome in the project for the exploitation of Las Cristinas, °” the treatment of the investment by

Respondent does not amount to a breach of the standards of treatment required by the Treaty.
Il. MERITS

170. The Tribunal is unanimously of the view that the claim in this case must fail
because of the manner in which the transfer of shares to Claimant occurred. Its reasoning is set

out in the following paragraphs.

171. Claimant alleges that Respondent’s actions breach the obligations: (a) not to
expropriate the investment except in accordance with the conditions set out in Article VII of the
Treaty; and (b) to treat the investment in a fair and equitable manner and to accord it full

protection and security under Article II(2).
A. Expropriation
1. Claimant’s Position: Gold Rights

172. Claimant argues that the standard for finding an expropriation of contractual
rights is that “the State has gone beyond its role as a mere party to the contract and relied on its
superior governmental power. [...] [T]he State uses its public authority and steps out of the role
of the contracting party.”'*’ In the oral proceedings, Claimant argued that “there is culmination
of the State acting in terminating the contract for reasons that are not legitimate contractual
considerations; plus the State stepping out of the contractual framework and exercising State
powers to terminate in a way that a private party can’t; plus, thirdly, the CVG in the particular

case acting in conjunction with other State agencies.”'**

173. Claimant argues that expropriation is evidenced in three instances. The first is
when CVG rescinded the Work Contract on November 6, 2001. It says that Venezuelan law
precludes unilateral termination of a contract without first resorting to the agreed mechanism of
186 See 4 201 below.
Claimant’s Reply {| 492 (internal footnotes omitted).

Tr. Day 1:182 (Terry). See more generally, the discussion of the test of expropriation of contractual rights
at Tr. Day 1:161-86 (Terry).

52

dispute settlement, whether in court or via arbitration. Though the Work Contract provided for
ICC arbitration, CVG did not resort to it but rather relied on its exorbitant administrative law
powers that allegedly exempted it from this requirement regarding administrative contracts.’
Therefore, the case is distinguishable from those investment arbitrations where the State
committed a merely contractual breach and other remedies were available to the investor.'° In
the oral proceedings, Claimant also relied on its legitimate expectations regarding the

competence of the government to submit contractual disputes to arbitration.'*!

Further, it also
clarified its position by suggesting that termination and failure to arbitrate constituted two

. an «162
separate bases for its expropriation claim.'”

174. Secondly, according to Claimant, CVG relied on exorbitant administrative powers
to seize MINCA’s assets on November 16, 2001. The seizure of assets by a squadron of the
Venezuelan National Guard to enforce an administrative act without resorting to judicial
assistance could not have been carried out by a party exercising merely its commercial

prerogatives.'©

175. Thirdly, and more broadly, Claimant argues that the Ministry of Energy and the
President of the Republic had assisted CVG in carrying out its expropriation. Rather than merely
disposing of the mining rights after the rescinding of the Work Contract, the Ministry and the
President were necessary and active participants in the expropriation.

176. Claimant considers that the expropriation was unlawful because it did not satisfy

the criteria of lawfulness set out in Article VII(1) of the BIT.'® First, while Venezuelan law

Claimant’s Reply #4 494-508. Counsel for Claimant emphasized that there was agreement between experts
and probably parties that “the termination, whether it was lawful or not as a matter of Venezuelan law was
carried out by a State agency using its exorbitant power. As Dr. Grau says, to quote him again, using a
public power, not a power having a contractual source.” See Tr. Day 4:820 (Terry). See also Tr. Day
4:822 (Terry).

Claimant’s Reply 44] 494-508; Tr. Day 4:81 1-27 (Terry).
Tr. Day 2:258-60 (Terry).

Tr. Day 2:311-13 (Terry).

Claimant’s Reply ff 520-27.

160

Claimant’s Reply ff 515-19.

See Ex. R-39 (ie., that the expropriation be for a public purpose, under due process of law, in a non-
discriminatory manner and against prompt, adequate and effective compensation).

353

provides that contracts may be terminated for reasons of general or public interest, rather than on
the basis of the breach, so long as compensation is paid, CVG never invoked reasons of such a
nature. Secondly, due process was not provided either in the contractually agreed arbitral forum
or in the domestic courts. Thirdly, the expropriation was discriminatory because no other
company or property received this treatment. Fourthly, no compensation was paid to
Claimant.'%

177. Finally, Claimant rejects Respondent’s argument that the allegedly expropriated
contractual rights were already null and void. Claimant says that the Venezuelan authorities had
never sought to nullify Claimant’s ownership of the shares, and the attempt to terminate the

Work Contract necessarily presupposed that the Work Contract continued to exist.'°7

2. Claimant’s Position: Copper Rights

178. In Claimant’s view, MINCA had valid and binding rights to the Las Cristinas
Copper Concessions, assigned by CVG in January 1999 in accordance with the 1997 Amended
Shareholders’ Agreement. These rights were expropriated when the Ministry of Energy and
Mines cancelled the concession on March 8, 2001. The failure of MINCA to file reports and
feasibility studies could not justify the cancellation because the Ministry itself had not obtained
for MINCA the necessary land use permit, without which exploration could not begin.'®

179. Claimant argues that the expropriation of the right to mine copper was unlawful
because of the discriminatory nature of the cancellation, which affected only Claimant; because
the alleged public purpose disguised the real reason — which was to transfer rights to CVG (and
eventually to Crystallex); because of the failure of due process; and because of the clear absence

of compensation.'®

Claimant’s Reply fj 528-40. On due process, see also Tr. Day 2:290-302 (Terry), Tr. Day 2:313-14
(Terry). In the context of due process, Claimant explained that the nullity action was withdrawn in July
2004 because of the time limits for BIT claims and the requirement to discontinue other proceedings. See
Tr. Day 2:302-03 (Terry).

Claimant’s Reply $f 541-42.
Claimant’s Reply §§ 543-46; Tr. Day 2:320-23 (Terry).
Claimant’s Reply $f 547-50.

54

3. Respondent’s Position: Gold Rights

180. | Respondent states that “the key question in assessing whether a State’s taking of a
claimant’s property constitutes an expropriation is not whether the State acted as only a private
party could act, but rather, did the State step out of its role as a contracting party and interfere
with the contract on the basis of its sovereign authority.”'’ Claimant errs in setting the criterion
as whether a State has acted as a “private party”, because the State is never simply a private
party; and even in its contractual capacity the State retains such inherent capabilities as acting
through resolutions and decrees.'”! Also, Claimant is wrong in alleging that the availability of a
pre-agreed forum for the resolution of disputes is necessary if the wrongful termination of a
concession or similar agreement is to be treated as a contractual dispute and not as an
expropriation; and, in any event, MINCA could have referred, but did not refer, the termination

of the Work Contract to ICC arbitration.”

181. Respondent argues that it has rightfully terminated MINCA’s rights to exploit
gold in response to MINCA’s breaches of contract. CVG had the right under the Work Contract
to terminate the contract in case of an uncorrected contractual breach by the other party. Three
breaches warranted the termination: (i) suspension by MINCA of exploitation works without a
duly justified reason for more than 12 months; (ii) failure by MINCA to submit detailed reports
on its activities for a period of two years; and (iii) most importantly, the breach of the obligation

of non-assignment without approval by the other party.!”*

182. Regarding the particular instances of expropriation alleged by Claimant,
Respondent takes the view that it had acted only as a State contracting party to an administrative

contract, and not on the basis of an unlawful exercise of sovereign authority. Respondent rejects

170 Respondent’s Rejoinder | 664. On the standard, see also, Tr. Day 3:536-51 and Tr. Day 3:561-83

(Goodman).

As Respondent's counsel put it, “if you sign up for a footrace with a three-legged person, you know that
that person will have that kind of attribute and that they may in that sense outperform you. .... [I]t’s a
question of the CVG having that authority. It’s not something that it’s exerting in order to interfere with
the contractual process. It can’t do otherwise. It’s part of the administrative law scheme.” See Tr. Day
3:540 (Goodman).

Respondent's Rejoinder if] 653-67.

 

172

5 Respondent’s Rejoinder §f] 668-76.

55

the argument that contractual termination by CVG without resort to ICC arbitration amounted to
expropriation. The Work Contract does not include such a requirement, and Venezuelan law
does not provide such a rule for administrative contracts.' The fact that CVG terminated the
contract by means of a decree is, on its own, irrelevant: State organs commonly act through
decrees and resolutions. What is important is that termination took place in response to a
contractual breach, and was promulgated within the contractual framework rather than in
contravention of it.'°

183. Secondly, Respondent rejects the argument that CVG’s recovery of MINCA’s
assets amounted to expropriation. In its view, Claimant has asked the wrong question — could a
private party have done it? — rather than whether “the CVG’s actions exceed the normal conduct
that other State entities party to an administrative contract would have taken in executing its
termination.”!”° By applying this criterion, the recovery of property was within the four corners

of CVG’s rights to recover the property in accordance with the administrative contract.”

184. Thirdly, the involvement of the Ministry of Energy and Mining and the President

would not amount to expropriation. It has not been demonstrated that their acts breached the

Work Contract, and in any event their involvement occurred after its termination.!”*

185. Respondent rejects the argument that there was discriminatory treatment of
Claimant, arguing that the transfers of shares of other mining companies, which the State had

accepted, took place in significantly different circumstances.'”

Respondent denies any
obligation to pay compensation.'*®’ Respondent argues that any expropriation would not have

been unlawful in any event because the challenged acts pursued a public purpose, were not

As the counsel for Respondent put it at the hearing, “[T]he decision made by the public administration is
self-imposed. ... [T]he public administration has the power of self-protection ... [A] decision made by the
administration is imperative. There is no need to resort to a court.” See Tr. Day 3:517 (Wray).

Respondent's Rejoinder $f] 680-96.
Respondent's Rejoinder § 698.

Respondent's Rejoinder {ff 697-708; Tr. Day 3:589-94 (Hodgson).
Respondent's Rejoinder §f] 709-15; Tr. Day 3:594-98 (Hodgson).
Respondent's Rejoinder $f] 677-78.

180 Respondent’s Rejoinder §f] 780-86.

56

1

discriminatory, and complied with due process,'*' and the lack of compensation alone does not

render expropriation unlawful.'*?

186. Finally, Respondent takes the view that the unlawful assignment of the
contractual rights to Claimant invalidated both the Work Contract and the transfer of shares. The
invalidation of the underlying contractual relationships that have been allegedly expropriated, by
reason of the conduct of Claimant and of Placer Dome, provides an alternative ground for

rejecting the expropriation claim.'*?

4. Respondent’s Position: Copper Rights

187. Respondent argues first, that MINCA did not hold any valid Copper Concession
rights in the first place; and secondly, that the Ministry of Energy and Mining lawfully
extinguished any residual concessionary rights of MINCA that might have existed. The lack of
any valid concession rights flows from four considerations: (i) the absence of mandatory permits
for land use and exploration; (ii) the invalidation of the incidental rights to copper by the
termination of the Work Contract; (iii) the invalidity of the assignment of the Copper
Concessions; and (iv) the absence of serious plans by Claimant to mine copper.'*! In any event,
the cancellation of the Copper Concessions took place on the basis of MINCA’s non-compliance,
and the alleged governmental involvement neither is demonstrated in factual terms nor would
amount to expropriation by the application of the correct standard of expropriation.'** Finally,

6

Respondent notes that Claimant had been provided with due process,'®* and denies any

obligation to pay compensation.'*”

Respondent's Rejoinder $f] 862-73.
Respondent's Rejoinder $f] 874-77.
Respondent's Rejoinder $f] 772-79.
Respondent's Rejoinder {ff 716-38; Tr. Day 3:598-600 (Hodgson).
Respondent's Rejoinder {fj 739-62; Tr. Day 3:600-05 (Hodgson).
Respondent's Rejoinder $f] 763-71.
Respondent's Rejoinder $f] 780-86.

57

5. The Tribunal’s Decision

188. The Tribunal considers that the rights in respect of gold and the rights in respect
of copper were so closely interrelated and interdependent that they can be considered together in
relation to the arguments that Claimant’s rights under the Canada-Venezuela BIT have been
violated. That conclusion follows both from the history and structure of the commercial

relationship between the Parties, and from a close reading of the relevant legal instruments.

189. | While the Work Contract of March 4, 1992 does not specifically mention copper,
it appears to the Tribunal that the Copper Concessions were granted in such a way that they were
covered by the Work Contract. The Amended Shareholders Agreement of July 31, 1997 stated
that:

CVG, at MINCA's request, has filed applications with MEM for copper
concessions at Las Cristinas, in performing the provisions relating to new
minerals set forth in the [Work Contract dated] March 4, 1992. CVG hereby
undertakes to transfer said concession to MINCA, by means of direct
assignment, as soon as the same are awarded by MEM to CVG ....'

190. Indeed, on April 7, 1999, the Work Contract was amended to reflect, among other
things, that the royalty scheme for gold would apply to copper as well.'®? Finally, the Copper
Concession Agreement (made between CVG and MINCA on April 19, 1999) itself also
explained that MINCA would pay CVG a royalty for ”copper under the same terms and
conditions as specified in Annex III of the [Work Contract of March 1992].” Thus, viewing
these agreements together, it is clear that the copper concession was interrelated with the Work
Contract in such a way that termination of the Work Contract operated to terminate it as well.
As far as the termination of the Work Contract itself is concerned, the Tribunal finds that

Venezuela’s action was both justified and legitimate.

Ex. C-30 at Section 4.02.

189 Ex. C-21A at pp. 3-4. In addition, it should be noted that the sixth paragraph of the Copper Concession

Agreement states that the property “will be reverted ... if for any cause the Republic decides to revoke the
CONCESSIONS, or if they lapse with the expiration of the term for which they were granted” (emphasis
added), see Ex. R-67.

58

191. On 8 August 2000, CVG, Placer Dome, PDV, and MINCA entered into an
agreement to suspend the performance of the Work Contract for a period of one year beginning
on 15 July 2000 (Extension Agreement).'°

192. The Extension Agreement had a very clear purpose: to grant the parties time “to
find an investor interested in participat[ing] in MINCA and/or in the Project”'”! and to do so “by

mutual agreement.”!”?

193. Specifically, the parties to the Extension Agreement agreed that, within 30 days
following its execution, they would hire an investment bank “by mutual agreement;”'”? prepare a
schedule of activities “by mutual agreement” together with an investment bank “chosen by the
Parties” to establish the parameters for locating an investor;'” and in the event that a third party
expressed its interest in participating in MINCA and/or the Project and met the standards jointly
determined, “the Parties shall make their best efforts to favour the incorporation of such third

party to the Project."

194. Thus, the Extension Agreement, which necessarily modified the Work Contract,
spelled out that Placer Dome and the CVG would work together to find either an entirely new

party to replace Placer Dome, or a third party to join Placer Dome and CVG in the Project.

195. Yet although the Extension Agreement plainly required mutual cooperation and
agreement in selecting an investor, Placer Dome engaged in secret negotiations and share

transfers with Vannessa, only to “inform” CVG after the fact, on July 13, 2001, that it had been

190 See Ex. C-60A. The Work Contract is referred to as “the Agreement” in the Extension Agreement, but is
elsewhere in the pleadings and this award referred to as the Work Contract.

Id. at 2.

Id. at 3-5.

Td. at 4.

Id. at 3.

Id. at 3-5 (emphasis added).

59

its’

successful in search for a new investor within the period governed by the Extension

Agreement.’

196. Since that Agreement extended until July 14, 2001, Placer Dome was obligated to
work with CVG up until the end of the extension to find a mutually-acceptable new investor, and
it was not open to Placer Dome to thrust a new investor on CVG without its consent. Thus the
failure of Placer Dome to work mutually under the Extension Agreement to insert a new investor
provided a legitimate basis upon which CVG could terminate the Work Contract. In other
words, the term on which the one-year extension was granted was breached by Placer Dome and

hence the Extension Agreement was voided.'*”

197. As Claimant has pointed out, the Extension Agreement “was a consensual 12-
month suspension, not the kind of unjustified 12-month stoppage that would give the CVG the
right to rescind under Article 19 of the [Work] Contract.”!°* As this consensual suspension was
rendered void by Placer Dome’s actions in incorporating Vannessa as the putative new investor,

Venezuela’s right to rescind under Article 19 was revived.

198. Claimant acknowledges that the breach of the Extension Agreement was one of
the main bases upon which CVG sought to terminate the Work Contract. In a letter to MEM,
General Rangel Gémez stated that the decision was “essentially based on the conduct of the
company Placer Dome ... to transfer its shares in PDV to the company I.H.C. Corp., a subsidiary
of Vanesa [sic] Ventures L.T.D., as a way of evading the C.V.G.’s ... right to participate in the

selection of a new (third-party) shareholder in MINCA, as expressly stipulated in contractual

See Ex. C-95A, Letter from W. Hayes, Placer Dome Executive Vice President for the United States and
Latin America to F. Rangel Gomez, CVG President (July 13, 2001) at 1. See also Ex. R-105, Letter from
E, Rauguth, Vannessa Ventures, Ltd Executive Vice President, to F. Rangel, CVG President (October 30,
2001) (English translation) at 1 (“Our negotiation with Placer Dome was governed by strict rules of
confidentiality, forbidding the parties from discussing or sharing it with any third party. That is the reason
why Vannessa did not contact the CVG prior to the purchase.”).

It is of no moment that Scotia Capital, the investment bank chosen to find a new investor, suspended its
activities in May 2001 by agreement of the CVG and Placer Dome. The Extension Agreement itself was
never terminated and its spirit still underlay the parties’ search for a new investor. Indeed, that the “spirit”
of the Extension Agreement still governed the parties’ behavior is admitted by Placer Dome in its July 13,
2001 letter. See infra. Furthermore, even if Vannessa’s allegations are true that the CVG failed to act
diligently in attempts to find a new investor, this is insufficient justification for Placer Dome to have acted
in excess of its power in order to incorporate a new investor unilaterally.

See Claimant’s Reply 4 82.

60

provisions signed by both parts of that company ... .”!” In its Reply, Claimant states that “(t]he
contracts to which General Rangel Gomez was referring were the MINCA Bylaws ..., the 1997
Shareholders’ Agreement ..., and the Extension Agreement.”

199. Moreover, in its July 13, 2001 letter to CVG, Placer Dome implicitly admitted
that it was required to comply with the Extension Agreement, taking the position (without
elaboration) that its agreement to sell its shares in PDV to Vannessa fell “within the spirit” of the

. 2
Extension Agreement.”"!

Yet, as just explained, far from falling “within the spirit” of the
Extension Agreement, Placer Dome’s actions in incorporating Vannessa as a third-party investor
unilaterally, and without CVG’s input, were in fact directly contrary to that spirit and, what is

more, to the Extension Agreement’s plain language.

200. Such a violation of the Extension Agreement amounts to a breach, rendering
Venezuela’s subsequent decision to terminate the Work Contract both justified and legitimate. It
destroyed the basis of the relationship upon which the exploitation of Las Cristinas by CVG and

its partner in the project was premised.

201. The Tribunal has already explained that it considers that the evidence shows
clearly that the identity and specific experience and characteristics of Placer Dome were material
factors in its selection as the foreign investor in the Las Cristinas project.” That is evident from
the process by which Placer Dome came to be selected, and is a factor of central importance in
this case. There is no basis on which it could reasonably be supposed that Venezuela was
indifferent to the identity or the technical and commercial characteristics and experience of its
partner in the Las Cristinas project, or that it would be consistent with the nature of the

relationship as understood by the Parties simply to substitute one company for another in that

199 Ex. R-48 (emphasis added).

200 Claimant’s Reply at {208-09 (emphasis added).

201 See Ex. C-95A, Letter from W. Hayes, Placer Dome Executive Vice President for the United States and

Latin America to F. Rangel Gomez, CVG President (July 13, 2001) at 1 (“Este acuerdo [celebrado entre
Placer Dome y Vannessa] que por este medio le participamos se encuentra dentro del espiritu del tiltimo
convenio de prérroga ...) (emphasis added). It should be noted that the English translation Claimant
provided does not contain the words “within the spirit” (though they are plainly contained in the Spanish
version), but translates the phrase simply thus: “The agreement [entered into by Placer Dome and
Vannessa] that we are notifying you of at this time falls within the last extension agreement ... .”

202

See $f] 50-54 above.

61

role, without Venezuela’s consent.

Besides having been recognized by both parties, as

mentioned in paragraph 54 of this Award, the intuitu personae character of the relationship was

also acknowledged through provisions in a series of documents.

202.

First, both Shareholders’ Agreements included an article restricting the transfer of

the rights of their signatories under them. In the 1991 Shareholders’ Agreement, entered into

between Placer Dome and CVG, Article V.D. stated:

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, neither party may assign
any of its rights or delegate any of its duties under this Agreement without
first obtaining the prior written consent of the other party which shall not be
unreasonably withheld. This Agreement shall enure to and be binding upon
each of the parties hereto and their respective successors and permitted
assigns.”

In the 1997 Shareholders’ Agreement, entered into between Placer Dome, PDV, and CVG,

Section 10.01 stated:

203.

Unless otherwise provided herein, the parties cannot assign their rights or
delegate their obligations hereunder without the other party’s prior written
consent. This Amended Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the
benefit of each contracting party, and their permitted assignees.”

Second, the MINCA By-laws also included an article by which the shares

belonging to one of the shareholders could not be sold before they had first been offered to the

other shareholders, which means that any such transfer also needed a kind of implied

authorization of the other shareholder, constituted by its refusal to buy the shares. Article 9 of

the MINCA By-laws provided that:

203

204

Ex. C-5A.
Ex. C-30.

[...] The Shareholders shall have a preferential right to purchase the shares
that other Shareholders wish to sell for a consideration, in the proportion
which the number of shares held by each shareholder at the time the sale
offer is known bears to the total number of shares of the Company. For these
purposes, the selling Shareholder shall send a letter to the Board of Directors
of the Company informing it of the number of shares it wishes to sell, the
name of the intended buyer and the purchase price. The Board of Directors
shall give immediate notice of the offer to the other Shareholders, who shall
have a term of thirty (30) calendar days to exercise their preferential right. If
the other Shareholders do not exercise their preferential right, or exercise it

62

partially, the selling Shareholder may sell the remaining shares for a price no
lower than the price informed to the Board of Directors.

Any transfer made in violation of this Clause shall be deemed to be void and
without any effect upon the Company. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
transfers of shares to related companies, wholly-owned by Shareholders,
directly or indirectly, or by the Shareholder’s parent Company are hereby
authorized.”

204. While in this case it was not PDV that was selling its shares in MINCA, but rather
a senior wholly owned subsidiary of Placer Dome that was selling its shares in PDV, this does
not detract from the indication that is implicit in Article 9 of the MINCA Bylaws that it mattered
who the partners in the project were, and that new shareholders could not be introduced without

the consent of the other shareholders.

205. Third, Clause Twenty Eighth of the Work Contract stipulated that “the parties
may not assign in any manner this agreement except by prior written approval of the other
party.” Article X (Assignment; Binding Effect) of the 1997 Amended Shareholders’

Agreement?”

2206

made by CVG and Placer Dome stipulated:

Unless otherwise provided herein, the parties cannot assign their rights or
delegate their obligations hereunder without the other party’s prior written
consent. This Amended Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the
benefit of each contracting party, and their permitted assignees.

The fact that an assignment “in any manner” was forbidden unless prior written consent was
obtained from the other party means, in the understanding of the Tribunal, that an assignment

could not be made indirectly by a change of the owner of the shares of MINCA.

206. Moreover, as was noted above, the only clear way in which a change of control
could be effected in accordance with the MINCA Bylaws, through the Article 9 pre-emption
procedure, was not followed.”°* Placer Dome clearly sought to withdraw from the partnership
that was secured by the structure of MINCA and to insert another company in its place. But

Placer Dome did not present CVG with the price of the deal with Vannessa before it was
208 Ex. C-6A.

206 Ex. C-20A, Clause Twenty Eighth.

207 Ex. C-30.

208 See 474 above.

63

completed and allow 30 days for CVG to meet that price. Indeed, at the very meeting at which
the President of MINCA met Mr Pinedo, in-house counsel for PDV, to inform Placer Dome of
CVG’s decision to consider Placer Dome’s proposal, Mr Pinedo advised MINCA’s President for
the first time of the impending sale to Vannessa. Despite Placer Dome’s proposal to sell to
CVG, and CVG’s interest in considering the proposal, Claimant disrupted this process by
thrusting on CVG the deal that it had agreed with Vannessa.

207. The unavoidable conclusion is that this series of provisions shows clearly that the
whole operation had to remain inside the joint venture between Placer Dome and CVG, without
the introduction by either party, through one device or another, of a new party without the

consent of the other party.

208. Though it was apparent that Placer Dome was actively seeking a new investor to
step into the Las Cristinas project, it is not disputed that Placer Dome did not inform CVG of its
intention to transfer its interests in PDV to Vannessa until a matter of hours before the expiry of
the agreed period of suspension on July 15, 2001. Nor is it disputed that CVG had the right to
terminate the Work Contract with MINCA in the event of any further unauthorized suspension.
Further, it is evident that the termination of the Work Contract would have terminated the basis

upon which Placer Dome had made its investment.

209. It is well established that, in order to amount to an expropriation under
international law, it is necessary that the conduct of the State should go beyond that which an
ordinary contracting party could adopt.” In the present case, although in 2002 various legal
measures were adopted to cancel rights in respect of Las Cristinas, those measures were all
consequent upon the initial termination of the Work Contract — as was the physical occupation of

the Las Cristinas site by CVG.

210. The evidence points to the termination being a step for which CVG and Placer
Dome had made contractual provision, motivated by the unauthorised continuation of the work
suspension and the withdrawal of Placer Dome from its participation (via PDV) in the Las

209 See, e.g., Impregilo SpA v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on

Jurisdiction, April 22, 2005 (hereinafter, Impregilo v. Pakistan), 4 260; Consortium RFCC v. Kingdom of
Morocco, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/6, Award, December 22, 2003, 4 51; ILC Articles on State
Responsibility, Commentary on Article 4, 6.

64

Cristinas project.7"° Claimant has not shown that Respondent’s actions were more than

legitimate contractual responses to what the Tribunal considers to be contractual breaches.

211. The Tribunal takes note that the notice of the breach,”! dated August 6, 2001,
invokes three contractual breaches by MINCA: (1) the violation of its obligation to submit
detailed reports to CVG; (2) the failure to resume work on the mine, after the expiration of the
last extension on July 15, 2001; (3) the entry into a transaction with Claimant for the transfer of
all of the shares of MINCA “thus contravening express contractual provisions contained in
Clause Twenty-fifth [in fact, Twenty Eighth] of the above referenced Contract [i.e., the Work
Contract], by virtue whereof it was bound to obtain due written authorization by CVG therefor in

view of the scope such transfer has over MINCA ... .”

212. The three same violations were also asserted in the notice of cancellation of the
Work Contract”'? on 6 November 2001, after the lapse of the 90 day period given to Claimant to

remedy the violations.

213. The Tribunal finds no evidence that termination was motivated by an intention to
confer benefits upon CVG, Crystallex (with whom Respondent subsequently made an agreement

concerning Las Cristinas), or any other entity.

214. The Tribunal does not consider that the termination of the Work Contract rises
above the “high threshold’*" that separates a contractual dispute from a violation of a treaty
prohibition on expropriation. The claim that Respondent has violated Article VII of the Canada-
Venezuela BIT by the termination of the Work Contract and the steps consequential upon that

termination is accordingly rejected.

210 Respondent also cited the failure of MINCA to file reports as a reason for termination of the Work
Contract. See Ex. C-109A, Ex. R-85.

Ex. C-109A (emphasis added).

Ex. C-148A.

Impregilo v. Pakistan, § 267.

65

215. As to the taking of physical assets in the context of the November 2001 takeover

214

of the Las Cristinas site,"” the Seventeenth Clause of the Work Contract provided that those

assets would revert to Venezuela (or CVG) upon termination of the Contract:
Permanent works done by the Company [MINCA], including facilities,
accessories, equipment and any other goods acquired in ownership to be used
for the exploration, development and exploitation subject hereof shall pass in

full title to the Corporation [CVG], free of encumbrances and charges, and
without any indemnity, once this Agreement terminates, whatever the cause.

While the Seventeenth Clause of the Work Contract was modified on April 7, 19997! to change
the reference to “the Corporation“ to “the Nation,” this change does not affect the analysis
because, either way, Placer Dome had no right to them, and consequently Vannessa could have

no right to claim damages for them.
B. Fair and Equitable Treatment and Full Protection and Security

216. Claimant’s submissions regarding alleged violations of the provisions on fair and
equitable treatment (“FET”) and full protection and security (“FPS”), both contained in Article
II(2) of the Canada-Venezuela BIT, are both considered in this section, although they are two

distinct standards of protection of an investor’s rights.
1. Claimant’s Position

217. Claimant claims a breach of the right to fair and equitable treatment through the
unilateral termination by CVG of the Work Contract without first resorting to “arbitration
according to the Venezuelan Civil Procedural Code, performed in accordance with the arbitration
tules of the International Chamber of Commerce in Paris” as provided in Clause Twenty Sixth of
the Work Contract, and also in the conduct of CVG and the Venezuelan courts which, it says,
prevented MINCA from commencing the ICC arbitration in respect of the contractual
disputes.*"° Claimant rejects Respondent’s argument that MINCA itself had failed to present a

case to the ICC and instead chose to pursue a process of “formalisation” of arbitration before the

214 See 4 100 above.
21s Ex. C-21A.
216

Tr. Day 2:291-305 (Terry).

66

Venezuelan courts, arguing that the formalisation process was required by the applicable rules of
the Venezuelan Civil Procedure Code. Claimant says that CVG had explicitly rejected the
possibility of arbitrating disputes in respect of (allegedly) administrative contracts. More
broadly, Claimant argues that it was mistreated by the judicial system because delays and
dismissals of its claims by courts, which were less than independent and impartial and were
acting against the background of political controversy, had the effect of denying its right to
arbitration.?'’ Claimant also invokes its reasonable and legitimate expectations that CVG would

respect the contractual right to go to arbitration.”"*

218. Claimant considers that the standard of FPS applies to the protection by the State
of foreign investments from actions of the State’s officials and agencies. Claimant argues that
Respondent failed to provide full protection and security to its investment by not exercising due
diligence in protecting Claimant from injurious acts of Respondent’s officials and agencies.
Claimant argues that “full protection and security” is not limited to cases involving civil strife
and also applies to a situation such as that in the present dispute. In particular, Claimant argues
that: the Ministry of Energy and Mines failed to exercise its obligations of supervision and
control in respect of the Las Cristinas project; the Venezuelan Fiscalia failed to properly
investigate the unlawful expropriations of Claimant’s rights; and the National Assembly

committees failed to properly investigate its complaints.”!°

2. Respondent’s Position

219. Respondent denies that it breached the obligation to provide fair and equitable
treatment. It argues that Claimant’s position is fundamentally flawed in two respects: first,
MINCA itself prevented the Venezuelan courts from ordering arbitration, by the procedures that
it chose to pursue before those courts; secondly, MINCA never tried to initiate the arbitration
with the ICC. More broadly, Claimant’s arguments, even if true, would not satisfy “[t]he

standard for denial of justice [that] requires evidently arbitrary, unjust, idiosyncratic,

27 Claimant’s Memorial §§ 190-208; Claimant’s Reply 4 551-64.
218 Tr. Day 4:837-38 (Terry). For a broader view, see Tr. Day 2:314-19 (Terry).
219

Claimant’s Reply f] 565-74. See also Tr. Day 2:319-20 (Terry).

67

9220

discriminatory acts. In the oral proceedings, Respondent rejected Claimant’s arguments

about its legitimate expectations as being vague and unsubstantiated.””!

220. Respondent considers that the FPS standard is in principle limited to the duty of
the State to protect investors against physical violence, and notes the uncertainty about the
application of the standard outside the context of protection from physical violence.”
Respondent says that it has not denied full protection and security to Claimant. In any event, it
says that the Ministry of Energy and Mines did not have any obligation to prevent CVG from
exercising its contractual rights, and that the events alleged could not establish a breach of an
obligation to protect.”* Claimant did not have any right to an investigation by the Fiscalia or

any right to have committees of the National Assembly investigate its complaints.”~*
3. The Tribunal’s Decision

221. The Tribunal has found that the decision to terminate the Work Contract, and the
consequent steps to take over the Las Cristinas site and to bring rights in respect of Las Cristinas
under the control of Respondent, did not amount to an expropriation. They were contractual
responses to what the Tribunal considers to be contractual breaches. The questions here are
whether Respondent violated the Treaty by treating the investment unfairly or inequitably, and

whether there was any failure to accord full protection and security to the investment.

222. The Tribunal recognizes that there are different formulations of the precise
content of the FET standard, but observes that they all have in common the requirement that the
standard does not guarantee the success or profitability of an investment but requires that the
treatment of investments not fall below a minimum standard of fairness and equitableness that all
investors have a right to expect. The Tribunal agrees that in this case the treatment of Claimant’s

investment by Respondent, in light of the manner in which the investment was made and of the

220

Respondent's Rejoinder 813. See generally Respondent’s Rejoinder {| 792-832; Tr. Day 3:605-14
(Hodgson).

221

Tr. Day 3:564-69 (Goodman); Tr. Day 3:585-87 (Hodgson).

222

22 Tr. Day 3:615-17 (Hodgson).

223

Respondent's Rejoinder {fj 833-48; Tr. Day 3:618-19 (Hodgson).

24

2 Respondent's Rejoinder 4 849-53; Tr. Day 3:614-15 (Hodgson).

68

contractual framework that had been agreed for the development of Las Cristinas, cannot be
regarded as falling below that minimum standard, however the standard might be formulated in

its precise details.

223. Similarly, as far as the content of the FPS standard is concerned, the Tribunal is
broadly in agreement that it applies at least in situations where actions of third parties involving
either physical violence or the disregard of legal rights occur, and requires that the State exercise
due diligence to prevent harm to the investor, it being understood that the FPS standard does not
grant the investor an “insurance against all and every risk.” While members of the Tribunal do
not consider that there is a more precise formulation of the content of the standard that is

225

universally accepte they are in agreement that even the most demanding formulation of the

FPS standard for which Claimant contended was not violated in the present case.

224. More specifically, the Tribunal does not accept that the termination of the Work
Contract without first resorting to arbitration constitutes a violation of either the right to fair and

equitable treatment or the right to full protection and security.

225. Having considered the evidence concerning Venezuelan law that was put before
it, the Tribunal is not persuaded that arbitration was an essential precondition to termination of
the contract, although under Clause Twenty Sixth of the Work Contract arbitration was plainly

an option for the resolution of disputes arising out of the termination of the contract.

226. Furthermore, in the view of the Tribunal, Claimant has not proved its claim that
Respondent has violated Claimant’s right to fair and equitable treatment or its right to full
protection and security under the BIT by obstructing the access of Claimant to the Venezuelan

courts or to arbitration in order to pursue its claims. It is true that in the ten sets of proceedings

226

listed above” there are instances in which the Venezuelan Courts failed to deal promptly, or at

all, with applications for interim relief; and it is true that there were considerable delays in

225 For example, the different approaches in Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The Republic

of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN 3467, Award, July 1, 2004, 4] 183-87, and in El Paso Energy
International Company v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Award, October 31, 2011,
522-23 both command support.

226

See 4] 103 above.

69

dealing with many of the applications. The Tribunal does not, however, consider that the delays

are of an order that violates Respondent’s obligations under the Treaty.

227. Tribunals in other cases have pointed to the high threshold in this regard. In
Waste Management, the award referred to “a lack of due process leading to an outcome which
offends judicial propriety — as might be the case with a manifest failure of natural justice.””””
The Tribunal considers that to be the correct approach. The question is not whether the host
State legal system is performing as efficiently as it ideally could: it is whether it is performing so
badly as to violate treaty obligations to accord fair and equitable treatment and full protection
and security. The Tribunal does not consider that the delays in this case are of an order that

constitute conduct that falls below the minimum standard demanded by the Treaty.

228. Allegations of a lack of independence and impartiality are more difficult to deal
with. They often amount to allegations of violations of professional rules, or even of criminal
laws, and it is not to be expected that evidence will be readily available. Such allegations would,
if proven, constitute very serious violations of the State’s treaty obligations. But they must be
properly proved; and the proof must, at least ordinarily, relate to the specific cases in which the
impropriety is alleged to have occurred. Inferences of a serious and endemic lack of
independence and impartiality in the judiciary, drawn from an examination of other cases or
from anecdotal or circumstantial evidence, will not ordinarily suffice to prove an allegation of
impropriety in a particular case. The evidence in this case does not warrant a conclusion that the
decisions of the courts in Venezuela in the proceedings instituted by Claimant demonstrate a lack
of independence or impartiality, and the Tribunal does not accept that they amount to breaches of

either the right to fair and equitable treatment or the right to full protection and security.

229. As far as concerns Claimant’s submissions concerning access to ICC arbitration
are concerned, the Tribunal notes that Claimant did not file an application directly with the ICC,
but chose to seek an order from the Venezuelan courts that CVG must accept ICC arbitration.
Claimant had also sought to litigate various aspects of the dispute before the Venezuelan courts,

27

2 Waste Management v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, April 30, 2004,
4198. Cf, Loewen Group v. United States of America, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, Award, June 26,
2003, § 132; Alex Genin v. The Republic of Estonia, ICSID Case No. ARB/99/2, Award, June 25, 2001,
4371.

70

but eventually decided to waive its right to continue its proceedings before the Venezuelan courts
in order to pursue the present arbitration. Such a waiver is a necessary precondition of access to
arbitration under the Canada-Venezuela BIT, stipulated by Article XII(3)(b). That provision also
requires that Claimant waive its rights to initiate or continue “a dispute settlement procedure of
any kind” to which the dispute has been referred. The right to ICC arbitration had, therefore, to

be waived in order that Claimant could bring the case before this Tribunal.

230. Further, the Tribunal notes that a three-year time limit is imposed by Article
XII(3)(d) of the BIT, in respect to arbitration under the Treaty. Access to this Tribunal is an
agreed alternative to the pursuit of remedies in national courts or in contractual arbitrations, in

relation to complaints of conduct that is alleged to amount to a violation of the Treaty.

231. Claimant did not support its allegations that its treatment by Respondent was
discriminatory. No evidence of dissimilar treatment of investors in a position similar to that of
Claimant was adduced. Similarly, no further evidence to support the allegation of a breach of the
“fair and equitable treatment” provision or the “full protection and security” provision in the BIT

was adduced. The Tribunal does not consider that Claimant has substantiated either allegation.

232. In these circumstances, the Tribunal finds that there has been no violation of the
duty to accord Claimant’s investment fair and equitable treatment or the duty to accord it full

protection and security under the BIT.
Ill. CONCLUSION

233. For the reasons given above, the Tribunal concludes that there has been no

violation of the rights of Claimant under the Canada-Venezuela BIT.
Iv. COSTS

234. The Tribunal having found that there has been no violation of Claimant’s rights
under the BIT, the question of costs remains. The Decision on Jurisdiction reserved the
allocation of costs for later determination, and the Tribunal accordingly has to decide on the

allocation of costs for both the jurisdiction and the merits phases of this case.

71

235. The Tribunal notes that both Parties employed outside counsel and experts. It
notes further that the total costs exceeded US $20 million and that Claimant’s costs were under
one-half of Respondent’s costs. While it understands the magnitude of the issues at stake, and
that each Party took its own decisions on how best to protect its interests, the Tribunal considers
it regrettable that the costs of what should be an efficient and reasonably expeditious procedure

are so high.

236. In this case, Claimant was in effect the winner of the jurisdiction phase and the
loser of the merits phase of this case. Given the logistics of case preparation and the extent to
which issues are intertwined, it is practically impossible to separate out the costs of the two
phases. Taking account of the extent to which each side has prevailed, and the respective
expenditures of each Party, the Tribunal has decided that each side should bear its own costs and

one-half of the costs of the Tribunal and of ICSID.
Vv. DISPOSITIF

237. For the above reasons, and pursuant to Article 52 of the Arbitration Rules, the
Arbitral Tribunal:

i) by a majority rejects the objections to jurisdiction made by the Bolivarian

Republic of Venezuela, and decides that it has jurisdiction to determine the dispute;

ii) unanimously dismisses all of the claims made by Claimant against Respondent
under the Canada-Venezuela Bilateral Investment Treaty in this case, summarized in

paragraph 344 of Claimant’s Memorial and paragraph 639 of Claimant’s Reply; and

iii) unanimously decides that each Party shall bear its own costs and one-half of the

costs of the Tribunal and of ICSID.

72

Signed [Signed]

Hon. Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Date: 12-17-2012 Date: 12-10-2012

Signed

Professor Vaughan Lowe QC, President

Date: 12-14-2012

73

