INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

VENEZUELA HOLDINGS, B.V.
MOBIL CERRO NEGRO HOLDING, LTD.
MOBIL VENEZOLANA DE PETROLEOS HOLDINGS, INC.
MOBIL CERRO NEGRO, LTD. AND
MOBIL VENEZOLANA DE PETROLEOS, INC.
(RESPONDENTS)

AND

BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
(APPLICANT)

ICSID CASE No. ARB/07/27)

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee:
Sir Franklin Berman, President of the Committee
Tan Sri Cecil Abraham, Member of the Committee
Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper, Member of the Committee

Secretary of the Committee:
Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco

Date of dispatch to the Parties: March 9, 2017

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Respondents:

Mr. Thomas L. Cubbage III
Mr. Miguel Lopez Forastier
Ms. Mary T. Hernandez
Covington & Burling LLP
1201 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
Washington, D.C. 20004-2401
USA

Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel
Mr. Scott Vesel

Mr. Simon Maynard
Three Crowns LLP
New Fetter Place

8-10 New Fetter Lane
London EC4A 1AZ
UK

Mrs. Alice Brown

Mr. Eugene J. Silva II

Production Company Law Department
Exxon Mobil Corporation

1301 Fannin Street

CORP-FB-1459

Houston, TX 77002

USA

Representing the Applicant:

Dr. Reinaldo Enrique Mujioz Pedroza
Procurador General de la Reptiblica

Av. Los Tlustres, cruce con calle Francisco Lazo
Marti

Edif. Procuraduria General de la Reptiblica,
piso 8

Urb. Santa Ménica

Caracas 1040

Venezuela

Mr. George Kahale, III

Mr. Benard V. Preziosi, Jr.

Ms. Miriam K. Harwood

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
101 Park Avenue

New York, NY 10178

USA

Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, S.C.
Rubén Dario 281, Pisos 8 & 9

Col. Bosque de Chapultepec

11580 Mexico, D.F.

Mexico

Il.

Table of Contents

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Procedural History 1
1. Application, Registration, Provisional Stay of Enforcement and Constitution of the
Committee 1
2. First Session and Procedural Order NO. 1.....sssssssessessessesneeseensceneeseeneeneeneenesseeneeneeneennes 2
3. Stay of Enforcement 3
4, Written Procedure 6
5. Hearing on A I 6
6. Post-Hearing Phase 8
Request for Relief 9
1. Appli 9
2. Respond 9
Arguments of the Partie: 9
1. Appli 9
A. Grounds for li 9
B. Standard for hi 10
(i) Manifest excess of powers: 10
(ii) Failure to state reasons: 11
(iii)Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure: ...........00ccceeeeeee 12
C. Facts alleged supporting the grounds for ANnulMent.....c.cccccccece ete 13
(i) Failure to Apply the Proper Law and the Special Agreement concerning the Cerro
Negro Project 13
(ii) Refusal to allow essential document production ..........cccceeeeeeeeeeseseeeeeeeees 18
(iii)Exercise of Jurisdiction under the Dutch Treaty based on a Corporate
Restructuring Effected to Gain access to ICSID..
2. Respond 23
A. Concerning the grounds for hi 23
B. Concerning the standard for li 23
(i) Manifest excess of powers: 24
(ii) Failure to state reasons: 25
(iii)Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure: .
C. Concerning the alleged facts supporting the grounds for annulment

 

iii

(i) Failure to Apply the Proper Law and the Special Agreement concerning the Cerro
Negro Project 27

(ii) Refusal to allow essential document production ..........cccceeeeeeeeeeseseeeeeeeees 30

(iii)Exercise of Jurisdiction under the Dutch Treaty based on a Corporate
Restructuring Effected to Gain access to ICSID..

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

IV. the Committee’S Analysis 35
(i) Jurisdiction 36
(ii) Excess of power (Article 52(1)(D) oo... eeeeceseseeeeseeeeteeeeeeeneneeeeeensnenenes 39
(iii)Failure to give reasons (Article 52(1)(€).....cccccsecseseseees ese eeeeeeneneneneeeeneeenees 39
(iv) Document production 42
(v) ‘The Price Cap’ 46
V. Decision 71
VI. Cost 73
VII. Dispositif. 74

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. APPLICATION, REGISTRATION, PROVISIONAL STAY OF ENFORCEMENT AND
CONSTITUTION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. On 2 February 2015, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (““Venezuela” or “the Applicant”)
filed with the Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID” or “the Centre”) an Application under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention
and Rule 50 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules (‘the Application”), seeking the annulment of the
Award rendered on 9 October 2014 (“the Award”) of the Tribunal in the arbitration
proceedings between Venezuela Holdings, B.V., Mobil Cerro Negro Holding, Ltd., Mobil
Venezolana de Petréleos Holdings, Inc., Mobil Cerro Negro, Ltd. and Mobil Venezolana de
Petrdleos, Inc. (“the Mobil Parties” or “Respondents”’) and Venezuela. The Application sought
annulment of the Award on three of the five grounds set forth in Article 52(1) of the

Convention.

2. The Application also included a request for a stay of enforcement of the Award under

Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention.

3. On 9 February 2015, the Secretary-General informed the Parties that the Application had been
registered on that date and that the Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID would
proceed to appoint an ad hoc Committee pursuant to Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention.
The Parties were also notified that, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2), enforcement of

the Award had been provisionally stayed.

4. By letter of 8 May 2015 the Secretary-General notified the Parties that a Committee had been
constituted, composed of Sir Franklin Berman (British) as President, Tan Sri Cecil Abraham
(Malaysian) and Prof. Dr. Rolf Knieper (German) as Members, and that, in accordance with
Rule 52(2) of the Arbitration Rules, the annulment proceeding was deemed to have begun on
that date. The Parties were also informed that Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco, Legal Counsel,

ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Committee.

2. FIRST SESSION AND PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 1

On 22 May 2015, the Secretary circulated a draft agenda for the first session and invited the
Parties to consult and revert to the Committee with their joint or separate proposals on the draft

agenda items as well as on any item they might wish to add.

After consultation with the Parties, the Committee notified the Parties on 10 June 2015,

pursuant to Arbitration Rule 13(1) that the first session would be held on 7 July 2015.

On 11 June 2015, the Parties jointly submitted a draft Procedural Order No. 1 with their
agreement on all the items included in the draft agenda and confirmed that they had no items
that they wished to add. It was also agreed that the first session would be held by telephone

conference.

On 15 June 2015, the Mobil Parties enclosed a copy of the Decision on Revision that had been
issued by the Tribunal on 12 June 2016. In its Decision, the Tribunal dismissed the Application
for Revision as inadmissible, declared the stay of enforcement automatically terminated and

decided that all costs related to the proceeding would be born by the Applicant.

The first session was duly held by telephone conference on 7 July 2015. The list of participants

was as follows:

Members of the Committee:
Sir Franklin Berman, President of the Committee
Tan Sri Cecil Abraham, Member of the Committee

Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper, Member of the Committee

ICSID Secretariat:

Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco, Secretary of the Committee

Attending on behalf of the Applicant:

Mr. George Kahale, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

Mr. Ben Preziosi, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle
Ms. Arianna Sanchez, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

10.

13.

14.

Mr. Fuad Zarbiyev, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

Attending on behalf of the Respondents:

Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel, Three Crowns

Mr. Scott Vesel, Three Crowns

Mr. Thomas L. Cubbage III, Covington & Burling
Mr. Miguel Lépez Forastier, Covington & Burling
Mr. René Mouledoux, ExxonMobil

Mr. Eugene Silva II, ExxonMobil

On 13 July 2015, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 1 containing the Committee’s

decisions on procedure, including a schedule for written submissions.

3. STAY OF ENFORCEMENT

. On9 June 2015, the Mobil Parties submitted a communication contending that “the provisional

stay of enforcement granted by the Secretary General on 9 February 2015 [had] automatically
terminated as of 8 June 2015” and seeking confirmation from the Committee. On the same
day the Applicant wrote to the Committee opposing the Respondents’ interpretation of
Rule 54(2). The Applicant contended that the stay remained in place and should continue in
place until the conclusion of the proceeding. If the Respondents wished the Committee to rule
on the continuation of the stay, the Applicant proposed that the Committee establish a briefing
schedule for that purpose. The Parties exchanged further communications on whether the
request was properly framed as a request for a new stay (assuming the stay had been
automatically terminated) or as a request for the continuation of the stay (assuming the stay

continued in place).

. On 10 June 2015, the Committee established a schedule of submissions on the issue of a stay

and indicated that the Parties would be given the opportunity to argue this issue orally before

the Committee during the first session.

On 10 June 2015, the Mobil Parties filed their submission on the stay issue.

On 24 June 2015, Venezuela filed its submission on the stay issue.

15. Having heard the Parties’ oral arguments at the first session on 7 July 2015, the Committee
issued its decision concerning the stay in Procedural Order No. 2 dated 28 July 2015. In the
Order, the Committee noted that “[t]he Parties were in disagreement over the essential nature
of the stay application. In the view of Venezuela, it was applying for a prolongation of the
provisional stay brought into effect by the Secretary-General in application of Article 52.5 of
the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 54(2). In the view of the Mobil Parties, that
provisional stay had lapsed, and the application could therefore only be for the imposition of a
fresh stay de novo. Given the actual enforcement situation, however, both Parties had indicated
that, in the circumstances, the question was not one which the Committee was required to
decide. The Committee was moreover satisfied that the criteria to be applied, in deciding
whether to grant or to deny a stay, would be the same under either of the two alternative

scenarios.” Paragraph 10 of the Order reads as follows:

a) The enforcement of the Award of the Tribunal dated 9 October 2014 (ICSID Case
No. ARB/07/27) is stayed pending the Committee’s decision on Venezuela’s

application of 2 February 2015 for its annulment.

b

The continued effect of Paragraph a. above is conditional on the receipt, within 30
days of the date of this Order, of an official undertaking in writing, by a Minister
or other senior officer empowered to commit the Government of Venezuela, that,
if the Committee decides not to annul the Award, or to annul it only in part,
Venezuela will promptly comply with any or all parts of the Award that have not
been annulled. The written undertaking will be addressed to the Committee and

copied to each of the Mobil Parties.

c

If no undertaking satisfying the terms of Paragraph b. above has been received at
the end of the time limit specified in that paragraph, the stay will automatically be
lifted 15 days later, but only if there has by then been received an official
undertaking or undertakings in writing, by a senior officer or officers empowered
to commit each of the Mobil Parties, that no attempt will be made to enforce any
part of the Award in a manner that does not take full account of the requirement
set forth in the above-cited paragraphs of the Award to avoid double recovery. In
the absence of an undertaking or undertakings to that effect, the stay will continue

in effect until such time as the requisite undertaking or undertakings have been

16.

received. The written undertaking or undertakings will be addressed to the
Committee and copied to each of the other Parties to the present annulment

proceedings.

d

It is open to any Party to apply at any time for a modification or termination of the

above in accordance with the provisions of Arbitration Rule 54.

e) Any Party may apply to the Committee, if the need arises, to certify whether the

conditions laid down in Paragraphs b. or c. above have been duly complied with.

On 18 August 2015, the Centre received a letter addressed to the Committee by the
Viceprocurador de la Reptiblica of Venezuela, which was however challenged by the Mobil
Parties by letter of 20 August 2015 as failing to comply with the requirements of paragraph
10(b) of Order No. 2; the Mobil Parties requested that the stay be lifted in accordance with
paragraph 10(c) of the Order unless Venezuela provided a compliant undertaking by 26 August
2015 or a bank guarantee covering the full amount of the La Ceiba portion of the Award by

10 September 2015.

. On 24 August 2015, the Committee suspended the time limits under paragraph 10 of Order

No. 2 and invited Venezuela to confirm in writing, at Ministerial level, not later than 31 August
2015, that the letter did constitute “a formal and binding undertaking on the part of the
Government of Venezuela, in the words of sub-paragraph 10(b), ‘that, if the Committee
decides not to annul the Award, or to annul it only in part, Venezuela [would] promptly comply
with any or all parts of the Award that have not been annulled’.” The Committee further noted
that the Mobil Parties would be at liberty thereafter, if they considered it necessary, to avail

themselves of the procedure specified in sub-paragraph 10(e) of the Order.

. On 28 August 2015, a letter dated 27 August 2015 was received from the Minister of Petroleum

and Mines of Venezuela containing a confirmation as requested by the Committee. On
1 September 2015, the Mobil Parties requested the Committee to confirm under
paragraph 10(e) of Order No. 2 that Venezuela had not complied with paragraph 10(b) of the
Order and to order that the stay be lifted immediately upon provision by the Mobil Parties of
the undertaking referred to in paragraph 10(c) of the Order. On 2 September 2015, the

Committee invited the Applicant’s response; the time limits under paragraph 10 of Procedural

19.

2

S

21.

22.

23.

Order No. 2 would in the meanwhile remain suspended. On 4 September 2015, the Applicant

wrote asserting that the Minister’s letter did comply with the Committee’s request.

On 17 September 2015, the Committee issued a decision in the following terms:

[...] Having examined all of the submissions and supporting documents, the
Committee is in no doubt that the two communications made on behalf of
Venezuela correspond to the precise requirements laid down in Procedural Order
No. 2, notably as regards the scope of the undertaking and its operation in time.
[...] The Committee is accordingly satisfied that the Government of Venezuela has
formally engaged itself, in the event that the Committee decides not to annul the
Award, or to annul it only in part, promptly to comply with any or all parts of the
Award that have not been annulled. That being so, and as laid down in sub-
paragraph 10 a. of Procedural Order No. 2, the enforcement of the Award of the
Tribunal dated 9 October 2014 (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/27) is stayed pending
the Committee’s decision on Venezuela’s application of 2 February 2015 for its
annulment. [...] In consequence of the above, sub-paragraphs 10 b., c., and e. of

Procedural Order No. 2 cease to have effect.

4. WRITTEN PROCEDURE

. On 22 July, 16 September, 4 November, and 23 December 2015, the Parties duly filed their

respective written Memorials in support of and in opposition to the Application for Annulment.

5. HEARING ON ANNULMENT

On 12 August 2015, the Committee determined, on the basis of agreement between the Parties,

that the hearing would be held on 25 and 26 January 2016.

On 2 December 2015, the Committee invited the Parties to confer and try to reach agreement
on the procedural arrangements for the hearing and submit any such agreements or points or

disagreement by 15 January 2016.

On 12 January 2016, the Parties submitted their agreements and points of disagreement

concerning procedural hearing matters. The Committee issued its decision concerning

24.

25.

26.

procedural arrangements on 14 January 2016 and confirmed that a pre-hearing organizational

meeting would not be necessary.

On 21 January 2016, the Committee sent a communication to the Parties concerning a severe
snow storm forecast for the hearing venue during the period immediately prior to the hearing.
The Committee noted that the storm was expected to disrupt transport and power, and put
forward possible alternative arrangements for that eventuality. After numerous exchanges
between the Parties and the Committee and two conference calls with its President, the hearing

days were finally vacated.

After consultation with the Parties, the Committee confirmed 8 and 9 March 2016 as the new
hearing dates, and further confirmed that the timing arrangements would be those established

for the original hearing but transposed to the new dates.

The hearing was duly held at the seat of ICSID in Washington, D.C. on 8 and 9 March 2016.

The list of participants was as follows:

Members of the Committee:
Sir Franklin Berman, President of the Committee
Tan Sri Cecil Abraham, Member of the Committee

Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper, Member of the Committee

ICSID Secretariat:

Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco, Secretary of the Committee

Attending on behalf of the Applicant:

Mr. George Kahale, III, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

Mr. Benard V. Preziosi, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

Mr. Fuad Zarbiyev, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

Mr. Borzu Sabahi, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

Ms. Arianna Sanchez, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

Mr. Simon Batifort, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

Ms. Lisandra Novo International, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

Ms. Kimberly Blair International, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

Ms. Gloria Diaz-Bujan, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle
Mr. Christopher Grech, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle
Mr. Farshad Ali Zahedinia, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle

Attending on behalf of the Respondents:

Mr. Gietan Verhoosel, Three Crowns

Mr. Scott Vesel, Three Crowns

Mr. Simon Maynard, Three Crowns

Mr. Thomas Cubbage, Covington & Burling
Mr. Miguel Lépez Forastier, Covington & Burling
Ms. Mary Hernandez, Covington & Burling
Mr. David Rodriguez, Covington & Burling
Ms. Catherine Gibson, Covington & Burling
Mr. Eugene Silva, ExxonMobil

Mr. Bill Buck, ExxonMobil

Ms. JoAnn Lee, ExxonMobil

Ms. Alice Brown, ExxonMobil

6. POST-HEARING PHASE

27. On 25 March 2016, the Parties submitted their agreed corrections to the hearing transcript.

28. On 15 April 2016, as requested by the Committee, the Parties submitted their respective

statements of costs.

29. The Tribunal declared the proceeding closed on 6 January 2017 in accordance with Rules 53
and 38(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Il. REQUEST FOR RELIEF
1. APPLICANT

30. The Applicant makes the following request for relief:'

(i) [T]he portion of the Award dealing with the Cerro Negro Project should be annulled due to the
tribunal's manifest excess of powers and failure to state reasons in holding that it had jurisdiction
under the Dutch Treaty; (ii) in the event that the portion of the Award dealing with the Cerro Negro
Project is not so annulled, then the part of the Award dealing with the amount of compensation for
the Cerro Negro Project and the determination of such compensation in paragraph 404(d) of the
Award should be annulled on the grounds of (a) manifest excess of powers and failure to state
reasons in failing to apply the special agreement regarding compensation and (b) manifest excess
of powers, failure to state reasons and serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure in
failing to order document production relating to the special agreement regarding compensation;
and (iii) the portion of the Award dealing with the La Ceiba Project should be annulled due to the
tribunal's manifest excess of powers and failure to state reasons in holding that it had jurisdiction

under the Dutch Treaty.

2. RESPONDENTS

31. The Respondents makes the following request for relief:?

The Mobil Parties respectfully request that the Committee dismiss the Application and award them

all costs incurred in connection with these proceedings.

II. ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES
1. APPLICANT
A. Grounds for annulment

32. The Applicant seeks annulment of the Award under Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention.

Specifically, the Applicant relies on the following three grounds for annulment:?

' Reply, para. 323.
2 Rejoinder, para. 112.

3 Memorial, para. 102.

e Manifest excess of powers (Article 52(1)(b) ICSID Convention);
e Failure to state reasons (Article 52(1)(e) ICSID Convention); and
¢ Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure (Article 52(1)(d) ICSID

Convention).

B. Standard for annulment
33. The Applicant acknowledges that annulment constitutes an exception to the finality of awards
and that annulment does not constitute appeal. According to the Applicant, what matters is
that this exception to finality does exist under the ICSID Convention and that the Applicant is
not seeking an appeal but has filed a “bona fide application for annulment that fits squarely

within Article 52 of the ICSID Convention”.*

3

&

. The Applicant rejects the limiting proposition put forward by the Mobil Parties that annulment
is discretionary even when the grounds for annulment are met. According to the Applicant,
this proposition is not supported by the text or the drafting history of the ICSID Convention;>
“Tijn sum, if the Committee finds that a ground for annulment exists, it must annul the

Award.”°

3

an

. Concerning the specific three grounds for annulment it relies upon, Venezuela asserts the

following:

(i) Manifest excess of powers:

— Failure to apply the proper law: it is well established that a tribunal manifestly
exceeds its powers when it fails to apply the law agreed upon by the parties, even
if the tribunal is nominally applying the correct law.’ The Applicant does not
dispute that a mere error of law or a failure to apply individual provisions of the
applicable law do not constitute a manifest excess of power, but rejects the

allegation that it is seeking annulment on that basis; annulment is sought rather

+ Reply, paras, 156, 157.

5 Reply, para. 160.

© Reply, para. 170.

7 Memorial, paras. 106-110.

on the grounds that the Tribunal either completely failed to apply the proper law
or referred to it but then effectively disregarded it. The Applicant contends that
the Mobil Parties do not dispute that failure to apply the proper law altogether or
gross misapplication of the law that amounts to failure to apply it amount to a

manifest excess of power.®

— Lack of jurisdiction: the Applicant rejects the notion that it is “merely attempting
to challenge the tribunal’s ‘factual findings’ on jurisdiction;” the lack of
jurisdiction follows from the application of the standard established by the
Tribunal, such that its conclusions on jurisdiction cannot be reconciled with its
factual findings.? Lack of jurisdiction amounts to an excess of powers that is

manifest per se.'°

— Admissibility: the Applicant rejects the argument that the Tribunal’s decision on
jurisdiction amounts in reality to a decision on admissibility. Even if it were, a
characterization as admissibility does not prevent annulment for manifest excess

of powers (or failure to state reasons).!!

(ii) Failure to state reasons:

— The Applicant contends that the obligation to state reasons “flows from”
Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention, which requires that the award “deal with
every question submitted to the Tribunal, and [...] state the reasons upon which it
is based.”'? Specifically, this ground for annulment has two main components:
(first) that it is not possible to follow the Tribunal’s reasoning to its conclusion,

and (second) that the Tribunal failed to deal with questions raised by the

* Reply, paras. 172-175.

° Reply, paras, 182-183.

° Reply, paras. 177-181, 185.
4 Reply, para. 186.

2 Memorial, paras. 112-115.

applicant, the answer to which might have affected its conclusion.'* The
Applicant submits that neither of these components is disputed by the Mobil

Parties. !*

(iii) Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure:

— The Applicant contends that this ground involves a two-part test: (first) the
departure must be serious, which refers to its actual or potential impact on the
award; and (second) the procedural rule affected must be fundamental, which

refers to the minimal standards of procedure including the right to be heard. '>

— The Applicant understands that the Mobil Parties do not dispute the test itself but
rather whether it has been met in the present case. According to the Applicant:

a. The ‘seriousness’ test is met because the Tribunal’s decision on document
production prevented the Applicant from fully presenting its case.!°

b. The ‘fundamental’ test is equally met because the taking of evidence forms

part of the right to be heard.'? The discretion enjoyed by tribunals in

managing document production does not “alter the principle that flat denial

of a request for production of highly relevant and material documents is

tantamount to a denial of due process.” !§ In other words, tribunals do not

have discretion to deviate from a fundamental rule of procedure. '?

5 Reply, paras. 188-189.
4 Reply, paras. 190-191.
'5 Reply, para. 193.
'6 Reply, para. 194.
"7 Reply, para. 195.
'8 Reply, para. 197.
° Reply, para. 198.

C. Facts alleged supporting the grounds for annulment

36. The three grounds for annulment relied on by the Applicant are based on the following three

  

contentions, of which (i) and (ii) are relevant to the Cerro Negro Project, and (iii) is relevant

to both the Cerro Negro and the La Ceiba Projects:”°

“(i) the tribunal did not apply the applicable law and the special agreement relating
to the investment of the Mobil Parties in the Cerro Negro Project, thereby
disregarding the basic terms and conditions on which that investment was
authorized; (ii) the tribunal refused to allow essential document production with
respect to the fundamental issue in (i) above, applying the wrong standard and
denying the Applicant due process; and (iii) the tribunal exercised jurisdiction
under the Dutch Treaty based on a corporate restructuring effected by the Mobil
Parties in anticipation of litigation for the sole purpose of gaining access to

ICSID.”?!
(i) Failure to Apply the Proper Law and the Special Agreement concerning the Cerro
Negro Project
37. The Applicant alleges that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state

reasons when it failed to apply the proper law and the special agreement concerning the Cerro

Negro Project.”

3

oo

. It emphasizes that its Application for Annulment does not seek to challenge any findings of
fact by the Tribunal: “On the contrary, the Applicant fully agrees with the tribunal’s principal
findings relating to the compensation structure of the Cerro Negro Project.”?? According to
the Applicant, it is “the Mobil Parties [who] are forced to either distort or ignore every single
piece of evidence in the record to sustain their position on the facts concerning the

compensation structure of the Cerro Negro Project.”*4

2° Memorial, para. 102.

2! Memorial, para. 102.
Memorial, paras. 105, 123.
2 Reply, paras. 201, 204.

> Reply, para. 203.

39. Venezuela contends that the portion of the Tribunal’s decision relating to the compensation for
the Cerro Negro Project must be annulled precisely because the Tribunal’s conclusions do not
follow from the Tribunal’s factual findings.*> The Tribunal’s conclusions are at odds with its
own findings of fact as a result of its failure to apply the proper law under Article 9(5) of the
Dutch Treaty, which amounts to a manifest excess of power. The Tribunal also failed to state
the reasons that would carry its findings of fact to its conclusions on the Cerro Negro Project

compensation structure.

a) Manifest excess of powers
Failure to apply Article 9(5) of the Dutch Treat:

40. According to the Applicant, Article 9(5) of the Dutch Treaty required that the Award be based
“not only on the provisions of the Dutch Treaty and international law, but also on Venezuelan
law and ‘the provisions of special agreements relating to the investments’.””° The Tribunal
acknowledged this provision but manifestly exceeded its powers when it disregarded the
compensation structure for the Cerro Negro Project applicable under Venezuelan law and the
special agreement on compensation for the Cerro Negro Project, namely the Cerro Negro

Association Agreement, as authorized by the Cerro Negro Congressional Authorization.”

41. The Applicant asserts that a tribunal manifestly exceeds its powers when it fails to apply the
law agreed upon by the parties,”* even if the tribunal is nominally applying the correct law.?°
In the present case, the Applicant submits that the Tribunal referred to Article 9(5) of the BIT
but then ignored both the applicable law (Venezuelan law) and the special agreement under
that provision (the Cerro Negro Association Agreement, as authorized by the Cerro Negro

Congressional Authorization).*°

°5 Reply, para. 206.

2 Memorial, para. 105.

2” Memorial, paras. 106-110, 121-122. Reply, para. 207.
28 Memorial, para. 106.

2° Memorial, para. 107.

3 Memorial, paras. 106-110, 124.

42. Venezuela rejects the Mobil Parties’ argument that in order to establish a manifest excess of
powers “the Republic would need to establish that either (a) the Tribunal applied a law different
than the ones enumerated in Article 9(5) or (b) under the exception recognized by some
committees, the Tribunal erred so egregiously in its determination as to which of these sources
of law applied to which issues as to amount to a failure to apply these sources of law at all.”?!
According to Venezuela, Article 9(5) does not establish options, and so the Tribunal was not
free to disregard a special agreement on compensation.** This is also not contrary to
international law; when a State admits an investment under certain conditions, the State does

not violate international law by applying those conditions.*?

4

oO

. Regarding failure to apply Venezuelan law, the Applicant ultimately relies on the argument
that “[a] party cannot claim compensation for the expropriation of rights it never had.”**
Because the scope of an investor’s rights is always determined by national law, the Tribunal
should have applied Venezuelan law in order to determine the scope of the Mobil Parties’

rights.

4

&

. In this sense, the relevant enquiry*> is not “whether a particular asset ‘qualifies as an investment
under the Treaty’ but rather what that asset consists of.”*° What the asset consists of (or the
scope of the rights attached to it) is determined by national law, not international law.
International law can only provide protection for rights recognized by domestic law, but not

create new property rights or expand existing property rights.*”

4

an

. The Tribunal determined the extent of the compensation due for the expropriation of the
Respondents’ rights under international law, in reliance on the fundamental but irrelevant

principle that a State may not invoke its internal law as an excuse to escape international

3! Reply, para. 207, quoting from Counter-Memorial, para. 180.
* Reply, para. 208.

3 Reply, para. 210.

¥ Reply, para. 219.

35 Reply, para. 225.

% Reply, para. 219.

57 Reply, paras. 211, 219.

obligations. In so doing, the Tribunal failed to address the Applicant’s argument that an
investor’s property rights are defined by local law or its corollary that an investment treaty
merely protects these rights but does not create or expand them.** By applying international
law instead of domestic law to determine the scope of the expropriated rights the Tribunal

manifestly exceeded its powers.

4

a

. Regarding failure to apply the special agreement, the Applicant relies on the combination of
the Cerro Negro Congressional Authorization and the Cerro Negro Association Agreement.*?
Together, these instruments established the terms and conditions of the Cerro Negro Project,
including its compensation structure, which included the price cap on compensation for
governmental action affecting the project. This compensation structure constituted a special
agreement in the sense of Article 9(5) regardless of whether the State was a party to the
Association Agreement because the parties to the Association Agreement could not depart
from the terms of the Congressional Authorization, as mandated by ArticleS of the
Nationalization Law.*° The conditions laid down by the Congressional Authorization would
apply even if the Treaty did not specifically include special agreements in Article 9(5). This
is (i) because the Congressional Authorization constituted a condition for the investment
established from the outset by the State and (ii) because, as a matter of principle, property

rights are created and defined by national law.

b) Failure to state reasons

4

Nn

. The Applicant submits that the purported reasons given by the Tribunal to ignore the Cerro
Negro Project compensation structure are “not reasons at all”. They were facts that bore no
relevance to the issue before the Tribunal and did not address the core point made by Venezuela
that “a party cannot receive compensation for rights it never had or beyond the rights it did

have.””4!

38 Memorial, paras. 128-132.

*? Venezuela rejects the Mobil Parties’ argument that there was no special agreement capable of being applied as a
source of law. Reply, para. 226.

“0 Reply, paras. 227-230.
+1 Reply, paras. 236-241. Memorial, paras. 123-130.

48. The Applicant claims that the Tribunal also failed to state reasons in the sense of Article

4

5

©

So

52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention in that it failed to address the Applicant’s argument that an
investor’s property rights are defined by domestic law, which would have affected the outcome

of the Award. A failure to deal with material issues is tantamount to a failure to state reasons.

. According to the Applicant, the Tribunal also failed to address the Applicant’s arguments

(i) that the compensation structure established for the Cerro Negro Project pursuant to the
Cerro Negro Congressional Authorization was an integral part of the fair market value
analysis;*° (ii) that the relevance of the compensation provisions was not a matter of a “third-

party beneficiary” analysis, which was not part of Venezuela’s argument;*+

as well as (iii) Dr.
Mommer’s uncontested testimony which would have supported the Tribunal’s own findings
of fact concerning the compensation structure under the Association Agreement and the

Congressional Authorization.**

c) Conclusion

. In the light of the above, the Applicant frames the argument concerning annulment under

Article 52(1)(b) and/or (e) of the ICSID Convention based on the Tribunal’s failure to apply

the proper law and the special agreement as follows:

The issue of whether the portion of the Award relating to compensation for
the Cerro Negro Project should be annulled for manifest excess of powers
or failure to state reasons, or both, hinges upon whether there was any basis
for the tribunal to disregard the terms and conditions established for the
Cerro Negro Project pursuant to the Cerro Negro Congressional

Authorization.“

* Reply, para. 243. Memorial, paras. 131-132. The Applicant rejects the Respondents’ argument that this is a new
issue that was not presented before the Tribunal. Reply, paras. 245-249.

+8 Reply, paras. 250-264. Memorial, paras. 133-137.
+ Reply, paras. 265-273. Memorial, paras. 138-142.
+5 Reply, paras. 274-276. Memorial, paras. 143-147.
46 Reply, para. 277.

51. The Applicant answers this issue in the negative, on the ground that the reasons provided by
the Tribunal are not sufficient to establish a link between the bases or factual findings relied
on by the Tribunal and the conclusions reached by it, and must therefore result in the annulment

of the portion of the Award that deals with compensation for the Cerro Negro Project.*”

(ii) Refusal to allow essential document production

52.The Applicant contends that the same portion of the Award should be annulled as a
consequence of the Tribunal’s refusal to allow document production concerning the
applicability of the compensation structure of the Project pursuant to the Congressional
Authorization.*8 According to the Applicant, the Tribunal’s refusal to allow this request for
document production constitutes a manifest excess of powers,*? a failure to state reasons*’ and
a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure*! pursuant to Article 52(1)(b), (e)

and (d) of the ICSID Convention.

5

ow

. The Applicant contends that the request for document production (i) was sufficiently narrow,*?
related to the Mobil Parties’ “theory of the compensation structure of the Cerro Negro Project
being an ‘incentive’” and (ii) was relevant to the Applicant’s argument “that under the
Congressional Authorization for the Cerro Negro Project, Respondent expressly reserved all
of its sovereign rights to take action affecting the Project, that this was a fundamental condition
to obtaining the authorization of the Project that was required by law, that Mobil Cerro Negro
agreed that compensation would be subject to the terms, conditions and, most importantly,

limitations on compensation through a price cap to be set forth in the Cerro Negro Association

47 Reply, paras. 242, 279-280.

+8 Memorial, para. 149.

*° Memorial, paras. 152-158.

5° Memorial, para. 159. Reply, paras. 291-298.

5! Memorial, para. 160-167. Reply, paras. 299-303.
52 Reply, paras. 302.

Agreement, and that Mobil Cerro Negro understood from the outset that any compensation for

adverse governmental action would be subject to those terms, conditions and limitations.”°?

5

&

. The Applicant acknowledges “that the record is clear and that the tribunal found the material
facts to be exactly as the Applicant has presented them, but that does not mean that the Mobil
Parties were entitled to hide highly relevant documents that would have confirmed the
Applicant’s position...”°*+ According to the Applicant, these documents would have shown the
Mobil Parties’ understanding of the special agreement on compensation for governmental
action against the Project and would have had a significant and material impact on the

Tribunal’s determination of the relevance of the price cap.»

a) Manifest excess of powers

55. The Tribunal’s refusal to order document production was effected in one sentence, where the
Tribunal “consider[ed] that [Venezuela] ha[d] not demonstrated that the documents requested
[were] necessary as required under Article 43(a) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 34(2)(a)
of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.”*° According to Venezuela, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded
its powers when it failed to apply the applicable law in so far as it failed to apply any proper
standard for document production*’ even if, as the Mobil Parties argue, ICSID provides no
specific rules of document production*® and even if the Tribunal mentioned Article 43(a) of
the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(2(a).° Failing to apply “well-known

principles” is equivalent to failing to apply the provisions mentioned or constitutes a “‘gross

53 Reply, paras. 282-283, quoting from Venezuela’s Observations on Mobil Parties’ Reply to Venezuela’s Application
for an Order Requiring the Production of Documents.

54 Reply, para. 287.

55 Memorial, paras. 150-151.
56 Memorial, para. 150.

57 Memorial, paras. 152-158.
58 Reply, para. 288.

5 Reply, para. 289.

misapplication or misinterpretation of the governing principles, amounting to a failure to apply

the applicable law.”°°

b) Failure to state reasons

56. According to the Applicant, the Tribunal also failed to state reasons for its denial of the
document production request. In fact, the Tribunal “provided no supporting reasons at all,
simply reciting the ultimate conclusion that the standard for document production had not been
met.”°! The Applicant contends that it is not possible to decipher how the Tribunal arrived at

its conclusion.”

c) Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure
57. Finally, the Applicant argues that the refusal constituted a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure. The Applicant contends that tribunals do not have unfettered
discretion to manage document production to the extent of including unjustified denials of
document production. This would constitute a denial of the right to be heard, which itself

constitutes a fundamental rule of procedure.®

(iii) Exercise of Jurisdiction under the Dutch Treaty based on a Corporate Restructuring
Effected to Gain access to ICSID
58. The Applicant contends that the Tribunal’s failure to dismiss the case for lack of jurisdiction
constitutes a manifest excess of powers in the sense of Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention and a failure to state reasons in the sense of Article 52(1)(e).™
59. The Applicant submits that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers when it found that it

had jurisdiction despite the abuse of rights constituted by the corporate restructuring

© Memorial, para. 153.
&! Reply, para. 292.
© Reply, para. 294.
© Reply, para. 300.
© Reply, para. 304.

20

undertaken by the Mobil Parties with the sole purpose of gaining access to ICSID jurisdiction

and in anticipation of litigation.

6!

So

. In addition, the Tribunal failed to state reasons to explain how it reached the conclusion that it
had jurisdiction having found “that the sole purpose of the corporate restructuring was to gain
access to ICSID, that there were existing and foreseeable disputes between the Mobil Parties
and Venezuela prior to the Dutch restructuring and that the Mobil Parties had already notified
the Applicant of tax disputes and of a potential expropriation dispute before the

restructuring.”©°

a) Manifest excess of powers
61. The Applicant contends that a tribunal’s exercise of jurisdiction when jurisdiction does not
exist constitutes in itself a manifest excess of powers,°” and lists a “set of factors to be taken
into account in determining whether there has been an abuse through a ‘corporation of
convenience’ for purposes of obtaining ICSID jurisdiction”. The Tribunal referred to the cases

where these factors are considered but “failed to apply the principles they represent.”°*

6

Nv

. The Applicant relies in particular on the principle that “transfers into a treaty jurisdiction for
the sole purpose of gaining access to ICSID jurisdiction in anticipation of litigation constitute
treaty abuse.”©? According to the Applicant, all the factors identified were present in this case.
Therefore, there could have been no doubt that the corporate restructuring constituted an abuse
of rights.”° The exercise of jurisdiction in those circumstances constituted a manifest excess

of powers.”!

6 Memorial, para. 168.
Memorial, para. 168.
§7 Memorial, para. 169.
8 Memorial, paras. 171, 181.
Memorial, para. 182.
7 Memorial, para. 186.

7 Memorial, para. 188.

21

b) Failure to state reasons

63. According to the Applicant, the Award should be annulled for failure to state reasons, this

being a ground that applies when the reasons given are insufficient or contradictory.’

64. The Applicant contends that the Tribunal’s conclusion that there was no abuse of rights in the
Mobil Parties’ corporate restructuring does not follow from the Tribunal’s factual and legal
findings that (i) a restructuring effected with the sole purpose of securing access to ICSID
jurisdiction would constitute an abuse of right; and that (ii) the corporate restructuring of the
Mobil Parties was done with the sole purpose of gaining access to ICSID jurisdiction and at a

time when there were existing and foreseeable disputes.”

65. The Applicant further contends that the Tribunal’s different conclusions on jurisdiction
concerning the expropriation claim and the income tax measure claim are contradictory; :
“the tribunal’s exercise of jurisdiction over the expropriation claim on the ground that the
expropriation did not occur until after the Mobil Parties had restructured their interests directly
contradicts the tribunal’s determination that it did not have jurisdiction over the claim based
on the income tax measure, which did not take effect until January 2007, after the restructuring
of both the Cerro Negro and the La Ceiba Projects.”.”4

66. Finally, the Applicant submits that, even though the Tribunal recognized the foreseeability
principle as stated in the Pac Rim Decision, it (i) failed to analyze it and therefore to address
the argument that jurisdiction cannot be exercised where the restructuring that brings about the
protection of a treaty occurs when the claim is foreseeable, which applied to the expropriation
claim in this case; and (ii) upheld jurisdiction over the expropriation claim on the basis of when
the nationalization measures were actually taken, instead of considering when the dispute

concerning those measures was foreseeable.’

” Reply, paras. 318-319.
3 Memorial, para. 190.
74 Memorial, para. 191.

75 Memorial, para. 192. Reply, paras. 320-322, referring to Pac Rim Cayman LLC v. The Republic of El Salvador
(ICSID Case No. ARB/09/12), Decision on the Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections, dated 1 June 2012.

22

2. RESPONDENTS

A. Concerning the grounds for annulment
67. The Mobil Parties consider the application for annulment part of a tactic to evade or at least

delay payment of the compensation awarded to them in the Arbitration.”

68. The Mobil Parties contend that none of the complaints raised against the Award has any merit;
“[w]hat is relevant to — and dispositive of — the Republic’s Application is that none of its

complaints could possibly give rise to a valid basis for annulment under any of the grounds
listed in Article 52.”7”

B. Concerning the standard for annulment
69. The Mobil Parties state that annulment is “constrained by three fundamental propositions”,”*

which results in the grounds for annulment being subject to “particularly high standards””’:

© annulment constitutes an extraordinary and limited exception to the finality of

awards. 80

¢ annulment does not constitute appeal and therefore does not allow for revision

of errors of fact or law.8!

¢ annulment is discretionary.®2

70. Concerning the three specific grounds for annulment relied on by Venezuela, the Mobil Parties

argue as follows:

% Counter-Memorial, paras. 2, 5.

” Counter-Memorial, para. 8.

8 Counter-Memorial, para. 46.

7 Counter-Memorial, para. 47.

*° Counter-Memorial, paras. 46, 52-55.
8! Counter-Memorial, paras. 46, 56-64.
® Counter-Memorial, paras. 46, 65-69.

23

(i) Manifest excess of powers:

The Mobil Parties contend that manifest excess of powers contains a “dual
requirement” that the Tribunal acted in excess of powers and that the excess
qualifies as manifest.*? In particular, the word “manifest” was intended to place
a serious restriction and emphasizes the extraordinary nature of the annulment
remedy. They refer to decisions of previous ad hoc committees which found that:
(i) manifest means “‘evident’, ‘obvious’, and ‘plain on its face’ such that it can
be discerned without any elaborate analysis of the Award’**; and that (ii) the

excess must give rise to serious consequences. *°

Failure to apply the proper law: the Mobil Parties distinguish between failure to
apply the law and an error in the application of the law, and contend that only the
former could constitute a basis for annulment — albeit not every failure to apply
the law will meet the threshold for annulment.®° In the same sense, failure to
apply individual provisions of the law*’ and failure to refer to the governing law
would not amount to failure to apply the law.** The Mobil Parties also note that
a few ad hoc committees have differentiated between a mere error of law and an
atrocious error of law, and acknowledged the possibility that an “atrocious” error
could constitute basis for annulment.*? In addition, they argue that even if failure
to apply the law was established, the Applicant would also have to show that the
failure was manifest, and contend that, so long as a tribunal endeavoured to apply

the proper law (as they suggest the Committee will be satisfied is the case here),

8 Counter-Memorial, para. 71.

* Counter-Memorial, para.73.

§5 Counter.
86 Counter.
§7 Counter.
§§ Counter.

* Counter.

“Memorial, para. 74.

Memorial, paras. 80-85. Rejoinder, paras. 46-49.
-Memorial, para. 88-89.

Memorial, para. 90.

-Memorial, paras. 86-87. Rejoinder, para. 50.

24

that would discharge its duty and would thus fail to cross the “manifest”

threshold.”

Lack of jurisdiction: The Mobil Parties argue that a manifest excess of powers
concerning jurisdiction should be treated no differently from any other ground for
annulment, in that it must meet the dual requirement that jurisdiction was
exercised where there was none and that the non-existence of jurisdiction was

manifest.”!

They reject the argument that the manifest requirement should not
apply in relation to jurisdiction (or that exercising jurisdiction where none exists

in itself raises to the level of manifest excess of powers).”

Admissibility: The Mobil Parties submit that an allegation of abuse of right is a
claim of admissibility and not an objection to jurisdiction. Since admissibility is
discretionary in nature, it “cannot provide a basis for annulment for an alleged

manifest excess of powers.”°?

(ii) Failure to state reasons:

The Mobil Parties contend that the standard for annulment for failure to state
reasons requires the following: (i) that the failure result in “a particular point
essentially lacking any expressed rationale”; and (ii) that the point itself be
necessary for the tribunal’s decision.** According to the Respondents, so long as
the reasoning can be followed, is “plausible” and not “clearly frivolous”, there is
no basis for annulment under this ground.°° The Mobil Parties further state that

this ground does not cover failure to address a question (which is governed by

% Counter-Memorial, para. 92.

*' Counter:
* Counter:
°5 Counter:
** Counter:

°5 Counter:

“Memorial, para. 97.
-Memorial, paras. 98-103.
“Memorial, para. 96.
Memorial, para. 111.

Memorial, para. 112.

25

Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention)”* unless the particular failure “amounts
to a failure in the intelligibility of the reasoning in the award.”°’ Similarly, the
Tribunal’s reasoning need not be exhaustive or explicit.°* The Mobil Parties
acknowledge that contradictory reasons may fall under this ground for annulment,
but argue that the contradiction would have to render the reasoning

incomprehensible and not constitute a mere inconsistency.”

(iii) Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure:

— The Mobil Parties contend that this ground involves a “three-stage test”: (i) that
the procedural rule be fundamental or limited to the principles of natural justice;
(ii) that there be a departure as opposed to an exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion;
and (iii) that the departure be sufficiently serious to merit annulment, i.e., that it
cause the Tribunal to reach “a result substantially different from what it would

have awarded had such a rule been observed.”!

C. Concerning the alleged facts supporting the grounds for annulment
71. The Mobil Parties describe the Applicant’s “theory” as follows: “that in order to participate in
the Cerro Negro Project, Mobil CN was forced to agree to a contract with PDVSA-CN, the
terms of which (through an unspecified legal mechanism) precluded the pursuit of treaty-based

remedies against the Republic to obtain full compensation in case of expropriation.”!°!

T

N

. According to the Mobil Parties, this theory is not supported by either the facts or the language
of the Cerro Negro Association Agreement.!°? In particular, the Mobil Parties argue that
Section 15 of the CNAA contains a “limited indemnity” granted by a subsidiary of PDVSA

for certain governmental actions, not a limitation on Venezuela’s compensation obligation

°6 Counter-Memorial, paras. 115-116.

°” Counter-Memorial, para. 116.

°8 Counter-Memorial, paras. 117-118, 121.

% Counter-Memorial, paras. 119-120. Rejoinder, para. 82.
10 Counter-Memorial, para. 106.

'! Rejoinder, para. 16.

12 Rejoinder, para. 17.

26

under the Dutch Treaty, !°? not least because the limitation of liability constituted a limitation
on the investors and PDVSA under a contract, whereas the payment of just compensation for
expropriation constituted an obligation of Venezuela under a treaty.!°* The contractual
indemnity provided protection to the Mobil Parties as an incentive to invest in the Cerro Negro

Project, and was additional to the treaty protection. !°

73. The Mobil Parties similarly contend that the Applicant’s position finds no support in its own
Congressional enactments or the Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions of the Framework of
Conditions.!°° The Venezuelan Congress did not enact provisions “capable of being read as
disclaiming the Republic’s international law obligations or as providing a basis to construe the
Mobil Parties’ decision to invest as a waiver of the Mobil Parties’ international law rights to

obtain just compensation in the event of an expropriation.” !°”

(i) Failure to Apply the Proper Law and the Special Agreement concerning the Cerro
Negro Project
a) Manifest excess of powers
74. The Mobil Parties state that the complaint of manifest excess of powers must be rejected
because the Tribunal correctly identified and applied the proper law, because there was no
special agreement in the sense of Article 9(5) of the Dutch Treaty between the Parties and
because Venezuela could not rely on its domestic legislation to amend or avoid its obligations

under the Treaty. !°*

7:

an

. Regarding identification and application of the proper law, the Mobil Parties contend that the
Tribunal observed the possible sources of law listed by the Parties in Article 9(5) of the Treaty,

which did not in itself allocate matters to one law or another, leaving it therefore for the

3 Rejoinder, para. 26.

'4 Rejoinder, para. 42.
05 Rejoinder, para. 36.
106 Rejoinder, paras. 27-43.
'T Rejoinder, para. 41.

108 Rejoinder, para. 45.

27

Tribunal to determine which issues would be governed by which law.'! The Tribunal’s
approach “‘is consistent with well-established principles of international law and the practice

of other investment tribunals.”!!°

7

a

. The Mobil Parties submit that the Tribunal’s determination that international law governed the

amount of compensation due for the expropriation of their interests is “unassailable” and

  

supported by “ample and unanimous authority,!!! whereas Venezuela’s position that this

 

issue
should have been determined under domestic law instruments is “untenable” under the
principle that a State cannot rely on its domestic law to thwart its international obligations

enshrined in Article 27 of the Vienna Convention. |!”

T

x

. Regarding the existence or otherwise of a special agreement within the meaning of Article 9(5)
of the Treaty, the Mobil Parties reject the argument that the CNAA can be used as the basis for
such special agreement since the Republic was not a party to the contract and “[i]t is axiomatic
that a contract can only be a source of law as between the parties to the contract.”!'? The
Tribunal also reached this conclusion and its findings are not subject to review on

annulment.!!*

T

oo

. Since the CNAA does not constitute a special agreement and the Framework of Conditions
and Congressional Authorization constitute pieces of legislation, not agreements, the
combination of these instruments does not result in a special agreement under Article 9(5) of

the Treaty. !!>

7

oS

. Regarding the argument that domestic law governs the scope of property rights and therefore

that the extent of compensation is dependent on the scope of these rights under national law

109 Rejoinder, para. 51.
410 Rejoinder, para. 52.
411 Rejoinder, para. 54.
12 Rejoinder, paras. 56-57.
43 Rejoinder, para. 58.
"4 Rejoinder, para. 60.

4S Rejoinder, paras. 61-62.

28

(and its corollary that the Tribunal should have applied domestic law to determine the amount
of compensation), the Mobil Parties state that it is inadmissible on annulment as (i) it

constitutes a new argument that was not presented before the Tribunal; !!°

and (ii) the Applicant
is unable to identify any such right.'!7 In any event, the Mobil Parties contend that the

principles relied on are not applicable to the present case.!!8

80. The Mobil Parties contend that it is a well-established argument that annulment cannot be
based on new evidence or new arguments, which makes this new argument inadmissible. A
reference made by Venezuela in the context of its FET argument to “rights and expectations”
being defined by Venezuelan law and special agreements is not equivalent to its current

argument on the scope of “property rights” and its impact on the amount of compensation.!!?

81. The Mobil Parties state that there was no dispute relating to the scope of property rights, and
therefore the Applicant is unable to identify which property right exactly is under discussion.
The dispute identified by Venezuela before the Tribunal concerned whether its liability under
the Treaty was limited by the CNAA or the Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions, which did

not require a determination on the scope of a property right.'°

82. Finally, the Mobil Parties argue that the authorities relied on by the Applicant do not support
its position concerning the limitation of an investor’s treaty rights through a contract with the
State. In particular, the Mobil Parties refer to the Siag case and distinguish it from the present
situation in that the underlying contract in Siag was between the parties to the dispute and it
contained a provision requiring payment of a share of the sale value of the transferred

investment to the State for which there is no equivalent in the CNAA. '?!

46 Rejoinder, paras. 66-69.
417 Rejoinder, paras. 66, 70-72.
48 Rejoinder, paras. 66, 73-79.
49 Rejoinder, paras. 67-69.
120 Rejoinder, paras. 70-72.
'21 Rejoinder, paras. 73-79.

29

b) Failure to state reasons

83. The Mobil Parties assert that the Tribunal provided “clear, cogent, and correct reasons for
rejecting the Republic’s attempts to invoke the indemnity provisions to limit the Republic’s
liability” in particular, that Venezuela was not a party to the CNAA and that the Republic’s
domestic legislation cannot alter its international law obligations. In addition, the Mobil
Parties contend that there is no contradiction between the “description of undisputed facts”

provided by the Tribunal in the Award and the Tribunal’s legal conclusions.

84. The Mobil Parties refer to the Applicant’s “new argument” and contend that Venezuela may
not challenge the Award on the basis of a failure to address an argument that was never
presented to the Tribunal. In any case, the Mobil Parties find that the reasons provided for not

applying either the Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions or the CNAA were correct. !??

8:

on

. Regarding the argument that the Tribunal should have considered the indemnity provisions in
the analysis of the fair market value, the Mobil Parties state that the Republic cannot fault the
Tribunal for inconsistency in finding that the Republic may not rely on the indemnity
provisions and then not considering the indemnity provisions in the analysis of the fair market

value. !73

86. The Mobil Parties also reject Venezuela’s arguments concerning the third-party beneficiary

analysis and Dr. Mommer’s testimony. !*+

(ii) Refusal to allow essential document production
a) Manifest excess of powers
87. The Mobil Parties say that the Tribunal applied the standard contained in Article 43 of the
ICSID Convention to decide the document production request. Accordingly, Venezuela’s
argument that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by failing to apply the proper law

is untenable. Article 43 is the only applicable standard for document production under the

'22 Rejoinder, para. 84.
3 Rejoinder, paras. 85-86.
'24 Rejoinder, paras. 87-88.

30

ICSID Convention, and therefore the Applicant’s references to “all recognized standards” or

to “any proper standard” are unavailing. !?°

8

oo

. According to the Mobil Parties, the Applicant is ultimately arguing that the Tribunal reached
the wrong decision “when exercising its discretion in applying the standard”, which is not

reviewable on annulment. !7°

b) Failure to state reasons

8

o

. The Mobil Parties contend that the Tribunal provided adequate reasons for its decision to deny
document production, and add that (i) “brevity of the Tribunal’s order alone is not a meaningful
criterion for determining a failure to state reasons, particularly here where the parties’
pleadings clearly provided context and documentation for the Tribunal’s order”; and that (ii)
the Tribunal’s reasoning “may be implicit in other considerations and conclusions in the

award”, !27

9

S

. Likewise, the Mobil Parties assert that Venezuela has not (i) produced support for its
contention that procedural orders must state reasons; or (ii) explained “how its contention of
an inadequate explanation of the denial is consistent with its own inaction” after the decision
was issued by the Tribunal. Specifically, the Mobil Parties remark that the Republic never
complained of lack of reasoning or demanded that the Tribunal elaborate. As a consequence,

the Applicant has forfeited its ability to bring this complaint on annulment.!?8

c) Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure

91. The Mobil Parties argue that the Applicant has failed to establish any of the three necessary

elements under this ground for annulment. !??

25 Rejoinder, paras. 96-97.

'26 Rejoinder, para. 98.
27 Counter-Memorial, paras. 323-326. Rejoinder, para. 100.
28 Counter-Memorial, para. 322. Rejoinder, para. 99.

29 Rejoinder, para. 89.

31

92. First, the Applicant has failed to establish that there was a fundamental rule that entitled it to
the production of these documents. In particular, the Mobil Parties contend that the Tribunal
applied the relevant standard under Article 43 of the ICSID Convention, which is inherently
discretionary and therefore cannot constitute a fundamental rule which would have required

the Tribunal to rule in a particular way.!°

93. Second, even if there was a fundamental rule, the Applicant has failed to establish that there
was a departure from it, since the denial of documents was justified. In particular, the
documents failed to meet the standard of materiality under the IBA Rules on the Taking of
Evidence in International Arbitration. This is supported by the Applicant’s own contention
that it had presented sufficient evidence in support of the factual premises of its legal

contentions. !3!

94. Third, even if there was a departure, Venezuela has failed to establish that the departure was
serious in the sense of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, and in particular to
demonstrate that “the application was ‘materially prejudiced’ and the Award might have been

different had the alleged departure not occurred.” !>?

(iii) Exercise of Jurisdiction under the Dutch Treaty based on a Corporate Restructuring
Effected to Gain access to ICSID

a) Manifest excess of powers
95. The Mobil Parties contend that the Applicant’s argument on “abuse of right” lacks merit, firstly
because ‘abuse of right’ is a question of admissibility, falling within the discretion of the
Tribunal, and is not therefore subject to review on annulment; secondly because it seeks to
relitigate factual or legal issues, which is not possible on annulment; and thirdly because in

any event the Committee should uphold the determinations made by the Tribunal.'**

130 Rejoinder, paras. 89-91.
'5! Rejoinder, paras. 89, 92-94.
132

Rejoinder, paras. 89, 95.
83 Counter-Memorial, paras. 348-350.

32

96. First, concerning the question of admissibility, the Mobil Parties assert that Venezuela does
not dispute that “‘all mandatory requirements for ICSID jurisdiction were satisfied in this case”,
nor the distinction between jurisdiction and admissibility, nor that issues of admissibility are
not subject to review on annulment. The Mobil Parties deny that the abuse of right objection
can properly be framed as a jurisdictional argument, and contend that both the Parties and the
Tribunal distinguished between issues of jurisdiction and admissibility, and included abuse of
right among the latter. Even if the Tribunal had classified this issue as one of jurisdiction,
“nomenclature alone cannot alter the substance of the Tribunal’s decision and render it

reviewable at the annulment phase.” !*4

97. Second, the Mobil Parties state that the fact that Venezuela is raising the same arguments on
annulment as it raised at the jurisdictional phase means that it is seeking to have the issue
relitigated in the hopes of obtaining a different result. This is not permissible on annulment
since ad hoc committees do not have the authority to substitute their own findings for those of

the tribunal. !35

98. Third, even if the Committee were to review the abuse of right objection at the annulment
stage, the Mobil Parties contend that it would find that it does not warrant annulment. In
particular, the Mobil Parties say that the Tribunal acted within its discretion when analyzing
the abuse of right objection and concluding that the restructuring of the Mobil Parties was “a
perfectly legitimate goal” because it occurred before the expropriating measures had been
implemented and the dispute had arisen. The Mobil Parties in addition reject Venezuela’s
contention that the Tribunal did not consider foreseeability when deciding whether it had
jurisdiction over the expropriation claim; on the contrary, the Tribunal found that the absence
of references to expropriating measures in contemporaneous correspondence and press

announcements indicated that the measures had not been foreseeable at the time of the

'34 Rejoinder, paras. 102-106.

35 Counter-Memorial, paras, 356-360.

33

restructuring. 136 Th any case, the decisions in Pac Rim, Tidewater and Gremcitel are consistent

with the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction.!°7

b) Failure to state reasons

9

6

. According to the Mobil Parties, Venezuela’s argument that the Tribunal’s reasoning is
contradictory should be dismissed because it is premised on the mischaracterization of the

138

Tribunal’s findings of fact and law;'°* the Tribunal’s reasoning is in fact “complete and

coherent, and displays no trace of the sort of self-contradiction that could render the relevant

parts of the Award incomprehensible, as would be required for annulment.” !??

100. According to the Mobil Parties, the Tribunal did not find that it is invariably an abuse of right
to restructure with the sole purpose of gaining access to ICSID jurisdiction. Instead, what the
Tribunal found is that it could constitute an abuse of right to do so for pre-existing disputes,
but was legitimate for future disputes. The Mobil Parties also dispute that there was any
finding by the Tribunal that the restructuring was effected to access ICSID jurisdiction for
existing disputes. To the contrary, their position, as supported by the Tribunal’s findings, has
always been that jurisdiction was sought for “action that the Respondent took or continued to
take after the restructuring was completed”.'*° In order to reach its conclusion the Tribunal
had analyzed several legal authorities that had addressed restructurings as an alleged abuse of
right, and had applied the legal principles derived from these authorities to the facts of the

case. !4!

101.The Mobil Parties also dispute the claim that there was a contradiction in the exercise of
jurisdiction over the expropriation claim but not over the claim concerning income tax.
According to the Mobil Parties, the Tribunal found that the income tax claim constituted a pre-

existing claim that was known at the time of the restructuring, so that the Tribunal’s denial of

'36 Rejoinder, paras. 107-108.

57 Counter-Memorial, paras, 368-377.
38 Counter-Memorial, para. 378.

89 Rejoinder, para. 109.

49 Counter-Memorial, para. 379.

41 Counter-Memorial, paras. 380-383.

34

jurisdiction over this claim was consistent with its assuming jurisdiction over the expropriation
claim, which the Tribunal considered a future claim unknown at the time of the restructuring. 142
In particular, the Tribunal found that although the income tax rate was formally enacted after
the restructuring, “a real dispute concerning a decision already made” to increase the income
tax existed before the restructuring.'** By contrast, the nationalization measures had not been
undertaken, were not known, and had not been raised as a dispute before the restructuring

occurred, '4

102.The Mobil Parties further deny that the Tribunal failed to address Venezuela’s argument
regarding foreseeability of the expropriation claim. According to the Mobil Parties, the
Tribunal acknowledged and dismissed this argument, albeit analyzing it in different terms. The
Tribunal was not required to frame its reasoning in the precise language of foreseeability, but
the reasoning behind the Tribunal’s approach “was not only clearly articulated but has been
endorsed and followed by subsequent Tribunals.” In particular, the Tribunal’s finding that the
dispute regarding the expropriation was a “future dispute” at the time of the restructuring

impliedly concludes that the dispute was not foreseeable at the time. '4°

10.

a

. Finally, the Mobil Parties contend that Venezuela’s reliance on Pac Rim is misplaced because
that decision considered the foreseeability of an actual or specific future dispute as opposed to
the foreseeability of a potential dispute or a possible controversy. According to the Mobil
Parties, the Tribunal’s observation that it concurred in the view taken by the Pac Rim Tribunal
is consistent with its analysis on foreseeability. In particular, the Tribunal’s approach is
““comparable’ to that of the Pac Rim tribunal because both decisions analyzed when the

99146

specific disputes arose in respect of each measure.

IV. THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

42 Counter-Memorial, para. 385.

‘43 According to the Mobil Parties, this finding also disproves the Applicant’s allegation that the Tribunal assumed
that a dispute cannot arise until a measure is taken. Rejoinder, para. 110.

44 Counter-Memorial, paras. 385-391.

145 Counter-Memorial, paras. 392-397.

446 Rejoinder, para. 111.

35

104. As already indicated, the Applicant, Venezuela, makes three requests for annulment of the
Award: the Tribunal’s erroneous assumption of jurisdiction (as a manifest excess of power
under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention); the Tribunal’s refusal, for no adequate
reason, to order production of certain documents (as a serious departure from a fundamental
tule of procedure under Article 52(1)(d)); and the Tribunal’s decision not to apply the price
cap provisions of the Cerro Negro Project to the assessment of Venezuela’s admitted liability
to pay compensation (as a combination of manifest excess of power for failure to apply the

proper law and failure to state reasons, under Article 52(1)(b) and (e)).

105. Two of these three requests can be disposed of without great difficulty, and will be dealt with
first. The third, however, raises questions of some difficulty and importance and will therefore

form the main focus of this Decision.

(i) Jurisdiction
106. It should be recalled that Venezuela’s arguments under this head are directed at the Tribunal’s
decision to assume jurisdiction both in respect of the Cerro Negro Project and of the La Ceiba

Project.

107.The burden of Venezuela’s complaint under this head is that the corporate re-structuring
undertaken by the Mobil Parties in 2005 was for the sole purpose of gaining access to ICSID
under the Netherlands/Venezuela BIT; that it was done in anticipation of litigation; and that
there is ample precedent for regarding that combination of circumstances as an abuse of right

“that should have led the tribunal to find that it lacked jurisdiction to hear this case.” !#”

108.The essence of the Mobil Parties’ answer is that an ‘abuse of right’ argument goes to
admissibility, not jurisdiction, and is therefore outside the scope of the annulment process,
inasmuch as it relates to an issue that is recognized to lie within a tribunal’s discretionary
assessment. But the Mobil Parties assert also that the restructuring was entirely legitimate (and

was found to be so by the Tribunal), and moreover that the Tribunal gave ample attention to

47 Applicant’s Memorial, paragraph 168.

36

Venezuela’s contention that the litigation was foreseeable at the time, and gave that contention

a reasoned rejection.

109. Venezuela retorts that the issue is not the legitimacy of the restructuring as such, but rather,

given the circumstances under which it was undertaken, whether it was effective to bring the
dispute between the Parties within the jurisdictional consent to arbitration under the BIT. To
which the Mobil Parties reply that in the arbitral proceedings there was no dispute between the
Parties that all of the formal conditions for jurisdiction were satisfied, so that the real issue

raised by Venezuela is indeed one of admissibility, not jurisdiction.

110. The Committee accepts that there is some force in the argument advanced by Venezuela that

111.

matters of jurisdiction may call for a more rigorous approach than other grounds for annulment,
simply because a tribunal ought not to be allowed to exercise a judicial power it does not have
(or vice versa). The Committee also accepts that there is weight in the Mobil Parties’
contention that questions of admissibility may require to be approached in a different way from
questions of jurisdiction for the purposes of the annulment scheme laid down in Article 52 of
the ICSID Convention. It is plain on the face of it that the reference in Article 52(1)(b) to a
tribunal having “manifestly exceeded its powers” fits most naturally into the context of
jurisdiction, in the sense that it covers the case where a tribunal exercises a judicial power
which on a proper analysis had not been conferred on it (or vice versa declines to exercise a
jurisdiction which it did possess). It follows that it is less easy to apply the criterion laid down
in Article 52(1)(b) — and in particular when it comes to deciding whether the excess was
‘manifest’ — when what the tribunal is doing is to make a discretionary assessment of whether,
assuming the existence of its judicial power in principle, it is proper in the particular

circumstances for that power to be exercised.

The Committee does not, however, have to decide any of these questions. The issue that
divides the Parties in these annulment proceedings, as it divided them in the underlying
arbitration proceedings, is the extent to which the dispute or disputes that went to arbitration
were in fact within the contemplation of the Mobil Parties, as foreign investors in Venezuela,
at the time at which the corporate restructuring was undertaken; in other words whether there

had been a manipulation of the ownership of an established investment with the express

37

purpose of bringing an already existing dispute within a favourable jurisdictional regime from
which it did not benefit at the time the dispute emerged. This is the central question which
the Tribunal addressed, and it did so in extenso, devoting a full twenty-one paragraphs to the
question in its Decision on Jurisdiction;'*® the Tribunal had, immediately previous to that,
devoted eighteen paragraphs to the law on ‘abuse of right’ including an analysis of the prior
case-law before international courts and tribunals and in investment arbitration.'4? The
outcome of this eleven-page treatment is that the Tribunal adopts, as the basis for its decision
on the point, the need “to give ‘effect to the object and purpose of the ICSID Convention’ and
to preserve ‘its integrity”. !°° It finds that “the main, if not the sole purpose of the restructuring
was to protect Mobil investments from adverse Venezuelan measures in getting access to
ICSID arbitration through the Dutch-Venezuela BIT”, but that this still remained capable of
being either legitimate corporate planning or, alternatively, an abuse of right; which of those
two it was, would depend on the circumstances. Having proceeded to consider the
circumstances, i.e. those specific to the case, notably the timing of new investment into the
Claimants’ projects, measured against the timing of the assertion by the Claimants vis-a-vis
Venezuela of the existence of investment disputes, the Tribunal draws a distinction between
pre-existing and future disputes, which it then applies so as to include within its jurisdiction
Cerro Negro and La Ceiba disputes “born” after specified dates, while excluding any dispute

“born” before those dates.

112. The dispute over jurisdiction then carried itself forward into the merits phase of the arbitral
proceedings, in the form of a disagreement between the Parties over which of the complex
series of claims by the Claimants against the Respondent in respect of the Cerro Negro Project
did or did not fall within the Tribunal’s conclusions in its Decision on Jurisdiction. These were
in turn analysed in detail by the Tribunal in paragraphs 191-210 of the Award. The analysis
culminates in the enunciation of a distinction between “a potential dispute relating to a measure
to be taken” and on the other hand “‘a real dispute concerning a decision already made.” On

the basis of which distinction the Tribunal confirms that it has no jurisdiction over the dispute

448 Decision on Jurisdiction of 10 June 2010, paragraphs 186-206.
49 Tbid., paragraphs 167-185.
'50 At paragraph 184.

38

relating to the increase in income tax, but proceeds to the merits on the dispute in relation to

expropriation. !>!

113. For the purposes of the present Decision, the Committee will treat as a composite whole all of
these jurisdictional findings, those which appear in the Decision on Jurisdiction and those
which appear in the Award, and will apply the provisions of Article 52(1) of the ICSID

Convention accordingly. !>*

(ii) Excess of power (Article 52(1)(b)

114. However the argument may be put, it seems to the Committee beyond doubt that it has no
legitimate power to control the Tribunal’s specific findings on either of the two elements in its
jurisdictional findings, i.e. either the legal theory which the Tribunal applied in order to
distinguish between legitimate corporate planning and abuse of right, or the application of that
theory to the particular circumstances of the case. That would amount to appeal, not annulment;
on the first point, it would be an appeal on a point of law, on the second point, an appeal on
the facts. As the ad hoc Committee in the CMS v. Argentina annulment proceedings pithily put
the matter, “the Committee cannot simply substitute its own view of the law and its own

appreciation of the facts for those of the Tribunal.” >>

115.The Committee is thus unable to find that there has been an excess of power by the Tribunal

on this issue, let alone a manifest one.

(iii) Failure to give reasons (Article 52(1)(e)
116. The only basis on which, within the accepted limits of the annulment procedure, the Committee
could legitimately be asked to intervene would be if it were alleged that the process by which
the Tribunal had arrived at one or another of these findings was vitiated by a defect so serious

as to invalidate the findings themselves.

‘5! Award, at paragraph 210.

'S2 The Tribunal has itself stated, quite properly, that its Decision on Jurisdiction is to be regarded as an integral part
of the Award; see Award, paragraph 15.

153 CMS y. Argentina, Decision on Annulment of 5 September 2007, at paragraph 158.

39

117.This is indeed the basis on which Venezuela has brought its application invoking Article
52(1)(e) of the Convention, namely a failure to state reasons. Although, as set down in that
Article, the vitiating factor is the failure by a tribunal to state reasons for its “award”, it is
common ground that that criterion has to be applied mutatis mutandis when, as in this case,
the challenge is not directed at the eventual decision on the merits itself, but at a finding
contained in a decision on preliminary objections, or (again as in this case) largely in a decision

on preliminary objections but completed in the final award.

118.For the reasons already stated in paragraphs 111 and 112 above, however, the Committee
cannot find any substance in the claim that the Tribunal failed to state sufficient reasons in
support of the conclusions it had reached either on the point of law or on the question of fact.
The Committee has not been able to identify a fault of any kind in the quality or sufficiency of
the Tribunal’s reasoning on either point to sustain the conclusions the Tribunal ultimately
arrived at. To repeat the frequently cited test laid down by the ad hoc committee in MINE v.
Guinea, “the requirement to state reasons is satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow
how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to Point B. and eventually to its conclusion, even if
it made an error of fact or law.”'*+ The Committee is in no doubt that the relevant portions of
the Decision on Jurisdiction meet that basic test, as do the relevant paragraphs in the Award.
All that can remain, therefore, is Venezuela’s complaint that the Tribunal’s composite decision
on jurisdiction suffers from an internal contradiction when it arrives at opposite conclusions in
respect of the expropriation claim (found to be within the jurisdiction) and the income tax claim

(found to fall outside the jurisdiction).

119. For a complaint of that kind to be valid, two conditions would have to be satisfied: first, that
there was indeed a contradiction which was apparent on the face of the Decision; but second,
and in the circumstances more important still, that the contradiction, once demonstrated, was
serious enough to vitiate the Tribunal’s reasoning on jurisdiction as a whole. This latter

condition stems from the fact that, when applied mutatis mutandis to a decision on jurisdiction,

'S Decision on Annulment, 22 December 1989, at paragraph 5.09.

40

what Article 52(1)(e) opens to challenge is a failure to state reasons for the decision on

jurisdiction as such, not alleged insufficiencies in parts of the reasoning along the way.

120.The Committee does not, however, believe that the reasoning of the Tribunal is open to

objection under either of those heads.

121. To begin with, the notion of a contradiction in its reasoning would have to entail, in the specific
circumstances, either that the Tribunal had applied different (and mutually incompatible) legal
theories in accepting jurisdiction over one head of claim while rejecting another, or that the
Tribunal, even while applying one and the same legal theory, had nevertheless reached
opposite assessments of identical or substantially similar sets of facts. The first of these
possibilities is however excluded by the plain fact that, in paragraphs 186-205 of its Decision
on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal can be seen to be applying exactly the same legal theory just
enunciated in the preceding paragraph, without exception, to all of the Cerro Negro and La
Ceiba claims. Venezuela challenges whether the analysis and application which the Tribunal
made in this connection of earlier awards by other tribunals is correct, but — even if it were the
case that those awards were binding in law on the Tribunal — a challenge of that kind quite
clearly takes on the quality of an appeal on a point of law, which is in turn not an admissible

ground for annulment.

122. Conversely, with regard to the factual analysis, what Venezuela asserts is that the Tribunal’s
holding that the income tax measures which took effect only after the restructuring of both
projects were outside its jurisdiction is irreconcilable with its holding that the expropriation,
which likewise took place after the restructuring, was within its jurisdiction.'°> The essence of
the argument raised by Venezuela on this point is that the Tribunal wrongly failed to apply to
the expropriation claims the foreseeability test it had applied to the tax claims. The Committee
does not however see that this argument is well-founded. It appears clearly from the relevant
portion in the Decision on Jurisdiction (at paragraphs 202-204) that the Tribunal made the
distinction turn on the difference between pre-existing disputes, notably those that had already

been identified by the investors and notified as such to the Respondent, and future disputes,

'55 Paragraph 65 above.

41

the origin of which lay in measures taken by the Venezuelan authorities after the restructuring
which brought the investment under the umbrella of the BIT. In particular, in paragraphs 202-
203, the Tribunal notes: that by June 2005 there were already pending disputes relating to
royalties and income tax in respect of which the investors had actually consented to ICSID
arbitration under the Venezuelan Investment Law; that their parallel consent for any future
disputes was expressly made ‘out of an abundance of caution’ and explicitly in connection
with possible future expropriation or confiscation; and that the nationalization measures

happened only from January 2007 onwards.

123. The key passage in paragraph 203 of the Decision contrasts ‘already pending disputes’ with
disputes based on measures still to be taken later on. The Committee can find no contradiction,
let alone a manifest contradiction, between this finding and the finding in paragraph 210 of the
Award (dealing with the tax disputes), which makes the Tribunal’s decision turn on whether
the disagreement was a ‘potential dispute,’ or alternatively a ‘real dispute concerning a
decision already made.’ The assessment of the facts, and specifically the assessment of whether
the facts showed the difference to be in fact a ‘potential dispute,’ or alternatively a ‘real dispute
concerning a decision already made,’ was a matter within the authority of the Tribunal, and
the Committee cannot find that there was anything in the way this was done that might justify

intervention within the framework of the annulment process.
124. This ground for annulment is accordingly rejected.

(iv) Document production

125. Venezuela’s submission under the head of document production can be disposed of even more

shortly.

126. The object of Venezuela’s complaint is a decision by the Tribunal on 24 March 2011 in which
it denied the Respondent’s application for an order for the production of documents that had
been lodged a month earlier. The Tribunal’s decision had been preceded by a double round
of exchanges between the Parties (application — reply — observations on reply —- comments on
observations), but the Tribunal’s lapidary decision is in two sentences, one sentence stating
that the Respondent has not demonstrated that the documents requested are “necessary as

required under Article 43(a) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 34(2)(a) of the ICSID

42

Arbitration Rules” and the next that the application is therefore denied. Venezuela says that
this represented a further sanctionable failure to state reasons, a manifest excess of powers,
and in addition constituted a “serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure” within

the meaning of Article 52(1)(d) of the Convention.

127. The Committee shares to a certain extent Venezuela’s sense of surprise at the cursory nature
of the Tribunal’s decision. It might perhaps have been desirable for the Tribunal, having once
allowed the sequential exchanges between the Parties described above, to have said a little
more about why it was declining to accede to the application. That is however an aspect on
which it would be rash to pronounce without a full investigation of the content of the exchanges
and the elements of the developing argument in the arbitral proceedings to which the
Respondent’s request for production related, and an investigation of that kind lies plainly
beyond the functions of an ad hoc annulment committee. It could also be said that the Tribunal
was a little imprecise in choosing to couch the decision in terms of a failure by the Respondent
to demonstrate necessity; in fact, the provisions both of the Convention and of the Arbitration
Rules cited leave little room for doubt that what these provisions establish is not a right or duty
inhering in one or other party but rather a power conferred on the tribunal itself. What both
Convention and Rules say is that a tribunal “may,” “if it deems necessary,” call upon the parties
to produce documents or other evidence. The use of the verb ‘may’ shows in itself that we are
in the presence of a power to be exercised by the tribunal at its own discretion, and this is then
redoubled by the express indication that the tribunal is to be the sole judge of necessity. That
said, the Committee can find no warrant for saying that the exercise of that discretion is subject
to control through the annulment procedure on the basis simply that the tribunal has not offered

sufficiently ample reasons for how it has chosen to exercise its discretion.

128. Venezuela has in addition argued that the Tribunal’s rejection of the document production
request represents a ‘manifest excess of powers for failure to apply applicable law,’ which it
justifies on the basis that the Tribunal must have failed to apply the standard of ‘necessity’ laid
down in other arbitral decisions, but the Committee can find no substance in this argument at
all, which is on the one hand inconsistent with the discretionary power vested in a tribunal, and

(even if not) would be tantamount to a straightforward appeal against the Tribunal’s decision.

43

129. It remains then to consider whether the Tribunal’s refusal to order production of the requested
documents can be impugned as a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. The
Committee notes at the outset that the bar is set high; the rule of procedure must be a
‘fundamental’ one, and the departure from it must in addition be a ‘serious’ one. This is
common ground between the Parties on both sides.!°° Venezuela rests the substance of its
argument on the submission that the denial of the particular documents adversely affected its
right to be heard and the associated requirement that a party be given a full opportunity to
present its case, which it says are unanimously recognized as basic and fundamental elements

of fair arbitral procedure.

130. The Committee agrees that the right of a party to be heard and the full opportunity to present
its case, whether taken singly or in combination, fall squarely within the category of what
Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention refers to as a ‘fundamental rule of procedure’. The
Committee will therefore examine whether there was ‘a serious departure from’ that right (or
those rights) as a result of the Tribunal’s denial of Venezuela’s request to order production of

the particular documents in question.

131.The Committee notes in this connection that the documents Venezuela sought were
‘presentations that relate to the legal and financial aspects of the Cerro Negro Project referred
to by [one of the witnesses in the parallel ICC arbitration]’; and on the other hand ‘presentations
and similar documents prepared by or for Mobil or its subsidiaries or affiliates ... during the
period prior to the execution of the Cerro Negro Association Agreement that relate to the
contractual and financial aspects of the Cerro Negro Project ...’!°’ The Committee notes
further that the Mobil Parties’ response was that this represented a fishing expedition, that the
requests covered a broad category of documents that were irrelevant and immaterial, and the
documents were in any case unnecessary for the resolution of the case.'°* They particularly

argued in further support that the request was based on a confusion of the treaty claims under

'56 There is no dispute between the Parties, either, that refusals to compel production of documents have been accepted
as the ground for annulment in no more than a very small number of cases; cf. ICSID Secretariat Background Paper
on Annulment (updated version, May 2016), paragraph 101.

'57 See Memorial, paragraph 76.
'58 Cited ibid., paragraph 77. See also Counter-Memorial, paragraphs 295 ff.

44

litigation in the arbitration with the contract claims being heard in the parallel ICC

arbitration.!°°

132. The point for decision by the ad hoc Committee in these proceedings is not, however, whether
either side was right or wrong in these arguments, or indeed whether the Tribunal was right or
wrong in accepting one set of arguments or the other, whether as a matter of law or as a matter
of discretionary assessment. That, once again, would constitute appeal. The only aspect
properly for consideration by the Committee is the possible effect of the Tribunal’s refusal to
order disclosure. Specifically, did that refusal infringe Venezuela’s right to be heard, or did it

at least deny Venezuela a full opportunity to present its case?

133. The Committee considers the first of these two contentions to be unsustainable. In the limited
number of prior cases in which ad hoc committees have given serious consideration to the
contention that a party has been denied the right to be heard, it has been on the basis that a
tribunal reached its ultimate award on a ground that one or both parties had had no opportunity
to address at all in its argument. The Committee can see no sign whatever in the text of the
Award itself, nor in the submissions of either side in these proceedings, that the grounds for
the Tribunal’s findings on the merits in its Award had not been fully and amply argued by the

Parties, both in writing and orally.

134. As to the second contention, namely that, by reason of the refusal to order disclosure of these
documents, Venezuela had been denied a full opportunity to present its case, the Committee
concludes that the answer lies in Venezuela’s own written submissions. At paragraph 151 of
its Memorial in the present annulment proceedings, Venezuela asserts that “To the extent that
the tribunal considered that it did not have sufficient evidence of the special conditions under
which the Cerro Negro Project was authorized — although, as reviewed earlier, the record is
quite clear on that point — those documents would have had a significant and material impact
on the tribunal’s determination as to the relevance of the price cap ...”!°° And further on, that

“The record is replete with documents and testimony that prove the contrary and is devoid of

159 ibid.

160 Emphasis added.

45

any evidence to support the Mobil Parties’ revisionist history, but if the tribunal had any doubt
about that, which was not expressed in — and is even contradicted by — its recitation of the facts,
clearly the presentations prepared by the Mobil Parties to explain the terms and conditions of
the Cerro Negro Project to their own executive committee would have shed light on their

understanding.” !°!

135. In the light of those avowals by the Applicant itself, the Committee is clear that the contention
that the Applicant was denied a full opportunity to present its case is without merit and the

request for annulment on this ground cannot therefore be accepted.
136. The first and second of Venezuela’s requests for annulment are accordingly rejected.

(v) ‘The Price Cap’?

137.The Committee proceeds then to consider the third request for annulment, the one which has
given the Committee the greatest difficulty and has assumed the greatest importance in the
case, namely Venezuela’s challenge to what it considers to be the Tribunal’s flawed approach
to the assessment of compensation for expropriation. It should be recalled that this ground
relates exclusively to the Cerro Negro Project, not the La Ceiba Project, and that the request is
therefore, by definition, for an annulment of the Award in part only. That is expressly foreseen
in Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention. The Committee associates itself with the views of
other ad hoc committees that a request for the partial annulment of an award can relate, in
appropriate cases, to limited portions of an Award only. There was no dispute before it between

the Parties on this point.

138. The Committee notes, by way of preliminary, that it is not in dispute, and never has been, that
the Cerro Negro Project was expropriated by Venezuela in 2007. Nor has Venezuela ever
denied that this expropriation carried with it an obligation to pay compensation. The essence

of the dispute between the Parties is over the nature and magnitude of the compensation due.

‘6! Tbid., paragraph 157 (emphasis added).

162 The Committee has adopted this descriptor from the Applicant’s submissions as a useful form of shorthand; the

quotation marks signal, however, that the phrase is not regarded by the Committee as an entirely accurate reflection
of the nature of the issue that had been placed before it in these proceedings.

46

139. It will be recalled that Venezuela asserts as Applicant that those parts of the Award dealing
with Venezuela’s liability to pay compensation in respect of the expropriation of the Cerro
Negro Project should be annulled because of the Tribunal’s failure, in the Award, to give due
effect to certain legal provisions applicable to the Project. The specific reference is, in the first
instance, to ‘the Cerro Negro Congressional Authorization’ (i.e. the formal decision by which
the Venezuelan legislature approved the Project, as required by Venezuelan law), and, in the
second instance, to ‘the Cerro Negro Association Agreement’ (i.e. the contractual agreement
under which the Mobil Parties and the Venezuelan State entity Lagoven entered into and
undertook the Project). More specifically still, the Cerro Negro Association Agreement
required the parties to that Agreement to carry out the Project “under the terms and subject to
the conditions set forth in this Agreement, and in accordance with the requirements set forth
in [the Venezuelan nationalization law of 1975] and the Conditions”; and the Conditions are
defined in terms as those set forth in the decision of 2 October 1997 by which the Venezuelan
Congress approved the Agreement and authorized Lagoven to enter into it (‘the Cerro Negro

Congressional Authorization’).

140. One particular consequence of this general scheme was that the terms of the Association
Agreement reflected specifically what are known as the Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions
of the Congressional Authorization. The Eighteenth Condition was to the effect that neither
the Association Agreement nor activities and operations conducted under it was to impose any
obligation on the Republic of Venezuela nor restrict its sovereign powers. This was duly
reflected in the Agreement, in the form of an additional paragraph appended to the clause which
provides for the settlement of disputes by arbitration (Clause 18).'°? This additional paragraph
has figured largely in Venezuela’s argument in these annulment proceedings, but the
Committee has found it of only limited relevance to the essential issue, as will appear below.
What the Twentieth Condition required, on the other hand, was that the Agreement should
contain provisions for either the renegotiation of its terms or, failing that, for compensation, in

the event of “adverse and significant economic consequences” arising out of what are described

'63 The provisions of the Association Agreement are referred to variously in the exhibits and memorials as ‘Articles’
and ‘Clauses’ and are numbered variously in Roman and Arabic numerals. The Committee will follow the usage in

the Award of the terminology ‘Clause’ with Arabic numbering.

47

in neutral terms as ‘discriminatory measures’; but this is made subject to the proviso that there
should not be deemed to be an adverse and significant economic consequence of this kind at
any time when the price of crude oil was higher than a specified threshold. This was in its turn
reflected, in a somewhat elaborated form, in Clause 15 of the Agreement, under the title
‘Consequences of Certain Governmental Actions’. The Tribunal, in paragraph 51(4) of its
Award, refers to this as a “limitation of liability.” That is also the way in which Venezuela, as
Respondent in the Arbitration, pleaded its case. Its case was that the expropriation of Cerro
Negro was lawful under the BIT; that the compensation for it was to be calculated in
accordance with the BIT and assessed as of June 2007; and that the compensation due was to
be limited by “the amount of compensation to be granted for adverse governmental action
specifically negotiated and agreed at the outset of the Cerro Negro Project as an express

condition of the Project’s authorization by Congress.” !*+

141.The Tribunal, for its part, upheld the Respondent’s contention that the expropriation was
lawful. It relied specifically on the facts that the expropriation took place as a result of laws
enacted by the National Assembly and executive decisions, and that these latter allowed for
negotiation, with nationalization following only if negotiation failed, a process which the
Tribunal found to be “compatible with the due process obligation of Article 6 of the BIT.”!®
Moreover, the failure to reach agreement on the quantum of compensation did not of itself, the
Tribunal held, render the expropriation unlawful, so long as the offer of compensation made
was not unreasonable. !©° The compensation due to the foreign investors was accordingly, the
Tribunal held, to be “calculated in conformity with the requirements of Article 6(c) of the
BIT.” ©’ This is, in the ad hoc Committee’ s view, a key finding, to which it will therefore revert

in several places in this Decision.

164 See paras. 144-145 of the Award.
165 Thid., para. 297.

166 Tbid., para. 301: “... the mere fact that an investor has not received compensation does not in itself render an
expropriation unlawful. An offer of compensation may have been made to the investor and, in such a case, the legality
of the expropriation will depend on the terms of that offer.”

167 Thid., para. 306: “In light of the above, the claim that the expropriation was unlawful is rejected. Accordingly, the
Tribunal does not need to consider the standard for compensation in case of unlawful expropriation or whether it

48

142. It should be noted that Article 6(c) calls for the payment of “just compensation.” !® Article 6(c)
also provides that the compensation must represent “the market value of the investments
affected.”'® The Parties were, so it seems from the Award, in agreement before the Tribunal
that these parameters required the application of a discounted cash flow approach. Having
considered the elements necessary for such an approach, i.e. production volume, future
revenues, taxes, operational and investment costs, and having determined the appropriate
discount rate to apply, the Tribunal then turned, in Section VIII.C.3 of its Award, 170 to consider
the effect of what it termed the ‘Price Cap’ under the Twentieth Condition of the Congressional
Authorization and Clause 15 of the Association Agreement (see above), in the light of the
Respondent’s contention that compensation had to be limited in accordance with the Price Cap.
The Claimants contested this, contending for their part that the Price Cap was not applicable
to the case in hand, as their claims were treaty claims under the BIT not contractual claims
under the Association Agreement, and Venezuela, the Respondent in the Arbitration, was not
in any case itself party to the Agreement. Venezuela’s answer was that it was not seeking
contractual enforcement of the Association Agreement, but rather seeking to have respected
the terms and conditions under which the Cerro Negro Project had been authorized in the first
place. Venezuela submitted further that any prospective purchaser of Mobil Cerro Negro’s

investment would have taken the Price Cap into account in placing a value on it.!7!

143.The Tribunal deals with the matter quite briefly in paragraphs 371-374 of the Award.
Paragraphs 371 and 372 recite the content of the Price Cap and place it alongside the provisions

in Clause 15 of the Agreement that confer on the foreign investors a separate right to

contractual arbitration against Lagoven, the Venezuelan party to the Association Agreement,

would differ from the standard for compensation to be paid in case of lawful expropriation. The compensation must
be calculated in conformity with the requirements of Article 6(c) of the BIT.”

168 ‘justa compensacion’ in the authentic Spanish-language text. In its argument before the Committee Venezuela has
used the form ‘equitable compensation;’ the Committee considers the two terms to be equivalent in their meaning, but
prefers to use the terminology of the BIT itself.

16° Either as at the moment immediately before the measures were taken or before they became known (whichever
was the earlier).

70 At paras. 369 ff.
"71 [bid., at para. 370.

49

coupled with an obligation to pursue whatever legal recourse may be available to mitigate any
damages suffered by them as a result of the ‘discriminatory measures’ (see paragraph 140
above) and thereafter to bring into account in relation to Lagoven any net benefit received from

legal action of that kind. Paragraph 373 of the Award then states —

“The Tribunal notes that the Twentieth condition of the Congressional Authorization does not
impose a specific price cap, but provides for a price cap to be established in the Association
Agreement. In the present case, Clause 15(1) of the Association Agreement makes a clear
distinction between the action that the Foreign Party may initiate against Lagoven CN on the
one hand, and the action that it may initiate against the Government on the other. The price cap
contained in Clause 15(2)(a) is applicable only to the compensation payable by Lagoven CN.
Since the Respondent in this proceeding is the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, not Lagoven

CN, the Tribunal concludes that it may not oppose this price cap to the Claimants.”

The Tribunal finally draws from this the conclusion (paragraph 374) that the assessment it had

arrived at of the compensation due remains unaffected by the Price Cap.

144. The findings in these two paragraphs, particularly paragraph 373, which represented in effect
the acceptance of the Claimants’ case and the rejection of that of the Respondent, have caused

the Committee some considerable difficulty and will be considered in greater detail below.

145. It should however be noted at this stage that these findings led to a question as to the possibility
of double recovery, in the light of the provision in Clause 15 referred to above under which the
foreign investors were to bring into account in relation to Lagoven the benefits received out of
pursuing their alternative remedy (sc. under the BIT) against the Government of Venezuela.
The particular awkwardness lay in the fact that the parallel cause of action against Lagoven
under the Association Agreement had already been pursued to its conclusion in an ICC
arbitration, and had led to a very substantial award of compensation to one of the Mobil
claimants in the present BIT arbitration, precisely in respect of the expropriation of the Cerro

Negro Project; and the award had indeed already been paid.'”*

"2 See Award, para. 379.

50

146.The Mobil Parties have made much in these proceedings of this requirement to pursue

independent remedies against adverse governmental measures, and of the fact that such

remedies would seem, under Clause 15 of the Agreement, to have a priority of some kind.!
However that may be, it is not clear what bearing it might have on the proceedings for
annulment. It appears to the Committee that Venezuela’s arguments as to the effect of the Price
Cap would have had just as much, or just as little, relevance to the question of the quantum of
compensation under the BIT had there been no prior award in the ICC proceedings, or for that
matter no ICC proceedings at all. The only connection between the two came about because
the Tribunal found itself in a situation in which, whatever sequence of time might have been
foreseen by those drafting Section 15, the actual sequence in time was that the ICC arbitration
had been completed before the present Arbitration had been finally argued, and because the
Respondent (Venezuela) thereupon submitted that the ICC award put an end to the entire
dispute. These circumstances inevitably raised a question in the Tribunal’s mind as to whether

there might be a possibility of double recovery.

147. The Tribunal deals with this matter (once again briefly) in Section VIII.C.5 of the Award, in
which, having recalled the general principle of no enrichissement sans cause and recited the
specific contractual provisions against it, the Tribunal notes an express statement made by the
Claimants during the proceedings (which the Tribunal says it has no reason to doubt) that, in
the event of an award in their favour in the ICSID proceedings, they were willing to make the
required reimbursement to PDVSA (the parent body of Lagoven). The Tribunal concludes as
follows, in paragraph 381: “Effectively, the total compensation payable to the Claimants is the
amount specified in paragraph 374 above, less the amount already received by the Claimants
under the ICC Award for the same damage. Double recovery will thus be avoided.” Linked to
this is point (e) in the dispositive part of the Award, in which the Tribunal “takes note ... of
the Claimants’ representation that, in the event of favourable award, the Claimants are willing

to make the required reimbursements to PDVSA. Double recovery will thus be avoided.”

148.The Committee did its utmost to understand exactly what the Tribunal might have been

intending to convey through these passages. Even after having sought the assistance of the

"3 Counsel referred to it, in the oral hearing, as a ‘condition precedent’ (Transcript, Day 2, pp.343-344).

51

Parties in this endeavour, the Committee remains in a state of some uncertainty. Fortunately,
however, in view of what follows, the matter turns out to be immaterial to the Committee’s
decision on the request for annulment, and the Committee sees no need to pursue it further, on
the basis that the avoidance of double recovery is, in its essence, an adjustment that might arise
ex post facto (as the paragraphs cited above seem to imply), whereas the question raised in
these annulment proceedings is one going to the basis for the assessment of the compensation
due in the first place. The Committee notes simply that the conclusion is however irresistible
that the Tribunal saw in its mind some sort of necessary connection, however unspecific,
between the contractual liability (already met) and the compensation still to be assessed in the

BIT Arbitration.

149. This conclusion is reinforced by the fact that, in a separate section of its Award, 74 the Tribunal
addresses directly what it calls “Effects of the ICC Arbitration,” and that (as paragraph 215 of
the Award indicates) this was a question which the Tribunal had itself raised with the Parties.
In crude terms, the Claimants’ position was ‘no effect at all,’ and the Respondent’s ‘full effect’
(i.e. that nothing remained over for decision in the BIT arbitration). The remaining paragraphs
in this section of the Award are devoted to the Tribunal’s reasons for rejecting the
Respondent’s contention. The Tribunal points out in particular that there was no identity of
parties: the State was not party to the ICC arbitration, nor was Lagoven, the respondent in the
ICC proceedings, party to the BIT Arbitration. The Tribunal does, however, go on to note (in
paragraph 218) that the Association Agreement limits the compensation due from PDVSA, a
limitation reflected in the amount awarded by the ICC tribunal, and then adds “No such
limitation applies, however, to the State's responsibility under the BIT;” and it gives as the
reasons for this that the Government of Venezuela was “neither a party to the Association
Agreement nor a third-party beneficiary,” and that Venezuela had not “advanced any relevant
argument that the limitations on ... contractual liability under Clause 15 should be transmuted
into limitations of the State’s responsibility under international law.” The Section concludes
with a forward reference to the Section of the Award dealing with quantum, to which the

Committee will turn below.

"74 Award, paragraphs 215-219.

52

150. Before the quantum Section, however, a further relevant passage occurs at the conclusion of

151.

the Section of the Award dealing with the applicable law. Its relevance is that it, too, deals
with the question of the applicability of the Price Cap, as a matter of law, to the assessment of
liability and compensation. After stating its disagreement with Venezuela’s argument that the
Cerro Negro Conditions “import the contractual limitations to PDVSA-CN’s indemnity
obligations under Clause 15 of the CNAA into the State’s responsibility for breach of the

Treaty,” the Tribunal concludes as follows, in paragraph 225 -

“The Tribunal recalls that it is a fundamental principle of international law that “[a] party may
not invoke the provisions of its internal law as justification for its failure to perform a treaty.”
Under this principle, international obligations arising from a treaty cannot be discarded on the
grounds of national law. Among the legal systems on which the Award “shall be based”
pursuant to Article 9(5) of the Treaty, the Tribunal has no doubt in concluding that this issue
must be governed by international law. Consequently, the Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions
cannot exempt or excuse the Respondent from its obligations under the Treaty or under
customary international law. Bearing this in mind, the Tribunal has considered the effect of the
Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions of the Cerro Negro Framework of Conditions in the

section on quantum below.”

As can be seen from the final sentence, the Tribunal’s conclusion on this point, too, is directly
linked to its subsequent discussion of the quantum of compensation, and it is all these portions
of the Award taken together that form the kernel of the question which the Committee has

before it for decision.

Venezuela has raised in the present proceedings various challenges to these linked portions of
the Award. The Committee summarizes them as follows. Venezuela submits: (a) that the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by applying the wrong law to the assessment of the
compensation due for the expropriation of the Cerro Negro investments; (b) that the Tribunal
failed altogether to address itself to the prior question of the determination of the nature of the
rights constituting the Cerro Negro investments, as a precondition to their evaluation, and
thereby failed to support with adequate reasons a central element in its findings; (c) that the
Tribunal gave no sufficient reasons, or alternatively contradictory reasons, for disregarding the

compensation structure laid down by the Congressional Authorization and then in the

53

152.

153.

154.

Association Agreement; (d) that, in acting as above, the Tribunal failed to address at all some

of the Respondent’s central arguments.

The Committee will not follow in its entirety the way in which the material has been addressed
by either Venezuela or the Mobil Parties in argument before it, but will make its own analysis
of the material in the manner it finds most appropriate and most convenient, under the
following headings: (1) the applicable law; (2) the relevant international law; (3) the relevant
national law; (4) the implications of the above for the assessment of compensation; (5) the

quality of the Tribunal’s reasoning.

a) The applicable law
As is well known, Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention requires a tribunal to decide a dispute
in accordance with such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties. In the absence of such
agreement, the tribunal is to apply the law of the respondent State “and such rules of
international law as may be applicable.” The latter dispensation extends, however, only to a
case where the parties have not themselves settled the applicable law. Where the parties have

done so, the provisions of the second sentence in Article 42(1) are displaced.

In the present case, the Parties have indeed agreed on the applicable law, via Article 9(5) of
the BIT. The provisions of Article 9(5) bind Venezuela directly, as a Contracting Party to the
BIT, and it is settled law that a foreign investor, when accepting a State’s standing offer to
arbitrate under a BIT, likewise accepts, as an element of that offer, such provisions as to
applicable law as are contained in the BIT. Article 9(5) thus represents, for this Arbitration,
‘the rules of law agreed by the parties.’ This is made crystal-clear by the terms of the
Article itself, which states that the arbitral award “shall be based on” and then goes on to

provide as follows:

“i. the law of the Contracting Party concerned;

ii. the provisions of this Agreement and other relevant Agreements between the Contracting
Parties;

iii. the provisions of special agreements relating to the investments;

iv. the general principles of international law; and

vy. such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties to the dispute.”

54

Beyond that, the Article gives no indication as to a hierarchy or order of priority between these
various sources of law, except to the extent that the conjunctive “and” implies that several, or
indeed all, of these sources of law may come into play in the circumstances of a particular

dispute.

155. These factors are duly reflected by the Tribunal in Section VI (Applicable Law) of the Award,
at paragraphs 220-225. In paragraph 223 (the terms of which are set out in full in the footnote
below), !” the Tribunal determines that it will apply the BIT as well as the other agreed sources
of law “where appropriate.”!”° It observes that Article 9(5) does not itself allocate individual
matters to particular sources of law, so that the determination remains one for the Tribunal
itself to make. The Tribunal does so however in terms which are not altogether easy to
understand, when it states that the determination it will make is “whether an issue is subject to
national or international law.” The penumbra of uncertainty as to exactly what the Tribunal
has in mind by the two categories — apparently mutually exclusive and exhaustive — of ‘national
law’ and ‘international law’ is then further obscured by the next following sentence, in which
the Tribunal says that it will be determined, issue by issue, “whether the applicable
international law should be limited to general principles of international law under Article 9(5)

of the BIT or whether it includes customary international law.”!””

156. The main question is of course where this binary categorization leaves the BIT itself, and what
implications that might have for the application of the provisions of the BIT to the merits of

the dispute. The particular importance of this question, for the purposes of these annulment

175“ Accordingly, the Tribunal will apply the BIT and the other agreed sources of law where appropriate. Article 9(5)
of the Treaty does not allocate matters to any of those laws. Accordingly, it is for the Tribunal to determine whether
an issue is subject to national or international law. Further, if and when an issue arises, the Tribunal will determine
whether the applicable international law should be limited to general principles of international law under Article 9(5)
of the BIT or whether it includes customary international law. Moreover, with respect to the interpretation of the BIT,
the Tribunal will resort to the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which both States have ratified, as a "relevant
Agreement between the Contracting Parties".” Award, para. 223.

‘6 Tt is not entirely clear from the grammar whether this qualifying phrase (with its necessary implication that a
particular source might or might not be applied, according to circumstances) attaches itself only to the ‘other agreed
sources’ or to the BIT as well. The Committee interprets it as applying primarily to the other sources, i.e. that the
Tribunal’s intention was that the provisions of the BIT should always be applied whenever they were in point.

 

'” Further potential confusion arises out of the use in this sentence of the Award in English of one verb in the
conditional (‘should be limited’) while the next is in the indicative (‘includes’).

55

proceedings, is the finding by the Tribunal that comes a short while later on, in paragraph 225.

Paragraphs 224 and 225 read as follows:

224. Article 9(5) of the Dutch Treaty quoted above includes “the law of the Contracting Party”
and “the provisions of special agreements relating to the investments” among the sources of
applicable law. In reliance on these provisions, the Respondent appears to argue that the
Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions of the Cerro Negro Framework of Conditions (i) relieve
the Republic from its obligation to comply with the standards set forth in the Treaty, and/or (ii)
import the contractual limitations to PDVSA-CN’s indemnity obligations under Clause 15 of

the CNAA into the State’s responsibility for breach of the Treaty".

225. The Tribunal disagrees with this position. The Tribunal recalls that it is a fundamental
principle of international law that “[a] party may not invoke the provisions of its internal law
as justification for its failure to perform a treaty.” Under this principle, international obligations
arising from a treaty cannot be discarded on the grounds of national law. Among the legal
systems on which the Award “shall be based” pursuant to Article 9(5) of the Treaty, the
Tribunal has no doubt in concluding that this issue must be governed by international law.
Consequently, the Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions cannot exempt or excuse the
Respondent from its obligations under the Treaty or under customary international law. Bearing
this in mind, the Tribunal has considered the effect of the Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions

of the Cerro Negro Framework of Conditions in the section on quantum below.”

157. Here the Tribunal does make a specific determination of applicable law which, as the
Committee reads matters, came to assume cardinal importance in the determination of the
Cerro Negro dispute. The determination, however, like the passages cited above, is in itself
less than entirely clear: “Among the legal systems on which the Award “shall be based” pursuant to
Article 9(5) of the Treaty, the Tribunal has no doubt in concluding that this issue must be governed by
international law.” Judging from the sentence that follows: “Consequently, the Eighteenth and
Twentieth Conditions cannot exempt or excuse the Respondent from its obligations under the Treaty
or under customary international law,” and from the way in which the Tribunal describes the
Respondent’s argument in paragraph 224, what the Tribunal has in mind by ‘this issue’ would
appear to be the effect of the Congressional Authorization and the terms of the Association
Agreement on the assessment of the compensation due under the BIT. The Committee puts

the matter in this contingent way because, despite the central importance of the point at issue,

56

the Tribunal does not itself explain the point with any great clarity; moreover, as will be shown
below, the two intrusive references to “customary international law” are the source of still

further uncertainty.178

158. What significance should be attached to the above will be discussed below. For the moment,
it suffices to note that the only reasoning offered for this key finding is that in the two preceding
sentences of paragraph 225 (see above). In these two sentences the Tribunal invokes, in two
different wordings, the basic principle of international law that the state of a party’s internal
law cannot be advanced as valid justification for its failure to perform a treaty or, as in the
second sentence, ‘discarding on the grounds of national law international obligations arising
from a treaty’. The Committee will also discuss further below how far this was in fact the

issue in dispute between the Parties in the arbitral proceedings.

b) The relevant international law

159. As will appear from the above, the exclusive sources of law for the determination of the dispute
brought to arbitration are those listed in extenso in Article 9(5) of the BIT and are set out in
paragraph 154 above. The listing contains two references to international law, one implicit,
one explicit. The explicit reference, in sub-paragraph iv, is to “the general principles of
international law” and is presumably to be understood as pointing in turn to one of the sources
of law enumerated in Article 38(1) of the Statute of the International Court of Justice. The
implicit reference to international law is that in sub-paragraph ii to “the provisions of this
Agreement” i.e. to the BIT itself which, as an inter-State treaty, must necessarily be taken to
constitute international law.'” It is the Tribunal which makes its own addition to the Treaty
list by adding in a mention of customary international law in paragraph 223 (“if and when an
issue arises, the Tribunal will determine whether the applicable international law should be limited to
general principles of international law under Article 9(5) of the BIT or whether it includes customary
international law’), and reserving to itself the decision from case to case to “determine whether

the applicable international law should be limited to general principles of international law

"8 See further paragraph 159 below.

‘7° The sub-paragraph refers also to ‘other relevant Agreements between the Contracting Parties,” but it would seem
that none such were advanced in argument in the arbitration.

s7

under Article 9(5) of the BIT or whether it includes customary international law.” But the
Tribunal gives no indication of where it derives the authority to make what looks like a
modification — or indeed an expansion !8° — of the source rules laid down in the Article, nor
does the Tribunal state what criterion it has in mind to use in order to decide (when the case
arises) whether or not to ‘include customary international law.’ The significance of this for the

Tribunal’s Award will also be considered further below.

160. An important and direct determination of applicable law does, however, appear somewhat later
in the Award, at paragraph 306, in which the Tribunal rejects the Mobil Parties’ claim that the
expropriation was unlawful. It draws as the conclusion from this that “The compensation must
be calculated in conformity with the requirements of Article 6(c) of the BIT.” As already
indicated, the ad hoc Committee regards this as a key finding in the Award. There is no express
reference to its being a choice of law determination under Article 9(5), or a determination in
pursuit of what the Tribunal had already decided in this respect in the Section of the Award on
‘Applicable Law’ (paragraphs 153-155 above). But such an express reference was hardly
necessary. The sentence appears immediately before Section VIII.C of the Award, in which
the Tribunal deals with the ‘Quantum of the Expropriation of the Cerro Negro Project,’ and
which opens with a description of the requirements in this regard laid down by Article 6 of the
BIT: ‘just compensation’ and ‘market value.’ The manner in which the Tribunal followed
through on this central determination of the applicable law will also be considered further

below in the section entitled “The implications for the assessment of compensation”.

c) The relevant national law

161.

As the Committee has already noted, perhaps the most troublesome finding of the Tribunal,
for the purposes of these annulment proceedings, is its determination in paragraph 225 of the
Award set out in paragraph 150 above. In crude terms, the Tribunal here decides that national
(internal) law may not be invoked to avoid international obligations, whether arising under

treaty or otherwise. The general principle is indeed a fundamental one, and its application in

180 In Article 38(1) of the ICJ Statute, the sub-paragraph referring to ‘international custom’ stands separate and distinct
from the sub-paragraph referring to ‘general principles.”

58

respect of treaties is universally accepted,'*! as it is more generally.'**

The examples
commonly given are those of an attempt ex post facto to override an established treaty
obligation or other international obligation, or the case in which a State had failed to ensure, at
the time of entering into a treaty, that its internal law was adequate to enable the treaty to be
given full effect. The copious authorities listed by the International Law Commission in 2001
are all of that kind. '*? They typically involve the provisions of written legislation or the national
Constitution. Less clear, however, is precisely what, in this specific context, the Tribunal had
in mind as ‘national law.’ The treatment in the Award of the Congressional Conditions
establishes that, in the judgement of the Tribunal, the approval given by the Venezuelan
Congress was approval of the proposed terms of the Association Agreement, and the
Agreement, in turn, incorporated the conditions for that approval that had been laid down by
the Congress in advance. The Mobil Parties themselves made much, in their argument before
the Committee in these proceedings, of the fact that the intervention of the Congress merely
confirmed what had been negotiated at length and agreed between the investors and PDVSA.
But the Committee is hard put to see how this helps their case; it establishes only that the
Congressional action, far from being a unilateral imposition contrary to the intentions or
expectations of the foreign investors, was in fact in harmony with their intentions and
expectations and served the purpose of putting these into legal effect at the time the investment
was entered into. It does not therefore serve to explain why the limited legislative intervention
which took place ought to be regarded as equivalent in character or effect to an attempt to

override international obligations by the invocation of national law.

162. The Tribunal’s finding on this point is not altogether easy to follow. That the Tribunal sets
aside the terms of the Association Agreement (based as they were on the Congressional
Conditions) as directly binding on Venezuela for the purposes of the arbitral proceedings is
understandable enough if it should be taken as another way of saying that the governing law

for the assessment of compensation was the BIT. The finding in paragraph 225, however,

'81 See article 27 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969 (“A party may not invoke the provisions of
its internal law as justification for its failure to perform a treaty. ...”).

See Article 3 of the ILC’s Draft article on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts 2001.

 

182

183 See the Commentary to the ILC Draft Articles.

59

presupposes the existence of a conflict of some kind between Venezuela’s internal law and its
international obligations, and it is both the nature of that ‘internal law’ which the Tribunal had
in mind and the nature of the supposed conflict which trouble the Committee. On the one hand,
it appears to the Committee that at no stage has Venezuela sought to invoke any provision of
its internal law as standing in the way of paying compensation for the expropriation as required
by the BIT; as indicated above, the obligation to pay compensation has always been
acknowledged, and the Tribunal finds expressly that the expropriation was not in itself
unlawful or in breach of Venezuela’s treaty obligations. By the same token, on the other hand,
the Tribunal expressly finds that the offer of compensation did not in itself render the
underlying expropriation a breach of the BIT — and this must carry with it the consequence that
the Tribunal considered that the offer made, based as it was on the Congressional Conditions
and Association Agreement, was not incompatible with the Treaty. The Tribunal says
specifically that it “finds that the evidence submitted does not demonstrate that the proposals
made by Venezuela were incompatible with the requirement of ‘just’ compensation of Article
6(c) of the BIT.” '*+ If that is so, however, it becomes very hard to see in what way the
invocation of the Congressional Conditions and Association Agreement can have been thought
to be equivalent to an attempt to make the provisions of Venezuelan law prevail over
Venezuela’s international obligations. For that reason alone, the Committee will approach with
caution any suggestion that the exclusion of the Congressional Conditions and Association
Agreement as in themselves determinative of the question of the quantum of compensation
also made the Price Cap irrelevant to the determination of the quantum by other means, i.e.

those provided for in the BIT.

163. The Committee notes also that a part of the Mobil Parties’ case is based on the concept that the
intention and effect of the contractual obligations under the Association Agreement was to
provide for a partial (because price-capped) compensation from Lagoven or PDVSA, on top
of the unrestricted compensation that would be due from the State, with the overlap being taken
care of by the mechanism in Clause 15 for the avoidance of double recovery. The Committee

has no need to decide the point, and observes merely that a structure of that kind is not readily

84 Award, paragraph 305.

60

reconcilable with the actual terms of Clause 15, which both foresees that action against the
State would happen first in time and specifies that its aim would be “mitigation” of the liability
of Lagoven/PDVSA, not vice versa. Much the same applies to the Mobil Parties’ case — in
large measure accepted by the Tribunal — that, even if Clause 15 should properly be viewed as
a contractual ‘limitation of liability,’ this did not enure to the benefit of Venezuela, since the
Association Agreement was res inter alios acta, or (in the terms in which the argument was
put) Venezuela was not a ‘third party beneficiary’ of Clause 15. While the Committee can
understand the point behind the argument, it does not find — for the reasons set out below —
that the argument is germane to the real point at issue in the Arbitration, namely what exactly
was the investment that had been expropriated and how was it to be valued for compensation

purposes.

d) The implications for the assessment of compensation
164. As described above, a key finding by the Tribunal was that the compensation due to the Mobil
Parties had to be assessed in accordance with Article 6(c) of the BIT which lays down as the
applicable standard that of ‘just compensation’ (justa compensacion in the Spanish). The
requirements of Article 6(c) (paragraph 142 above) are set out in full in paragraph 307 of the
Award, and begin the Section on the Quantum of the Expropriation. No doubt partly as a result
of the fact that there was no disagreement between the Parties that a discounted cash flow
(DCF) approach was the right one to use (paragraph 308 of the Award), there is next to no
analysis to be found in the Award of what else might be required by way of interpretation of
Article 6(c) as the basis for its proper application. The overwhelming part of the discussion, as
already indicated, is devoted to the detailed practical application of the DCF technique to the
particular circumstances of the case. The analysis takes up nearly 60 paragraphs of the Award,
and culminates in paragraph 368 with the determination of a net cash flow figure of
US$ 1,411.7 million, which then becomes in due course the liability figure in (d) of the
dispositive part of the Award at paragraph 404. There is no other discussion of a general kind
as to what factors or elements might have to be taken into account in order to arrive at what
Article 6(c) requires by way of “the market value of the investments affected immediately
before the measures were taken or the impending measure became public knowledge,

whichever is the earlier.” The sole exception is a brief discussion at paragraph 365 of the

61

question of the timing of the evaluation, in which the Tribunal determines “that the
compensation must correspond to the amount that a willing buyer would have been ready to

pay to a willing seller in order to acquire his interests but for the expropriation.” !®>

165.In other words, the structure of the Award is such that, by the time the Tribunal comes to its
promised consideration of the possible effect of the Price Cap (see paragraph 143 above),

which it does in a separate Section, ©

it has already determined a compensation figure. As
paragraph 370 of the Award recites, the Claimants argued that the Price Cap was simply
irrelevant and therefore inapplicable, and this is the view the Tribunal itself adopts in

paragraph 373, with the consequence that its earlier compensation figure remains unaffected.

166. This represents another significant finding, and the Tribunal’s reasons for it are given quite

briefly, in paragraph 373 itself, as follows —

“The Tribunal notes that the Twentieth condition of the Congressional Authorization does not
impose a specific price cap, but provides for a price cap to be established in the Association
Agreement. In the present case, Clause 15(1) of the Association Agreement makes a clear
distinction between the action that the Foreign Party may initiate against Lagoven CN on the
one hand, and the action that it may initiate against the Government on the other. The price cap
contained in Clause 15(2)(a) is applicable only to the compensation payable by Lagoven CN.
Since the Respondent in this proceeding is the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, not Lagoven

CN, the Tribunal concludes that it may not oppose this price cap to the Claimants.”

The Tribunal’s conclusion, in other words, is not necessarily one of substantive irrelevance or
inapplicability in law, but of non-opposability, as res inter alios acta. The finding is thus
qualitatively different from the Tribunal’s earlier finding in paragraph 225 of the Award (see
paragraphs 150 and 161 above). And the point made here by the Tribunal, while valid as a
matter of contract law, has no bearing on the argument whether the existence of a price cap as

such was a relevant factor for the assessment of the compensation due under the BIT.

'85 The context was a difference of opinion between the experts on both sides as to whether a confiscation risk must
be taken into account for the determination of the discount rate, and the Tribunal, having decided that it must, adjusts
the discount rate accordingly.

'86 At paragraphs 369-374.

62

e) The Tribunal’s reasoning

167. Venezuela now raises before this ad hoc Committee two basic objections to these various

findings by the Tribunal.

168. Venezuela says: first, that an investment is, of its very nature, an item of property, that the
ascertainment of what that property consists of is a necessary and inescapable precondition to
any assessment of its value, and specifically of its ‘market value’ under Article 6(c) of the BIT,
so that this is an essential prior step which the reasoning of the Tribunal missed out entirely;
second, that property is not a quantity that is, or can be, created by international law, and that
the only role of international law is to recognize property created and defined by national law,
and then to draw from that whatever consequences may flow on the international plane, so that
the Tribunal failed altogether to bring the proper analysis to bear on the scope of the
expropriation in question, or on the law applicable to its consequences by way of

compensation.

169. The Mobil Parties counter!®” that Venezuela never put this ‘property’ argument before the
Tribunal in the arbitral proceedings, and assert, for their part, that “the dispute did not concern
‘property rights’ governed by domestic law but pertained exclusively to rights and obligations
under the Treaty, which are governed by international law’.!** The Committee does not,
however, believe that this is correct, since it is clear that the character of the rights at issue
(whether they be called ‘property rights’ or by some other description) is inherent in the very
nature of an ‘investment,’ even before the point is reached at which the appropriate remedy
has to be determined for an interference with the investment. The point at issue was therefore
necessarily before the Tribunal. To say that an investment consists of rights created under
national law is not the same as to claim that the only remedies available are those under the

relevant national law.

170. Having given the matter its anxious consideration, the Committee is of the view that Venezuela

is right, in principle, in each of its two contentions set out in paragraph 168 above. The

'87 See Counter-Memorial, at paragraphs 226-242.
'88 Tbid., paragraph 242.

63

Committee will therefore have to consider whether the conclusions drawn by Venezuela are
also correct, and in that case what effect it would have on the integrity of the relevant part of
the Award, measured against the criteria in sub-paragraphs (b) and (e) of Article 52(1) of the
ICSID Convention.

171.Before coming to that point, the Committee must, however, give its reasons for agreeing in

principle with the two Venezuelan propositions.

172.The Committee takes as its starting point (as indicated above) that the classification of an
investment as a form of property is indisputably correct. Even if the property is incorporeal
or intangible, and consists merely of a collection of rights, the proposition remains unaffected.
This is so intuitive a proposition that it is not stated in the books, but that does not affect its
inherent character. For present purposes, though, the question is, in effect, answered by the

definition of “investments” given in Article 1(a) of the BIT:

“For the purposes of this Agreement:

(a) the term ‘investments’ shall comprise every kind of asset and more particularly though not
exclusively:

i. movable and immovable property, as well as any other rights in rem in respect of every kind
of asset;

ii. rights derived from shares, bonds, and other kinds of interests in companies and joint-
ventures;

iii. title to money, to other assets or to any performance having an economic value;
iv. rights in the field of intellectual property, technical processes, goodwill and know-how;

y. rights granted under public law, including rights to prospect, explore, extract, and win natural
resources.”

173. The chapeau to the sub-paragraph “every kind of asset,” as well as the detailed examples that
follow, bracket ‘assets’ together with tangible property and rights and titles of various kinds.
In the present Arbitration, the ‘investment’ (so far as the Cerro Negro Project is concerned)
englobes both rights over tangible physical assets and entitlements of an intangible kind. The
Tribunal adopts a similar definition of it in paragraphs 57-58 of the Award. The Committee
does not see that there can be any reasonable basis for contesting that the bundle of rights

constituting the Cerro Negro investment was created by or under Venezuelan law and, having

64

174.

175.

176.

been so created, was then a type of property recognized and protected by international law in
the form of the BIT. The Tribunal approaches the matter in exactly this manner in the
paragraphs just cited. It is therefore not necessary for the Committee to resume the substantial
body of writings mustered by Venezuela in these proceedings in support of their contention
that this pattern is the universal norm; the Mobil Parties were not able to summon up any

authority to the contrary, and the Committee regards the proposition as indisputable.

More important, though, is what follows from the above. Venezuela says that the property
rights themselves that were acquired by the investors in making their investment were
circumscribed by the provisions of the Congressional Conditions and their fulfilment in the
Association Agreement, which together limited the compensation that would be due to them
for future Government measures, and that the Tribunal simply omitted the necessary step of
registering the real nature of the rights comprising the investment before proceeding to value
them for the purposes of assessing compensation for their confiscation. The Mobil Parties
appear to have no direct answer to this, but rest their argument on the well-known difference

between contract claims and treaty claims.

It is plain to the Committee that, when it comes to the assessment of compensation for the
Cerro Negro expropriation, the two critically essential elements in the Award’s reasoning are
the Tribunal’s decision that the question is governed by the BIT, and the way in which the

Tribunal put that decision into effect.

As already indicated, the Tribunal’s decision that the question of compensation for the Cerro
Negro expropriation is governed by the BIT and consequently that it must be assessed in
accordance with, i.e. by applying, Article 6(c) of the BIT is both necessary and inevitable. If
the Tribunal’s decision that the question of compensation was to be governed by international
law is properly to be understood as selecting the BIT, as a matter of applicable law, the decision
is plainly right and not open to question. The difficulty in the reasoning underlying the Award
is rather twofold: the way in which, once the choice had been made, Article 6(c) of the BIT
was in fact applied; and the concept of ‘international law’ utilized by the Tribunal in reaching

and implementing its decision that compensation was to be governed by international, not

65

national, law. The two aspects are not entirely distinct from one another, but need to be

approached separately.

177. The crucial issue — which became also the central issue in these annulment proceedings — was
whether what the Tribunal refers to as the ‘limitation on liability’ in the Eighteenth and
Twentieth Conditions, as incorporated into the Association Agreement, was relevant to the
assessment of the compensation due, and if so how. In the event, the Tribunal simply set this
‘limitation’ aside as not relevant, and thus took no account of it. It did so at two places in the
Award, and for two different sets of reasons. The two sets of reasons are not literally
contradictory, but there is a question as to their compatibility with one another. Each of them

has, however, to be appreciated in its particular context in the Award.

178.The first set of reasons is to be found at paragraphs 216 and 218 of the Award. Here the
Tribunal decides that the ICC arbitration and the BIT Arbitration “concern the liability of
different parties under different normative regimes.” It also decides that, while the Association
Agreement does incorporate a limit on the compensation due from PDVSA, “[n]o such
limitation applies ... to the State’s responsibility under the BIT”, and gives as the reason that
the Government “was neither a party to the CNAA nor a third-party beneficiary.” The context
for these findings was (see above) the question the Tribunal had itself raised ex officio as to
what impact (if any) the award that had in the meanwhile been issued by the ICC tribunal
should have on the still pending dispute under the BIT. In this context, the decision by the
Tribunal that the ICC arbitration was formally irrelevant to the issue before it is readily
understandable. It is moreover a decision the Tribunal was competent to make and is not
subject to appeal. What preoccupies the Committee, though, is whether a simple decision that
the ICC award on the contract dispute did not in and of itself bring an end to the dispute under
the BIT became transmogrified, whether consciously or not, into something much wider, and
at a stage before the provisions of the BIT governing compensation had been addressed in the
Award at all. Both in paragraph 216 and in paragraph 218, the Tribunal prays in aid a source
of law that is not within the listing in Article 9(5), namely ‘international law’ tout court (see
paragraph 155 above). That the use here of ‘international law’ is not merely an imprecise
shorthand for the BIT appears unmistakably from the language of paragraph 216 which, as set

out above, refers to responsibility for breach of the BIT “and international law.” The same

66

appears, though rather less explicitly, in the reference in paragraph 218 to a contractual clause
becoming “transmuted into limitations of the State’s responsibility under international law.”
No explanation is given of how or why a putative responsibility of the Respondent State under

international law extraneous to the BIT might fall within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

179. The second set of reasons given by the Tribunal for setting aside the relevance of the Price Cap
can be found in the key passages at paragraph 225 of the Award; these are reflected in full at
paragraphs 155-156 above and there is no need to repeat them here. Taking them once again,
however, in their particular context, the Tribunal says (in paragraph 224) that what it is
addressing is the argument that (i) the Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions either relieve
Venezuela from its obligation to comply with the standards under the BIT and/or (ii) import
the corresponding limitation on liability into Venezuela’s responsibility for breach of the BIT.
In context, the answer given by the Tribunal in paragraph 225 is, once more, understandable —
though it should be noticed that Venezuela has vehemently denied in these Annulment
proceedings that it ever did advance these propositions in its defence in the Arbitration, and
says that the Tribunal is repeating here the mis-description of its position put forward in
argument by the Mobil Parties. The Committee’s preoccupation is, however, once again that
the rejection of two supposed propositions about ‘overriding’ treaty obligations, or setting them
aside, became transmogrified into something much wider with potentially determinative effect
for the interpretation and application of the BIT before the provisions of the BIT governing

compensation had been addressed in the Award at all.

180.To summarize therefore, in the passages just analysed the Tribunal, in incidentally disposing
of peripheral arguments supposed to have been directed at displacing the compensation
provisions of the BIT, appears to have committed itself to general propositions about the
relationship between ‘national law’ and ‘international law’ which appear in turn to have
foreclosed in advance the proper application of the BIT to the case. In brief: to determine
that the Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions do not displace Venezuela’s international
obligations is not at all synonymous with determining that they have no relevance for the

ascertainment of the content and consequences of those obligations.

67

181.It seems to the Committee to be obvious that in an appropriate case the resolution of a disputed
issue under international law can itself entail the application of national law, simply because
that is what the international rule requires. The ILC, in §7 of its Commentary on draft Article
3 on State Responsibility says, “Especially in the fields of injury to aliens and their property
and of human rights, the content and application of internal law will often be relevant to the
question of international responsibility. In every case it will be seen on analysis that either the
provisions of internal law are relevant as facts in applying the applicable international standard,
or else that they are actually incorporated in some form, conditionally or unconditionally, into
that standard.”!*° That possibility is plainly allowed for in the choice of law regime of Article
9(5) of the BIT when it lists ‘the law of the Contracting Party concerned’ and ‘the provisions
of this Agreement’ as the first two among the elements of law on which an arbitral award shall
be based (paragraph 154 above). However that may be, it also appears from Venezuela’s
Memorial in these proceedings that this precise point had been put to the Tribunal by
Venezuela when it argued, in its Counter-Memorial on the Merits, that the Claimants were
trying to ‘read out of Article 9.5 [of the BIT] the first and third sources of law’ and insisted
that, under the BIT, Venezuelan law had to be taken into account. That is, of course, radically
different from an attempt to use its internal law to evade its obligations under the BIT, and the
Committee has not been able to find anywhere in the Award in which Venezuela’s actual

argument was addressed.

182. After the passages discussed above, the Tribunal does not come to the assessment of the
compensation due for the Cerro Negro expropriation until paragraphs 306 and following of the
Award (see paragraph 162 above). As there indicated, the Tribunal lays down definitively —
and in the Committee’s view correctly — that the compensation “must be calculated in
conformity with the requirements of Article 6(c) of the BIT.” In form and in effect this is a
determination of law. What ought necessarily to follow is the ascertainment of what those
requirements are under the BIT and then their application in specie to the particular case in

hand, and the Committee will now examine the way in which that was done.

189 See also Crawford, State Responsibility, at p. 101 (“National law will often be relevant, whether because it is
incorporated by reference in the international law rule, or because it is part of the factual matrix of the dispute.”)

68

183.The process begins in paragraph 307 with a recital verbatim of the key requirements of
Article 6(c), notably the standard of ‘just compensation’ and that its measure must be the
market value “of the investments affected” immediately before the expropriating measures. It
then transitions immediately (paragraph 308) to the DCF analysis said to have been agreed by
the Parties as the basis for evaluation, and the next 60 paragraphs are given over to the detail
of the DCF analysis, culminating (as indicated above) in the ultimate compensation figure
announced in paragraph 368. At this point, the Award moves to the short excursus on the Price
Cap discussed at paragraphs 142-143 above, leading to the conclusion that it may not be

‘opposed to’ the Claimants in the BIT Arbitration.

184. On the strength of the analysis above, the Committee is itself driven to the conclusion that,
although the Tribunal devotes some attention to destroying two straw men (that the Price Cap
is contractually binding in itself in the BIT Arbitration, or that the Price Cap can have the effect
of displacing or overriding Venezuela’s international obligations towards the investors), at no
stage does the Tribunal give any consideration to what relevance the limitations on the
investors’ rights embodied in the Price Cap might actually have to the application of the
mandatory criteria laid down in the BIT for compensation. At paragraph 306 the Tribunal
makes the definitive determination for the purposes of the Award that the compensation due
“must be calculated in conformity with the requirements of Article 6(c) of the BIT.” These
requirements are then recalled verbatim in paragraph 307, which the Tribunal rounds off with
its own conclusion that the compensation “must correspond to the amount that a willing buyer
would have been ready to pay to a willing seller at the time in order to acquire the expropriated
interests.” But the focus then shifts immediately to the detail of a discounted cash flow
analysis, and there is no discussion at all of what should be understood, in the circumstances

of the case, by the principal criterion of ‘just compensation,’ !°°

or of what, in the particular
circumstances, should be understood by the market value ‘of the investments affected.’ Nor
indeed is any further development to be found of the Tribunal’s own determination that the
measure of market value is what a willing buyer would have been prepared to pay to a willing

seller. The only consideration given to the Price Cap is in connection with the two straw men

1° The discussion of this principal criterion is to be found in the Section on the lawfulness of the expropriation, at
paragraph 305; but it is not particularized, nor is it followed through.

 

69

described above; there is no discussion of any kind of what effect the Price Cap (as a limitation
on the investor’s rights) might have had on ‘market value’ of the investment or on the intentions
and calculations of the hypothetical willing buyer.'?! This is notwithstanding the fact that this
would seem to be a necessary and inevitable element in any willing buyer/willing seller
analysis, and the fact that (on the evidence of the Award itself: paragraph 370) that precise
proposition had been put in argument by Venezuela. The only response to Venezuela’s
argument is the first of the two straw men, the one contained in paragraph 373 of the Award, !°
and which was, so it seems, the argument being put forward to the Tribunal by the Claimants.
The Award records in paragraph 370 Venezuela’s contention that the Claimants’ argument

does not address the real issue, and the Committee can only respectfully agree.

185.The Committee concludes this portion of its Decision by adverting to one related aspect of the

Award.
186. The corresponding passages in the Award are the following (all emphases supplied) —

“These proceedings concern the responsibility of the State for breach of the Treaty and
international law.” (paragraph 216)

“Neither has the Respondent advanced any relevant argument that the limitations on PDVSA-
CN’s contractual liability under Clause 15 should be transmuted into limitations of the State’s
responsibility under international law.” (paragraph 218)

“... the Tribunal has no doubt in concluding that this issue must be governed by international
law. Consequently, the Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions cannot exempt or excuse the
Respondent from its obligations under the Treaty or under customary international law.”
(paragraph 225).

187. Taking these passages in themselves and in their individual contexts it is hard to avoid seeing
in them an implication that there exists notionally and in spe a given quantum of compensation
for expropriation imposed ‘by international law’ from which it is not possible to detract by
domestic legal means or by any other form of action other than on the international plane. If

so, then the underlying concept remains unexplained; nothing can be found on the face of the

'°! Contrast the direct application of the willing buyer criterion to the quantum of compensation in respect of the La
Ceiba Project at paragraph 385 of the Award.

'%2 See paragraph 184 above.

70

Award to establish what the relationship is between the postulated liability ‘under international
law’ and the compensation criterion expressly laid down in the BIT. Nor, even if there does
exist some pre-existing notional obligation under ‘international law’ (which both paragraphs
216 and 225 treat as something different from the BIT), is there any reasoning to establish why
that obligation should be justiciable in the arbitration at all, let alone why it should be taken to
override the express provision to be found in the BIT. In other words, in its anxiety to dismiss
any thought that national law can be invoked as a defence to the breach of an international
obligation, the Tribunal ended up falling into an another version of exactly the same type of
proposition, i.e. that some alternative source of international obligation can be invoked to
displace particular rights and obligations established by treaty. Had the Tribunal set out to
articulate the proposition directly, and to reason it through, it would immediately have realized
that this proposition was as unsustainable, at the level of general principle, as the proposition

which the Tribunal was setting out to reject.

V. DECISION

188. The ad hoc Committee accordingly arrives at the following conclusions: -

a) The Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers to the extent that it held that general
international law, and specifically customary international law, regulated the determination
and assessment of the compensation due to the Mobil Parties for the expropriation of their
investment in the Cerro Negro Project, in place of the application of the provisions of the
BIT.

b) Those parts of the Award that purport to be based on the existence, irrespective of the BIT,
of a justiciable obligation on Venezuela towards the Mobil Parties in respect of the
compensation due for the expropriation of their investment in the Cerro Negro Project, fail
to state the reasons on which they are based.

c

Those parts of the Award that purport to set aside altogether the potential relevance, for the
purposes of applying the provisions of the BIT, of the compensation provisions forming
part of the Mobil Parties’ investment in the Cerro Negro Project are unsupported by
analysis and based on contradictory reasoning, and thus fail to state the reasons on which

they are based.

71

189. The Committee accordingly finds that the portions of the Award dealing with the compensation
due for the admitted (and lawful) expropriation of the Cerro Negro Project are so seriously
deficient both in their reasoning and in the choice and application of the appropriate sources
of law under the governing Bilateral Investment Treaty as to give rise to grounds for annulment
under Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention. The Committee sees no need to enter further
into the question whether either one of these deficiencies, taken on its own, would have
justified the annulment of the relevant parts of the Award, since it is evident that the two
deficiencies identified bear on exactly the same aspects of the Tribunal’s decision and the
reasoning behind it; and indeed, as indicated above, the two deficiencies can hardly be
separated from one another. The consequence is that they reinforce one another, and in so
doing they lead to a situation in which the relevant parts of the Award can be impugned both
as a ‘manifest excess of power’ under Article 52(1)(b), and as a ‘failure to state reasons’ under
Article 52(1)(e).!°? The Tribunal exceeded its powers by failing to apply the proper law, and
the ‘manifest’ nature of this failure is shown by the inadequacies in the Tribunal’s reasoning
for the choice of applicable law, in both its positive (the law chosen) and negative (the law
rejected) aspects. Conversely, the failure to state adequate and non-contradictory reasons is of
central significance inasmuch as it had decisive effect on the choice and application of
applicable law and thus on the Tribunal’s decision on the principal point at issue (the

assessment of the compensation due).

190. The Committee should not be understood by this Decision to be determining in what way either
the Price Cap or the outcome of the ICC arbitration should be brought to bear on the assessment
of compensation in the present dispute. That would lie beyond its competence, and is in any
event a decision which the Committee is in no position to make. The Committee’s decision is
directed simply at the a priori exclusion in the Award of certain essential elements from the

process of arriving at the compensation due pursuant to the terms of Article 6 of the BIT.

191.

Given the limited nature of the annulment to be pronounced, the Committee considers it both
necessary and useful to indicate more precisely, in the dispositive section which will follow,

which aspects of the Award are annulled (and therefore which parts of the Award are left

"3 Cf. Lucchetti v. Peru, Decision on Annulment of 5 September 2007, at para. 72.

72

untouched by the Decision). It will be up to the Parties to take the necessary steps thereafter to
put the resulting situation into practical effect. No doubt they will choose whatever method is

most convenient and most efficient towards that end.

192. The stay of enforcement laid down in Procedural Order No. 2 of 28 July 2015 will, according
to its terms, cease to have effect on the date of issue of the present Decision. The Committee
specifically recalls in this connection the letter of 27 August 2015 from the Minister of
Petroleum and Minerals of Venezuela conveying a formal and binding commitment on behalf
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in the event that Venezuela’s present Application for
Annulment is unsuccessful in whole or in part, to comply promptly with any or all parts of the

Award that have not been annulled.

VI.COSTS

193. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, which applies to annulment mutatis mutandis pursuant
to Article 52(4), gives the Committee discretion to allocate the costs of the proceeding between
the parties as it deems appropriate. As regards the allocation of the costs of these annulment
proceedings, the Committee intends to follow the same approach as that of the Tribunal, and
take into account the conduct of the Parties as well as the principle that costs should normally

follow the event.

194. Both Parties, in their written submissions, have asked for the costs of these proceedings to be
awarded in their favour, and each Party duly submitted a statement of costs in response to the
Committee’s request at the conclusion of the oral hearing. Venezuela, as Applicant, claimed a
total of US$ 2,092,414 in costs and expenses, and the Mobil Parties, as Respondents, a total of
US$ 701,617.30; in support of the amount claimed, Venezuela drew attention to its need to

operate throughout in both the English and Spanish languages.

195. Applying to the outcome of these proceedings the approach indicated in paragraph 193 above,
the Committee notes that Venezuela has been plainly successful over the main and most
substantial issue, i.e. that relating to compensation for the Cerro Negro expropriation, which
has in turn occupied the major part of both the written and oral argument. Against that must
however be set the dismissal of its two other requests for annulment (jurisdiction and document

production) which the Committee has found to have little substantive merit. In these

73

circumstances, the Committee considers that the only reasonable decision is to let the costs of
the preparation and presentation of Parties’ respective cases lie where they fall and to split the
costs of the annulment proceedings, including the fees and expenses of the Members of the
Committee and the costs of the Centre, between the Parties, with the result that each side will
bear the costs of the preparation and presentation of its own case, and that the costs of the
annulment proceedings, including the fees and expenses of the Members of the Committee and
the costs of the Centre, will be shared equally between the Applicant and the Respondents.
The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed financial statement of the case

account once all invoices are received and the account is final.
VII. DISPOSITIF
196. On the basis of the reasoning above, the Committee decides: -

1) the request for the annulment of the Award on account of the Tribunal’s assumption of

jurisdiction is rejected;

2

the request for the annulment of the Award on account of the Tribunal’s refusal to order

document production is rejected;

3

the request for the annulment of the portion of the Award dealing with compensation for
the expropriation of the Cerro Negro Project is upheld in part, as follows: paragraph 404(d)
of the Award is annulled, together with certain paragraphs in Sections V, VI, and VIII of
the Award bearing directly on the assessment of compensation and the basis therefor, that

is to say paragraphs 216-218, paragraphs 223-225, and paragraphs 373-374;

4

for the avoidance of doubt, the Committee specifies that the following parts of the Award
are not affected by sub-paragraph 3) above, namely paragraphs 297-306, paragraphs 307-
367, the first sentence of paragraph 368, paragraphs 386-400, and paragraph 403, as well
as paragraphs 184-213 and the Decision on Jurisdiction of 10 June 2010;

5

in accordance with the terms of paragraph 10.a of Procedural Order No. 2 of 28 July 2015,
the stay of enforcement laid down in that Order will cease to have effect on the date of

issue of the present Decision;

74

6) each Party shall bear the costs of the preparation and presentation of its own case. The
costs of the annulment proceedings, including the fees and expenses of the Members of the
Committee and the costs of the Centre, shall be shared equally between the Applicant and

the Respondents.

75

[signed] [signed]

 

Tan Sri Cecil Abraham Professor Dr. Rolf Knieper
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee
Date: February 23, 2017 Date: February 28, 2017
[signed]

Sir Franklin Berman
President of the ad hoc Committee
Date: March 3, 2017

76

