INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

Mobi CORPORATION, VENEZUELA HOLDINGS, B.V.,
Mobi CERRO NEGRO HOLDING, L1D.,
MOBIL VENEZOLANA DE PETROLEOS HOLDINGS, INC.,
Mosit CERRO NEGRO, LTD., AND
MOBIL VENEZOLANA DE PETROLEOS, INC.
(CLAIMANTS)

AND

BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID CasE No. ARB/07/27)

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

Members of the Tribunal:

HLE. Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President
Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Arbitrator
Dr. Ahmed Sadek El-Kosheri, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Ms. Katia Yannaca-Small

Representing the Claimants:

Mr. Oscar M. Garibaldi,

Mr. Eugene Gulland,

Mr. Miguel Lopez Forastier

Covington & Burling LLP
and

Ms. Toni D. Hennike

Exxon Mobil Corporation

Date: June 10, 2010

Representing the Respondent:

Mr. George Kahale, III,

Mr. Mark H. O’ Donoghue,

Ms. Miriam K. Harwood,

Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

CONTENTS

L PROCEDURE 2
IL. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

A-—THE RESPONDENT’S MEMORIAL ON JURISDICTION
1- Background of the case

 

 

 

 

 
 
  
 
 

 

 

2- Objections to Jurisdiction

B — THE CLAIMANT’S COUNTER MEMORIAL ON JURISDICTIO!
1- S of facts

2- Legal basis for jurisdiction

C-— THE RESPONDENT’S REPLY ON JURISDICTION
D-—THE CLAIMANT’S REJOINDER ON JURISDICTIO:
E-THE HEARING ON JURISDICTION

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I. DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL 19
A-— ARTICLE 22 OF THE INVESTMENT LAW....0.....ccccscsssessesesseeseeseesessessnsseeeeneeneeneesees 19
1- Standard of Interpretation 21
(a) Determination of the standard 21
(b) Content of the standard 25
2- Interpretation of Article 22 28
(a) The text of Article 22 28
(b) The principle of effet utile. 31
(c) The intention of Venezuela 33

 

B — ARTICLE 9 OF THE BIT BETWEEN THE NETHERLANDS AND VENEZUELA .... 39
1- Jurisdiction under the BIT
(a) Nationality of the Claimants
(b) Direct and Indirect Investments
2- Abuse of right

(a) The applicable law
(b) Application of the Law to the Case
C-COSTS OF THE PROCEEDINGS

Iv. DISPOSITIVE PART OF THE DECISION...

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROCEDURE

On 6 September 2007, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or “the Centre”) received from (i) three U.S. (Delaware) companies, Mobil
Corporation (“Mobil”), Mobil Cerro Negro Holding, Ltd. (“Mobil CN Holding”),
and Mobil Venezolana de Petrdleos Holdings, Inc. (“Mobil Venezolana Holdings”);
(ii) two Bahamian companies, namely Mobil Cerro Negro, Ltd. (“Mobil CN”), and,
Mobil Venezolana de Petréleos, Inc. (“Mobil Venezolana”); and (iii) one Dutch
company, Venezuela Holdings, B.V. (“Venezuela Holdings”), a request for
arbitration, dated 6 September 2007, against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

(“Venezuela” or the “Respondent”).

On the same day, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (“the
Institution Rules”) acknowledged receipt of the request and on the same day

transmitted a copy to Venezuela and to its Embassy in Washington, D.C.

The Request for Arbitration, as supplemented by the Claimants’ letters of 28
September 2007, was registered by the Centre on 10 October 2007, pursuant to Article
36(3) of the ICSID Convention. On the same day, the Secretary-General of ICSID, in
accordance with Rule 7 of the Institution Rules, notified the parties of the registration

and invited them to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible.

By letter of 7 January 2008, the Claimants confirmed the parties’ agreement on the
number and method for the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal, according to which
the Tribunal shall be composed of three arbitrators, one appointed by each party and
the third one, who shall serve as the President of the Tribunal, to be appointed by

agreement of the parties with the assistance of the first two appointed arbitrators.

5. On 7 January 2008, the Claimants appointed Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, a
national of Switzerland, as arbitrator. On 31 January 2008, the Respondent appointed

Dr. Ahmed S. El-Kosheri, a national of Egypt, as arbitrator.

6. The parties having failed to appoint a presiding arbitrator, and more than 90 days
having elapsed since the registration of the request for arbitration, the Claimants, by
letter of 16 May 2008, requested the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council to
appoint the presiding arbitrator, pursuant to Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and
ICSID Arbitration Rule 4. On 25 July 2008, the Chairman of the ICSID
Administrative Council, in consultation with the Parties, appointed H.E. Judge Gilbert

Guillaume, a national of France, as the presiding arbitrator.

7. All three arbitrators having accepted their appointments, the Acting Secretary-General
of ICSID, by letter of 8 August 2008, informed the Parties of the constitution of the
Tribunal, consisting of H.E. Judge Gilbert Guillaume, Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-
Kohler and Dr. Ahmed S. El-Kosheri, and that the proceeding was deemed to have

begun on that day, pursuant to Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

8. The first session of the Tribunal was, with the agreement of the parties, held on 7
November 2008, at the World Bank’s Paris Conference Center. Present at the session

were:

Members of the Tribunal:

1. H. E. Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President of the Tribunal
2. Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Arbitrator
3. Dr. Ahmed S. El-Kosheri, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat:

4. Ms. Katia Yannaca-Small, Secretary of the Tribunal

For the Claimants:

5. Mr. Oscar M. Garibaldi, Covington & Burling LLP

6. Mr. Eugene D. Gulland, Covington & Burling LLP

7. Mr. Toni D. Hennike, Law Department, Exxon Mobil Corporation

8. Mr. Charles A. Beach, Law Department, Exxon Mobil Corporation

9. Mr. Luis Marulanda del Valle, Law Department, Exxon Mobil Corporation

For the Respondent:

10. Mr. George Kahale, III, Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

11. Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, S.C
12. Ms. Miriam K. Harwood, Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
13. Mr. Peter M. Wolrich, Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

14. Dr. Bernard Mommer, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

15. Ms. Hildegard Rondon de Sans6, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

16. Dra. Beatrice Sansé de Ramirez, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

17. Ms. Mariel Pérez, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

18. Ms. Irama Mommer, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

9. Various aspects of procedure were determined at the session, including a schedule for

the submission of written pleadings.

10. The Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction was filed on 15 January 2009, followed
by the Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction on 16 April 2009, the
Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction on 15 June 2009 and the Claimants’ Rejoinder on

Jurisdiction on 17 August 2009.

11. On 9 September 2009, the Tribunal held a procedural conference with the parties by

telephone.

12. An oral Hearing on Jurisdiction was held at the offices of the World Bank’s Paris

Conference Center, on 23-24 September 2009. Present at the hearing were:

Members of the Tribunal:
1. HE. Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President of the Tribunal
2. Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Arbitrator
3. Dr. Ahmed S. El-Kosheri, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat:
4. Ms. Katia Yannaca-Small, Secretary of the Tribunal

Attending on behalf of the Claimants:
5. Mr. Oscar Garibaldi, Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. Eugene Gulland, Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. Thomas Cubbage, Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. Miguel Lépez Forastier, Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. David Shuford, Covington & Burling LLP
Ms. Luisa Torres, Covington & Burling LLP

Bo PND

S

11.
12.
13.
14.
1S.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Ms. Mary Hernandez, Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. Andres Barrera, Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. Andrés A. Mezgravis, Travieso Evans Arria Rengel & Paz
Mr. Theodore Frois, Exxon Mobil Corporation
Ms. Toni D. Hennike, Exxon Mobil Corporation
Mr. Charles A. Beach, Exxon Mobil Corporation
Mr. Eugene Silva, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. Alberto Ravell, Exxon Mobil Corporation
Mrs. Anna Knull, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. James R. Massey, witness

Professor Alan Brewer-Carias, expert

Professor Christoph Schreuer, expert

Attending on behalf of the Respondent:

IL.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

Mr. George Kahale III, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Mark O'Donoghue, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Miriam Harwood, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Peter Wolrich, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Gloria Diaz, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Mr. Christopher Grech, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Joaquin Parra, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Dr. Bernard Mommer, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Mr. Armando Giraud, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Ms. Moreeliec Pefia, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Following the hearing, Members of the Tribunal deliberated by various means of

communication, including a meeting for deliberations in Paris on 2 December 2009.

The Tribunal has taken into account all the pleadings, documents and testimonies that

were submitted in this case.

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

A - THE RESPONDENT’S MEMORIAL ON JURISDICTION

15.

On 15 January 2009, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela submitted a Memorial

containing its Objections to Jurisdiction (the "Memorial").

1- Background of the case

16. Such Memorial first reviews the background of the case. In this respect it stresses the
strategic nature of the oil industry in Venezuela under article 302 of the Constitution.
It recalls that in 1975, the oil industry was nationalized through the Organic Law that
Reserves to the State the Industry and Trade of Hydrocarbons (the “1975
Nationalization Law”). In fact, the Law “permitted only two means of private
participation in the oil industry: (i) operating agreements, which were to be simple
service contracts; and (ii) association agreements, which were permitted only in
“special cases”. “The latter were valid only if a State company had a participation that
guarantied control by the State and only if the agreement was approved by Congress”!
In this context, a State-owned petroleum company, Petrédleos de Venezuela (PDVSA)

was then created.

17. The 1990’s marked a change of policy known as Apertura Petrolera. Foreign investors
returned to the Venezuelan oil industry through “progressively more strained
interpretations of the 1975 Nationalization Law”?. In this framework, an agreement
was entered into on 28 October 1997 by Lagoven Cerro Negro S.A. (now PDVSA
Cerro Negro S.A., hereinafter referred to as Lagoven or “PDVSA CN”, a subsidiary of
PDVSA with Veba Oel Venezuela Orinoco GmBH (Veba), a German corporation, and
Mobil Produccién e Industrializacién de Venezuela, Inc. (MPIV), a Delaware
corporation, for the production and upgrading of extra-heavy crude oil in the Orinoco
Oil Belt. The agreement (the “Cerro Negro Agreement’) did not create any
“contractual relationship with the Republic and imposed no restriction on the right of
the Government to exercise its authority over the petroleum industry”>. It only
provided for compensation of the contracting private parties by Lagoven in the event
that certain governmental actions defined in the contract as “Discriminatory

" Memorial § 12.

> Memorial § 14.
> Memorial § 23.

4
5
6
7
8

Measures” would result in a “Material Adverse Impact”, subject to a ceiling on
compensation. Disputes between the Parties related to the Cerro Negro Project would
be governed by Venezuelan law and submitted to arbitration within the International

Chamber of Commerce (ICC).

Moreover Profit Sharing Agreements were authorized by the Congress of Venezuela
in 1995 to permit private investors “to explore for oil with no participation by a State
owned entity”* In this framework, the La Ceiba Agreement was concluded on 10 July
1996. As of June 2007, Mobil Venezolana (Bahamas) was one of the parties to that
Agreement. Here again, the contract “imposed no limitations whatsoever on the

sovereign rights” of Venezuela’.

A new Hydrocarbon Law was adopted in 2001° and from October 2004, a number of
measures were taken by the Government of Venezuela to regulate the petroleum
industry. The royalty rates were increased in October 2004. Then “the Minister of
Energy and Mines issued an Instruction on April 12, 2005, declaring that the operating
service agreements were illegal and setting in motion an orderly process of
“migration” of those agreements to the new form of mixed companies required under
the 2001 Hydrocarbons Law”’, In May 2006, an extraction tax of 33 1/3 % was
enacted. In August 2006, the income tax rate was increased to 50 % and “term sheets
were prepared for all companies involved in the associations, outlining the proposed
conditions for conversion into mixed companies consistent with the 2001
Hydrocarbons Law. Discussions regarding migration failed to reach fruition, and on 8
January, 2007, the President of the Republic announced that all the projects that had
been operating outside the framework of the 2001 Hydrocarbons Law, including the

Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Projects would be nationalized”*. A decree of 26 February

Memorial § 34.
Memorial § 36.
Memorial - Footnote 52.
Memorial § 39.

Memorial § 45.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

2007 called for the transformation (called “migracién”) of the oil associations
(including both Projects) into mixed companies approved by the National Assembly
(the “Nationalization Decree”). Amicable settlements were arrived at in most cases.
However for the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Projects, “Exxon Mobil has insisted on
demands for grossly exaggerated compensation that made settlement with it

impossible”.

In the midst of the changes in the Venezuelan petroleum industry thus described, the
Claimants in October 2005 created a new entity under the laws of the Netherlands,
Venezuela Holdings, and inserted it into the corporate chains for the Cerro Negro and

La Ceiba Projects in February 2006 and November 2006 respectively.

As a result of this restructuring, Mobil (Delaware) owns 100% of Venezuela Holdings
(Netherlands), which owns 100% of Mobil CN Holding (Delaware), which owns
100 % of Mobil CN (Bahamas), which finally owns a 41 2/3 % interest in the Cerro

Negro Association.

Venezuela Holdings (Netherlands) also owns 100 % of Mobil Venezolana Holdings
(Delaware), which owns 100 % of Mobil Venezolana (Bahamas), which finally owns a

50 % interest in the La Ceiba Association.

As a consequence, according to Venezuela, the claims addressed to the Tribunal fall

into three general categories:

“(a) claims deriving from Mobil CN’s interest in the Cerro Negro Project;
(b) claims deriving from Mobil Venezolana’s interest in the La Ceiba Project;
(c) claims deriving from Mobil’s investment in the capital of the two operators,

OCN and Agencia Operadora La Ceiba” 10.

The jurisdictional grounds alleged for the first two categories are:

° Memorial § 52.
'© Memorial § 73.

25.

26.

27.

i

a. The 1999 Venezuelan Law on the promotion and protection of investments
(the “Investment Law”);
b. The 1993 bilateral investment treaty between the Netherlands and Venezuela

(the “BIT” or the “Treaty”).

The sole alleged basis for jurisdiction over the last of Mobil’s claims is the

“Investment Law”.
Objections to Jurisdiction

Venezuela first contends that Article 22 of the Investment Law does not provide the
requisite clear and unambiguous consent to arbitration of this dispute. In this respect, it
refers to the text itself of the law, to Venezuelan legal principles and to a decision
rendered on 17 October 2008 by the Venezuelan Supreme Court. It moreover stresses
that a comparison of Article 22 with other national investment laws leads to the same
conclusion. It adds that a comparison with the language of consent in ICSID’s model
clauses also makes clear that consent to ICSID jurisdiction does not exist in the
present case. Finally it submits that in any case, Claimants Venezuela Holding, Mobil
CN Holding and Mobil Venezolana Holdings are not “the owners” of the direct
investments in Venezuela or “the one who actually controlled” them. Therefore they

do not qualify as “international investors” under the Investment Law.

Venezuela contends that the BIT does not provide a basis for ICSID jurisdiction over
the dispute. It submits that Venezuela Holdings is a “corporation of convenience”
created in anticipation of litigation against the Republic of Venezuela for the sole
purpose of gaining access to ICSID jurisdiction. It concludes that “this abuse of the
corporate form and blatant treaty-shopping should not be condoned”"?, In support of

this argument, it invokes ICSID case law in Autopista v. Venezuela, Tokios Tokeles v.

Memorial § 120.

? Memorial § 127.

28.

Ukraine and Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia. It moreover submits that Claimants Mobil
CN, Mobil CN Holding, Mobil Venezolana and Mobil Venezolana Holdings cannot
obtain jurisdiction under the Dutch treaty, because of their nationality. It finally
contends that indirect investments, as those cited by the Claimants, do not qualify for

protection under that treaty.

Venezuela concludes that “for the reasons set forth above, the claims set forth in the

Request should be dismissed in their entirety”'’,

B - THE CLAIMANT’S COUNTER MEMORIAL ON JURISDICTION

29.

30.

31.

SRRES

On 16 April 2009, the Claimants submitted a Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (the

“Counter-memorial”).

1- Statement of facts

The Claimants first state that “there is no genuine dispute about the main events giving
rise to this arbitration” *. They stress in particular that Venezuela “has admitted that it

‘nationalized’ the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Projects in 2007” 1S

The Claimants however submit that “the Respondent’s chronology of relevant events is

misleading” 6

. They contend that the Venezuelan Government gave repeated
assurances after 2001 that it would honor contracts signed during the oil opening. In
particular, the Government entered on 16 January 2002 into a Royalty Procedures
Agreement accepting that the royalty rate for the Cerro Negro Project would remain at
the reduced rate of 1% and would not for the life of the Cerro Negro Project exceed 16

2/3 % (instead of the 30 % provided for in the 2001 Law)", Moreover, the Claimants

submit that, contrary to the allegations of the Government of Venezuela, the

> Memorial § 179.

Counter Memorial § 1.

Counter Memorial § 18.
Counter Memorial p.12.
Counter Memorial § 25.

32.

33.

Government was not willing in 2006 to negotiate the terms of a “migracién” of the
Project to a mixed enterprise. Then, as a follow up to a speech by President Chavez of
8 January 2007, the National Assembly enacted on 1“ February 2007 an Enabling Law
under which a Nationalization Decree was taken on 26 February 2007. As ordered by
that decree and under threat of military force, Operadora La Ceiba’s and Operadora
Cerro Negro’s assets and operation were transferred to PDVSA in April 2007 “with
full reservation of rights”. In June 2007, Venezuela fully and finally expropriated the

entire investments.

The Claimants then explain how their investments were restructured in 2004-2006
through a holding company in the Netherlands. This process “began in late 2004,
immediately after the Respondent increased the royalty rate for Orinoco Oil Belt
projects from 1 % to 16 2/3 %"'* Cit] “was completed in 2006, well before the
Republic of Venezuela made announcements that it intended to nationalize the Orinoco

Oil Belt and profit-sharing projects”.

During that period, new and important
investments were projected and made. The restructuring “was not intended, nor could it
have been intended to ‘position’ the Claimants for disputes that ‘had arisen,’ as alleged

by the Respondent”.

The Claimants add that the Cerro Negro Association Agreement does not curtail their
rights to prosecute this case. On the contrary, it requires Mobil Cerro Negro to
commence and pursue legal claims against Venezuela parallel to the proceedings in the
ICC case against PDVSA and PDVSA-CN. Moreover, the agreement “does not limit
the recovery to which the Claimants are entitled in this arbitration”! They do not
contest the right of Venezuela to expropriate their investments as long as the

Respondent complies with the requirements under the Treaty, general international law

'8 Counter Memorial § 42.

19
20
21

Ibidem.

Counter Memorial § 46.
Counter Memorial § 56.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

and Venezuela's own law, “including the payment of full compensation”. They assert
that this obligation is referred to in the Offering Memorandum and the Common
Security Agreement entered for the financing of the Cerro Negro Project, also

mentioned by the Respondent.

The Claimants further submit that they engaged in good faith negotiations with the
Government of Venezuela. The negotiation on the terms of the “migracién” open
before the nationalization was completed, failed “over non-economic terms imposed by

the Government, including ‘elimination of arbitration”?

. The negotiation failed
because Venezuela was not prepared to pay compensation based on fair market value,

as legally required.

The Claimants then contend that PDVSA purchased bonds related to the Cerro Negro

Project to avoid a default resulting from the Respondent’s expropriation.

They finally contend that Mobil Cerro Negro has not engaged in any campaign of
harassment against PDVSA or PDVSA-CN, as the Respondent alleged. It only sought
conservatory measures in various jurisdictions to ensure that the award to be rendered

in the ICC arbitration would not become illusory.

Legal basis for jurisdiction

Turning to jurisdiction, the Claimants contend that the requirements for ICSID

jurisdiction are met ratione materiae, ratione personae, and ratione voluntatis.

They first submit that Venezuela consented to that jurisdiction through Article 22 of
the Investment Law. This text must be interpreted objectively and in good faith under
the ICSID Convention and the relevant principles of international law, as recognized

by ICSID case law. It must, in particular, take into account the principle of effet utile.

> Counter Memorial § 58.

23

Counter Memorial § 64.

39.

40.

Al.

The Claimants add that their interpretation is confirmed by the context and purpose of
the Investment Law, as well as the legislative intent. Moreover, “the Respondent’s
strained comparisons of Article 22 of the Investment Law with consent formulations in
other domestic investment statutes and the ICSID Model Clauses are irrelevant”.
They submit that the decision rendered in 2008 by the Supreme Court of Venezuela is
“not binding on this Tribunal” and “is not entitled to authority of any kind”?>. They
contend that “there is no basis under the Investment Law for the proposition that the
concepts of “international investment” and “international investor” presuppose direct
ownership or direct control over the investment””®. They add that in any case
Venezolana Holdings, Mobil Cerro Negro Holding and Mobil Venezolana Holdings

are international investors under the Investment Law.

The Claimants then state that Venezuela consented to ICSID jurisdiction under

Article 9 of the BIT.

In this respect they first state that Venezuela Holding is not a “corporation of
convenience “created” for the sole purpose of gaining access to ICSID jurisdiction”.
According to the Claimants, the objection raised on that basis by Venezuela fails both
on factual and legal grounds. There is no legal basis for imposing nationality

requirements extraneous to the Treaty or for disregarding the nationality of those

holdings. There is no more legal basis for piercing Venezuela Holding’s corporate veil.

The Claimants further submit that not only Venezuela Holdings, but also Mobil Cerro
Negro, Mobil Cerro Negro Holding, Mobil Venezolana and Mobil Venezolana
Holdings are nationals of the Netherlands protected by the Treaty. Finally they
contend that the Treaty protects indirect investments. On all those points, they invoke

ICSID case law.

*4 Counter Memorial § 158.

25
26
27

Counter Memorial § 161.
Counter Memorial § 186.
Counter Memorial § 187.

42.

In the light of those arguments, the Claimants “request the following relief in the form

of an Award on Jurisdiction:

i. A declaration that the dispute is within the jurisdiction of ICSID and the

competence of this Tribunal;

ii. An order dismissing all of the Respondent’s objections to the jurisdiction of ICSID

and the competence of the Tribunal;

iii. An order that the Respondent pay all costs of the proceedings on jurisdiction,
including the Tribunal’s fees and expenses and the costs of the Claimants’ legal
representation, subject to interest; and

iv. Such other relief as might be right and proper’,

C- THE RESPONDENT’S REPLY ON JURISDICTION

43.

44.

45.

On 15 June 2009, Venezuela submitted its Reply on Jurisdiction (the “Reply”).

It first states that the Claimants’ version of the facts omits a few important points. It
stresses in particular that Mobil CN “received a very robust return””? from its
investments and that, contrary to the Claimants’ evaluation, the true value of the
interest at issue in this case is substantially less than US$ 1 billion®”. It adds that the
measures complained of by the Claimants were taken in the legitimate exercise of

Venezuela’s sovereign rights and were reasonable and non discriminatory.

Venezuela then contends that the language of Article 22 does not support Claimants’
position on jurisdiction. It submits that Venezuelan law is necessarily part of the
analysis of that article. Under the law of Venezuela, as well as under international law,

consent to arbitrate must be clear and unequivocal. Article 22 does not contain such

28 Counter Memorial § 272.

2

° Reply § 5.

3° Reply § 15.

46.

47.

48.

31

consent. “The provision constitutes recognition and confirmation by the State that
arbitration is a legitimate means of settling investment disputes with the State if and
when the State has consented to arbitration under a specific treaty or agreement”.
That interpretation corresponds to the text, is compatible with the principle of effet utile
and is supported by ICSID case law, as well as the long standing Venezuelan hostility
towards arbitration. A comparison of Article 22 with other examples of true consent
further undermines Claimants’ position in this case. Finally, “there is no legislative

history militating against the plain language of the statute”,

Venezuela adds that, in any case, jurisdiction does not exist under the Investment Law
and its implementing regulations for indirect investments, such as those of Venezuela

Holdings, Mobil CN Holdings and Mobil Venezolana Holdings.

The Respondent then reaffirms that the Treaty does not establish a basis for jurisdiction
in the present case. It stresses that ICSID case law provides “a clear set of factors to be
taken into account in determining whether there has been an abuse through a
‘corporation of convenience’ for purposes of obtaining ICSID jurisdiction”. Those
conditions are not met here. The restructuring occurred long after the investment. It
was took effect only in order to gain access to ICSID. The disputes were not only
foreseeable, but they had actually been identified and notified to Respondent before the
Dutch company was even created. The restructuring did not create a protected
investment under the good faith standards articulated in the Phoenix v. Czech Republic

case. There was an abuse of rights.

Venezuela further recalls that Mobil CN and Mobil Venezolana are companies
organized under the laws of the Bahamas and that Mobil CN Holding and Mobil
Venezolana Holdings are companies organized under the laws of the State of Delaware

(USA). It submits that in any event those companies cannot bring claims as “Dutch

Reply § 62.

» Reply p. 48.
33 Reply §117.

49.

50.

nationals” in their own right. It contends in particular that this is incompatible with

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

The Respondent finally submits that the investments of Venezuela Holdings, Mobil
Cerro Negro Holding and Mobil Venezolana Holdings consist of equity interests in their
immediate subsidiaries organized under the laws of the USA and the Bahamas. As such
they are not “investments in the territory” of Venezuela. Those companies thus lack

standing to assert jurisdiction under the BIT.

Venezuela finally maintains that the claims should be rejected for lack of jurisdiction.

D - THE CLAIMANT’S REJOINDER ON JURISDICTION

Sl.

52.

53.

On 17 August 2009, the Claimants submitted their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction (the

“Rejoinder”).

They first reaffirm that the Respondent consented to ICSID jurisdiction in the
Investment Law. According to the Claimants, Venezuela has retreated from its earlier
position that its law controls this question, but it continues to distort the international
standard of interpretation of consent instruments. They reaffirm that the Respondent’s
construction of the words “if it so establishes” in Article 22 is untenable. They stress
that other parts of that article and the intent of the drafters confirm the result of the
Claimants’ textual analysis. They contest the Respondent’s theory on the purpose of

Article 22, as a matter of law and fact.

The Claimants further submit that “nothing in the text of the Investment Law or the
Regulation excludes protection of investors that control investments through ownership
of shares in holding companies”**. As a consequence, Venezuela Holdings, Mobil Cerro

Negro Holding and Mobil Venezolana Holdings are protected by the Investment Law.

4 Rejoinder § 55.

54.

55.

56.

The Claimants then recall that Venezuela Holdings is a company incorporated in the
Netherlands. It is thus a “national” of the Netherlands as required by the BIT. Its
subsidiaries are genuinely and legally controlled by Venezuela Holdings. They are also
covered by the BIT. Moreover, the Respondent’s allegations of “treaty abuse” have no
legal or factual ground, being observed that the Claimants “are not seeking the

9935

protection of the Treaty in respect of acts performed before””° it became applicable to

them.

The Claimants further contend that the BIT does not limit the definition of investment to
direct investment. It does not require that the claim be related to an investment “in the
territory” of Venezuela. The objections raised by the Respondent on those grounds are

without basis.

The Claimants finally maintain their submission as stated in their Counter Memorial.

E-THE HEARING ON JURISDICTION

57.

At the hearing held on 23 and 24 September 2009, Venezuela maintained and developed
its objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. It contends that it always had a “reluctant

attitude toward arbitration”,

as shown by its Constitution, its 1998 Commercial
Arbitration Law and the jurisprudence of its Supreme Court. It submits that under
international law and Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, consent to arbitration must be
clearly and unequivocally expressed. It adds that this is also the case under Venezuelan
law, which “is of some relevance in this case, even if not dispositive”*’. Tt recalls that,

under Article 22 of the Venezuelan Investment Law, “Venezuela shall submit to

arbitration in accordance with treaties, if they so provide”**, It concludes that “if the

35 Rejoinder § 79.

36 Hearing, 24 December 2009, transcript, p.9.
37 Ipidem p53.

38 Ihidem p.55.

58.

59.

60.

61.

treaties do not require the submission of a particular dispute to international arbitration,

the provision is obviously inoperable”. This is the situation in the present case.

Venezuela further contends that the BIT does not provide a basis for ICSID jurisdiction.
It recalls that the Claimants had already notified investment disputes in February, May
and June 2005 before the Dutch company was inserted into the corporate chain of
ownership. Thus the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the specific disputes that existed
at that time. It has no more jurisdiction over the expropriation dispute which arose in
2007 because this dispute was already anticipated in 2005 and the Dutch company never
made any bona fide investment in Venezuela. Thus, as in the Phoenix case, the creation

of the Dutch company was not nationality planning, but abuse of right.

In answer to a question put by members of the Tribunal with respect to the arbitration
pending in the International Chamber of Commerce between the Claimants and PDVSA
Cerro Negro, the Claimants and the Respondent agreed that there was no risk of double

recovery.

At the hearing, the Claimants reaffirmed that the Tribunal has jurisdiction under Article
22 of the Venezuelan Law. They stress that Article 22 must be interpreted according to
the ICSID Convention and to general international law in good faith without bias for or
against jurisdiction. They analyse that text in its context, taking account of its object
and purpose and conclude that it expresses the consent of Venezuela to arbitration of
controversies to which the ICSID Convention may be applicable. They add that
Article 3 §4 of the Investment Law covers Venezuela Holdings, Mobil Cerro Negro

Holding and Mobil Venezolana Holdings.

The Claimants further submit that, in the present case, the Tribunal has jurisdiction
under the BIT both ratione personae and ratione materiae. They analyse the Phoenix
award mentioned by Venezuela and stress that, the present situation is completely

different, in particular with respect to anticipations and investments.

> Ibidem p58.

Til.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL

Article 25 §1 of the ICSID Convention provides that “[t]he jurisdiction of the Centre
shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a
Contracting State and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the

dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre”.

According to Article 25, consent by both parties to a dispute is thus an indispensable
condition for jurisdiction. The fact that the host State and the investor’s State of

nationality are parties to the Convention does not suffice.

Consent can be given through direct agreement between the host State and the investor.
Under ICSID case law, consent may also result from a unilateral offer by the host State,

expressed in its legislation or in a treaty, which is subsequently accepted by the investor.

In the present case, the Claimants submit that Venezuela consented to the jurisdiction of

the Centre through :
a. Article 22 of the Venezuelan Decree with rank and force of law N°356 on the
promotion and protection of investments of 3 October 1999 (the “Investment
Law”).
b. The Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment
between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Venezuela

signed at Caracas on 22 October 1991 (the “BIT” or the "Treaty").

The Respondent objects to both of these alleged bases for jurisdiction.

A- ARTICLE 22 OF THE INVESTMENT LAW

Article 22 of the Investment Law reads as follows:

“Las controversias que surjan entre un inversionista internacional, cuyo pais de
origen tenga vigente con Venezuela un tratado 0 acuerdo sobre promocién y
protecciédn de inversiones, 0 las controversias respecto de las cuales sean
aplicables las disposiciones del Convenio Constitutivo del Organismo
Multilateral de Garantia de Inversiones (QMGI-MIGA) o del Convenio sobre
Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a Inversiones entre Estados y Nacionales de
Otros Estados (CIADI), seran sometidas al arbitraje internacional en los
términos del respectivo tratado 0 acuerdo, si asi éste lo establece, sin perjuicio
de la posibilidad de hacer uso, cuando proceda, de las vias contenciosas
contempladas en la legislacién venezolana vigente”.

68. Translated to English, Article 22 could read as follows:

“Disputes arising between an international investor whose country of origin has
in effect with Venezuela a treaty or agreement on the promotion and protection
of investments, or disputes to which are applicable the provision of the
Convention Establishing the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
(OMGI -MIGA) or the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and National of other States (ICSID), shall be submitted to
international arbitration according to the terms of the respective treaty or
agreement, if it so provides, without prejudice to the possibility of making use,
when appropriate, of the dispute resolution means provided for under the
Venezuelan legislation in effect”.

69. The Parties disagree on the interpretation to be given to Article 22. The Claimants
submit that Venezuela consented to ICSID jurisdiction under that article. Venezuela

contends that that text does not provide such consent.

70. In order to clarify the meaning of Article 22, the Tribunal will first determine the

standard of interpretation to be used and then apply that standard to Article 22.

40 This translation has been proposed by Venezuela (Memorial on objections to jurisdiction §78). The Claimants
have provided another translation in which the word « si asf éste lo establece » have been translated, not as « if it
so provides », but as « if it so establishes ». However the Claimants have stated that that difference of translation
is immaterial (Counter-Memorial — footnote 205; Rejoinder — footnote 43). At the hearing, Venezuela declared
that « The proper translation of « si asi éste lo establece » is « if it so provides ». One can also translate it as “if it
so establishes”, use the word « establishes” as synonym with « provides ... » (24 September 2009 p.46). The
Parties seem in agreement on the immateriality of the difference between “provided” and “established”, although
they diverge on the meaning to be given to both words (see also the Reply Memorial of Venezuela — footnote
16).

 

        

20

71.

72.

73.

74.

1- Standard of Interpretation
(a) Determination of the standard

In its Memorial, Venezuela submits that “under Venezuelan Law, Article 22 does not
provide the requisite clear and unambiguous consent to arbitration of this dispute*’. In
that perspective, it refers to the applicable “Venezuelan legal principles” and to a
judgment issued by the Constitutional Division of the Venezuela Supreme Court of

Justice of 17 October 2008 interpreting Article 22.

In the Reply, Venezuela adds that it “did not say that the issue of consent in this
proceeding is governed exclusively by Venezuelan law and did not say that the recent
Venezuela Supreme Court decision alone requires dismissal of this case”. It only said
that “Venezuelan Law principles are highly relevant and must be taken into account in

deciding whether a Venezuelan statute constitutes consent to arbitrate...”"

The Claimants for their part submit that “the meaning and effects of article 22 must be
determined, first and foremost, under the ICSID Convention and the principles of

: « 9943
international law”*

. They add that an ICSID Tribunal is judge of its own competence
and that as a consequence the decision of the Venezuelan Supreme Court is not binding

on the Tribunal.

The Tribunal first notes that under Article 41 § 1 of the ICSID Convention, it is “judge
of its own competence”. It is so whatever the basis of that competence, including a
unilateral offer made in the Host State’s legislation and subsequently accepted by the

investor. This has been recognized by ICSID tribunals in a number of cases,

' Memorial p.45.
2 Reply § 22.

43
44

Counter-Memorial § 98.

See for example Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No.

ARB/84/3, Second Decision on Jurisdiction (14 April 1988), 3 ICSID Reports 131 (1995), at § 60 (SPP v.
Egypt), Inceysa Vallisoletana, S.L. v. El Salvador, I\CSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award (2 August 2006), § 212-

21

75.

76.

77.

The Tribunal adds that the same solution has been retained by the Permanent Court of
International Justice and the International Court of Justice which made clear that a
sovereign State’s interpretation of its own unilateral consent to the jurisdiction of an
international tribunal is not binding on the tribunal or determinative of jurisdictional
issues’, Thus, the interpretation given to Article 22 by Venezuelan authorities or by

Venezuelan courts cannot control the Tribunal’s decision on its competence.

Another issue is whether Article 22 must be interpreted according Venezuelan rules of
interpretation or according to international law rules of interpretation. ICSID case Law

on that question is rare and lacks coherence.

In a number of cases, ICSID tribunals had to apply national legislations which were so
clear that neither the parties, nor the tribunal felt necessary to expressly take a position

on the rules of interpretation to be applied.

(i) In Tradex y. Albania 46 the Tribunal noted that the Albanian investment law stated
unambiguously that “[t]he Republic of Albania hereby consents to the submission
thereof to the ICSID”"” and Albania only challenged the jurisdiction of the tribunal
ratione temporis. In its decision, it rejected that objection through an analysis of the
applicable text, without referring to any general principle of interpretation.

(ii) In Inceysa v. El Salvador, four Salvadorian laws were invoked by the Claimant.
In three cases, the Tribunal, observed that it was “obvious” that those laws did not
confer jurisdiction to ICSID Bot specified twice that the laws invoked did not meet
the requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. By contrast, it said in five
lines that the fourth text “clearly indicates that the Salvadorian State... made to the
foreign investors a unilateral offer’, which however did not cover the investment in
question”

 

213; Zhinvali Development Ltd. v. Republic of Georgia, (CSID Case No. ARB/00/1, Award (24 January 2003),
3 § 339,

45 lectricity Cy of Sofia and Bulgaria (Preliminary objections), PCIJ. Series A/B N°77 (1989); Aegean Sea
Continental Shelf (Greece v. Turkey) — 19 December 1978 — ICJ Reports 1978 p.3; Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain
v. Canada) - 4 December 1998 — ICJ Report 1988 p. 432.

46

Tradex Hellas S.A.v. Republic of Albania, \CSID Case No. ARB/94/2, Decision on Jurisdiction (24 December

1996), 14 ICSID Rev.—FILJ 161 (1999); 5 ICSID Rep. 47 (2002);
“7 Thidem $79.

48 Inceysa v. El Salvador, Award, § 310, 316 and 327.

© Ihidem, $332.

22

78.

79.

80.

(iii) In Rumeli Telekom v. Kazakhstan, the Tribunal decided that it had jurisdiction on
the basis of the BIT between Turkey and Kazakhstan. It added in two lines that it also
had jurisdiction under the foreign investment law of Kazakhstan™’. However, as that
law had been repealed, there was a discussion on the jurisdiction ratione temporis of
the Tribunal. In that respect, the Tribunal rejected the objection of the Respondent,
basing itself both on the transitional provisions of the Kazakh law and on the fact that
it is “well established in international law that a State may not take away accrued
rights of a foreign investor by domestic legislation abrogating the law granting these
rights”””.

(iv) In Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania, the Tribunal, after having quoted the relevant
provisions of the Tanzanian investment law observed that, in view of those provisions,
its jurisdiction was facing an “immediate” and “insurmountable difficulty”.

In three cases, however, ICSID Tribunals dealt explicitly with the question of the rules

of interpretation to be applied.

In SPP v. Egypt, the Tribunal noted that, “[t]he jurisdictional issue in this case involves
more than interpretation of municipal legislation. The issue is whether certain
unilaterally enacted legislation has created an international obligation under a
multilateral treaty. Resolution of this issue involves both statutory interpretation and
treaty interpretation”. “Thus in deciding whether in the circumstances of the present
case, law N° 43 constitutes consent to the Centre’s jurisdiction, the Tribunal will apply
general principles of statutory interpretation taking into consideration, where
appropriate, relevant rules of treaty interpretation and principles of international law

applicable to unilateral declarations”**.

However, one must note that in the rest of the
award, the part to be played by those different norms of interpretation is not easy to

identify.

In CSOB v. Slovak Republic, the ICSID Tribunal had to decide whether it had
jurisdiction both under a BIT and under a notice published by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Slovak Republic. It stated on both grounds that “the question of whether

the parties have effectively expressed their consent to ICSID jurisdiction is not to be

°° Rumeli Telekom AS v. Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16, Award (29 July 2008), $334.

5! Thidem, §333 and 335.

* Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Lid v. Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Award (18 July 2008), §329.
*3 SPP y, Egypt, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, (14 April 1988), $61.

23

81.

82.

83.

answered by reference to national law; it is governed by international law as set out in

article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention”™*.

Finally, in Zhinvali v. Georgia, the Tribunal took a third approach. Considering the
Georgian investment law, it said that it was “dealing with an internal statute rather than
a bilateral agreement”. It observed that “if the national law of Georgia addresses this
question of consent which the Tribunal find that it does then the Tribunal must follow
that national law guidance, but always subject to ultimate governance by international
law”>>, It added that Georgian law was in “keeping with any international law principles

that may be applicable”

and on the basis of the law thus interpreted, it concluded that
the Claimant and the Respondent did consent to submit the dispute to the jurisdiction of

ICSID.

From this review of ICSID case law, it results that:
(i) In at least four cases, the question was not clearly dealt with.

(ii) In SPP v. Egypt, the Tribunal decided to apply “general principles of
statutory interpretation” taking into account both “relevant rules of treaty
interpretation and principles of international law applicable to unilateral
declarations”.

(iii) In CSOB v. Slovak Republic, the Tribunal opted for international law
without any reservation.

(iv) In Zhinvali v. Georgia, it opted for domestic law “subject to ultimate
governance by international law”.

The hesitations of ICSID Tribunals on that question result from the fact that, in those

ICSID cases, the State’s consent to arbitration was not contained in a treaty to be

interpreted according to the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 23 May 1969,

but in a unilateral act of a sovereign state, generally in the form of a national legislation.

54 Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka v. The Slovak Republic, ICSID Case ARB/97/4, Decision on Objections to
Jurisdiction, (24 May 1999), § 35, 36 and 46.

Zhinvali v. Georgia, Award, (24 January 2003), §339.
% Thidem, $340.

24

84.

85.

86.

Determining the applicable standard of interpretation is particularly difficult when the
offer is contained in domestic legislation or other unilateral acts of the State, where
there is no overarching convention regarding interpretation. The International Court of
Justice had to face that very problem when interpreting optional declarations of
compulsory jurisdiction made by States under Article 36 §2 of its Statute. It observed
that:
“A declaration of acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court
whether there are specified limits set to that acceptance or not, is a unilateral
act of State sovereignty. At the same time, it establishes a consensual bond and
the potential for a jurisdictional link with the other States which have made
declarations pursuant to article 36 §2 of the Statute and “makes a standing offer

to the other States party to the Statute which have not yet deposited a
declaration of acceptance”*”.

Accordingly, such “international instrument must be interpreted by reference to
international law’”””.

The Tribunal shares that analysis, which is in line with the decision taken in CSOB v.
Slovak Republic and ultimately also in Zhinvali v. Georgia. Legislation and more
generally unilateral acts by which a State consents to ICSID jurisdiction must be
considered as standing offers to foreign investors under the ICSID Convention. Those
unilateral acts must accordingly be interpreted according to the ICSID Convention itself

and to the rules of international law governing unilateral declarations of States.

(b) Content of the standard

The ICSID Convention requires in Article 25 that parties to the dispute “consent in
writing” to submit such dispute to the Centre. Under Article 25, consent in writing is
thus indispensable, but the text does not give any further indication on the manner or

timing of such written consent or on the way in which it must be interpreted.

57 Land and Maritime Boundary between Cameroon and Nigeria, Preliminary objections — ICJ Reports 1998 p.
291 §25 ; Fisheries jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) — ICJ Reports 1998 p. 453 §46.

Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) — ICJ Reports 1998 § 43, 64 and 68.

25

87.

88.

89.

90.

Rules governing States’ unilateral acts in international law have never been codified and
remain controversial on a certain number of points. Moreover, as recognized by the
International Law Commission in its report of 2006 to the General Assembly of the
United Nations, “the concept of unilateral act is not uniform’”’. According to the

Commission a basic distinction must be drawn in that field between:

(i) acts formulated in the framework and on the basis of a treaty,
(ii) and other acts formulated by States in the exercise of their freedom to act on

the international plane.

Both acts may have the effect of creating legal obligations. However when considering
acts not formulated in the framework and on the basis of a treaty, it is often difficult to
determine whether those acts imply such obligations. Facing situations of that kind in
the Preah Vihear case in 1961 and in the Nuclear Tests cases in 1974, the International
Court of Justice decided that “when States make statements by which their freedom of

action is to be limited, a restrictive interpretation is called for”,

Similarly, the International Law Commission adopted in 2006 Guiding Principles
covering this type of declaration under which “a unilateral declaration entails obligation
for the formulating State only if it is stated in clear and specific terms. In the case of
doubt as to the scope of the obligations resulting from such a declaration, such

obligations shall be interpreted in a restrictive manner”*!,

Rules of interpretation are however somewhat different when, as in the present case,
unilateral acts are formulated in the framework and on the basis of a treaty, such as the

ICSID Convention.

* Document A/CN.4/L.703 dated 20 July 2006 §3.

6
Nuclear Tests:
Armed activi

 

;- New Zealand v. France- Judgment of 20 December 1974, ICJ Reports 1974 p. 472- 473 § 47;
s on the territory of the Congo (New application, 2002), (Democratic Republic of the Congo v.

 

Rwanda), ICJ Reports, 2006, p.28, §49 and 50)

61

Document A/CN.4/L-703 dated 20 July 2006 — Guiding Principles applicable to unilateral declarations of

States capable of creating legal obligations - § 7.

26

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

Those rules have been fixed by the International Court of Justice in a long series of
cases, when interpreting unilateral declarations of compulsory jurisdiction made under
Article 36 § 2 of its Statute. The Court recalled that such a declaration is a unilateral act
of State sovereignty and that at, the same time, it establishes or could establish a

jurisdictional link with other States (see § 84 above).

Accordingly, the Court first stated that “T[t]he regime relating to the interpretation” of
such declarations “is not identical with that established for the interpretation of treaties

1962

by the Vienna Convention on the law of treaties”. It then stressed that every

declaration “must be interpreted as it stands, having regard to the words actually

used”.

At the same time, since declarations are unilaterally drafted instruments, “the Court has
not hesitated to place a certain emphasis on the intention of the depositing State’. “In
interpreting a unilateral declaration that is alleged to constitute consent by a sovereign
State to the jurisdiction of an international tribunal, consideration must be given to the

intention of the government at the time it was made”®.

The Court thus interprets “the relevant words of a declaration including a reservation
contained therein in a natural and reasonable way, having due regard to the intention of
the State concerned”, That intention can be deduced from the text, but also from the

context, the circumstances of its preparation and the purposes intended to be served.

It is on the basis of those rules of international law governing the interpretation of
unilateral acts formulated within the framework and on the basis of a treaty that this

Tribunal will now proceed to the interpretation of Article 22 of the Investment Law.

© Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) — ICJ Reports 1998 p.453. §46.

Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. — Preliminary objection — Judgment — ICJ Reports 1952 p. 105.

©4 Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) — ICJ Reports 1998 p. 454 § 48.

65

SPP v. Egypt, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 April 1988, § 107.

© Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) — ICJ Reports 1998 p.454 § 49.

27

96. The Tribunal must add that the fact that domestic law and the international law of
treaties are not controlling or dispositive does not mean that they should be completely

ignored:

(i) As stated in the preceding paragraphs, when tribunals interpret unilateral acts,
they must have due regard to the intention of the State having formulated such

acts. In this respect domestic law may play a useful role.

(ii) Although the law of treaties as codified in the Vienna Convention is not
relevant in the interpretation of unilateral acts, the provisions of that
Convention may “apply analogously to the extent compatible with the sui

generis character” of unilateral acts“.

2- Interpretation of Article 22

(a) The text of Article 22

97. According to Article 22, disputes arising under Venezuela’s BITs or to which the MIGA
or ICSID Convention is applicable, “shall be submitted to international arbitration

according to the terms of the respective treaty or agreement, if it so provides”.

98. The Parties agree that this provision creates an obligation to go to arbitration subject to
certain conditions and in particular subject to the last condition thus incorporated in

Article 22. But they disagree on the interpretation to be given to that condition.

99. For the Claimants, the terms “if it so provides” means “if the respective treaty or
agreement establishes (or provides for) international arbitration as a mean of dispute
resolution”. The Claimants then note that the ICSID Convention establishes such a
system of dispute resolution. They conclude that, in the case of ICSID, the condition

expressed in Article 22 is fulfilled and that Venezuela has thus consented to arbitration

°T Thidem —ICJ Reports 1998 p. 453 § 46.
©8 Rejoinder § 18.

28

100.

101.

102.

103.

of ICSID disputes through that article. The Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction in the

present case.

By contrast, Venezuela interprets the word “‘if it so provides” as if “the relevant treaty or
agreement requires submission of the particular dispute to international arbitration”. It
notes that there is no such obligation in the ICSID Convention. Thus the condition is not

fulfilled in the case of ICSID and the Arbitral Tribunal has no jurisdiction in the present

case.

The Tribunal observes that Article 22 consists of one single long sentence of some
complexity. As stated by Professor Christoph H. Schreuer in his Commentary to the
ICSID Convention, this Article “is drafted in ambiguous terms and is likely to give rise
to difficulties of interpretation, notably as to whether it contains an expression of

Venezuela’s consent to ICSID arbitration or not””’.

In this respect, the Tribunal notes that the disputes which Article 22 mentions “shall be
submitted to international arbitration” subject to certain conditions. Article 22 thus
creates a conditional obligation relating to the settlement of those disputes. Disputes

covered by the text are:

(i) disputes arising between an international investor whose country of origin
has a BIT in effect with Venezuela;
(ii) disputes to which the provisions of the MIGA Convention are applicable;

(iii) disputes to which the ICSID Convention is applicable.

In this compound text, one observes that there is no mention of the Parties to the
disputes in question. With respect to BITs, Article 22 refers to disputes arising
“between” an international investor. One would have expected that, after the word

“between”, mention would have made not of one of the Parties, but of the two Parties to

© Hearing — 24 September 2009, transcript, p. 45.

10

C. Schreuer et al, “The ICSID Convention: A Commentary”— Second Edition, Cambridge University Press,

2009, p. 363.

29

the dispute. This is not the case and the text must be completed in the light of BITs. A
priori it could be construed as covering disputes between an international investor and

Venezuela to which BITs are applicable.

104. With respect to the MIGA Convention, the Tribunal notes that the only disputes to
which Venezuela could be a Party under that Convention are not disputes with

investors, but disputes with the Agency itself”.

105. Finally, Article 22 covers disputes in which the ICSID Convention applies subject to

two conditions.

106. First, the text specifies that the dispute shall be submitted to arbitration “according to
the terms of the respective treaty or agreement”. On that point, the Tribunal notes that,
at the outset, Article 22 mentions “treaty or agreement” on the promotion and protection
of investments and then the MIGA and ICSID Conventions. One could have expected
that at the end of the article the text would have referred to the “respective treaty,
agreement or convention”. It does not do so. In spite of this awkward drafting, the
Tribunal considers that the words “treaty and agreement” also cover the two

Conventions.

107. One then reaches the second condition resulting from the words “si asi éste lo

establece”, “if it so provides” or “establishes”, on which the Parties disagree.

108. Grammatically, it is undisputed that the word “it” refers to the preceding words “treaty

or agreement”, which as stated above include the ICSID Convention.

109. The difficulty is with the word “lo” (“so”). This word certainly refers to the preceding
words “shall be submitted to international arbitration”. However it could be interpreted
in two ways. It could mean:

(i) If the treaty, agreement or convention provides for international arbitration or

7| Convention establishing the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) of 11 October 1985 — Article
57 and Annex II.

30

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

(ii) If the treaty, agreement or convention provides for mandatory submission of

disputes to international arbitration.

. Both interpretations are grammatically possible. In the first one, the word “lo” (so)
refers to international arbitration. In the second one, it refers to the obligation to submit

disputes to international arbitration.

In a number of cases concerning unilateral declarations, the International Court of
Justice decided that it “cannot base itself on a purely grammatical interpretation of the
text”, Facing an ambiguous and obscure text, the Tribunal is in the same situation in

the present case and has to look further.

(b) The principle of effet utile

. In this regard, the Claimants invoke the principle of effet utile (ut res magis valeat quam

pereat).

They contend that construing “if it so establishes” as “if the ICSID Convention provides
consent to arbitration (or requires arbitration)” “would subject the mandate of the ICSID

portion of Article 22 to a condition that could never be met”?

Moreover, the final
clause of Article 22 referring to the possibility of litigation in Venezuelan courts would
in such a case be useless. This would be “in flagrant violation of the principle of effet

utile”™.

The Respondent opposes this view. It submits that Article 22 does not contain a general
consent to arbitration of international investment disputes. It only constitutes
recognition and confirmation by the State that arbitration is a legitimate means of

settling investment disputes with investors, if and when the State has consented to

2 anglo-Iranian Oil Co. — Preliminary objection — Judgment — ICJ Report 1952 p. 104 ; Fisheries Jurisdiction

Spai
is

14

in v. Canada) — ICJ Report 1998 § 47 p. 454.

Counter Memorial § 113.
Counter-Memorial § 115.

31

arbitration under a specific treaty. In such an interpretation, the clause reserving the

competence of Venezuelan courts would still be useful.

115. In the Rejoinder, the Claimants recognize that it would not “be absurd” for a statute “to
recognize and confirm the legitimacy of arbitration as a means of dispute settlement””>.

But they submit that such an interpretation cannot be given to Article 22.

116. The Tribunal recalls that, as recognized by the International Court of Justice, “the
principle of effectiveness has an important role in the law of treaties”’®. As stated by the
Tribunal in the Eureko v. Poland case “[i]t is a cardinal rule of the interpretation of
treaties that each and every clause of a treaty is to be interpreted as meaningful rather
than meaningless””’. The International Court of Justice” and ICSID Tribunals” applied

that principle in number of treaty cases.

117. It remains to be seen whether it is also applicable in the interpretation of State unilateral

declarations, such as the legislation invoked in the present case.

118. In its 1988 decision, the SPP v. Egypt Tribunal did resort to the principle of effet utile 80.
However, later, the International Court of Justice decided that the principle of effet utile
must not be taken into account in the interpretation of States unilateral declarations*'.
For such declaration “what is referred to in the first place... is that it should be

interpreted in a manner compatible with the effect sought” by the State making it,

7 Rejoinder § 42.
76 Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada). ICJ Report 1998 p. 455 § 52.
7 Eureko BV v. Poland, Partial Award and Dissenting Opinion, (19 August 2005), § 248.

Advisory opinion of 21 June 1971 on the legal consequences for States of the continued presence of South
Africa in Namibia — ICJ Reports 1971 p.35 § 66 ; Border and transborder armed actions (Nicaragua v. Honduras)
— Judgment of 20 December 1988 — ICJ Reports 1998 p. 89 § 46.

° Pan American Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Co v. Argentine Republic — 1CSID Case No.
ARB/03/13, Decision on Preliminary Objections, (27 July 2006), §132 and PB America Production Co. and
others v. Argentine Republic — ICSID Case No. ARB/04/8 § 110; Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A.
v. Jordan, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/13, -Decision on Jurisdiction, (9 November 2004), § 95.
8° SPP y. Egypt, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, (4 April 1988), § 95-96.

8! Fisheries jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) — ICJ Reports 1998 p. 455 § 52.
© Ibidem.

32

119. This Tribunal agrees with this ruling. Thus in order to interpret Article 22, it will now
consider its context, the circumstances of its preparation and its purpose in order to try

to determine what was the intention of Venezuela when adopting Article 22..

(c) The intention of Venezuela

120. In this regard, Claimants contend first that the provisions of the Investment Law “are in

9983

many respects typical of investment treaties which usually includes arbitration

clauses. Article 22 must be viewed in that context.

121. The Tribunal notes that, according to its Article 1, the Investment Law was “intended to
provide investments and investors, both domestic and foreign with a stable and
predictable legal framework in which the former and the latter may operate in a secure
environment, through the regulation of actions by the State, towards these investments
and investors, in order to achieve the increase, diversification and harmonious

integration of investments to advance the objectives of national development”.

122. Such aims are in general terms comparable to those of the treaties on promotion and
reciprocal protection of investments and are reflected in the text of the law itself. Thus,
the law contains provisions relating to fair and equitable treatment (Article 7 § 1), non-
discrimination (article 8), confiscations and expropriations (Article 11) which are
comparable to those incorporated in BITs. However, the rights thus recognized to
international investors are often qualified in order not to affect the application of
Venezuelan law® or the rights of Venezuelan investors**, Moreover Article 24 of the
law specifies that its provisions do not prevent the adoption by Venezuela of a number
of measures it enumerates, inter alia for national security, the conservation of natural

resources and the integrity and stability of the Venezuelan financial system.

5 Counter Memorial § 119.
* Article 7; Article 7 § 1; Article 7 § 2; Article 11; Article 12; Article 12 § 2, Article 14
* Article 7 § 1; Article 10; Article 15 § 2.

33

123. The law is thus in some respect different from BITs. Moreover, BITs do not always

contain compulsory arbitration clauses. Therefore one cannot draw from the law as a
whole the conclusion that Article 22 must be interpreted as establishing consent by

Venezuela to submit ICSID disputes to arbitration.

124. The Parties further seek to interpret the Investment Law in the context of Venezuela's

attitude vis-a-vis arbitration. The Respondent stresses that that attitude has always been
and remains cautious and restrictive. By contrast, the Claimants contend that a pro-
arbitration environment was prevailing in 1999. For each of the Parties, Article 22 must

be interpreted in the light of the attitude thus put forward.

125. The Tribunal first observes that Venezuela had some experience of arbitration at the end

of the 19th and the beginning of 20th century which generated hostility in the country
towards this form of settlement of disputes. Its boundaries with Colombia® and the now
Republic of Guyana 87 were fixed at that time by two arbitral awards favourable to its
neighbours, the validity of which was contested. Moreover in 1902, Venezuela had to
face a military intervention by Germany, Italy and the United-Kingdom seeking to
collect unpaid debts and had to accept the establishment of Mixed Commissions in
charge of fixing the indemnities to be paid to its foreign creditors. Those events led to
the formulation of the Drago doctrine and the Drago-Porter Convention of 1907
prohibiting the use of force for the recovery of contractual debts. It also favoured the
insertion in concession contracts of the Calvo clause under which the investor commits

itself not to ask for diplomatic protection by its State of origin.

126. The Constitution of Venezuela of 1999 describes in its Articles 253 to 261 “the judicial

power and the system of justice” of Venezuela. Article 253 recognizes that “the

alternative means of justice” are part of that system and Article 258, after having

© Sentence arbitrale de la Reine régente d’Espagne du 16 mars 1891; sentence arbitrale du conseil fédéral

suisse du 14 mars 1922 — Reports of International Arbitral Awards of the United Nations — Volume I p. 225.
Sentence du 2 février 1897 — H. La Fontaine — Pasicrisie internationale — 1794-1900, p. 554.

34

mentioned “justice of peace”, provides that “the law shall promote arbitration,

conciliation, mediation and other alternative means of dispute settlement”.

127. However, Article 151 of the 1999 Constitution (which reproduces Article 127 of the

1966 Constitution) provides that:

“In public interest contracts, unless inapplicable by reason of the
nature of such contracts, a clause shall be deemed included, even if
not expressed, whereby any doubts and controversies which may arise
concerning such contracts and which cannot be resolved amicably by
the contracting parties, shall be decided by the competent courts of the
Republic, in accordance with its laws, and shall not on any grounds or
for any reason give rise to foreign claims”.
128. Moreover, Article 4 of the Law on Commercial Arbitration of 7 April 1998 provides

that:

“When one party to the arbitration agreement is a company where the
Republic, States, Municipalities or Independent Institutions have a
capital share of at least fifty per cent (50 %) or a company in which
the above mentioned parties have a capital share of at least fifty per
cent (50%), such agreement shall require for its validity the approval
of the competent statutory body and the written authorization of the
Ministry of Legal Protection. The agreement shall specify the type of
arbitration and the number of arbitrators, which shall in no event be
less than three (3)”.
129. This reluctant attitude explains that, during the preparation of the ICSID Convention,
Latin-American countries, including Venezuela, expressed reservations on the proposed
text which, they said, contravened their constitutional principles*. It also explains why

Venezuela signed the Convention only in 1993, almost thirty years after its adoption.

130. At that time, the environment in Venezuela had become more favourable to
international arbitration. In 1993 and 1994, the Respondent ratified both the ICSID
Convention and the New York Convention on the recognition and enforcement of
foreign arbitral awards of 10 June 1958, as well as the Convention establishing the

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency of 1985. From 1991 to 2001, it concluded

88 History of ICSID Convention — Volume II — | § 39.

35

131.

132.

133.

134,

25 BITs; 19 of them had entered into force in 2004. Finally it adopted the Investment

Law of 1999.

It thus appears that the traditional hostility of Venezuela towards international
arbitration had receded in the 1990s in favour of a more positive attitude. However,
Venezuela remained reluctant vis-a-vis contractual arbitration in the public sphere, as
testified by the 1998 Arbitration Law and Article 151 of the 1999 Constitution.
Moreover, the Tribunal cannot draw from this general evolution in favour of BITs the
conclusion that Venezuela, in adopting Article 22, intended to give in advance its

consent to ICSID arbitration in the absence of such BITs.

The legislative history of Article 22 could in this respect provide more useful
information on the intention of the drafters of the Investment Law*” However, the
Investment Law of 1999 was a decree-law and as such was not discussed in Parliament.
Moreover it contains no “exposicién de motivos”. Thus we have no direct information

on its preparation.

The Claimants submit that the Investment Law was drafted in 1999 “under the direction
of Ambassador Werner Corrales”, who in “a contemporaneous _ publication,
acknowledged that it was the intent of the drafters of the Investment Law to provide for
consent to ICSID arbitration”””. Respondent doubts that the Investment Law had been
drafted under Mr. Corrales’ direction. It adds that even so, “Mr. Corrales’ writings are

of no help in the interpreting Article 22791,

The Tribunal notes that in 1999 Mr. Corrales was Representative of Venezuela to the
World Trade Organisation. He recognizes himself that he is “not an attorney”, or an
“expert in international law” or “investment arbitration”. In a communication at a

conference on investment arbitration in comparative law organized in April 2009 by the

89 See for instance International Court of Justice - Aegean Sea Continental Shelf case (Greece v. Turkey)
Judgment of 17 December 1978 - ICJ Reports p. 26 to 43.
Counter Memorial § 122.

o1

Reply § 85.

36

Caracas Centro Empresarial de Conciliacién y Arbitraje (Caracas Business Centre of
Conciliation and Arbitration), he stated that he advised in 1999 that the President of
Venezuela should prepare a law “that would serve as the compulsory framework for all
international treaties and negotiations on investments”. He said that he was then
entrusted with preparing reference terms to write the draft law and direct its preparation.
He adds that the “legal drafting” was assigned to a legal consultant of the Institute of

Foreign Trade, Mr. Gonzalo Capriles”’.

135. Soon after the publication of the Investment Law, Mr. Corrales in two articles gave
“algunas ideas” (some ideas) on the legal regime of promotion and protection of
investments in Venezuela. In those articles, he stated that in his “opinion, a regime
applicable to foreign investments must leave open the possibility to resort to
international arbitration [unilaterally], which today is accepted almost everywhere in the
world, whether through the mechanism provided by the ICSID Convention or through
the submission of the dispute to an international arbitrator or to an ad hoc arbitral
tribunal as the one proposed by UNCITRAL. In any case, it must be clearly established
that there may not be a simultaneous resorting to national courts and to the arbitration
mechanism or to any other type of procedure of settlement of disputes. In our case, this
subject is dealt with in Chapter IV (article 21-23)” of the Investment Law, “where a

great part of the principles commented is accepted”®.

136. The Tribunal observes that, in those articles, Mr. Corrales expressed his opinion on the
provisions which, according to his judgement, must be incorporated in any regime of
international arbitration. He adds that a “great part” of those principles “is accepted in
articles 21 to 23 of the Investment Law”. He did not say that the drafters of Article 22

intended to provide for consent to ICSID arbitration in the absence of any BIT.

® Speech by Ing. Wermer Corrales at CEDCA’s event — Investment arbitration in Comparative Law — 28 April
2009 — Business — June 2009 p. 78 to 80.
°3 La OMC como espacio normativo — p. 185/186. The word “unilaterally” did not appear in the first article of
30 April 1999. It was added in the second article in 2000.

Ibidem.

37

137.

138.

139.

140.

Ten years later, at the conference already mentioned organized by the Caracas Centro
Empresarial de Conciliacién y Arbitraje, Mr. Corrales was invited by the organisers of
the conference to inform the audience of the “drafter’s intention” for the law” He then
stated that, as far as he was concerned as co-drafter of the law, such intention was to

offer “the possibility of open unilateral arbitration”

This last statement was made at a time the present proceedings were already engaged. It
is not supported by contemporaneous written documents and the Claimants themselves
did not ask Mr. Corrales to appear in the proceedings as a witness. They stated at the
hearing that they do not rely on Mr. Corrales’ statement “as legislative intent”, but only
as “confirmation” of their analysis’”. Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that the
legislative history of Article 22 does not establish that, in adopting the Investment Law,

Venezuela intended to consent in general and in advance to ICSID arbitration.

The Tribunal further observes that, at the time of the adoption of the Investment Law,
Venezuela had already signed more than 15 BITs stating either that it gave “‘its
unconditional consent to the submission of disputes” to ICSID arbitration or that its
disputes with foreign investors “shall at the request of the nationals concerned be
submitted to ICSID”, or using both phrases. Comparable words were used in some
national laws and in the ICSID model clauses. If it had been the intention of Venezuela
to give its advance consent to ICSID arbitration in general, it would have been easy for

the drafters of Article 22 to express that intention clearly by using any of those well

known formulas.

The Tribunal thus arrives to the conclusion that such intention is not established. As a

consequence, it cannot conclude from the ambiguous text of Article 22 that Venezuela,

5 Speech by Mr. Corrales - 29 April 2009 - Business - June 2009 p. 78 (Exh. C-187).
Ibidem p.80. (“In my scope of competence at least, I can state the intention of offering the possibility of open

unilateral arbitration

[Mly purpose as co-drafter was to offer in the broadest and most transparent manner the

 

possibility of the investors resorting to international arbitration as a unilateral offer made by the Venezuelan
state.”)
°7 Hearing 24 September 2009, transcript, p. 19.

38

141.

in adopting the 1999 Investment Law, consented in advance to ICSID arbitration for all
disputes covered by the ICSID Convention. That article does not provide a basis for

jurisdiction of the Tribunal in the present case.

Finally, the Tribunal notes that, according to the Respondent, Venezuela Holdings,
Mobil C.N. Holding and Mobil Venezolana Holdings do not qualify as “international
investors” under the Investment Law. The Respondent adds that, even if Article 22 were
to be construed as consent to jurisdiction, that article would not provide a basis for such
jurisdiction with respect to the claims submitted by those entities. The Claimants
conclude the contrary. As the Tribunal has arrived to the conclusion that Article 22 does
not constitute consent to jurisdiction with respect to any of the Claimants, it does not

have to take a decision on those alternative submissions.

B - ARTICLE 9 OF THE BIT BETWEEN THE NETHERLANDS AND VENEZUELA

142.

143.

On 22 October 1991, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Venezuela
concluded an Agreement on encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments,
which entered into force on 1 November 1993, after ratification by both Parties. That
Agreement was “done in the Spanish, Netherlands and English languages, the three
texts being equally authentic”. However, under paragraph 3 of a Protocol signed on the
same day, “[iJn case of difference of interpretation between the three equally authentic

texts of the present Agreement reference shall be made to the English text”.

Article 9 of the BIT provides in its paragraph 1 that “[d]isputes between one
Contracting Party and a national of the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation
of the former under this Agreement in relation to an investment of the latter, shall at the
request of the national concerned be submitted to the International Centre for the
settlement of Investment Disputes for settlement by arbitration or conciliation under”
the ICSID Convention. Article 9 adds in its paragraph 4 that “[e]ach Contracting Party

hereby gives its unconditional consent to the submission of disputes as referred to in

39

paragraph | of this Article to international arbitration in accordance with the provisions

of this Article”.

144. The Claimants contend that the Tribunal has jurisdiction under the BIT to consider the
case. The Respondent denies it. It describes the complex corporate form used by

Mobil for its investment and submits that :

(i) Some of the Claimants are not Dutch nationals and that the Dutch Claimant,
Venezuela Holdings, has only made indirect investments in Venezuela. Thus,
according to the Respondent, the BIT does not cover the present claims.

(ii) Moreover, the Dutch entity is a “corporation of convenience” inserted into the
corporate chain solely for the purpose of securing access to ICSID arbitration.

Such an “abuse” of right should not be permitted”®,

145. The Tribunal first recalls that the present dispute finds its origin in investments made by
Mobil in Venezuela for the exploration of oil in la Ceiba from 1996 and for the

production and upgrading of extra-heavy crude oil in Cerro Negro from 1997.

146. Some difficulties arose with respect to those projects from October 2004 to August
2006, when Venezuela increased royalty rates and income taxes and created a new
extraction tax. Then, in February 2007, a decree called for the transformation of the
existing Oil Associations (including Cerro Negro and La Ceiba) into mixed companies.
No agreement for such transformation was arrived at between Venezuela and the
Claimants. Later in 2007, Cerro Negro’s and La Ceiba’s assets and operations were

transferred to PDVSA and a decree of expropriation was issued.

147. In the meantime, the Exxon Mobil investments in Venezuela had been restructured
through a holding company incorporated in The Netherlands. As a result of this

restructuring, Mobil (Delaware) owns 100 % of Venezuela Holdings (Netherlands)

°8 Reply, paral 47.

40

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.

which owns 100 % of Mobil CN Holding (Delaware) which owns 100 % of Mobil CN

(Bahamas) which finally owns 41,66 % in the Cerro Negro project.

Venezuela Holdings (Netherlands) also owns 100 % of Mobil Venezolana Holding
(Delaware) which owns 100 % of Mobil Venezolana (Bahamas) which finally owns 50

% interest in the La Ceiba Association.

. In the light of those facts, the Tribunal will determine:

a. whether the BIT provides a jurisdictional basis in the present case
b. and, if so, whether the Claimants have engaged in treaty abuse, which would

exclude such jurisdiction.

1- Jurisdiction under the BIT

(a) Nationality of the Claimants

. It is undisputed that Venezuela Holdings (Netherlands) is an entity incorporated in the
Netherlands and as such, a Dutch national entitled to prevail itself of the BIT. But
Venezuela submits that its subsidiaries, Mobil CN Holding (Delaware), Mobil
Venezolana Holding (Delaware), Mobil CN (Bahamas) and Mobil Venezolana
(Bahamas) have been incorporated either in the United States of America or in the
Bahamas and are not Dutch nationals. According to the Respondent, they cannot prevail

themselves of the Dutch - Venezuela BIT.

Claimants contend that subsidiaries of Venezuela Holdings (Netherlands) are controlled

by this Dutch Holding and must therefore be deemed to be Dutch entities under the BIT.

Article 1 of the BIT provides that:

“For the purpose of this Agreement

“(b) The term “nationals” shall comprise with regard to either Contracting Party:

4l

153.

154.

155.

156.

157.

(i) national persons having the nationality of that Contracting Party;

(ii) legal persons constituted under the law of that Contracting Party;

(iii) legal persons not constituted under the law of that Contracting Party, but
controlled, directly or indirectly, by natural persons as defined in (i) or by

legal persons as defined in (ii) above”.

The Tribunal observes that Venezuela Holdings (Netherlands) owns 100 % of its US
and Bahamian subsidiaries. Those subsidiaries are thus controlled directly or indirectly
by a “legal person constituted under the law” of the Netherlands. Accordingly they must

be deemed to be Dutch nationals under article 1 (b) (iii) of the BIT.

The Respondent submits however, that this article is incompatible with Article 25 (2)
(b) of the ICSID Convention which, according to Venezuela, excludes the use of the

control test for the determination of a corporation’s nationality.

Article 25 (2) (b) of the ICSID Convention provides the following definition of the term
“national of another Contracting State”:
“(i) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting
State other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which
the parties consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or
arbitration, and,
(ii) any juridical person which had the nationality of the
Contracting State party to the dispute on that date and which,
because of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be
treated as a national of another Contracting State for the purposes
of this Convention”.

The Tribunal observes that Article 25 fixes the “outer limits” of ICSID jurisdiction and

that parties can consent to that jurisdiction only within those limits.

However Article 25 (b) (i) does not impose any particular criteria of nationality
(whether place of incorporation, siége social or control) in the case of juridical persons
not having the nationality of the Host State. Thus the parties to the Dutch-Venezuela

BIT were free to consider as nationals both the legal persons constituted under the law

42

158.

159.

160.

of one of the Parties and those constituted under another law, but controlled by such

legal persons. The BIT is thus compatible with Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

The Respondent further contends that in fact Venezuela Holdings (Netherlands) did not
exercise any control on its subsidiaries. In the absence of genuine control, the BIT

would not be applicable.

The Tribunal recalls that a Protocol to the BIT was concluded on the same day by the
Netherlands and Venezuela. This Protocol, which is an “integral part” of the BIT,

provides in its paragraph 1 ad Article 1 (b) (iii)

“A Contracting Party may require legal persons referred to in Article 1
Paragraph (b) (iii) to submit proof of such control in order to obtain the benefit
provided for in the provisions of the Agreement. For example, the following
may be considered acceptable proof:
a. that the legal person is an affiliate of a legal person constituted in the
territory of the other Contracting Party;
b. that the legal person is economically subordinated to a legal person
constituted on the territory of the other Contracting Party
c. that the percentage of its capital owned by national or legal persons of
the other Contracting Party makes it possible for them to exercise

control”.

In the present case, Venezuela Holdings (Netherlands) owns 100 % of the share capital
of its two American subsidiaries, which in turn own 100 % of the share capital of the
two Bahamas subsidiaries. Thus the share capital of Venezuela Holdings (Netherlands)
in those subsidiaries makes it possible for it to exercise control on them. The Tribunal
does not have to consider whether or not such control was exercised in fact. In any case,
under paragraph | (c) of the Protocol, those subsidiaries must be considered as nationals

of the Netherlands benefiting of the provisions of the BIT.

43

161

. This first objection to the tribunal jurisdiction based on the text of the BIT cannot be

upheld.

(b) Direct and Indirect Investments

162. Venezuela then submits that Venezuela Holdings (Netherlands), Mobil Cerro Negro

163.

Holding and Mobil Venezolana Holding (Delaware) are not entitled to assert claims
against Venezuela for their indirect interests in the Venezuelan investment of their
Bahamian subsidiaries. In this respect, it submits that “the provisions of the Dutch
Treaty establish that the obligations of a Contracting Party run only to nationals of the
other Contracting Party with respect to their own investments and only to extent that

those investments are located in the territory of the first Contracting Party””?.

The Claimants for their part contend that the BIT does not limit the definition of
“investment” to direct investments. Moreover, it “does not require that the claim be
related to an investment ‘in the territory’ of Venezuela”!”. The Treaty was intended to
protect investments in Venezuela held by a Netherlands company through a subsidiary

whether such subsidiary is incorporated in the Netherlands or in a third country”!”!,

164. The BIT in its Article 1 provides that:

“For the purpose of this Agreement:
a. the term “investment” shall comprise every kind of asset and more
particularly though not exclusively:

(i) movable and immovable property, as well as any other rights in rem
in respect of every kind of assets;
(ii) rights derived from shares, bonds, and other kinds of interests in
companies and joint ventures;
(iii) title to money, to other assets as to any performance having an

economic value;

° Reply § 167.

104
101

” Rejoinder § 104.

Ibidem § 105.

44

(iv) rights in the field of intellectual property, technical processes,
goodwill and know-how;
(v) rights granted under public law, including rights to prospect,

explore, extract and win natural resources”.

165. The Tribunal notes that there is no explicit reference to direct or indirect investments in
the BIT. The definition of investment given in Article | is very broad. It includes “every
kind of assets” and enumerates specific categories of investments as examples. One of
those categories consists of “shares, bonds or other kinds of interests in companies and
joint ventures”. The plain meaning of this provision is that shares or other kind of
interests held by Dutch shareholders in a company or in a joint venture having made
investment on Venezuelan territory are protected under Article 1. The BIT does not
require that there be no interposed companies between the ultimate owner of the
company or of the joint venture and the investment. Therefore, a literal reading of the
BIT does not support the allegation that the definition of investment excludes indirect
investments. Investments as defined in Article 1 could be direct or indirect as

recognized in similar cases by ICSID Tribunals'™.

166. The second objection to the Tribunal jurisdiction based on the text of the BIT cannot be

upheld.

2- Abuse of right

167. The Respondent then submits that the Exxon Mobil’s corporate restructuring through
the creation of the Dutch holding in 2005-2006 constituted an abuse of right and that, as
a consequence, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction under the BIT. The Claimants contend

that this allegation has no legal or factual basis.

102 siemens AG v. The Argentine Republic — ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8 — Decision on Jurisdiction, (3 August

2004),- §136-137, 12 ICSID Reports 174 (2007) ; Joannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia — ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, ( 6 July 2007), §123-124.

45

168. The Tribunal will first consider the law applicable to abuse of right before applying it to

the present case.

(a) The applicable law

169. The Tribunal first observes that in all systems of law, whether domestic or international,
there are concepts framed in order to avoid misuse of the law. Reference may be made
in this respect to “good faith” (“bonne foi”), “détournement de pouvoir” (misuse of

power) or “abus de droit” (abuse of right).

170. The principle of good faith has been recognized by the International Court of Justice as
“one of the basic principles governing the creation and performance of legal

“ and has been referred to

obligations”! It has been recognized in the law of treaties”
by a number of courts and tribunals including the Appellate Body of the World Trade

Organisation'® and ICSID tribunals!°°.

171.

The concept of détournement de pouvoir (misuse of power) has also been relied upon in
international law, in particular in the law of the seal”, the law of international

organisations'*, and in European Community law!

172. The same is true of abuse of right. As Hersch Lauterpacht noted in his book entitled

“Development of International Law by the International Court”: “There is no right,

103 Nuclear Tests — ICI Report 1974 p. 268 $46 — p.473 § 49; Armed action (Honduras v/Nicaragua — ICJ
Report 1988 p. 105 § 94.

4 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 23 May 1969, Articles 26 and 31 §1.
105 WTO Appellate Body WT/DS/08/AB/R — 24 February 2000 — US Tax Treatment for foreign sales
corporations § 166- WT/DS/184/AB/R 24 July 2001.
106 Amco Asia Corporation v. Indonesia. ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Jurisdiction, (25
September1983); SPP v. Egypt ,Decision on Jurisdiction II, (14 April 1988), § 63; Inceysa v. Salvador, ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/26,(2 August 2006), §230.
107 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982, Article 187.
108 sce for instance Administrative Tribunal of the International Labour Organisation — Judgments N°13 of 3
September 1954, N° 1129 of 3 July 1991 and N° 1392 of 1 February 1995.
109 ‘article 263 § 2 of the Treaty on European Union as revised in Lisbon. See for instance ECIC — Infried
Hochbaum v. Commission — Aff. C 107/90 — Rep. 1992 p. 174 § 14.

 

46

however well established, which could not, in some circumstances, be refused

recognition on the ground that it has been abused”!!°.

lll

173. It has thus long been recognized in arbitration that “abuse of authority or “abuse of

so 12

administration’ could engage State responsibility. The Permanent Court of

International Justice referred in two judgments to “abus de droit” in general. In the
Upper Silesia case, the Court recognized the right of Germany to dispose of her [its?]
property in this district until the actual transfer of sovereignty has been made under the

Versailles Treaty. However, it added that “a misuse of this right could endow an act of

alienation with the character of a breach of the Treaty”!3,

174. Some years later, in the Free Zones of Upper Savoy and District of Gex case, the
Permanent Court recognized to France the right to impose “fiscal taxes within the zones
as apart from customs duties at the frontier”. However it added that “a reservation must
be made as regard the case of abuses of a right, since it is certain that France must not

evade the obligation to maintain the zone by creating a customs barrier under the guise

of a control cordon”!

175. More recently, the Appellate Body of the World Trade Organisation stated that “the
principle of good faith, at once a general principle of law and general principle of

international law, controls the exercise of rights by States. One application of this

110 cit Hersch Lauterpacht — Development of International Law by the International Court — London 1958 p.
im’s International Law — Longman 9th Edition by Jennings and Watts Volume I § 124.
sion France-Venezuela — Lalanne and Ledour Case — United Nations Reports of
International Awards — Volume X p. 17 and 18, in which the arbitrator sanctionned an « abuse of authority » of
the President of the Venezuelan State of Guayana ».
12 Pacna — Arica Question (Chile v. Peru) - 4th March 1925 — United Nations Reports of International Arbitral
awards — Volume II p. 941 and 945. In that case the arbitrator considered whether there had been « abuse of
administration » by Chile in the disputed area. It arrives to the conclusion that Chile had used its conscription
“Jaws not so much for obtaining of recruits... but with the result, if not the purpose, of driving young Peruvians
from the [disputed] provinces». So far as it has been done, the Arbitrator holds it to be an abuse of Chilean
authority ».

Permanent Court of International Justice — Polish Upper Silesia — PCIJ — Report — Serie A — Judgment N°7
p. 30. The term « misuse of right » comes from the English version of the judgment. It corresponds to « abus de
droit » and « manquement au principe de bonne foi » in the original French text.
114 Permanent Court of International Justice - Free Zones of Upper Savoy and District of Gex — 7 June 1932 —
Serie A.B N°46.

  

 

47

general principle, widely known as the doctrine of “‘abus de droit”, prohibits the abusing

exercise of a State’s right”!', The European Court of Justice in many cases also

referred to such “abus de droit”''°.

176. For their part, ICSID tribunals had a number of occasions to consider whether or not the

wT ¢

conduct of an investor does constitute “‘an abuse of the convention purposes ‘an

119

118 | or an “abuse of the

abuse of legal personality’ an “abuse of corporate form’

system of international investment protection” 120.

177. Under general international law as well as under ICSID case law, abuse of right is to be

determined in each case, taking into account all the circumstances of the case.

178. In Autopista v. Venezuela, the investor, a Mexican company, ICA, restructured its
investment in a Venezuelan company, Aucoven in transferring 75 % of its shares to a
US corporation. It was alleged by Venezuela that this restructuring had been an abuse of
the corporate form in order to gain access to ICSID jurisdiction. The Tribunal recalled
that the transferee entity had been incorporated eight years before the parties entered
into the concession agreement. It noted that the transferee was not just a shell
corporation. It added that the Claimant had directly requested and had obtained in due
time Venezuela’s approval of the transfer of shares. It finally observed that the transfer

was justified by the difficulties for Mexican companies to obtain financing for projects

115 WO Appellate Body — Decision WT/DSS58/AB/R of 12 December 1998 - US Import prohibition of certain
shrimps and shrimps products § 158.

116 cee Triantafyllou, « L’interdiction des abus de droit en tant que principe général du droit communautaire ».
Cahiers de droit européen n° 5.6. 2002 p. 611-663.

"T Autopista Concesionada de Venezuela. C.A v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. 1CSID Case ARB/O0/S.
Decision on Jurisdiction, (27 September 2001), 16 ICSID Review - Foreign Investment Law Journal 5 (2001) §.
122.
'8 rT okos Tokelés v. Ukraine — ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18. Decision on Jurisdiction,( 29 April 2009) — 20
ICSID Review - Foreign Investment Law Journal 205 (2005) § 56.

119 A euas del Tunari S.A. v. Republic of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/3, Decision on Respondent's
Objections to Jurisdiction, (21 October 2005) - 20 ICSID Review — Foreign Investment Law Journal - 450
(2005).

120 Phoenix Action Ltd v. The Czech Republic, ICSID case No. ARB/O6/5, Award- § 113.

48

because of the peso crisis. On those bases it considered that the restructuring did not

constitute “an abuse of the Convention purposes” !?!,

179. In Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, the Claimant company was organised under Lithuanian
law and was owned and controlled at 99 % by Ukrainian nationals. The tribunal noted
that this enterprise was formed before the BIT between Ukraine and Lithuania entered
into force. It added that there was “no evidence in the record that the Claimant used its
formal legal personality for any improper use” such as fraud or malfeasance. It

concluded that there had been no abuse of legal personality”!

. However, the President
of the Tribunal dissented in a strongly motivated opinion noting that the investment had
been made “in Ukraine by Ukrainian citizens with Ukrainian capital” and as such could

not benefit from the protection of the ICSID mechanism'*,

180. In Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia, the Claimant, a Bolivian company, had entered into a
water concession contract with the Bolivian authorities. Bechtel, a US corporation,
owned 55 % of Aguas del Tunari. Bechtel then joined its water management projects
with Edison and its shares in Aguas del Tunari were transferred to a Dutch company.
The Tribunal was seized on the basis of the Dutch-Bolivian BIT. Bolivia argued that the
Dutch entity was a mere shell created solely for the purpose of gaining access to ICSID

and that therefore, the tribunal had no jurisdiction under the BIT.

181.

In a divided opinion, the Tribunal held that the Dutch entity was “not simply a
corporation shell established to obtain ICSID jurisdiction over the case”!**, Tt added that
“it is not uncommon in practice and - absent a particular limitation — not illegal to locate

one’s operation in a jurisdiction perceived to provide a beneficial regulatory and legal

121 A wtopista Concesionada de Venezuela, CA v. Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/O0/5, Decision

on Jurisdiction, (27 September 2001), § 123-126, 16 ICSID Review Foreign Investment Law Journal 5 (2001).
122 Tokios Tokeles v.Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, (29 April 2004), § 53 to
56. 20 ICSID Review Foreign Investment Law Journal. 205 (2005).

123 Thidem — Dissenting Opinion § 23 and 25.

124 Aguas del Tunari S.A. v. Republic of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/3, Decision on Respondent's
Objections to Jurisdiction, (21 October 2005), § 321, 20 ICSID Review - Foreign Investment Law Journal -
450 (2005).

49

environment in terms, for example, of taxation or the substantive law of the jurisdiction,
including the availability of a BIT”'”°. It concluded that it “did not find a sufficient
basis in the present record to support the allegation of abuse of corporate form or

fraud” !*°,

182. The Tribunal arrived at a different conclusion in Phoenix v. Czech Republic. In that

183.

case, the Claimant, Phoenix, was controlled by a former Czech national who
incorporated Phoenix under Israeli law and caused it to acquire an interest in two Czech
companies owned by members of his family. Before the acquisition, the Czech
companies had already been involved in lawsuits in the Czech Republic and in disputes
with the Czech authorities. Approximately two months after the acquisition, Phoenix
notified the Czech Republic of an investment dispute and subsequently commenced

ICSID arbitration.

The Tribunal examined successively the timing of the investment, the initial request to
ICSID, the timing of the claim, the substance of the transaction, and the true nature of
the operation. It noted that “all the damages claimed by Phoenix had already occurred
and were inflicted on the two Czech companies, when the alleged investment was
made’. It observed that the initial request “was based on a claim by the two Czech
companies, which were supposedly assigned to Phoenix”. It added that the timing of the
claim showed that “what was really at stake were indeed the pre-investment violations
and damages”. The “whole operation was not an economic investment, based on the
actual or future value of the companies, but indeed, simply a rearrangement of assets
within a family, to gain access to ICSID jurisdiction. Moreover, “no activity was either
launched or tried after the alleged investment was made”. “All the elements analysed
lead to the same conclusion of an abuse of right”. As a consequence the Tribunal

concluded that it lacked jurisdiction on the Claimant’ s request!?’,

125: Tpidem § 330 (d).
126

127

45.

Ibidem § 331.
Phoenix Action Ltd v.The Czech Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, (15 April 2009),- § 136 to

50

184. Those decisions and awards use different criteria to determine in each case whether or
not there has been abuse of right. But in all cases, as stated by Professor Prosper Weil in
his dissenting opinion in Tokios Tokelés, the question is to give “effect to the object and

purpose of the ICSID Convention” and to preserve “‘its integrity” !*,

185. In the present case, the Tribunal has to act accordingly and to consider whether or not
the restructuring of Mobil’s investments in Venezuela in 2005-2006 is to be deemed as

an abuse of right and as a consequence whether or not it has jurisdiction under the BIT.

(b) Application of the Law to the Case

186. Initially, Mobil investments in Venezuela were structured as follows:

(i) Mobil (Delaware) owned 100% of Mobil CN Holding (Delaware), which in
turn owned 100 % of Mobil CN Holding (Bahamas), which has a 41 2/3 %
participation in the Cerro Negro Association.

(ii) Mobil (Delaware) also owned 100 % of Mobil Venezolana Holding
(Delaware), which in turn owned 100 % of Mobil Venezolana (Bahamas),
which had a 50 % participation in the La Ceiba Association.

187. On 27 October 2005, Claimants created a new entity under the law of the Netherlands,
called Venezuela Holdings. On 21 February 2006, this entity acquired all the shares of
Mobil CN Holding (Delaware). Then on 23 November 2006, it also acquired all the

shares of Mobil Venezolana Holding (Delaware). The Dutch holding company was thus

inserted into the corporate chain for the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba projects.

188. Respondent submits that this restructuring occurred long after the investments. It adds
that it did not consent to it. It contends that “the disputes were not only foreseeable, but
they had actually been identified and notified to Respondent before the Dutch company
was even created”!”. Thus, according to Venezuela, the only purpose of this
restructuring was to gain access to ICSID for existing disputes. This was “an abusive
manipulation of the system of international protection under the ICSID Convention and

128 Tokio Tokeles v. Ukraine — Dissenting Opinion § 25.

129 Rejoinder p. 83.

51

the BITs”!*”. According to Venezuela it is therefore the duty of the Tribunal not to

protect such manipulation and to decline its jurisdiction.

189. Claimants contest each of those points. They explain that they were “surprised” by

Venezuela’s “unilateral imposition of a 16 2/3 % royalty rate in October 2004”, which
in their opinion was contrary to the existing agreements. They say that Mobil promptly
“undertook a review of the extent of the legal protection for its investments in
Venezuela”. Upon doing so, it concluded in early 2005 that it should restructure its
Venezuelan investments through a holding company incorporated in the Netherlands,

151 This choice was considered

which had a bilateral investment treaty with Venezuela’
as “logical”, taking into account the double taxation agreements concluded by the

Netherlands and the activities that Exxon Mobil already had in that country.

190. It thus appears to the Tribunal that the main, if not the sole purpose of the restructuring

191.

was to protect Mobil investments from adverse Venezuelan measures in getting access

to ICSID arbitration through the Dutch-Venezuela BIT.

Such restructuring could be “legitimate corporate planning” as contended by the
Claimants or an “abuse of right” as submitted by the Respondents. It depends upon the

circumstances in which it happened.

192. In this respect, the Tribunal first observes that, contrary to the situation in Autopista v.

130
131

Venezuela, there was no contractual obligation in the present case for Mobil or its
subsidiaries to submit the proposed restructuring to the approval of the Venezuelan
authorities. Yet, Mobil did not hide this operation. In fact, Mobil Cerro Negro notified
the Respondent of Venezuela Holdings’ ownership of the Cerro Negro investment on 16
October 2006. On 7 March 2007, Venezuela Holdings also informed Venezuela of the
acquisition of the La Ceiba investments. The Respondent did not raise any objection at

the time.

Rejoinder p. 147.
Counter Memorial § 195-197.

52

193. With respect to the timing of the investments, the Tribunal observes that, as stated by

the Respondent, “the main investment at issue is the investment in the Cerro Negro
project”!*?, The bulk of this investment, i.e. 1,915 billion US dollars, was made from
1999 to 2002. “By 2000, sales from early production of extra-heavy crude oil blended
with condensate had commenced. By 2001 the upgrade had been completed and by
2002 the project was already generating more than enough income to cover all its

expenses and cash needs”'3,

194. As a consequence from 2002 to 2005, the annual investment was far smaller than before

195.

and varied from a minimum of 45 million US dollars in 2003 to a maximum of 175

million US dollars in 2005.

In the last period, however, a gas facility modification and new wells (Pad 8) were

constructed. The wells were completed in late 2005!

and the gas facility became
operational in December 2006'*°. The investments in 2006 amounted to 89 million US

dollars.

196. The Tribunal does not have at its disposal such precise figures in the case of the La

197.

132
133
134
135

Ceiba project. However the Claimants submit that in “December 2005, Mobil
Venezolana, along with its partner, Petro-Canada La Ceiba GmbH, commited itself to
invest roughly US $ 1.3 billion in the La Ceiba project. Mobil re-confirmed its intention
to proceed with that investment in January 2007”. This is not contested by the

Respondent.

Moreover, it is not disputed that the Claimants contributed their part to those

investments.

Reply § 119.

Ibidem.

Reply § 124.

Rejoinder — footnote 183.

53

198. It thus appears that in 2005-2006, the two projects had developed normally through the

required investments. Therefore the investments made in 2006 in Cerro Negro were far
lower than those made each year from 1999 to 2001 (although higher than in 2002 and
2003). As stated by the Respondent, they were financed, as through the funds
“generated by the project itself rather than brought into Venezuela from or through the
Netherlands”'**. This was so because the project was already “up and running” 97, The
situation in the present case is thus quite different from the situation which the arbitral
tribunal had to consider in the Phoenix case. The limited amount of investment made in
particular in 2006 and the fact that it was financed without external funding was in
harmony with the project at the time of the restructuring as it then stood. No adverse
inference can be drawn from that situation. It should also be added that the Treaty
contains no requirement that the origin of the capital be foreign. Nor does general

international law provide a basis for imposing such a requirement'**,

199. The Tribunal will now turn from the timing of the investment to the timing of the

dispute. To that end, it will recall what complaints had already been lodged by the

Claimants at the time of the restructuring.

200. In two letters dated 2 February 2005, and 18 May 2005, drafted in comparable terms,

136

138

the Claimants first complained of the increase from 1 % to 16 2/3 % of the royalties
decided by Venezuela both for the Cerro Negro and the La Ceiba projects. They
requested the Government to designate representatives to meet with them in order to
discuss an amicable settlement. They added that “as you well know, in accordance with
Article 22 of the Investment Law, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has consented
to submit to arbitration under the ICSID Convention, investment disputes between the

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and foreign investors”. They went on, consenting “to

Reply § 124.
Ibidem.
For comparable cases, see Olguin v. Paraguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/5, Award, (26 July 2001), IC 97

(2001) at 13 n 4; Saipem S.p.a. v. The People Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Decision on
Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures, (21 March 2007), IIC 280 (2007) at 106

54

201.

ICSID’s jurisdiction for arbitration of the investment dispute, and of any further
investment dispute with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, so that, should
arbitration become necessary, it can be carried out under the ICSID Convention”. They
finally concluded in requesting “an early meeting to commence consultation” in order

“to explore an amicable solution of the matter” !*?,

Then, on 20 June 2005, Mobil Cerro Negro Holding, Mobil Cerro Negro and Operadora
Cerro Negro informed the Venezuelan authorities that the recent ministerial decision to
increase the royalties to 30 % “has broadened the investment dispute” previously
brought to their attention. They stated that the introduction of a bill that would increase
income tax rates from 34 % to 50 % would further broaden that dispute. They contended
those decisions were "in breach of the obligations” of Venezuela and requested again
consultations “in an effort to reach an amicable resolution of this matter”. They recalled
Article 22 of the Investment Law and the position they took on this matter in their
previous letters. They added that “[o]ut of an abundance of caution, each of the Mobil
Parties hereby confirms its consent to ICSID jurisdiction over the broadened dispute
described above and any other investment disputes with the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela existing at the present time or that may arise in the future, including without
limitation any dispute arising out of any expropriation or confiscation of all or part of

the investment” of the Mobil Parties.

202. It results from those letters that in June 2005 there were already pending disputes

139

between the Parties relating to the increase of royalties and income taxes decided by
Venezuela. Claimants had even accepted to submit those disputes to ICSID arbitration
under Article 22 of the Venezuelan Investment Law. “Out of an abundance of caution”,
they had further indicated that on the same basis they were also consenting to arbitration
for any future dispute, including future dispute arising from expropriation or

confiscation.

Quotations from the letter of 18 May 2005.

55

203

204.

205.

. As recalled above, the restructuring of Mobil’s investments through the Dutch entity
occurred from October 2005 to November 2006. At that time, there were already
pending disputes relating to royalties and income tax. However, nationalisation
measures were taken by the Venezuelan authorities only from January 2007 on. Thus,
the dispute over such nationalisation measures can only be deemed to have arisen after

the measures were taken.

As stated by the Claimants, the aim of the restructuring of their investments in
Venezuela through a Dutch holding was to protect those investments against breaches of
their rights by the Venezuelan authorities by gaining access to ICSID arbitration
through the BIT. The Tribunal considers that this was a perfectly legitimate goal as far

as it concerned future disputes.

With respect to pre-existing disputes, the situation is different and the Tribunal
considers that to restructure investments only in order to gain jurisdiction under a BIT
for such disputes would constitute, to take the words of the Phoenix Tribunal, “an
abusive manipulation of the system of international investment protection under the
ICSID Convention and the BITs '*°. The Claimants seem indeed to be conscious of this,
when they state that they “invoke ICSID jurisdiction on the basis of the consent
expressed in the Treaty only for disputes arising under the Treaty for action that the

Respondent took or continued to take after the restructuring was completed” '*!,

206. The Tribunal thus:

140
141

a. has jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention and the BIT with respect to
any dispute born after 21 February 2006 for the Cerro Negro project and
after 23 November 2006 for the La Ceiba project, and in particular with
respect to the pending dispute relating to the nationalisation of the

investments;

Phoenix v. Czech Republic - § 144.
Reply §4.

56

b. has no jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention and the BIT with respect to

any dispute born before those dates.

207. Finally, the Tribunal notes that Mobil Corporation has only raised claims on the basis of
Article 22 of the Investment Law and not on the basis of the BIT. In § 140 above, the
Tribunal has concluded that Article 22 of the Investment Law does not provide a basis
for jurisdiction in the present case. As a consequence, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction
over the claims of Mobil Corporation, which will thus not be a Party to the continuation

of these proceedings.

C- COSTS OF THE PROCEEDINGS

208. Lastly, the Tribunal makes no order at this stage regarding the costs of the

proceeding and reserves it to a later stage of the arbitration.

IV. DISPOSITIVE PART OF THE DECISION

209. For the foregoing reasons;

The Tribunal unanimously decides:

(a) that it has jurisdiction over the claims presented by Venezuela Holdings
(Netherlands), Mobil CN Holding and Mobil Venezolana Holdings
(Delaware), Mobil CN and Mobil Venezolana (Bahamas) as far as:

(i) they are based on alleged breaches of the Agreement on
encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments concluded on
22 October 1991 between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
Republic of Venezuela;

(ii) they relate to disputes born after 21 February 2006 for the Cerro
Negro Project and after 23 November 2006 for the La Ceiba Project
and in particular as far as they relate to the dispute concerning the

nationalization measures taken by the Republic of Venezuela;

s7

(b) that it has no jurisdiction under Article 22 of the Venezuelan Decree with
rank and force of law No. 356 on the protection and promotion of

investments of 3 October 1999;

(c) to make the necessary order for the continuation of the procedure pursuant

to Arbitration Rule 41 (4);

(d) to reserve all questions concerning the costs and expenses of the Tribunal

and the costs of the Parties for subsequent determination;

58

[ signed ] [ signed ]

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler Dr. Ahmed Sadek El-Kosheri

Arbitrator Abitrator

[ signed ]

Judge Gilbert Guillaume

President

