INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

VENEZUELA HOLDINGS, B.V.

Mobi CERRO NEGRO HOLDING, LTD.
MOBIL VENEZOLANA DE PETROLEOS HOLDINGS, INC.
MOBIL CERRO NEGRO, LTD. AND
MOBIL VENEZOLANA DE PETROLEOS, INC.
(CLAIMANTS)

AND

THE BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID CASE No. ARB/07/27

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal:

H.E. Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President
Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Arbitrator
Dr. Ahmed Sadek El-Kosheri, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 9 October 2014

PARTIES’ REPRESENTATIVES

Representing the Claimants:
Mr. Thomas L. Cubbage IIT
Mr. Miguel Lépez Forastier
Covington & Burling LLP
1201 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
Washington, D.C. 20004-2401
USA

and
Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel
Three Crowns LLP
1 King Street
London EC2V 8AU
UK

and
Mr. René J. Mouledoux.
Mr. Eugene J. Silva II
Production Company Law Department
Exxon Mobil Corporation
800 Bell Street
Houston, Texas 77002
USA

Representing the Respondent:
Dr. Manuel Enrique Galindo Ballesteros
Procuraduria General de la Reptiblica
Av. Los Ilustres, cruce con calle Francisco
Lazo Marti
Edif. Procuraduria General de la Reptiblica,
piso 8
Urb. Santa Ménica
Caracas 1040
Venezuela
and
Mr. George Kahale, III
Mr. Benard V. Preziosi, Jr.
Ms. Miriam K. Harwood
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
101 Park Avenue
New York, New York 10178
USA
and
Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, S.C.
Rubén Dario 281, Pisos 8 & 9
Col. Bosque de Chapultepec
11580 Mexico, D.F.
Mexico

nv

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
  

 

TABLE OF MAIN ABBREVIATIONS 3
I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 8
Il. THE FACTS 16
A. THE PARTIES 16
1. The Claimant: 16
2. The I7
B. SUMMARY OF THE MAIN FACTS 18
1. Venezuela's Oil Reserv 1s
2. The Oil Opening 20
3. Mobil S 22
4. Cerro Negro Inves 22
(a) Context of the Cerro Negro 22
(b) Elements of the Cerro Negro 26
(c) Cerro Negro Association Agreement, Reservation and Dedication Agreement and Cerro Negro Royalty
Reduction Agi 27
(d) Creation of Petrolera Cerro Negr 32
(©) Chalmette Refining 33
5. La Ceiba 34
(a) Context of the La Ceiba 34
(b) Elements of the La Ceiba 36
6. Origin of the Present Dispute 38
(a) Increase in the Royalty Rate in 2004 and 2005......
(b) Creation of the Extraction Tax in 2006
(c) Increase in the Income Tax Rate Applicable to Participants in Orinoco Oil Belt Ventures.
(d@) Production and export curtailments on the Cerro Negro Project...
(e) _ Expropriation of the Claimants’ Investments in the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Proje

C.  THEICC ARBITRATION

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

III. THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS 49
A. THE CLAIMANTS’ MEMORIAL 49
B. THE RESPONDENT’ S COUNTER-MEMORIAL 54
C. THE CLAIMANTS’ REPLY 53
D. THE RESPONDENT'S REJOINDER 61
E. HEARING AND PosT-HEARING BRIEFS 63

IV. JURISDICTION 66

V. EFFECTS OF THE ICC ARBITRATION.
VI. APPLICABLE LAW.
VII.FET AND ARBITRARY OR DISCRIMINATORY MEASURES

 

76

 

 

 

A. THE EXTRACTION T: 0

B. THE PRODUCTION AND EXPORT CURTAILMENT!
C. THE COERCION AND THE EXPROPRIATION MEASURES
D. THE SEVERANCE PAYMENTS

EXPROPRIATION
A. EXPROPRIATION OF “DISCRETE RIGHTS” BEFORE JUNE 2007...

VIL.

 

 

 

 

B. EXPROPRIATION OF THE CERRO NEGRO AND LA CEIBA PROJECTS IN JUNE 2007
C. QUANTUM OF THE EXPROPRIATION OF THE CERRO NEGRO PROJECT ..
1. Net Cash Flow

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a) Volume of I
b) Oil Price 108
c) Future Revenues 111
d) Royalties and Extraction Tax. 112
e) Cost of Operation and Capital Investment...

ff) Special Contributions 116
g) Income Tax 116
2. Discount Rate 119
3. Price Cap 122
4. Offset Claim 124
5. Double Recovery. 125

 

D. QUANTUM OF THE EXPROPRIATION OF THE LA CEIBA PROJECT...
IX. TAXES AND INTEREST

A. PROTECTION AGAINST TAXATION OF THE AWARD ....
B. INTEREST.

X. COSTS
XI. DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL.

 

 

 

 

nv

TABLE OF MAIN ABBREVIATIONS

 

ICSID Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

 

Award

The present Award on the merits of the dispute

 

Treaty or BIT

Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
Between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Venezuela of
22 October 1991 signed on 22 October 1991, which entered into force on 1
November 1993

 

Cerro Negro Association

Association Agreement Among Lagoven Cerro Negro, S.A., Mobil

 

Agreement or CNAA Producci6n e Industrializacién de Venezuela Inc. and Veba Oel Venezuela
Orinoco GmBH dated 28 October 1997
Cerro Negro Royalty Agreement between the Venezuelan Ministry of Energy and Mines and

Reduction Agreement

PDVSA Petréleo y Gas, S.A. to calculate the Royalty under Article 41 of the
Hydrocarbons Law dated 29 May 1998

 

Claimants

Mobil Cerro Negro Holding, Ltd., Mobil Venezolana de Petrdleos Holdings,
Inc., Mobil Cerro Negro, Ltd., Mobil Venezolana de Petréleos, Inc. and
Venezuela Holdings, B.V.

 

Cline Report

Expert Report of William B. Cline of Gaffney, Cline & Associates, Inc.,
“Technical Assessment of the Cerro Negro Contract Area” dated 14

December 2010

 

C. Mem. J.

The Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction dated 16

April 2009

 

C. Mem. M.

The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits dated 15 June 2011

 

Congressional Joint

Committee Report

Report of the Joint Committee on Energy and Mines of the Venezuelan
Congress on the Framework of the Conditions for the Cerro Negro Project

dated 10 April 1997

 

 

 

 

C-PH Brief The Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief dated 30 April 2012
C-PH Reply The Claimants’ Post-Hearing Reply dated 14 May 2012
CVP Corporacién Venezolana del Petréleo, S.A.

 

 

 

 

Decision on Jurisdiction

The Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction dated 10 June 2010

 

DCF

Discounted Cash Flow

 

Decree-Law 5200

Decree No. 5200 with Rank, Value and Force of Law on the Migration to
Mixed Companies of the Association Agreements of the Orinoco Oil Belt, as
well as of the Risk-and-Shared-Profit Exploration Agreements, Official
Gazette No. 38632, published on 26 February 2007

 

 

 

 

 

Enabling Law Law that Authorizes the President of the Republic to Issue Decrees with
Rank, Value and Force of Law in Delegated Subject Matters, Official Gazette
No. 38617, published on 1 February 2007

Ex. CL- The Claimants’ Legal Authority (legal authorities)

Ex. C- The Claimants’ Exhibit (documentary exhibits)

Ex. R- The Respondent’s Exhibit (legal authorities and/or documentary exhibits)

FET Fair and equitable treatment

 

First Heads of Agreement

Heads of Agreement among Lagoven, S.A., Mobil Oil Corporation and

Mobil Producci6n e Industrializacién de Venezuela dated 17 September 1996

 

Framework of Conditions
for the Cerro Negro
Association, Framework

of Conditions or FCCNA

Framework of Conditions for an Association Agreement on the exploitation,
upgrading and marketing of extra-heavy crude oil to be produced in the Cerro
Negro area of the Orinoco Oil Belt to be executed between Lagoven, S.A.,

Mobil Corporation and Veba Oel AG approved on 24 April 1997

 

Framework of Conditions

Framework of Conditions for the Association Agreements for risk-bearing

 

for the La Ceiba Project | exploration of new areas and hydrocarbon production under the shared-profit
or FCLCP scheme
Graves ICC Testimony Transcript of the Hearing on the Merits, 22 September 2010, Mobil Cerro

Negro, Ltd. v. Petréleos de Venezuela, S.A.. PDVSA Cerro Negro, S.A., ICC
Case No. 15416/JRF, International Court of Arbitration of the International

Chamber of Commerce (Graves Cross-Examination, Excerpt)

 

 

Graves Report

 

Expert Report of R. Dean Graves of Alvarez & Marsal Dispute Analysis &
Forensic Services, LLC dated 13 December 2010

 

 

 

ICC Award

Mobil Cerro Negro, Ltd. v. Pétroleos de Venezuela, S.A. and PDVSA Cerro
Negro, S.A., ICC Case No. ARB/15416/JRF, Award dated 23 December 2011

 

ICSID

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

 

ICSID Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and

Nationals of other States

 

ICSID Institution Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration

Proceedings (Institution Rules)

 

Jones ICC Testimony

Transcript of Hearing on the Merits, 21 September 2010, Mobil Cerro Negro,
Ltd. V. Petréleos de Venezuela, S.A. PDVSA Cerro Negro, S.A., ICC Case
No. 15416/JRF, International Court of Arbitration of the International

Chamber of Commerce (Jones Cross-Examination, Excerpt)

 

La Ceiba Association
Agreement or LCAA

Association AGreement dated July 10, 1996 between Corporacién
Venezolana del Petréleo, S.A. and Mobil Venezolana de Petrédleos Inc., Veba
OEL Venezuela Exploration GmbH and Nippon Oil Exploration (Venezuela)
Inc.

 

La Ceiba Evaluation Plan

La Ceiba Area Venezuela Evaluation Plan submitted by Agencia Operadora

La Ceiba, C.A. dated 11 December 2011

 

La Ceiba Royalty

Reduction Agreement

Royalty Reduction Agreement for Shared-Risk-and-Profit Projects among the
Venezuelan Ministry of Energy and Mines and Corporacién Venezolana del

Petréleo, S.A. dated 5 December 1995

 

Law on Effects of the

Migration

Law on the Effects of the Process of Migration to Mixed Companies of the
Agreements of the Orinoco Oil Belt, as well as of the At-Risk-and-Shared-

Profits Exploration Agreements

 

Letter of Intent

Letter of Intent among Lagoven, S.A. and Mobil Oil Corporation dated 20
December 1994

 

 

 

MEM The Ministry of Energy and Mines, the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum
and/or the Ministry of the People’s Power for Energy and Petroleum of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

Mem. J. The Respondent’s Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction dated 15 January

 

2009

 

 

 

Mem. M.

The Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits dated 15 December 2010

 

 

 

 

 

MFN Most favoured nation

Mobil Mobil Corporation

Mobil CN Mobil Cerro Negro, Ltd.

Mobil CN Holding Mobil Cerro Negro Holding, Ltd.

Mobil PIV Mobil Produccién e Industrializacién de Venezuela, Inc.

 

Mobil Venezolana

Mobil Venezolana de Petréleos, Inc.

 

Mobil Venezolana

Holdings

Mobil Venezolana de Petrdleos Holdings, Inc.

 

1975 Nationalization

Law

Organic Law that Reserves to the State the Industry and Trade of
Hydrocarbons, Decree No. 250, issued on 29 August 1975

 

Nippon La Ceiba

Nippon Oil Exploration (Venezuela), Inc.

 

October 2006 Production
Cut

Order from the Venezuelan Ministry of Energy to Operadora Cerro Negro to
reduce extra-heavy oil production for the month of October 2006 by a total of

50,000 barrels

 

 

 

 

 

 

Offtake Support Offtake Support Agreement for the Cerro Negro Extra Heavy Crude Oil
Agreement Project among Mobil Cerro Negro, Ltd., PDVSA Cerro Negro S.A., Mobil
Sales & Supply Corp. and the Bank of New York dated 18 June 1998

Operadora Cerro Negro Operadora Cerro Negro S.A.

or OCN

PDVSA Petréleos de Venezuela, S.A.

1. Request for | The Claimants’ Request for Arbitration against the Bolivarian Republic of

Arbitration | Venezuela dated 6 September 2007
or RFA

Rej. J. The Claimants’ Rejoinder on Objections to Jurisdiction dated 17 August

 

2009

 

 

 

Rej. M.

The Respondent’s Rejoinder on Merits dated 15 December 2011

 

Reply Mem. J.

The Respondent’s Reply on Objections to Jurisdiction dated 15 June 2009

 

Reply M.

The Claimants’ Reply Memorial on Merits dated 15 September 2011

 

Reservation and

Dedication Agreement

Reservation and Dedication Agreement Among Lagoven, S.A., Lagoven
Cerro Negro, S.A., Mobil Produccién e Industrializaci6n de Venezuela Inc.

and Veba Oel Venezuela Orinoco GmBH dated 28 October 1997

 

Respondent

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

 

Royalty Procedures

Agreement on Procedures for the Payment of the Exploitation Tax (Royalty)

 

 

 

Agreement of the Extra-Heavy Crude Produced and the Sulphur Extracted by Operadora
Cerro Negro, S.A.

R-PH Brief The Respondent’s Post-Hearing Memorial dated 30 April 2012

R-PH Reply The Respondent’s Post-Hearing Reply Memorial dated 14 May 2012

Tr. M. Transcript of the hearing on the merits

 

Vienna Convention or

VCLT

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, done at Vienna on 23 May 1969
(entered into force on 27 January 1980), United Nations, Treaty Series, vol.

1155, p. 331

 

Veba La Ceiba

Veba Oel Venezuela Exploration GmbH

 

Veba Orinoco

Veba Oel Venezuela Orinoco GmbH

 

Venezuela

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

 

Venezuela Holdings

Venezuela Holdings, B.V.

 

WS

Witness statement

 

 

1943 Hydrocarbons Law

 

Hydrocarbons Law, Official Gazette No. 31, issued on 13 March 1943

 

a

 

L

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 6 September 2007, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes received a Request for Arbitration against the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela dated 6 September 2007 from (i) three U.S. (Delaware) companies, i.e.,
Mobil Corporation, Mobil Cerro Negro Holding, Ltd. and Mobil Venezolana de
Petréleos Holdings, Inc., (ii) two Bahamian companies, i.e., Mobil Cerro Negro,
Ltd. and Mobil Venezolana de Petréleos, Inc. and (iii) one Dutch company

Venezuela Holdings, B.V.

On the same day, the Centre acknowledged receipt of the request for arbitration
pursuant to Rule 5 of the ICSID Institution Rules and transmitted a copy to

Venezuela and to the Venezuelan Embassy in Washington, D.C.

The Request for Arbitration, as supplemented by the Claimants’ letters of 28
September 2007, was registered by the Secretary-General of ICSID on 10 October
2007 pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention. On the same day, the
Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 7 of the Institution Rules, notified the
Parties of the registration and invited them to proceed to constitute a tribunal as soon

as possible.

By letter dated 7 January 2008, the Claimants confirmed the Parties’ agreement
regarding the constitution of the tribunal, according to which the tribunal would be
composed of three arbitrators, one appointed by each Party and a third presiding
arbitrator appointed by agreement of the Parties with the assistance of the first two

appointed arbitrators.

On 7 January 2008, the Claimants appointed Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler,
a national of the Swiss Confederation, as arbitrator. On 31 January 2008, the
Respondent appointed Dr. Ahmed S. El-Kosheri, a national of the Arab Republic of

Egypt, as arbitrator.

In the absence of the Parties’ appointment of a presiding arbitrator, the Claimants,
by letter dated 16 May 2008, requested the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative
Council to appoint the presiding arbitrator pursuant to Article 38 of the ICSID
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 4. On 25 July 2008, the Chairman of the
ICSID Administrative Council, in consultation with the Parties, appointed H.E.
Judge Gilbert Guillaume, a national of the French Republic, as the presiding

arbitrator.

All three arbitrators having accepted their appointments, the Acting Secretary-
General of ICSID by letter dated 8 August 2008 informed the Parties that the
Tribunal had been constituted and confirmed that the proceeding was deemed to
have begun on that day in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules. The Parties were also informed that Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu, of the

ICSID Secretariat, would provisionally serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

In September 2008, Ms. Katia Yannaca-Small, of the ICSID Secretariat, was

designated as the Secretary of the Tribunal, in place of Mr. Onwuamaegbu.

In accordance with the Parties’ agreement, the first session of the Tribunal was held
at the World Bank’s Paris Conference Center on 7 November 2008. The following

individuals were present at the first session:

Members of the Tribunal:

H. E. Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President of the Tribunal
Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Arbitrator

Dr. Ahmed Sadek El-Kosheri, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat:

Ms. Katia Yannaca-Small, Secretary of the Tribunal

For the Claiman

Mr. Oscar M. Garibaldi, Covington & Burling LLP

Mr. Eugene D. Gulland, Covington & Burling LLP

 

Mr. Toni D. Hennike, Law Department, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. Charles A. Beach, Law Department, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. Luis Marulanda del Valle, Law Department, Exxon Mobil
Corporation

For the Respondent:

Mr. George Kahale, III, Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, S.C
Ms. Miriam K. Harwood, Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Peter M. Wolrich, Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Dr. Bernard Mommer, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Ms. Hildegard Rond6n de Sans6, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Dra. Beatrice Sans6 de Ramirez, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Mr. Armando Giraud, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Ms. Moreeliec Peiia, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

The Tribunal determined various procedural issues at the first session, including a

schedule for the submission of written pleadings.

The Respondent’s Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction was filed on 15 January
2009, followed by the Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction
on 16 April 2009, the Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction on 15 June 2009 and the

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction on 17 August 2009.

On 9 September 2009, the Tribunal held a procedural conference with the Parties by

telephone.

The hearing on jurisdiction was held at the offices of the World Bank’s Paris
Conference Center from 23-24 September 2009. The following individuals were

present at the hearing:

Members of the Tribunal:

HE. Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President of the Tribunal
Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Arbitrator

Dr. Ahmed Sadek El-Kosheri, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat:

Ms. Katia Yannaca-Small, Secretary of the Tribunal

10

For the Claimants:

Mr. Oscar Garibaldi, Covington & Burling LLP

Mr. Eugene Gulland, Covington & Burling LLP

Mr. Thomas Cubbage, Covington & Burling LLP

Mr. Miguel Lopez Forastier, Covington & Burling LLP

Mr. David Shuford, Covington & Burling LLP

Ms. Luisa Torres, Covington & Burling LLP

Ms. Mary Hernandez, Covington & Burling LLP

Mr. Andres Barrera, Covington & Burling LLP

Mr. Andrés A. Mezgravis, Travieso Evans Arria Rengel & Paz
Mr. Theodore Frois, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Ms. Toni D. Hennike, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. Charles A. Beach, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. Eugene Silva, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. Alberto Ravell, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mrs. Anna Knull, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. James R. Massey, witness

Professor Allan Brewer-Carias, expert

Professor Christoph Schreuer, expert

For the Respondent:

Mr. George Kahale III, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Mark O'Donoghue, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Miriam Harwood, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Peter Wolrich, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Ms. Gloria Diaz, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Mr. Christopher Grech, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Joaquin Parra, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Dr. Bernard Mommer, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Mr. Armando Giraud, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Ms. Moreeliec Peiia, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

14. Following the hearing, the Members of the Tribunal deliberated by various means of

communication, including in a meeting in Paris on 2 December 2009.

1S.

In its Decision on Jurisdiction dated 10 June 2010, which forms an integral part of

this Award and is attached as Annex 2, the Tribunal unanimously decided:

“(a) that it has jurisdiction over the claims presented by Venezuela
Holdings (Netherlands), Mobil CN Holding and Mobil Venezolana
Holdings (Delaware), Mobil CN and Mobil Venezolana (Bahamas) as
far as:

(i) they are based on alleged breaches of the Agreement on
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments dated 22
October 1991 between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
Republic of Venezuela;

(ii) they relate to disputes born after 21 February 2006 for the Cerro
Negro Project and after 23 November 2006 for the La Ceiba Project
and, in particular, as far as they relate to the dispute concerning the
nationalization measures taken by the Republic of Venezuela;

(b) that it has no jurisdiction under Article 22 of the Venezuelan
Decree with rank and force of law No. 356 on the protection and
promotion of investments of 3 October 1999;

(c) to make the necessary order for the continuation of the procedure
pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41(4); and

(d) to reserve all questions concerning the costs and expenses of the

Tribunal and the costs of the Parties for subsequent determination.” .

In September 2010, Ms. Janet Whittaker, of the ICSID Secretariat, was designated

as the Secretary of the Tribunal, in place of Ms. Yannaca-Small.

On 15 December 2010, the Claimants submitted their Memorial on the Merits.

On 9 February 2011, the Respondent submitted its First Request for the Production
of Documents. On 23 February 2011, the Claimants submitted their Objections to
the Respondent’s First Request for Production of Documents. On 25 February
2011, the Respondent submitted an Application for an Order Requiring the
Production of Documents by the Claimants. On 14 March 2011, Claimants

submitted a Reply to the Respondent’s Application for an Order Requiring the

20.

21.

22.

Production of Documents. The Respondent submitted Observations on Claimants’
Reply to Respondent’s Application for an Order Requiring the Production of
Documents on 14 March 2011. On 17 March 2011, the Claimants submitted
Comments on Respondent’s Observations Regarding its Application for an Order
Requiring the Production of Documents. The Tribunal issued a decision on the
Respondent’s Application for an Order Requiring the Production of Documents on

24 March 2011.

On 15 June 2011, the Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial on the Merits.

On 15 September 2011, the Claimants submitted their Reply on the Merits.

On 15 December 2011, the Respondent submitted its Rejoinder Memorial on the

Merits.

The hearing on the merits was held at the offices of the World Bank’s Paris
Conference Center from 7 to 16 February 2012. The following individuals were

present at the hearing:

Members of the Tribunal:

HE. Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President of the Tribunal
Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, Arbitrator
Dr. Ahmed Sadek El-Kosheri, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat:

Ms. Janet Whittaker, Secretary of the Tribunal
For the Claiman

Mr. Oscar Garibaldi, Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. Eugene Gulland, Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. Thomas Cubbage, Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel, Covington & Burling LLP

 

Mr. Miguel Lépez Forastier, Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. José Arvelo, Covington & Burling LLP

Mr. Nathaniel Morales, Covington & Burling LLP

Mr. Philip Scarborough, Covington & Burling LLP
Mr. Joshua Simmons, Covington & Burling LLP

Mr. Matthew Swinehart, Covington & Burling LLP

Ms. Luisa Torres, Covington & Burling LLP

Mr. Mark Cuevas, Covington & Burling LLP

Ms. Lara Dominguez, Covington & Burling LLP

Mr. William Buck, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Ms. Mary Hernandez, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. Norman Kreutter, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Ms. JoAnne Lee, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. Robert McClure, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. René Mouledoux, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. Eugene Silva, Exxon Mobil Corporation

Mr. Timothy Cutt, witness

Mr. Brian Lawless, witness

Mr. Mark Ward, witness

Mr. Leonard West, witness

Mr. William Cline, Gaffney Cline & Associates

Mr. Neil Earnest, Muse Stancil & Co.

Ms. Sarah Emerson, Energy Security Analysis, Inc.

Mr. R. Dean Graves, Alvarez & Marsal

Mr. Doug Ho, Sproule Unconventional Ltd.

Mr. Keith MacLeod, Sproule Unconventional Ltd.

Mr. Alexis Maniatis, The Brattle Group

Professor Stewart Myers, The Brattle Group

For the Respondent:

Mr. George Kahale III, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Benard Preziosi, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Ms. Miriam Harwood, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Borzu Sabahi, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Fernando Tupa, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Justin Jacinto, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Kabir Duggal, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Ms. Liliana Dealbert, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Ms. Dori Yoldi, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Mr. Fuad Zabiyev, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Dr. Juan Carlos Boué, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. John Kirtley, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Gloria Diaz, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Bianca Granados, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Ms. Elizabeth O’ Connell, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Jorge Alcantar, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Mr. Chris Gregh, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Ms. Noemie Solle, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Mr. Christopher Grech, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Dra. Hildegard Rondén de Sans6, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Dra. Beatrice Sans6, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Dr. Alvaro Silva Calder6n, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Dr. Joaquin Parra, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Dra. Moreeliec Pefia, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Mr. Alvaro Ledo, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Mrs. Irama Mommer, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

H.E. Ambassador Jestis Pérez, Embassy of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela

Mrs. Zulma Pérez, Embassy of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Dr. Bernard Mommer, witness

Mr. José Angel Pereira Ruimwyk, witness

Mr. José Antonio Urbina Herrera, witness

Dr. Vladimir Brailowsky, Economia Aplicada, S.C.

Dr. Daniel Flores, Econ One Research, Inc.

Dr. Anthony Finizza, Econ One Research, Inc.

Ms. Lisa McGuff, Econ One Research, Inc.

Mr. Jestis Rafael Patifio Murillo, ARC Solutions, S.A.

Professor Louis Wells, Harvard Business School

23. On 30 April 2012, the Parties submitted post-hearing memorials.

24. On 14 May 2012, the Parties submitted post-hearing reply memorials.

25. In November 2012, Ms. Alicia Martin Blanco, of the ICSID Secretariat, was
designated as the Secretary of the Tribunal, in place of Ms. Whittaker.

26. The Members of the Tribunal deliberated by various means of communication,
including in meetings in Paris from 20 to 21 November 2012 and on 23 October

2013.
27. The Tribunal declared the proceedings closed on 28 July 2014.

IL. THE FACTS

28. This Chapter summarizes the factual background of this arbitration insofar as is

necessary to understand the issues that are raised in this case.

A. THE PARTIES
1. The Claimants

29. The five Claimants and their investments in Venezuela relevant to the present

dispute are as follows’:

(a) Venezuela Holdings, B.V. (Venezuela Holdings) is a corporation organized
and existing under the laws of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Venezuela
Holdings’ address is Graaf Engelbertlaan 75, Breda, 4837 DS, The
Netherlands. Venezuela Holdings held, through the other Claimants described
below, investments in the Cerro Negro Association and the La Ceiba

Association;

' The term “the Claimants” is used to refer to all of the Claimants collectively, as they remain after the Decision on
Jurisdiction. To avoid repeated references to the “Cerro Negro Claimants” or “La Ceiba Claimants”, the term “the
Claimants” is also used to refer to a subset of the Claimants that have brought a particular claim. Accordingly,
when referring to claims related to the Cerro Negro Project, “the Claimants” should be understood to refer to
Venezuela Holdings, Mobil Cerro Negro, and Mobil Cerro Negro Holdings (the Cerro Negro Claimants). When
referring to claims related to the La Ceiba Project, “Claimants” should be understood to refer to Venezuela
Holdings, Mobil Venezolana, and Mobil Venezolana Holding (the La Ceiba Claimants). A graphical
representation of each of the Claimants and their respective investments is at Mem. M., Annex A. Pursuant to the
Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, Mobil Corporation is no longer a Claimant in this arbitration.

 

 

 

    

30.

31.

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Mobil Cerro Negro Holding, Ltd. (Mobil Cerro Negro Holding) is a
corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Delaware,
United States of America. Mobil Cerro Negro Holding’s address is 2711
Centerville Road, Suite 400, Wilmington, Delaware 19808, United States of
America. Mobil Cerro Negro Holding is a wholly owned subsidiary of

Venezuela Holdings;

Mobil Cerro Negro, Ltd. (Mobil Cerro Negro) is a corporation organized and
existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas. Mobil Cerro
Negro is a wholly owned subsidiary of Mobil Cerro Negro Holding. Mobil
Cerro Negro was a party to the Cerro Negro Association Agreement and

owned a 41 2/3% participation in the Cerro Negro Association;

Mobil Venezolana de Petrdleos Holdings Inc. (Mobil Venezolana Holdings) is
a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Delaware,
United States of America. Mobil Venezolana Holdings’ address is 2711
Centerville Road, Suite 400, Wilmington, Delaware 19808, United States of
America. Mobil Venezolana Holdings is a wholly owned subsidiary of

Venezuela Holdings; and

Mobil Venezolana de Petrdéleos Inc. (Mobil Venezolana) is a corporation
organized and existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas.
Mobil Venezolana’s address is Shirley House, 50 Shirley St., Nassau, New
Providence, Commonwealth of the Bahamas. Mobil Venezolana was a party
to the La Ceiba Association Agreement and owned a 50% participation in the

La Ceiba Project.

The Claimants are represented in this arbitration by Covington & Burling, LLP.

2. The Respondent

The Respondent is the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

32. The Respondent is represented in this arbitration by the Procuraduria General de la

Reptiblica and Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, LLP.

B. SUMMARY OF THE MAIN FACTS

33. The following summary is meant to give a general overview of the present dispute.
It does not include all factual aspects that may be of relevance, particularly as these
emerged from the extensive testimony of witnesses and experts at the hearing on the
merits. Such testimony, insofar as it is relevant, will be discussed in the context of

the Tribunal’s analysis of the disputed issues.

34. The facts set forth in this section are those which are alleged by the Parties and that
the Tribunal has found to be supported by the evidentiary record, as well as facts
alleged by one Party that have not been disputed by the other. Where a fact is in

dispute, the Tribunal has indicated as such.

1. Venezuela’s Oil Reserves

35. Venezuela is one of the world’s leading petroleum producing countries’. The
petroleum industry in Venezuela has always been a strategic sector of vital national

importance to the economy’.

36. In 1975, the oil industry was nationalized through the Organic Law that Reserves to
the State the Industry and Trade of Hydrocarbons (“1975 Nationalization Law”)*.
The Law terminated the oil concessions held by private companies, expropriated

their operating assets and generally reserved oil industry activities to the State*.

37. Article 5 of the 1975 Nationalization Law provided that activities in the Venezuelan
petroleum industry were to be carried out by the State acting through State-owned

entities. A new State-owned entity called Petrdleos de Venezuela, S.A. (“PDVSA”)

> Mem. M. { 24.

> Mem. J. 9.

4 Mem. J. { 10; Mem. M. { 28.
> Mem. M. { 28; Mem. J. { 10.

was created to manage the “reserved” activities’, The Respondent was, and
continues to be, PDVSA’s sole shareholder’. After the passage of the 1975
Nationalization Law, PDVSA and its subsidiaries carried out activities in the
Venezuelan petroleum industry, without the equity participation of private parties,

for the following 15 years’.

38. By the 1980s, the Respondent wished to explore new fields or to look to the
country’s vast reserves of extra-heavy oil’. These reserves were primarily located in
reservoirs in the Orinoco River Basin, in the Orinoco Oil Belt (/a Faja Petrolifera
del Orinoco), which is a vast area covering approximately 55,000 square
kilometres'’. The Orinoco Oil Belt was divided into four areas, from east to west:

Cerro Negro (renamed Carabobo), Hamaca (later renamed Ayacucho), Zuata (later

renamed Junin) and Machete (later renamed Boyacé)''.

39. To meet these goals, the Respondent adopted a series of measures, collectively
known as the Apertura Petrolera (“Oil Opening”), which allowed foreign investors
to participate in the Venezuelan oil industry. One of the objectives of the Oil
Opening was the development of the extra-heavy oil reservoirs in the Orinoco Oil
Belt”.

° Mem. M. { 28.

7 Mem. M. {{ 28.

8 Mem. J. 13.

° Mem. M. 425.

'° Mem. M. {{ 26; Cline Report at p. 5.
'' Mem. M. {{ 26; Cline Report at p. 5.
° Mem. M. (33.

2. The Oil Opening

40. The Oil Opening was implemented on the basis of Article 5 of the Nationalization
Law, which authorized PDVSA to enter into two types of agreements with private

companies":

(i) operating services agreements — which required private companies to provide

specified services to PDVSA in exchange for a fee'*; and

(ii) association agreements — which were contractual joint ventures that PDVSA
could form with private companies for a specified term in “special cases

S15

[...] convenient to the public interest’ These agreements required specific

authorization by the Venezuelan Congress"*.

Al. To encourage investment, the Respondent introduced economic incentives. These

included:
(i) Reduction in the income tax rate

42. In August 1991, the Respondent amended the Income Tax Law to provide that
income arising from new exploitation and refinement of heavy and extra-heavy
crude oil under association agreements would be subject to the general corporate
rate (then 30%) instead of the rate applicable to other oil activities (then 67.7%)".
In 1993, the Respondent enacted Decree No. 188 on Amendment to the Income Tax
Law (Decreto de Reforma de la Ley de Impuesto sobre la Renta) expressly
providing that participants in “vertically integrated projects related to the
exploitation, refining, industrialization, emulsification, transport and

commercialization of extra-heavy crude oil” would be subject to the general

'S Mem. M. { 34; Bond Offering Memorandum, Cerro Negro Finance Ltd. (11 June 1998) at F-6 (Ex. R-26)
(“Offering Memorandum”); see also Mem. J. at (12-15.

'} Offering Memorandum at F-6 (Ex. R-26).

'S 1975 Nationalization Law, Article 5 (Ex. C-214).
'° Ibid.

Mem. M. 49.

20

corporate rate of 30%, instead of the 67.7% rate otherwise applicable to oil

activities’. This general corporate rate was later raised to 34%”.
(ii) Reduction in the Applicable Royalty

43. The 1943 Hydrocarbons Law then in force empowered the Respondent to reduce the

“exploitation tax” (i.e., the royalty payable) in some circumstances. It provides that:

“All concessionaires referred to in Article 39 shall pay (...)

1. — The exploitation tax, which will be equal to 16 2/3 percent of the
crude oil extracted, measured in the production field in the facilities
where the inspection is carried out (...)

Sole Paragraph- For the purpose of extending the economic
exploitation of certain concessions, the Federal Executive is hereby
authorized to reduce the exploitation tax referred to in this

subparagraph in those cases in which it is demonstrated to its

that the i cost, i tax amounts,
has reached the limit which does not permit commercial exploitation.
The Federal Executive may also increase again the reduced
exploitation tax until restoring it to its original amount, when, in its

judgment, the causes which gave rise to the reduction have changed*”.

44. Exercising the discretion conferred on it by this provision, the Respondent, through
the La Ceiba Royalty Reduction Agreement, provided that the applicable royalty
would be 16 2/3% during early production and would be reduced, according to a
sliding scale, once commercial production was achieved. The sliding scale linked
the royalty rate (ranging from 1% to 16 2/3%), to the profitability of the project”.

Similarly, under the Cerro Negro Royalty Reduction Agreement, the royalty rate

'8 Mem. M. 150. See also 1993 Law on Partial Amendment to the Income Tax Law (Ley de Reforma Parcial de la
Ley de Impuesto sobre la Renta) (26 August 1993), Article 1 (Ex. C-58).

'° Mem. M. 50. See also Decree No. 188 on Amendment to the Income Tax Law (Decreto de Reforma de la Ley
de Impuesto sobre la Renta) (25 May 1994) (Ex. C-59).

?° 1943 Hydrocarbons Law, Article 41(1) and Sole Paragraph (Ex. Ex. R-30).
2! Mem. M. 54.

21

was set at 16 2/3% during the early production phase of the Project”. Upon
achieving commercial production, the rate would be reduced to one percent until
such time as the accumulated gross income from the Project exceeded three times
the total initial investment, but in no event would the reduction period exceed nine
years from the beginning of commercial production. On expiry of the reduction, the

royalty rate would revert to 16 2/3%.

3. Mobil Investment

45. In September 1990, PDVSA approached Mobil Corporation” to “hear out and react
to” PDVSA’s “new policy of international cooperation being considered to foster

s24

expansion”~ Eventually, after studies, discussions and negotiations*, Mobil
participated in two projects that the Respondent offered during the Oil Opening: (i)
the Cerro Negro Project — a joint venture to exploit extra-heavy crude in the Orinoco
Oil Belt”; and (ii) the La Ceiba Project — a joint venture to explore and exploit, on a
shared-risk-and-profit basis, an area with light and medium crude potential adjacent

to Lake Maracaibo”.

4. Cerro Negro Investment

(a) Context of the Cerro Negro Investment

46. In December 1991, Mobil and Lagoven S.A. (“Lagoven” or “PDVSA P&G”)*

agreed to conduct a joint study to determine the feasibility of producing,

2? Mem. M. {[ 57.

°3 Mobil Corporation is a corporation organized and existing under the law of the State of Delaware, United States
of America. It owns all of the equity of Operadora Cerro Negro, S.A. and Agencia Operadora La Ceiba. Mobil
Corporation is a wholly owned subsidiary of Exxon Mobil Corporation. Exxon Corporation and Mobil
Corporation merged on 30 November 1999 to form the Exxon Mobil Corporation.

4 Mem. M. (44.
°5 Mem. M. ¥ 4.
6 Cerro Negro Association Agreement (Ex. C-68).

?7 La Ceiba Association Agreement (Ex. C-33).

 

°8 Along with Corpoven and Maraven, Lagoven was one of the three main operating subsidiaries of PDVSA until |
January 1998. On 1 January 1998, as part of a corporate reorganization, Lagoven and Maraven were merged into
Corpoven. Corpoven was then renamed PDVSA Petréleo y Gas, S.A.

22

47.

48.

* RFA { 60.
2° RFA 64.

transporting, upgrading and marketing extra-heavy crude oil from the Orinoco Oil
Belt”. On 20 December 1994, Lagoven and Mobil signed a Letter of Intent
agreeing to conduct a joint project study to determine the optimum technical,
marketing, economic, financial, legal and fiscal conditions required to develop an

extra-heavy oil project”.

On 17 September 1996, Lagoven, Mobil and Mobil Produccién e Industrializacién
de Venezuela, Inc. (“Mobil PIV”)*! signed a non-binding Heads of Agreement

(“First Heads of Agreement”)”

concerning the proposed terms and conditions of: (i)
the Cerro Negro synthetic crude oil joint venture (“Cerro Negro Association”); and
(ii) a second joint venture that would own and operate the Chalmette Refinery in
Louisiana, which would buy synthetic crude oil from the Cerro Negro Association
and refine it using specially designated facilities*. Lagoven and Mobil would have

equal equity participation in each joint venture™.

The First Heads of Agreement provided that Lagoven would compensate Mobil PIV
in the event that certain governmental actions resulted in a “Material Adverse

Impact”.

Specific limits were placed on the circumstances under which
compensation would be granted and the extent of such compensation, as discussed

further below**.

5! Mobil PIV is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Delaware, United States of

America.

Mobil PIV acquired a 41 2/3% interest in the Cerro Negro Association when the association was

 

formed on 28 October 1997. At that time, Mobil PIV was a wholly owned subsidiary of Mobil Corporation.
Mobil PIV assigned its interest in the Association Agreement to Mobil Cerro Negro on 29 October 1997.

* Heads of Agreement among Lagoven, S.A., Mobil Oil Corporation and Mobil Produccién e Industrializacién de
Venezuela dated 17 September 1996 (hereinafter “First Heads of Agreement”) (Ex. C-238).

3 RFA 70.
* Ibid.

*C-Mem. M. (21.
3° Mem. J. 4 24.

23

49. On 1 January 1997, Lagoven, Mobil and Veba Oel*’ signed a Second Heads of
Agreement, which superseded certain parts of First Heads of Agreement. Under the
Second Heads of Agreement, Lagoven and Mobil PIV would each own a 41 2/3%
interest in the synthetic crude oil joint venture, and Veba Orinoco* would own the

remaining 16 2/3% interest®.

50. Negotiations progressed between the Parties and proved successful. In order to
proceed further, the authorization of the Venezuelan Congress was required
pursuant to Article 5 of the 1975 Nationalization Law. Consequently, on 17 March
1997, the Ministry of Energy and Mines (“MEM”) submitted to the Venezuelan
Congress, the proposed Framework of Conditions for the Cerro Negro Association

(Marco de Condiciones)".

51. In the Framework of Conditions for the Cerro Negro Association, the Venezuelan
Congress established the general terms of, and conditions for, the Cerro Negro
Association and provided for undertakings by the Respondent with respect to certain

tights accorded to the participants in the association as follows*:

(1) The Thirteenth Condition provided that any cut in production required by
Venezuela’s OPEC obligations would be applied proportionately, as

follows*:

57 Veba Oel is an oil and gas exploration and production company based in Germany. Veba Oel was acquired by BP

Amoco in 2002.

 

* Veba Oel Venezuela Orinoco, GmbH (“Veba Orinoco”) is
Negro Association. Veba Orinoco held a 16 2/3% interest.

RFA 474.

 

subsidiary of Veba Oel and participant in the Cerro

*° On 20 January 2005, President Chavez changed the name of the Ministry of Energy and Mines to Ministry of
Energy and Petroleum. On 8 January 2007, President Chavez changed the name again to Ministry of the People’s
Power for Energy and Petroleum. Ministry of Energy is a reference to the Ministry of Energy and Mines, the
Ministry of Energy and Petroleum and/or the Ministry of the People’s Power for Energy and Petroleum. Mem. M.
(31, fin. 35.

+! Mem. M. { 59; Framework of Conditions for the Cerro Negro Project (Ex. C-21).
© Mem. M. (60.
4 Mem. M. { 61.

24

“Tf THE PARTIES are required to reduce their production as a result of

the international commitments of the Republic of Venezuela, such

reduction shall not exceed the reduction percentage generally

applicable to the national oil industry as a whole. This percentage shall

be calculated based on the available production capacity”.

(2) The Fifteenth Condition provided that the participants in the Cerro Negro
Project would be subject to the income tax rates applicable to companies in
general (as distinguished from the higher rates applicable to other companies

in the oil sector), as follows:

“[The activities to be carried out by the Parties under the Association
Agreement] shall not be subject to payment of Municipal Taxes
(Industry and Commerce Excise) or State taxes; furthermore, pursuant
to the second paragraph of article 9 of the Income Tax Law in force,
THE PARTIES and each of the Entities shall pay taxes under the
ordinary regime established in said law for companies and assimilated
entities, for any income obtained in connection with the activities of

THE PARTIES (including the Development Production)*””.

(3) The Eighteenth Condition reserved the rights of Venezuela in the following

terms**:

“The Association Agreement, and all activities and operations
conducted under it, shall not impose any obligation on the Republic of
Venezuela nor shall they restrict its sovereign powers, the exercise of
which shall not give rise to any claim, regardless of the nature or

characteristics of the claim by other states or foreign powers*””.

+ Framework of Conditions for the Cerro Negro Project, Thirteenth Condition (Ex. C-21).

* Framework of Conditions for the Cerro Negro Association, Fifteenth Condition (Ex. C-21).
4 Reply Mem. J. 6; C-Mem. M. { 14.

47 C_Mem. M. 14.

25

(4) The Twentieth Condition provided compensation for governmental action
having an adverse effect and expressly referred to the limitation of liability,

as follows*:

“The Association Agreement shall include provisions allowing the
renegotiation of the Agreement as necessary to compensate any Party
other than LAGOVEN, on equitable terms, for adverse and significant
economic consequences arising from the adoption of decisions made
by governmental authorities, or changes in legislation, that cause a
discriminatory treatment of THE ASSOCIATION, any entity or THE
PARTIES in their capacity as participants in THE ASSOCIATION.
However, it shall not be considered that a Party has suffered an adverse
and significant economic consequence as a result of any of said
decisions or changes in legislation, at any time when the Party is
receiving income from THE ASSOCIATION equal to a price of crude
oil above a maximum price that shall be specified in the Association

Agreement®”.

52. The Venezuelan Congress approved the proposed Framework of Conditions for the

Cerro Negro Association on 24 April 1997°.

(b) Elements of the Cerro Negro Investment

53. The principal elements of the Cerro Negro investment were*': (i) the execution of
the Cerro Negro Association Agreement’, the Reservation and Dedication
Agreement (Convenio de Reserva y Dedicacién de Area Designada)® and the Cerro

Negro Royalty Reduction Agreement™; (ii) the creation of Petrolera Cerro Negro to

“CMem. M. {fff 19-20.
* CMem. M. { 19.
RFA (81

*' REA { 86.

* Cerro Negro Association Agreement (Ex. C-68).

  

®S Reservation and Dedication Agreement Among Lagoven, S.A., Lagoven Cerro Negro, S.A., Mobil Produccién e
Industrializacién de Venezuela Inc. and Veba Oel Venezuela Orinoco GmBH, 28 October 1997 (Ex. C-248).

* Cerro Negro Royalty Reduction Agreement (Ex. C-336).

manage the project (Convenio de Operaciones Cerro Negro)*; and (iii) the
establishment of a joint venture between Mobil and PDVSA to own and operate the
Chalmette refinery (Convenio Modificado y Replanteado de Constitucién de
Sociedad de Responsabilidad Limitada )*°.

(c) Cerro Negro Association Agreement, Reservation and Dedication Agreement and
Cerro Negro Royalty Reduction Agreement

54. In June 1997, the proposed Cerro Negro Association Agreement was submitted to

the Venezuelan Congress*’. On 2 October 1997, the Congress determined that the

terms and conditions of the Cerro Negro Association Agreement and the Annexes

and Exhibits to the agreement complied with the Framework of Conditions for the

Cerro Negro Association and formally authorized the execution of those

instruments*.

55. On 28 October 1997, Lagoven Cerro Negro, S.A (“PDVSA-CN”)*, Veba Orinoco
and Mobil PIV entered into the Cerro Negro Association Agreement®. On the same
day, the Parties entered into the Reservation and Dedication Agreement. Under
the provisions thereof, PDVSA P&G conferred exclusive rights to develop and
exploit the oil reserves in a designated area of the Cerro Negro region upon

PDVSA-CN, Mobil Cerro Negro and Veba Orinoco”.

*5 Cerro Negro Association Agreement, Clause IV and Annex B (Ex. C-68). Cerro Negro Operating Agreement
(Ex. C-26).

°° Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of Chalmette Refining, L.L.C., 28 October 1997
(Ex. C-25).

>’ Mem. M. { 65; RFA 83.
* Ibid.

*° Lagoven Cerro Negro, S.A. is a subsidiary of Lagoven and a participant in the Cerro Negro Association. Lagoven
Cerro Negro, S.A. acquired a 41 2/3% interest in the Cerro Negro Association when the association was formed in
October 1997. On 11 May 1998, Lagoven Cerro Negro, S.A. changed its name to PDVSA Cerro Negro, S.A.
(PDVSA-CN).

© Mem. M. { 66.
©! Mem. M. (74.
© Ibid.

56. On 29 October 1997, Mobil PIV assigned its rights in the Cerro Negro Association
Agreement® to Mobil Cerro Negro“. Until the expropriation described below®, the
percentage interests of the Parties in the Cerro Negro Association were as follows:
PDVSA-CN -— 41 2/3%; Mobil Cerro Negro — 41 2/3%; and Veba Orinoco — 16
213%".

57. The Cerro Negro Association Agreement established an unincorporated joint
venture for a term of thirty-five years starting from 30 June 2000. The project
contemplated by the Cerro Negro Association Agreement — the Cerro Negro Project
— was a set of activities that included® (i) exploiting and developing the extra-heavy
crude oil fields in the Cerro Negro area; (ii) constructing and operating an upgrader
in the Jose Industrial Complex on the Venezuelan coast with the capacity to upgrade
approximately 120,000 barrels per day of extra-heavy crude oil to a level of 16.5°
API; (iii) laying and operating pipelines between the Cerro Negro area and the Jose
Industrial Complex (approximately 315 km); and (iv) selling the resulting products
of Mobil Cerro Negro and PDVSA-CN to Chalmette Refining®. The Cerro Negro
Association Agreement authorized the parties to expand the capacity of the Project
to produce extra-heavy crude as well as its capacity to upgrade that crude into
synthetic crude oil. An expansion project could be undertaken by unanimous
agreement of the participants or, alternatively, under certain conditions, by fewer

70

than all of the participants

° Mem. M. { 66.

Mobil Cerro Negro is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas.
Mobil Cerro Negro is a wholly owned subsidiary of Mobil Cerro Negro Holding. Until the expropriation ordered
by Decree-Law 5200, Mobil Cerro Negro held a 41 2/3% interest in the Cerro Negro Association.

© Mem. M. { 67.
° Ibid.
° Ibid.
° Mem. M. { 68.

© Chalmette Refining LLC is the limited liability company formed by PDV Chalmette, Inc., Mobil and Mobil Pipe
Line Company on 28 October 1997. Chalmette Refining is equally owned by PDVSA and Mobil through their
respective subsidiaries and it owns and operates the Chalmette Refinery in Louisiana.

Mem. M. 77.

 

 

28

58.

59.

The Cerro Negro Association Agreement granted the Parties an undivided interest in
the assets and liabilities of the venture in proportion to their respective interests”.
Title to the oil produced by the Cerro Negro Project vested in the participants at the
wellhead, also in proportion to their respective interests”. Each party was
separately responsible for paying its share of royalties and taxes owed to the
Respondent”. Further, the Cerro Negro Association Agreement provided that the
agreement “... in no event impose[d] any obligation on the Republic of Venezuela or

limit[ed] the exercise of its sovereign rights”™.

Similarly to the previous agreements, the First Heads of Agreement and the
Framework of Conditions for the Cerro Negro Association both contemplated
compensation to Mobil Cerro Negro in certain circumstances. This compensation
structure was also contained in the Cerro Negro Association Agreement”. Clause
15 provided that PDVSA-CN would compensate Mobil Cerro Negro and Veba
Orinoco for the economic consequences of governmental measures defined as

“Discriminatory Measures””.

The relevant compensation provisions of the Cerro
Negro Association Agreement began with the definition of the term “Discriminatory

Measure” as follows”:

““Discriminatory Measure” shall mean any change in (or any change in
the interpretation or application of) Venezuelan law, or any
Governmental Measure, which is unjust and is applicable to the Project
or any Foreign Party in its capacity as a participant in the Project and is
not generally applied to public or private entities engaged in Extra-

heavy crude upgrading projects in the Republic of Venezuela; or, with

™ Mem. M. { 69.

” Ibid.
" Tbid.

™ Cerro Negro Association Agreement, { 18.4 (Ex. C-68).
5 C-Mem. M. 22.

7 See Cerro Negro Association Agreement, Article I, Definition of “Discriminatory Measures”, Clause 15 and
Annex G, Accounting Procedures (Ex. C-68); C-Mem. M. { 22.

7 See Cerro Negro Association Agreement, Article I, Definition of “Discriminatory Measures” (Ex. C-68), C-Mem.

M. 22.

29

respect to tax rates, foreign exchange controls or the expropriation or
seizure [“ocupacién”] of assets of the Project or of a Foreign Party’s
interests in the Project, provided that such change in (or any change in
the interpretation or application of) Venezuelan law, or any
Governmental Measure is not generally applicable to Companies in the
Republic of Venezuela (including the imposition of income tax on the
Project or on any Foreign Party in its capacity as a participant in the
Project, at a rate that does not correspond with what is set forth in the
last sentence of the Fifteenth Condition); or with respect to municipal
taxes (license to perform industrial and commercial activities), the
imposition of municipal taxes on the Foreign Parties in their capacity
as participants in the Association notwithstanding the provision in the
Fifteenth Condition, only if the aggregate burden of the municipal
taxes on the affected Foreign Party’s gross revenue from the Project
exceeds by four percent (4%) the affected Foreign Party’s gross
revenue from the Project in the Fiscal Year at issue, in which event the
amount of municipal taxes that exceeds such four percent (4%) shall be
a discriminatory measure. A measure that falls within the definition of
Discriminatory Measure shall be deemed unjust if it results in a

Material Adverse Impact.”

60. Clause 15 of the Cerro Negro Association Agreement then provided substantive
provisions for compensation for Discriminatory Measures. These provisions set
forth the requirements for obtaining compensation, such as giving immediate notice
to PDVSA-CN upon the occurrence of an event that might lead to a “Material
Adverse Impact” (as defined in the Agreement), giving another notice immediately
to PDVSA-CN upon determination by the party seeking compensation that it
actually had suffered a “Material Adverse Impact”, and taking all steps to “reverse
or obtain relief from” the measure in question’. Pursuant to this provision, Mobil
Cerro Negro Ltd. initiated arbitration proceedings at the ICC International Court of

Arbitration (see below).

78 C-Mem. M. (24.

30

6l. Clause 15 also established the limitation of liability referred to in the Twentieth
Condition of the Framework Conditions for the Cerro Negro Association.

Specifically, Clause 15.2 provided as follows”:

“15.2 Limitation on Lagoven CN’s Obligation. (a) ... after the first
period of six (6) consecutive months during which the Price of Brent
Crude exceeds the Base Price, Lagoven CN shall not have the
obligation to compensate any Foreign Party for Discriminatory
Measures with respect to any Fiscal Year in which the average Price of
Brent Crude Oil exceeds Base Price, and such Foreign Party receives a
Net Cash Flow, after taking into account the effect of the
Discriminatory Measure, commensurate with a reference price for the
Production produced by the Parties which bears at least a reasonable
relationship, adjusted for quality and transportation differences, to the

Reference Cash Flow for such Fiscal Year.”

62. On 29 May 1998, the MEM and PDVSA P&G executed a Royalty Reduction
Agreement for the Orinoco Oil Belt projects (“Cerro Negro Royalty Reduction
Agreement”). The agreement provided for a royalty reduction for Orinoco Oil Belt
projects in accordance with the following formula: the applicable royalty would be
16 2/3% (the maximum allowed under the then existing law) during the early
production or development phase of the project. Upon achieving commercial
production (defined under the Cerro Negro Association Agreement as the upgrader
completion date), the royalty would be reduced to 1% until such time as the
accumulated gross income from the project exceeded three times the total
investment (from the start of the project until the beginning of commercial

production), but in no event would the reduction period exceed nine years from the

” Cerro Negro Association Agreement, Articles 15.1(a)-(c), 15.2(a) (Ex. C-68); C-Mem. M. { 23.

*° Mem. M. { 56; Agreement between the Venezuelan Ministry of Energy and Mines and PDVSA Petréleo y Gas,
S.A. to calculate the Royalty under Article 41 of the Hydrocarbons Law (Ex. C-336).

beginning of commercial production’'. This was reaffirmed by the Royalty

Procedures Agreement™.

63. The Cerro Negro Royalty Reduction Agreement provided that companies
participating in association agreements (such as Mobil Cerro Negro), by expressing
their consent in writing to the MEM, could avail themselves of the Cerro Negro
Royalty Reduction Agreement and become Parties to it*’. Mobil Cerro Negro did so

by letter dated 5 November 1998™.

(d) Creation of Petrolera Cerro Negro

64. The Cerro Negro Association Agreement mandated the creation of a company,
Petrolera Cerro Negro, S.A. (“Petrolera Cerro Negro’), to direct, coordinate and
supervise the activities of the Cerro Negro Project®. Parties to the Cerro Negro
Association Agreement held shares in Petrolera Cerro Negro in proportion to their

respective interests in the Cerro Negro Project**.

65. The Cerro Negro Association Agreement charged Petrolera Cerro Negro with
appointing a technical operator to run the Cerro Negro Project*’. On 1 December
1997, Petrolera Cerro Negro, PDVSA-CN, Mobil Cerro Negro and Veba Orinoco
signed an Operating Agreement with Operadora Cerro Negro, S.A. (“Operadora
Cerro Negro”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Mobil Corporation. Operadora
Cerro Negro became the operator of the Cerro Negro Project, acting as an agent of

the parties to the Cerro Negro Project®.

5! Mem. M. 57.
© Infra, 1 89.

83 Mem. M. 56.
* Ibid.

85 Mem. M. 78.
*© Ibid.

57 Mem. M. 79.
*8 Ibid.

® Ibid.

66.

67.

68.

69.

(e) Chalmette Refining

The Cerro Negro Project was a vertically integrated project”. To refine the
synthetic crude oil and other products of the Cerro Negro Project, Mobil and
PDVSA established a related downstream joint venture”. Chalmette Refining LLC
(“Chalmette Refining”) was created to own and operate the Chalmette Refinery”,
which was especially modified to refine diluted crude oil and synthetic crude oil

from the Cerro Negro Project into marketable products”.

On 1 November 1997, Mobil Cerro Negro and PDVSA-CN entered into the
Chalmette Offtake Agreement with Chalmette Refining™. Under that agreement,
Chalmette Refining was required to buy PDVSA-CN’s and Mobil Cerro Negro’s
shares of the diluted crude oil and synthetic crude oil produced by the Cerro Negro
Project for the life of the Cerro Negro venture’. On 18 June 1998, Mobil Cerro
Negro, PDVSA-CN, Mobil Sales & Supply Corporation and the Bank of New York
signed the Offtake Support Agreement”. Under the Offtake Support Agreement,
Mobil Sales & Supply Corporation, a Mobil subsidiary, was required to lift and
purchase any PDVSA-CN and Mobil Cerro Negro synthetic crude oil that was not

accepted by Chalmette Refining”.

Commercial production at the Cerro Negro project was achieved in August 2001".

In sum, the investment in Cerro Negro involved the construction, operation and

management of oil-production and upgrading facilities, and the establishment of a

°° Mem. M. { 81.

* Ibid.

© Mem. M. 82.

Ibid.

* Mem. M. (83.

95 As

 

iation Oil Supply Agreement between Mobil Cerro Negro, Ltd., Lagoven Cerro Negro, S.A. and Chalmette

Refining, L.L.C., Article Il and Annexes (Ex. C-250).
°° Mem. M. 85.

* Ibid.

°8 Mem. M. 18.

joint venture for the purchase of shares of production”. According to the Claimants,
from 1997 until June 2007, the three participants invested over U.S. $3.1 billion in

the Cerro Negro Project, of which Mobil allegedly invested over U.S.$1.3 billion’.

5. La Ceiba Investment

70. The second project in which Mobil participated in Venezuela was the La Ceiba
Project — a joint venture to explore and exploit an area with light and medium crude

oil potential’.

(a) Context of the La Ceiba Investment

71. In December 1994, the Respondent submitted to the Venezuelan Congress a
proposed Framework of Conditions for At-Risk-and-Shared-Profits Exploration

102

Agreements’. On 4 July 1995, the Venezuelan Congress approved the proposal’.

72. The Framework of Conditions for At-Risk-and-Shared-Profits Exploration
Agreements authorized the MEM to determine the geographic areas to be assigned
to a subsidiary of PDVSA for conducting exploration and exploitation activities.
The relevant PDVSA subsidiary, in turn, was authorized to select, through a
competitive bidding process, the private companies with which it would form

association agreements to explore the designated areas".

°° Mem. M. (58.
100 Mem. M. {[ 73.
101 RFA 59.

102 Mem. M. { 91.
"3 Thid.

‘4 Mem. M. 93.
"5 Thid.

73. One of the geographic areas designated for competitive bidding was La Ceiba, an

106

onshore field adjacent to Lake Maracaibo The La Ceiba area comprised 15

blocks totaling approximately 1,800 square kilometers’.

74. The international tender process contemplated by the Framework of Conditions for
At-Risk-and-Shared-Profits Exploration Agreements (also known as the Exploration
Bidding Round), took place between July 1995 and January 1996’. On 5
December 1995, Corporacién Venezolana del Petréleo, S.A. (“CVP”)'® and the
MEM entered into a Royalty Reduction Agreement for At-Risk-and-Shared-Profits
Exploration Projects (the “La Ceiba Royalty Reduction Agreement”)'’. Under that
agreement, the royalty would be 16 2/3% during early production and would be

reduced, according to a sliding scale, once commercial production was achieved".

75. Mobil satisfied the financial and technical requirements imposed by the tender rules
and was given the highest pre-qualification status and the right to participate in the
tender process alone or in a consortium'. Mobil Venezolana formed a consortium
with Veba Oel Venezuela Exploration GmbH (“Veba La Ceiba’) and Nippon Oil
Exploration (Venezuela), Inc. (“Nippon La Ceiba”) (collectively, “the Mobil
Consortium”) to bid for the La Ceiba area''*. Mobil Venezolana held a 50% interest
in the Mobil Consortium, Veba La Ceiba held a 30% interest, and Nippon La Ceiba

held the remaining 20% interest'"*.

' Mem. M. { 94.

'" Ibid.

108 Mem. M. {[ 95.

10 4 PDVSA subsidiary company.

"0 Mem. M. 4 54; La Ceiba Royalty Reduction Agreement (Ex. C-32).
‘Mem. M. 454.

'? Mem. M. { 96.

"3 Thid.

"4 Mem. M. 1 96, fn. 192.

76. On 16 January 1996, the Respondent awarded the La Ceiba area to the Mobil
Consortium'*. On 19 June 1996, the Venezuelan Congress determined that the La
Ceiba Association Agreement complied with the terms of the Framework of
Conditions for At-Risk-and-Shared-Profits Association Agreements and authorized

execution of the La Ceiba Association Agreement'’*.

(b) Elements of the La Ceiba Investment

77. On 10 July 1996, CVP, Mobil Venezolana, Veba La Ceiba and Nippon La Ceiba
entered into the La Ceiba Association Agreement to explore, develop and exploit oil
fields in the La Ceiba area'’’. The La Ceiba Association Agreement expressly
provided that it imposed no limitations on the sovereign rights of the Respondent'’*.
The Claimants also accepted the benefits conferred by the La Ceiba Royalty
Reduction Agreement by becoming a party to the La Ceiba Association

Agreement’.

78. Petro-Canada International GmbH (Petro-Canada) later acquired the interests of
Veba La Ceiba and Nippon La Ceiba in the venture’. At the time of the
expropriation discussed below, Mobil Venezolana and Petro-Canada were the sole

private investors having interests in the La Ceiba Project’”’.

79. The La Ceiba Association Agreement provided for the creation of a management
company, Administradora La Ceiba, to direct, coordinate and supervise the
Project’*. CVP held a 35% interest in Administradora La Ceiba and Mobil

Venezolana and Petro-Canada each held a 32.5% interest'*. The La Ceiba

"5 Mem. M. 1 99.
"6 Ibid.

"7 Mem. M. { 100.
"8 C.Mem. M. 147.
"Mem. M. { 100.
"°° Ibid.

"1 Mem. M. { 100.
22 Mem. M. { 101.
"3 Thid.

80.

81.

82.

4 Thid.
15 Mem. M. {|
°° Thid.
7 Mem. M.
28 Thid.

Association Agreement also established a Control Committee, which was
responsible for “fundamental decisions of national interest to the Venezuelan State

related to the performance” of the agreement’.

In the event of an oil discovery, the private investors were entitled to submit an
Evaluation Plan for assessment of the commercial potential of the discovery to

Administradora La Ceiba and the Control Committee’.

Upon a Declaration of
Commerciality (ie., the notification of an intention to prepare and submit a
Development Plan for approval), Mobil Venezolana and Petro-Canada could submit
a Development Plan to Administradora La Ceiba and the Control Committee for

approval'°.

On 20 August 1996, Agencia Operadora La Ceiba, C.A. (“Operadora La Ceiba”, a
wholly-owned subsidiary of Mobil), Administradora La Ceiba, CVP, Mobil
Venezolana, Veba La Ceiba and Nippon La Ceiba entered into the La Ceiba
Operating Agreement’. Under that agreement, all activities related to the
exploration, development and exploitation of the fields in the La Ceiba area were

entrusted to Operadora La Ceiba’.

Based on those exploration activities, on 11 December 2001, Operadora La Ceiba
submitted an Evaluation Plan to Administradora La Ceiba and the Control
129

Committee Administradora La Ceiba and the Control Committee approved the

Evaluation Plan soon after it was submitted'®.

103.

29 Mem. M. {1 107; La Ceiba Area Venezuela Evaluation Plan submitted by Operadora La Ceiba (“La Ceiba
Evaluation Plan”) (Ex. C-263).

130 Mem. M.

107.

83. On 30 September 2005, the La Ceiba investors filed a Declaration of Commerciality
for Blocks 1, 3, 4 and 7 of the La Ceiba area'*'. On 12 December 2005, Operadora
La Ceiba, acting on behalf of Mobil Venezolana and Petro-Canada, submitted to
Administradora La Ceiba a detailed Development Plan, which set forth the technical
and financial blueprint for exploiting commercial discoveries in the La Ceiba area’.
The Development Plan called for an investment of U.S.$1.347 billion to produce up

133

to 50,000 barrels of oil per day for an estimated field life of 27 years’.

84. In the Development Plan, Mobil Venezolana and Petro-Canada expressed their joint

intent to proceed to exploit the discoveries.

Each of them also agreed to reduce,
pro rata, its 50% interest in the project once CVP declared its intent to participate in

the consortium and designated its percentage interest, up to a limit of 35%'*.

85. The Development Plan was automatically approved by Administradora La Ceiba on
27 January 2007, under the terms of the La Ceiba Association Agreement’. The
Development Plan should then have been submitted to the Control Committee for
final approval. However, as asserted by the Claimant, “the Respondent frustrated

that step and soon thereafter expropriated the Claimants’ interests in the Project”.

6. Origin of the Present Dispute

86. The Claimants assert that the alleged wrongful measures at issue in the present case
were all taken after Mr. Hugo Chavez Frias was elected President of Venezuela in

December 1998'*. In approximate chronological order, the alleged adverse

8! Mem. M. { 109.
'? Mem. M. { 109.
133 Mem. M. { 110.
4 Mem. M. { 111.
"5 Thid.

186 Mem. M. J 113. The La Ceiba Association Agreement provides that “any proposal as to which no decision is
made within [60 days] shall be deemed approved”. See La Ceiba Association Agreement (Ex. C-33) 5.4.

57 Mem. M. { 113.
158 Mem. M. J 122. Mr. Chavez became President of Venezuela in February 1999.

 

87.

measures taken by the Respondent for which the Claimant seeks compensation
include the following”:

The unilateral termination of the Cerro Negro Royalty Reduction Agreement
and the Cerro Negro Royalty Procedures Agreement;

The further increase in the royalty rate through the imposition of the
extraction tax;

The increase in the income tax rate applicable to participants in Orinoco Oil
Belt ventures;

The production and export curtailments imposed on the Cerro Negro Project;
and

The direct expropriation of Mobil Cerro Negro’s and Mobil Venezolana’s
entire interests in the activities of the Cerro Negro Joint Venture and the La

Ceiba Joint Venture, as well as the related assets.

The facts relevant to these alleged wrongful measures are discussed below.

(a) Increase in the Royalty Rate in 2004 and 2005

88.

89.

As indicated above, a reduced royalty rate was applicable to the Cerro Negro
Investment and the La Ceiba Investment. On 13 November 2001, President Chavez
(exercising delegated legislative powers) issued the Organic Law of Hydrocarbons,
replacing the 1975 Nationalization Law and the 1943 Hydrocarbons Law'“’. Under
the new law, production activities were reserved to the State, and private Parties
would be authorized to participate in those activities only through mixed enterprises
M41

in which the State owned more than 50% of the shares Any production from a

mixed enterprise would be subject to a royalty of 30% and would have to be sold to

PDVSA or another State-owned company“.

According to the Claimants, both before and after the adoption of the 2001 Organic

Law of Hydrocarbons, President Chavez’s administration reaffirmed its assurances

'° Mem. M. ¥ 124.
“Mem. M. {{ 127; 2001 Organic Law of Hydrocarbons (Ley Organica de Hidrocarburos) (Ex. C-93).
‘41 Mem. M. { 127.

' Ibid.

90.

91.

that pre-existing contracts (such as the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Association
Agreements) would be respected". Further, on 16 January 2002, the MEM and
Operadora Cerro Negro (on behalf of the Cerro Negro Project participants) signed
an Agreement on Procedures for the Payment of the Exploitation Tax (Royalty) of
the Extra-Heavy Crude Produced and the Sulphur Extracted by Operadora Cerro
Negro, S.A. (“Royalty Procedures Agreement”)'*. Although the 2001 Organic Law
of Hydrocarbons (which provided for a royalty rate of 30%) was already in effect,
the Royalty Procedures Agreement reaffirmed that the royalty for participants in the
Cerro Negro Project would remain at the reduced rate of 1% in accordance with the
formula set forth in the Cerro Negro Royalty Reduction Agreement and that it

would not exceed 16 2/3% during the lifetime of the Project'*.

However, on 19 October 2004, PDVSA served notice on Mr. Mark Ward, President
of ExxonMobil de Venezuela S.A. (“ExxonMobil de Venezuela”)'“* that, by order of
President Chavez, the MEM was “leaving without effect” the 1% royalty rate that
had been guaranteed by the Cerro Negro Royalty Reduction Agreement’. A
royalty rate of 16 2/3% was imposed on the Project starting from 11 October
2004'*.

The Claimants assert that, at the time, neither of the alternative conditions specified
in the Cerro Negro Royalty Reduction Agreement for ending the rate reduction had
been met. Specifically, (i) the accumulated gross income from the Cerro Negro
Project had not reached three times the aggregate investment, and (ii) nine years had

not yet elapsed since the beginning of commercial production’”. This is not

‘3 Mem. M. { 128.

4 Mem. M. { 131.

'45 Mem. M. { 131; Royalty Procedures Agreement (Ex. C-30).
'46 An affiliate of Mobil Cerro Negro.

7 Mem. M. ¥ 134.

“8 Thid.

49 Mem. M. {| 135.

40

92.

93.

disputed by the Respondent, who emphasizes that it had the discretion under the

1943 Hydrocarbons Law to end the royalty concession’.

Similarly, on 25 February 2005, CVP informed Mr. Ward that the MEM, by express
instructions of President Chavez, was “leav[ing] without effect” the royalty
reduction established in the La Ceiba Royalty Reduction Agreement and imposing a

royalty rate of 16 2/3% on the La Ceiba Project’*'.

In its letter of 8 June 2005 to Mr. Ward, the Ministry of Energy and Mines stated
that “[t]he payment of royalties required from companies that process extra-heavy
crude in the Orinoco Oil Belt is 30%, as set forth in Article 44 of the Organic
Hydrocarbons Law in force”'*. On 23 June 2005, the Ministry of Energy and
Mines informed Mobil Cerro Negro that average monthly production above 120,000

153

barrels per day would be subject to a royalty rate of 30%

(b) Creation of the Extraction Tax in 2006

94.

95.

During the course of 2005 and 2006, the price of crude oil continued to soar,
reaching new record highs each year’. By May 2006, the price of crude oil had
risen to US$69.78 per barrel’.

On 16 May 2006, the National Assembly enacted a partial amendment to the 2001
Organic Law of Hydrocarbons, which created an additional royalty in the form of an
“extraction tax” (Impuesto de Extraccién)'*°. The new law, which took effect on 29

May 2006, imposed an extraction tax of 33 1/3% on all liquid hydrocarbons

150 C_Mem. M. 158.
'5! Mem. M. {| 136; Letter from PDVSA to Mark Ward, President of ExxonMobil de Venezuela dated 25 February

2005 (Ex. C-39).

Letter dated 8 June 2005 from the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum to Operadora Cerro Negro, S.A. (Ex. C-40).
See Reply M. 46.

153 Mem. M. {[ 144.

'4 CMe. M. { 64.

5 C_Mem. M. { 66.

'56 Mem. M. {] 149; Law on Partial Amendment to the Organic Law of Hydrocarbons, Article 5.4 (Ley de reforma

Parcial del Decreto 1.510 con Fuerza de Ley Orgdnica de Hidrocarburos) and Organic Law of Hydrocarbons
(as amended) (Ex. C-337).

41

96.

97.

extracted from the ground'’. Under the new scheme, royalty payments were to be
credited to the liability for the extraction tax'™.

Accordingly, Mobil Cerro Negro was liable to pay an additional 16 2/3% as an
extraction tax (i.e., 33 1/3% minus 16 2/3% equals 16 2/3%) for its production
159

share

Project to 33 1/3%'®.

This change increased the royalty rate applicable to the Cerro Negro

Mobil Cerro Negro paid the increased royalty and the extraction tax under protest
and with full reservation of rights’*’. It paid the royalty at the rate of 16 2/3% from
11 October 2004 and the extraction tax at the rate of 16 2/3% from 29 May 2006, in

both cases until the investment was expropriated in June 2007’.

(c) Increase in the Income Tax Rate Applicable to Participants in Orinoco Oil Belt

98.

99.

"57 Thid.

Ventures

On 29 August 2006, the National Assembly amended the Income Tax Law to repeal
the provision that subjected income from the extra-heavy oil projects in the Orinoco
Oil Belt to the general corporate rate, instead of the higher rate applicable to the oil

industry’®.

This amendment had the effect of increasing from 34% to 50% the rate
applicable to income from those projects, including the Cerro Negro Project’. The

measure took effect on 1 January 2007'*.

Accordingly, after 1 January 2007, Mobil Cerro Negro was subject to an income tax

rate of 50%'®. Mobil Cerro Negro made two income tax advance payments at the

158 Mem. M. {{ 150.
159 Mem. M. { 151.
1 Thid. See also Transcript of Hugo Chavez, Alé Presidente No. 288 (29 July 2007) (Ex. C-415).
161 Mem. M. {{ 152.

' Thid.

163 Mem. M. {{ 153.

‘4 Thid.
‘8 Thid.

166 Mem. M. {{ 154.

42

rate of 50% from 1 January 2007 until its investment was expropriated in June

2007'”.

(d) Production and export curtailments on the Cerro Negro Project

100.

101.

102.

Under the terms of the Cerro Negro Framework of Conditions and the Cerro Negro
Association Agreement, production and export curtailments could be imposed on
the Cerro Negro Project provided that they were necessary to comply with the
Respondent’s international commitments. They were to be applied on a pro rata
basis on all oil producers in Venezuela. From late 2006 through the first part of
2007, the Respondent imposed a series of production and export curtailments on the

Cerro Negro Project'®.

On 9 October 2006, the Ministry of Energy ordered Operadora Cerro Negro to
reduce extra-heavy oil production for that month by a total of 50,000 barrels
(“October 2006 Production Cut”)'®. Shortly thereafter, the Respondent agreed to
participate in two OPEC production cuts'”. The first cut, which was applied
between November 2006 and February 2007, reduced Venezuela’s oil production by
138,000 barrels per day'”. The second cut, which took effect on 1 February 2007
and remained in effect in June 2007, reduced oil production by an additional 57,000

m

barrels per day

Toward the end of 2006, the production cuts imposed by Venezuela were replaced
by restrictions on exports in each of November, January, February and March
2007'". The export curtailment imposed for March 2007 was to remain in effect

until the end of June 2007.

‘67 Mem. M. {{ 155.
168 Mem. M. {| 156.
'® Ibid.
1 Mem. M. {{ 157.
"" Ibid.
" Ibid.
3 RFA 156; Mem. M. {| 159.

43

103.

104.

As a consequence of these production and export cuts, the Cerro Negro Project
allegedly produced approximately 560,000 fewer barrels of extra-heavy crude in
2006, as compared with the production target for 2006, and exported about 5.5
million fewer barrels of synthetic crude oil by the end of June 2007 than the export

target for the first half of 2007'".

Mobil Cerro Negro formally objected to these curtailments as violations of the Cerro

Negro Framework of Conditions and the Cerro Negro Association’.

(e) Expropriation of the Claimants’ Investments in the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Projects

105. As described above, pursuant to the 2001 Hydrocarbons Law, operating service
agreements were to be reformed as mixed enterprises'”. The only activities
remaining outside of this legal framework were the Orinoco Oil Belt associations
(such as the Cerro Negro Project) and the Profit Sharing Agreements (such as the La
Ceiba Project)’.

106. On 8 January 2007, President Chavez announced that all of the projects that had
been operating outside of the framework of the 2001 Hydrocarbons Law, including
the Cerro Negro Project, would be nationalized'”. On 1 February 2007, through the
Enabling Law (see below), the Respondent made clear that it also intended to
nationalize profit-sharing projects such as the La Ceiba Project'®’.

107. On 1 February 2007, the National Assembly enacted a law entitled the “Law that
Authorizes the President of the Republic to Issue Decrees with Rank, Value and
Force of Law in Delegated Subject Matters” (“Enabling Law”)'*'. The Enabling

'™ Mem. M. { 160.
"S Ibid.

"Mem. M. { 162.
"7 Mem. M. {{ 127.
"8 Mem. J. 44.
Mem. J. 45.

'89 C_Mem. J. p.11 at 19.
'S! Mem. M. ¥ 171; Enabling Law (Ex. C-69).

44

108.

109.

'® Ibid.
'S Mem. M. { 172; Decree-Law 5200 (Ex. C-339)
'S4 Thid.
185 C_Mem. M. (81.
'° C-Mem. M. { 82.

Law authorized President Chavez to take over the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba joint

ventures and other similar associations by'™:

“[D]ecree[ing] norms allowing the State to assume directly or through
corporations of its exclusive property, the control of the activities
performed by the associations operating in the Orinoco Oil Belt,
including the upgraders and the associations for exploration at risk and
shared profits, to regularize and adjust their activities within the legal
framework that governs the national oil industry, through the
contractual form of mixed enterprises or companies [that are] exclusive

property of the State.”

On 26 February 2007, President Chavez issued Decree No. 5200 on the “Migration
to Mixed Companies of the Association Agreements of the Orinoco Oil Belt, as well
as of the At-Risk-and-Shared-Profits Exploration Agreements” (“Decree-Law
5200”)'*’. The Decree-Law ordered, inter alia, that the associations located in the
Orinoco Oil Belt (such as the Cerro Negro Association), and the At-Risk-and-
Shared-Profits Associations, (such as the La Ceiba Association), be “migrated” into
new mixed companies under the 2001 Organic Law of Hydrocarbons, in which
PDVSA or one of its subsidiaries would hold at least a 60% participation interest'™.
This process of transformation from the association form to a mixed company was

referred to as “migration”.

Decree-Law 5200 provided a roadmap and schedule for the migration of the
associations'**. Article 3 thereof required Operadora Cerro Negro and Operadora La
Ceiba, the operators of the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Projects, to transfer control of

all activities and operations related to those projects to Corporacién Venezolana del

45

110.

111.

Petrdleo, S.A. (or another affiliate of PDVSA) no later than 30 April 2007'’.
Accordingly, on 30 April 2007, Operadora Cerro Negro transferred to PDVSA
Petrdleo S.A. the operations and control of all activities related to the Cerro Negro
Project, with full reservation of rights'**. On 27 April 2007, Operadora La Ceiba did

the same in respect of the La Ceiba Project’.

Article 4 of Decree-Law 5200 gave Mobil Cerro Negro, Mobil Venezolana and
participants in other associations in the Orinoco Oil Belt and in At-Risk-and-Shared-
Profits Associations, four months (until 26 June 2007) to agree to participation in
the new mixed companies'*’. The mixed companies would be established and would
operate under a different statutory framework (the 2001 Organic Law of
Hydrocarbons) and under new contractual arrangements that would replace the
previous association agreements’. Article 5 of Decree-Law 5200 provided that, if
no agreement was reached on the establishment and functioning of the new mixed
companies by the end of the four-month period, “the Republic, through Petrdleos de
Venezuela S.A. or any of its affiliates [...] shall directly assume the activities of the

associations,” namely, the Cerro Negro Association and the La Ceiba Association'’”.

Throughout the four-month period specified in Article 4 of Decree-Law 5200,
discussions took place between Mobil Cerro Negro and Mobil Venezolana and the
Respondent about the potential participation of the Claimants in the new mixed
enterprises’. By 26 June 2007, no agreement had been reached on such

participation.

'87 Mem. M. { 175.
'88 Mem. M. { 176.

'® Ibid.

190 Mem. M. {{ 173.

'" Thid.

12 Mem. M. { 174.
13 Mem. M. { 177.
14 Mem. M. { 180.

112. On 27 June 2007, when the four-month term imposed by Decree-Law 5200 expired,
the Respondent seized the investments of Mobil Cerro Negro in the Cerro Negro
Project and the investments of Mobil Venezolana in the La Ceiba Project’. This is
not disputed by the Respondent. The Respondent has admitted that it “nationalized”

the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Projects in 2007".

113. On 5 October 2007, the National Assembly enacted the “Law on the Effects of the
Process of Migration to Mixed Companies of the Agreements of the Orinoco Oil
Belt, as well as of the At-Risk-and-Shared-Profits Exploration Agreements” (“Law
on Effects of the Migration”)'”’. The Law ratified the expropriation effected by
Decree-Law 5200 and ordered that the interests and assets, formerly belonging to
those companies that had not agreed to “migrate”, be formally transferred to the new

mixed companies by application of the “reversion principle”'*.

114. Article 1 of the Law on Effects of the Migration provided that association
agreements would “be extinguished as of the date of publication in the Official
Gazette [...] of the decree that transfers the right to exercise primary activities to the
mixed enterprises constituted according to what is provided in said Decree-Law
[Decree-Law 5200]”'”. Article 1 also provided a special rule for association
agreements in which none of the Parties had agreed to “migrate” to mixed
enterprises within the four-month period established in Decree-Law 5200. In such a
case, the association agreement would be extinguished as of the date of publication

of the Law on Effects of the Migration in the Official Gazette.

15 Mem. M. { 181.

196 Mem. J. 445.

17 Mem. M. { 186.

198 Mem. M. {{ 187.

'° Taw on Effects of the Migration, Article 1 (Ex. C-313).
°” Ibid.

115.

116.

117.

118.

By Decree No. 5916, published on 5 March 2008, the Respondent transferred to
PetroMonagas, S.A”. “[t]he right to develop primary activities of exploration in
search of reservoirs of heavy and extra-heavy crude oil, the extraction of such crude
oil in its natural state, and its initial production, transport and storage”*”.
Consequently, pursuant to Article 1 of the Law on Effects of the Migration, the

Cerro Negro Association Agreement was terminated as of that date.

Neither Mobil Venezolana nor Petro-Canada agreed to “migrate” the La Ceiba

Project to a new mixed enterprise™*.

Consequently, the La Ceiba Association
Agreement fell under the special rule of Article 1 of the Law on Effects of the
Migration. Accordingly, the La Ceiba Association Agreement was terminated as of

8 October 2007, the date of the publication of the Law on Effects of the Migration.

THE ICC ARBITRATION

The Tribunal notes that several proceedings have been initiated by the Claimants,
including proceedings against PDVSA before courts in London and New York. The
Tribunal will consider the impact of those proceedings, if any, in the course of this

Award.

In particular, the Tribunal notes that, in 2008, Mobil Cerro Negro initiated ICC
proceedings against PDVSA and PDVSA-CN. That proceeding was initiated
pursuant to Clause 15 of the Association Agreement, which affords Mobil Cerro
Negro the right to indemnification by PDVSA-CN in the event of certain
governmental measures, but requires Mobil Cerro Negro to initiate a legal action
against the Government to enforce that right and sets forth a mechanism to prevent

double recovery.

20! new mixed enterprise created in 2007, owned 83 1/3% by CVP and 16 2/3% by Veba Oil & Gas Cerro Negro

202

GmbH.

Mem. M. { 190; Decree No. 5916 Transferring to Petro Monagas $.A. the Right to Develop Primary Exploration
Activities Specified Therein (Decreto No. 5916, mediante el cual se transfiere a la empresa PetroMonagas, S.A.
el derecho a

actividades 1 ias de exploracion que él se especifican), Article 1 (Ex. C-316).

23 Mem. M. { 191.

48

119. The ICC proceeding has a direct bearing on the present proceeding in as much as the
“Discriminatory Measures” at issue in that proceeding are among those before the
Tribunal in this case. Further, in the ICC arbitration Mobil Cerro Negro submitted
that: “if MCN receives from the Respondents payment of any damages awarded in
this [ICC] Arbitration, and later receives payment of any damages awarded in the
ICSID case, MCN will reimburse the Respondents (after deducting legal costs) for
the payment they made, to the extent both payments relate to the same

Discriminatory Measures”™.

120. On 23 December 2011, the award was issued in the ICC proceeding, finding
PDVSA and PDVSA-CN jointly and severally liable for the economic consequences
of the “Discriminatory Measures”. Setting off the counterclaim, the ICC Tribunal
directed the Respondents in the ICC arbitration to pay to Mobil Cerro Negro a sum
of US$746,937,958, together with interest thereon. The implications of the ICC
Award on the various issues before this Tribunal (in particular, compensation) are

considered in the context of the Tribunal’s discussion of those issues.

121. The Tribunal has deliberated and thoroughly considered the Parties’ written
submissions on the merits and the oral arguments delivered in the course of the
evidentiary hearing.

Ill. THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

122. The following section briefly summarizes the Parties’ allegations, which are fully

addressed in the Tribunals analysis (see sections IV to XI below).
A. THE CLAIMANTS’ MEMORIAL
123. On 15 December 2010, the Claimants submitted their Memorial on the Merits.

124. The Claimants submit that the Venezuelan Government adopted a series of
measures adverse to the Claimants’ investments. In particular, the Claimants refer to

the following:

204 Claimant's post-hearing brief (25 October 2010) in the ICC Arbitration.

49

(i

Breach of the Cerro Negro Royalty Reduction Agreement, the Royalty
Procedures Agreement and the La Ceiba Royalty Reduction Agreement;

(ii) Imposition of increased royalty rates on production above 120,000 barrels per
day for the Cerro Negro Project;

(iii) | Unilateral termination of the Cerro Negro Royalty Reduction Agreement and
the Cerro Negro Royalty Procedures Agreement;

(iv) Further increase in the royalty rate through imposition of the extraction tax;

(v) Increase in the income-tax rate applicable to participants in the Orinoco Oil
Belt ventures;

(vi) Production and export curtailments on the Cerro Negro Project;

(vii) | Direct expropriation of Mobil Cerro Negro’s and Mobil Venezolana’s entire
interests in the activities of the Cerro Negro Joint Venture and the La Ceiba
Joint Venture and related assets;

(viii) Unjustified post-expropriation tax assessments; and

(ix) | Harassment of Claimants’ witnesses and Venezuelan counsel?”,

125. In light of the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, the Claimants have reshaped their

claims as follows:

“(i) claim arising out of the imposition of the Extraction Tax on the
Cerro Negro Project; (ii) claim arising out of the increase in the
income-tax rate for the participants in the Cerro Negro Project; (iii)
claim arising out of production and export curtailments imposed on the
Cerro Negro Project; and (iv) claim arising out of the expropriation of
the Claimants’ investments in the Cerro Negro Project and the La
Ceiba Project... [They] also note that they have sustained and continue
to sustain damage from the unconstitutional or otherwise unjustified
post-expropriation tax measures... and reserve their right to assert
claims arising from those measures depending on the outcome of
pending appeals and any further unreasonable delay in the

reimbursement of VAT credits”.

°° Mem. M. { 124.

°° Mem. M. {{ 226.

50.

207 Mem,
208 Mem
° Mem.
°° Mem.
*"! Mem.

126.

127.

128.

129.

Regarding the law applicable to the merits, the Claimants submit that “the ICSID
Convention and the Treaty determine the rules of law under which the claims
asserted in this proceeding must be adjudicated”””. In particular, Article 9 (5) of the
Treaty enumerates the sources of law upon which an arbitral award under the Treaty

must be based”.

The Claimants acknowledge that Venezuelan law is of some
relevance, in particular with respect to the evidence of the Respondent’s
commitments and conduct. However, they consider that the main source of law

must be the Treaty itself given that the claims are for breach of the Treaty”.

On that basis, the Claimants contend that the Respondent is in breach of the Treaty

in several respects.

First, Venezuela violated the Treaty by wrongfully expropriating the Claimants’
investments. That expropriation fails to meet at least three of the requirements of
Article 6 of the BIT in that it was (i) conducted without due process of law; (ii)
contrary to the Respondent’s undertakings; and (iii) not taken against any

compensation, let alone just compensation*”’.

Second, the Claimants contend that Venezuela has violated Article 3 (1) of the BIT
by failing to ensure fair and equitable treatment (FET) to its investments. “In brief,
the Respondent’s measures have frustrated the Claimants’ legitimate expectations,
which the Respondent itself created by inducing the Claimants to invest on the basis
of a specific legal framework that established economic incentives and legal

2211

protections for the duration of the investment

. M. 237.
.M. 240.
. M. 4241.
.M. 246.
.M. 271.

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.

Third, the Claimants submit that Venezuela has also violated Article 3 (1) of the
BIT by “taking arbitrary and discriminatory measures that impaired the operation,

management, use, enjoyment, or disposal of the Claimant’s investments”?””.

They contend that those “wrongful measures have directly caused severe damage to
the Claimants’ investments in Venezuela, culminating in the total deprivation,
without compensation, of the Claimants’ interests in the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba
Projects. The Claimants are therefore entitled to reparation in accordance with the

standards prescribed by international law for internationally wrongful acts”?"*.

The Claimants contend that they are entitled to be restored to the position they
would occupy without the Respondent’s wrongful conduct (restitutio in integrum).
Since the Treaty permits only monetary compensation, the Claimants request
monetary compensation that financially puts them in the same position they would

be absent the Respondent’s wrongful acts”.

According to the Claimants, their damages relating to the Cerro Negro Project
consist of (i) the damages sustained as a consequence of the measures taken before
the expropriation; plus (ii) the loss of interests in that project, as a going concern, as
a consequence of the expropriation. Given that the value of the lost interest in the
Project had increased since the expropriation, the Claimants contend that they are
entitled to the current fair market value, which they calculate by means of a
discounted cash flow analysis. Assessed as of 30 September 2010, and subject to
updating to the date of the Award in this proceeding, the Claimants calculate the
quantum of damages in respect of the Cerro Negro Project as approximately $14.5

billion’.

Regarding the La Ceiba investment, the Claimants contend that “particular

circumstances warrant a different method to determine the quantum of

212 Mem. M. p.134.

213,

4 Tid.

Mem. M. { 289.

*'5 Mem. M. {{ 292.

compensation needed to provide full reparation’”"°. The Claimants consider that
damages in this respect “are properly measured by the value of the Claimant’s actual

investment in that Project, which amounts to $179 million”?”’.

135. The Claimants add that the Tribunal should also address other aspects of the full
reparation required by international law. In particular, the Claimants allege that,
insofar as the damages have been determined on an after-tax basis, the Claimants are
entitled to protection against potential taxes on the compensation to be awarded.
Finally, the Claimants consider that they are also entitled to pre- and post-award
compound interest for the relevant periods, and to their costs and attorneys’ fees in

this proceeding”"*.

136. For these reasons, the Claimants request that the Tribunal render an award in its

favor:

“a. Upholding the claims asserted by the Claimants in this proceeding;
b. Determining that the Respondent has breached the Treaty and

applicable principles of customary international law:

By expropriating the Claimants’ investments concerning the Cerro
Negro Project and the La Ceiba Project without complying with the
requirements of the Treaty, including observance of due process of
law, respect for undertaking, and payment of compensation as required
by the Treaty;

By failing to accord fair and equitable treatment to the Claimant’s
investments concerning the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Projects;

By taking arbitrary and/or discriminatory measures that impaired the
operation, management, use, enjoyment and/or disposal of the
Claimants investments concerning the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba

Projects;

*'6 Mem. M. {{ 293.
°"7 Tid.
*'8 Mem. M. {{ 294.

c. Determining that such a breach has caused damages to the
Claimants;

d.Ordering the Respondent to pay to the Claimants compensation, in
accordance with the Treaty and customary international law, in an
amount sufficient to provide full reparation to the Claimants for the
damages incurred as a result of the Respondent’s conduct in violation
of the Treaty, including:

Compensation for damages sustained by the Claimants in respect of
their Cerrro Negro investment as a result of Decree-Law 5200 and the
wrongful measures that preceded it;

Compensation for damages sustained by the Claimants in respect of
their La Ceiba investment as a result of Decree-Law 5200 and the
wrongful measures that preceded it;

Pre-Award compound interest at a normal commercial rate;
Post-Award compound interest at a rate reflecting the yield of the
Respondent’s sovereign date as of the date of the Award;
e.Determining that the Claimants shall be protected from taxation of
such compensation, in the manner specified in this Memorial;
f.Ordering the Respondent to pay all costs and expenses of this
arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the tribunal and the cost
of legal representation, plus interest thereon in accordance with
applicable law; and

g-Such other additional relief as may be appropriate under the

9219

applicable law or may otherwise be just and proper’

B. THE RESPONDENT’S COUNTER-MEMORIAL

137. The Respondent submitted its Counter Memorial on 15 June 2011

138. In its Memorial, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to “confirm its Decision on

Jurisdiction and refuse to entertain jurisdiction for any claim based on royalty or tax

219 Mem. M. 371.

139.

140.

141.

142.

increases” as well as for “any claim based on production in excess of 120.000

99220

barrels per day’

With respect to the applicable law, the Respondent submits that Venezuelan law
must be taken into account both under article 42 (1) of the ICSID Convention and
under article 9 (5) of the BIT. This includes “the relevant hydrocarbon legislation
and the Cerro Negro Congressional Authorization, as well as the terms and
conditions of the special agreement relating to the Cerro Negro Project, particularly
the compensation provisions agreed at the outset of the Project in implementation of

99221

the Cerro Negro Congressional Authorization’

On the merits, the Respondent contends that the measures adopted did not violate

the Treaty.

Regarding the allegations of breach of FET, the Respondent submits that the FET
claims under the Dutch Treaty based on the fiscal measures are untenable for several
reasons, each of which would independently require dismissal of these claims: “(i)
they are precluded by Article 4 of the Dutch Treaty, the provision expressly dealing
with fiscal measures; (ii) they conflict with the Dutch Treaty Protocol, under which
non-discriminatory measures that do not violate the minimum standards of
international law are beyond the scope of the Dutch Treaty’s FET clause, Article 3
(1); Gii) they do not violate even the most expansive notions of FET, based on
‘legitimate expectations’ at the time of the original investment or Claimants’ notion
of a ‘reasonable stable and predictable environment’; and (iv) Claimants do not even
attempt to make their FET argument from the standpoint of Venezuela Holdings at

the time of the ‘Dutch’ acquisition of the investment”™”.

The Respondent observes that in addition to their FET claims based upon tax and
royalty measures, the Claimants allege breach of the FET with respect to “(i) the

production or export cutbacks, and presumably the production limitation (...) (ii) the

°C, Mem. M. { 125.
1 C, Mem. M. { 132.

222

C. Mem. M. 4211.

143.

144.

145.

3 .C. Mem.
4 C. Mem.
5 C. Mem.
°C. Mem.
“7 C. Mem.

change in operationship, (iii) negotiation under alleged duress, (iv) lack of approval
of the La Ceiba development plan and (vy) alleged violation of Venezuelan law”™’.

The Respondent contends that all these claims are without merit.

According to the Respondent, the measures that it took were neither arbitrary, nor
discriminatory, and therefore did not violate article 3(1) of the BIT. Like the FET
allegations, the claims relating to the fiscal measures would have to be dismissed
because they are beyond the scope of Article 4 of the BIT. In addition, the
Respondent considers that there is no basis for claims of arbitrariness or
discriminatory treatment as the Government measures do not rise to the established

thresholds.**

The Respondent submits that this case involves no wrongful or unlawful
expropriation. According to the Respondent, the pre-migration measures do not
constitute expropriation. The Respondent states that the 2007 migration was not a

99205

wrongful or unlawful expropriation’ In particular, “the mere lack of agreement

on compensation does not render an expropriation unlawful.”*

Therefore,
compensation must be calculated in accordance with the BIT and the damage

assessed as of 26 June 2007.

The Respondent identifies the following key issues on quantum for the Cerro Negro
Project: “(i) the impact of the limitation on the amount of compensation to be
granted for adverse governmental action specifically negotiated and agreed at the
outset of the Cerro Negro Project as an express condition of the Project’s
authorization by Congress; (ii) the discount rate to be applied to projected future
cash flows; and (iii) the price, cost and volume projection (with the 120,000 barrels

per day limit) that are necessary to project cash flows”.

M212.

. M.A 219-226
. M. p. 194.

. M.9f 282.

. M.f 288.

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

28 C. Mem.
°° Ibid.

20, Mem.
31, Mem,

232

= C. Mem.

On the first point, the Respondent contends that the price cap set forth in the Cerro
Negro Associate Agreement in implementation of the Congressional authorization
must be applied in the present case. Regarding the discount rate, the Respondent
submits that the only reasonable proposal is to take the average of appropriate
methodologies for an international oil project**, which leads toa 19.8 % — discount

rate to calculate compensation in this case*”.

Finally, regarding future cash flows,
the Respondent contends that Claimants seek to inflate compensation by inflating
cash flows. Instead, the Tribunal should apply the price cap resulting from the
agreed limitation on compensation and the 19.8% discount rate to the cash flow
calculated by Respondent’s experts, which yields a value as of June 26, 2007 of US$

$353,542,997°.

The Respondent submits that the compensation for the La Ceiba Project could be

limited to the value of the investment, i.e. US$ 75,000,000.

The Respondent adds that the outstanding Cerro Negro debt amounts to US$
238,139,797. According to the Respondent, this debt must be taken into account,

BI

with the total compensation therefore being limited to US$ 190,403,200.

The Respondent contends that the Claimants’ request to increase the amount of the
award in this case by taking into account any potential tax consequences must be

232

denied*”’, and that simple, post award interest should be applied. Finally, the

Respondent considers that the Claimants should bear all costs.

According to the Respondent, the appropriate amount of compensation for the

nationalization is US$ 190,403,200, and all other claims should be dismissed.

. M41 344.

. Mf 369.
.M. (371.
. M. 378.

c.

151.

152.

153.

154.

THE CLAIMANTS’ REPLY

In their Reply dated 15 September 2011, the Claimants note that the Respondent
does not dispute the core facts of the case, including the expropriation, the
Republic’s reassurances and inducements to Mobil, the benefits derived from the
Claimants’ investments and the Cerro Negro annual net income in the years

preceding the expropriation.”

The Claimants contend that the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections have no
merit. They observe that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the claims for
expropriation and for production and export curtailments is uncontested. According
to the Claimants, the Tribunal also has jurisdiction over the claims arising out of the
imposition of the extraction tax and of the increase in the income tax rate in the

Cerro Negro Project.

The Claimants contend that they had a right to increase production over 120,000
barrels per day. They recognize that in June 2005, Venezuela imposed a higher
royalty over production exceeding that figure. The Claimants add that they are not
pursuing a claim relating to the dispute over such royalty, but stress that they
retained the right to increase their production at a higher level, and contend that the
“Tribunal has jurisdiction over the claims arising out of the expropriation” of that

right™.

The Claimants agree with the Respondent that Article 9(5) of the Treaty includes,
among the sources of applicable law, the law of the Contracting Party and the

provisions of special agreements relating to the investments”.

However, they
submit that this does not imply that “Condition Eighteen of the Framework of

Conditions excuses non-performance of the Respondent’s obligations under the

253 Reply M. 19.
°4 Reply M. p. 39.
255 Reply M. 60.

155.

156.

157.

158.

256 Reply M.
257 Reply M.
238 Reply M.
2 Reply M.
>49 Reply M.

236

Treaty** or that Condition Twentieth of the Cerro Negro Framework of Conditions

authorizes incorporation of contractual limitations in a Treaty Dispute*”.

According to the Claimants, “the Respondent concedes the expropriation and its
liability for compensation, but mischaracterizes the expropriation process”**. The
Claimants state that the expropriation was carried out without due process and was
contrary to undertakings. They stress that the Respondent did not pay or even offer
to pay compensation in accordance with the Treaty and its compensation standard.
Moreover, the Claimants contend that the Respondent’s pre-Decree-Law 5200

measures expropriated discrete rights of the Claimants.

The Claimants reiterate that Venezuela breached the FET standard set forth in
Article 3(1) of the BIT and Section 2 of the Protocol. They contend that, contrary to
the Respondent’s arguments, fiscal measures are not excluded from the scope of that
standard. In fact, according to the Claimants, the standard contained in those
provisions guarantees three different forms of treatment of foreign nationals under
international law, only one of which (the floor) is the International Minimum

Standards (IMS).

According to the Claimants, Venezuela “breached the FET and the IMS by

frustrating the Claimants’ legitimate expectations based on specific undertakings”*”.

Furthermore, the Claimants contend that the Respondent “breached Article 3 (1) in
subjecting the Claimants to a coercive ‘migration process’””*’.

The Claimants reaffirm that the Respondent’s conduct was arbitrary and that the
production curtailments on the Cerro Negro Project were discriminatory. Therefore,

the Respondent is in breach of Article 3(1) of the BIT.

p. 46.
p. 49.
p.5l

4 123.
4 136.

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

The Claimants note that “the Respondent has conceded that it is liable to pay
compensation for the expropriation of the Claimants interest in the Cerro Negro and
La Ceiba Projects. Although the Respondent has also (belatedly) conceded that the
applicable standard of compensation is fair market value, it admits a quantum of
compensation which is wholly inadequate (...), based on false factual premises and

untenable legal arguments”.

The Claimants reaffirm that the Respondent owes full reparation under international
law for the breach of its obligation under the Treaty. Thus, they must “receive
compensation that is at least equal to the fair market value of the property at the

time of the expropriation’”*’.

They add that, if the property has increased in value
since that time, further compensation is due for the loss represented by the foregone
increase’, In the light of these considerations, the Claimants updated their Cerro

Negro quantum submissions.

In this respect, they submit that the Respondent’s Cerro Negro compensation
analysis is factually and legally flawed. The Claimants contend that the
Respondent’s quantum calculations are debased from the outset by unfounded
assertions, and that they are invalidated by other serious errors. According to the
Claimants, market transactions discredit the Respondent’s valuation for Cerro
Negro. Similarly, the Claimants contend that the Respondent’s position concerning

compensation for La Ceiba is untenable.

According to the Claimants, the Respondent’s arguments on the remaining quantum
issues are without merit, whether they concern protection against taxation of the
Award, compound interests, costs and expenses of the Award or outstanding Mobil

Cerro Negro debts.

Concluding on quantum, the Claimants assert that they “are entitled to an award of

compensation in an amount of not less than $ 16,802.3 million, plus pre-award

*4 Reply M. { 161.

242.

Ibid.

> Reply M. {{ 185.

60

D.

164.

165.

interest and all other relief sought herein”. They finally ask the Tribunal to
dismiss “the defenses raised in the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, and render an
award in favor of the Claimants in the form requested in the Claimants’

Memorial”™®.

THE RESPONDENT’S REJOINDER

In its Rejoinder dated 15 December 2011, the Respondent reaffirms that the
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over any fiscal claims under the Decision on
Jurisdiction because they were part of an already pending dispute at the time of the

Dutch restructuring’. The Respondent contends that the Tribunal also lacks

jurisdiction to entertain a claim for project expansion™”.

In particular, claims based
on the imposition of the production limit of 120,000 barrels per day are beyond the
scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and “cannot be brought into this case under the

guise of calculating compensation for the 2007 nationalization”.

With respect to the applicable law, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal must
take into account Venezuelan law, including the relevant hydrocarbon legislation
and the Cerro Negro Congressional Authorization, as well as the terms and
conditions of the special agreement relating to the Cerro Negro Project, in
accordance with Article 9(5) of the BIT. This means that both the merits of the
claims and the issue of quantum must be analyzed in light of the reservation by the
Republic in the Eighteenth Condition, and the special compensation provisions of
the Twentieth Condition of the Cerro Negro Congressional Authorization (as
implemented by the Cerro Negro Association Agreement), which includes a

limitation on compensation that is established through the price cap*”.

4 Reply M. 272.
45 Reply M. { 275.

> Rej. M. 50.
47 Rej. M. p. 43
48 Rej. M. 76.
> Rej. M. 97.

166.

167.

168.

169.

The Respondent reaffirms that “apart from the lack of jurisdiction under the
Decision on Jurisdiction, there are several grounds for rejecting Claimants’ fiscal
FET claims”*”, as fiscal measures are not cognizable under Article 3 of the BIT and
Claimants make no argument under Article 4. Moreover, according to the
Respondent, the record of negotiations “shows that the right of the Government to
change law was anticipated, expressly preserved and addressed through the special
compensation mechanism Claimants want this Tribunal to ignore. On those facts,

p> 251

no fiscal FET claims could be sustained under any standard”.

The Respondent submits that investment treaty cases are unanimous in holding that

“non-confiscatory fiscal measures do not constitute an expropriation’?” and that
there can only be an expropriation if there is substantial deprivation of the entire
investment**. Accordingly, the pre-migration measures could not have constituted

an expropriation of “discrete rights”*™.

According to the Respondent, the 2007 Nationalization does not constitute an
unlawful expropriation, as it was (i) “carried out pursuant to alaw of public policy
in an orderly and non-discriminatory manner and for a public purpose, so
acknowledged by companies from all over the world; and (ii) serious compensation
negotiations took place, but agreement was simply not possible due to Claimants

99255

demands The Respondent adds that “a nationalization is not rendered unlawful

by the mere fact that compensation has not yet been determined or paid so long as

the government recognizes its obligation to compensate**.

With respect to the Cerro Negro Project, the Respondent stresses that compensation

must be calculated based on the fiscal regime in place in 2007, and that the proper

250 Rej. M. { 168.

°5! Rej. M. {168

2 Rej. M. 206.

253 Rej. M. 213.
254 Rej. M. p.154.

255 Rej. M. 230.
256 Rej. M. | 249.

170.

171.

172.

valuation date for the 2007 nationalization is the date of dispossession*”’, i.e., 26
June 2007. The Respondent contends that: (i) the compensation must be limited as
agreed pursuant to the Cerro Negro Congressional Authorization; (ii) the discount
rate must be calculated not according to the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), but
taking into consideration a number of elements which the Respondent’s experts
have analyzed when recommending a discount rate of 19.8% and (iii) the projected
cash flow must be calculated taking into account “all of the historical data as well as
all of the information that would have been available to a buyer as of June 26,

20077.

The Respondent concludes that the Claimants have designed “various maneuvers to
justify the exorbitant claims asserted, including ignoring the Decision on
Jurisdiction to apply an outdated fiscal regime, postulating a hypothetical new
project almost triple the size of the existing one, using unreasonable price scenarios
and an indefensible discount rate, and ignoring the carefully tailored compensation
provisions and limitations agreed as a fundamental condition to the authorization of

99259

the Cerro Negro Project It then provides a table showing “how one goes from
the exorbitant compensation claimed by the Claimant” (i.e., US$ 16,486 billion) “to
the compensation calculated by Respondent’s expert even before applying the
limitation” (i.e., US$ 844 million). When applying such limitation, the

compensation figure becomes US$ 354 million for the Cerro Negro Project.

The Respondent reaffirms its previous submissions with respect to the “Claimants

29261

request for a tax indemnity”*', pre-award and post-award interest and costs.

HEARING AND POST-HEARING BRIEFS

At the hearing held from 7 to 16 February 2012, the Parties maintained and
developed their arguments. Five days before the hearing, on 2 February 2012, the

257 Rej. M. p. 208.
258 Rej. M. 416.
25° Rej. M. 419.
°° Ibid...
26! Rej. M. p. 337.

Tribunal had been informed by the Respondent that a final award had been rendered
on 23 December 2011 in the ICC arbitration. The Tribunal requested both Parties to
address in their post-hearing briefs the impact, if any, of the ICC award on the

award to be rendered in this case.

173. On 30 April 2012, the Claimants submitted their Post-Hearing Brief. In their brief,
the Claimants refer to their statement at the hearing about President Chavez’s public
declaration that his government would not comply with any decision by Tribunal,

and they stress that the Respondent did not comment on that statement at the time.

174. In response to the Tribunal’s question, the Claimants contend that “the ICC award
should have no impact on the award to be rendered in this case, either on liability or
quantum... The ICC award and this case concern the liability of different parties

99262

under different normative regimes”*”. According to the Claimants, the ICC Award
does not end the compensation dispute, and the various arguments that the

Respondent has offered in that respect are untenable.”

175. Regarding jurisdiction, the Claimants reaffirm that the Tribunal has jurisdiction on
all claims that remain at issue. In particular, it has jurisdiction over the disputes
arising out of (i) the imposition of the 33 1/3% extraction tax (the extraction tax
dispute) and (ii) the repudiation of the guarantee that Mobil CN would be subject to

the general corporate income tax rate (the income tax dispute)".

176. The Claimants confirm their interpretation of Conditions 18 and 20 of the Cerro
Negro Framework of Conditions and of Articles 3(1), 4 and 6 of the BIT. They
stress that the hearing confirmed that, at the time of the investment, they had a
legitimate expectation about the fiscal regime that would be applicable to the CN
Project”, and that their investments in the La Ceiba and the Cerro Negro Projects

have been unlawfully expropriated. The Claimants contend that they have a right to

°° C_PH Brief { 1.
°° C_PH Brief {3
°C_PH Brief { 10.
°65 C_PH Brief. p.19.

full compensation of their interests in those projects, which, after a detailed analysis,

they evaluate at US$ 16.6 billion in the case of Cerro Negro.

177. The Claimants consider that the Respondent’s sovereign debt yield at the date of the

award should be used to determine the rate of interest”.

178. In its Post-Hearing Memorial dated 30 April 2012, the Respondent, in response to
the Tribunal’s question regarding the ICC Award, states that the Cerro Negro claim
should be dismissed since compensation has already been paid in accordance with

the agreed compensation mechanism*”.

In any case, the Respondent considers that
the Cerro Negro result would not change even if the ICC award were to be

ignored”,

179. The Respondent reaffirms that the “Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over the royalty and
tax claims, which means that valuation of the Cerro Negro Project for purposes of
the 2007 nationalization must be made applying the fiscal regime of 2007”.
Regarding the production limit claim, the Respondent states that it “had no doubt
that production was limited to 120,000 barrels per day from the moment the project
was authorized in the 1990s”?”. “Thus, there is no jurisdictional basis for any claim

9271

for a 344,000 barrels per day project

180. The Respondent maintains its position with respect to the merits of the Cerro Negro
claims. It adds that the hearing confirms the reasonableness of the cash flow
projections prepared by its expert for Cerro Negro, on which it comes back with
some detail. The Respondent contends that the “344,000 barrels per day” project

advanced by the Claimants is based on untenable assumptions.

°° C_PH Brief { 82.
267 R-PH Brief p. 4.
268 R-PH Brief p. 8.
°° R-PH Brief { 16.
°” R-PH Brief ¥. 18.
°7" R-PH Brief { 19.

IV.

181.

182.

183.

184.

The Respondent further reaffirms that the appropriate compensation for La Ceiba is
US$ 75 million, with a simple interest at the same rate specified in the ICC Award

or a similar rate.

In their Post-Hearing Reply dated 14 May 2012, the Claimants maintain their
observations with respect to the impact of the ICC Award on the award to be
rendered in this case. They submit that the “Respondent’s Post Hearing Memorial

adds nothing new on the question of liability”?”.

They summarize their position
with respect to the expected cash flow of the Cerro Negro Project (oil price,
production, volume and production costs forecasts as well as inflation adjustments)
and the discount rate to be applied. The Claimants finally request the Tribunal to
award “the amount necessary to provide full reparation, calculated in accord with

the Claimants’ prior submissions”*”.

In its Post-Hearing Reply Memorial dated 14 May 2012, the Respondent reiterates
that “the ICC award and its satisfaction should end the compensation controversy
with respect to the Cerro Negro Project and the Cerro Negro claims should be
dismissed”?”, and that the result would be the same without the ICC Award. The
Respondent submits that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction with respect to royalties,
taxes and production limit and that the fiscal FET claims have to be dismissed on
the merits. The Respondent contends that there has been no expropriation of
“discrete rights” and that the 2007 expropriation was not unlawful. The Respondent

maintains its position on quantum (cash flow, production limits and discount rate).

JURISDICTION

In its Decision on Jurisdiction dated 10 June 2010, the Tribunal decided that “‘it has
no jurisdiction under article 22 of the Venezuelan Decree with rank and force of law

N° 356 on the protection and promotion of investments of 3 October 1999”.

*? C-PH Reply 19.
273 C_PH Reply {[ 52 and C-PH Brief {{ 38-41 (Cerro Negro) and { 81 (La Ceiba); Reply M. { 206, table 2.
24 R-PH Reply { 15.

66

185. The Tribunal then considered whether or not it had jurisdiction under the BIT.
According to the Respondent, the restructuring of the Mobil Corporation through the
creation in 2005-2006 of the Dutch holding constituted an abuse of rights, which
deprived the Tribunal of jurisdiction under the BIT. According to the Claimants, the

Respondent’s allegation lacked a legal and factual basis. The Tribunal decided that:

“204. As stated by the Claimants, the aim of the restructuring of their
investments in Venezuela through a Dutch holding was to protect those
investments against breaches of their rights by the Venezuelan
authorities by gaining access to ICSID arbitration through the BIT. The
Tribunal considers that this was a perfectly legitimate goal as far as it
concerned future disputes.”

205. With respect to pre-existing disputes, the situation is different and
the Tribunal considers that to restructure investments only in order to
gain jurisdiction under a BIT for such disputes would constitute, to
take the words of the Phoenix Tribunal, “an abusive manipulation of
the system of international investment protection under the ICSID

Convention and the BITs...”?”*

186. In light of those considerations, the Tribunal noted that the restructuring of Mobil’s
investments through a Dutch entity occurred from October 2005 to November 2006,
and it went on to decide whether at those dates there were pending disputes between
the Claimants and the Respondent. The Tribunal concluded that “complaints had

already been lodged by the Claimants at the time of the restructuring”””*.
187. In this respect, the Tribunal noted the following:

“200. In two letters dated 2 February 2005, and 18 May 2005, drafted

in comparable terms, the Claimants first complained of the increase

275 The Tribunal notes that the ICSID Tribunal in Pac Rim recently took a comparable approach. It expressed the

view that the dividing line occurs when the relevant party can foresee an actual dispute or a specific future
dispute with a very high probability and not merely as a possible controversy. In the Tribunal’s view, before that
dividing line is reached, there can be no abuse of process; but after that dividing line is passed, there will be. Pac
Rim Cayman Ltd v. Republic of El Salvador (ICSID Case ARB/Q9/12) - Decision on the Respondent’s
Preliminary Objections under CAFTA Articles 10.20.4. and 10.20.5 (2 August 2012) {j 2.99.

*6 Decision on Jurisdiction { 199.

 
   

188.

189.

277 Bx. C-12.

from 1% to 16 2/3% of the royalties decided by Venezuela both for the
Cerro Negro and the La Ceiba projects. They requested the
Government to designate representatives to meet with them in order to
discuss an amicable settlement. They added that ‘as you well know, in
accordance with Article 22 of the Investment Law, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has consented to submit to arbitration, under
the ICSID Convention, investment disputes between the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and foreign investors’. They went on,
consenting ‘to ICSID’s jurisdiction for arbitration of the investment
dispute, and of any further investment dispute with the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, so that, should arbitration become necessary, it
can be carried out under the ICSID Convention’. They concluded in
requesting ‘an early meeting to commence consultation’ in order ‘to

explore an amicable solution of the matter”.

Then, on 20 June 2005, Mobil Cerro Negro Holding, Mobil Cerro Negro and
Operadora Cerro Negro informed the Venezuelan authorities that the recent
ministerial decision to increase the royalties to 30% had “broadened the investment
dispute” previously brought to their attention. They stated that the introduction of a
bill that would increase income tax rates from 34% to 50% would further broaden
that dispute, and contended that those decisions were “in breach of the obligations”
of Venezuela. They requested consultations “in an effort to reach an amicable
resolution of this matter”, and added that “[o]ut of an abundance of caution, each of
the Mobil Parties hereby confirms its consent to ICSID jurisdiction over the
broadened dispute described above and any other investment disputes with the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela existing at the present time or that may arise in
the future, including without limitation any dispute arising out of any expropriation

or confiscation of all or part of the investment of the Mobil Parties”””.

It results from these letters that, in June 2005, there were already pending disputes

between the Parties relating to the increase of royalties and income taxes decided by

Venezuela. The Claimants had even accepted to submit those disputes to ICSID
arbitration under Article 22 of the Venezuelan Investment Law and, “[o]ut of an
abundance of caution”, they had further indicated that, on the same basis, they were
also consenting to arbitration for any future dispute, including future disputes arising

from expropriation or confiscation.

190. On this basis, the Tribunal decided as follows:

“(a) that it has jurisdiction over the claims presented by Venezuela
Holdings (Netherlands), Mobil CN Holding and Mobil Venezolana
Holding (Delaware), Mobil CN and Mobil Venzolana (Bahamas) as far
as:

(i) they are based on alleged breaches of the Agreement on
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments concluded
on 22 October 1991 between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
Republic of Venezuela;

(ii) they relate to disputes born after 21 February 2006 [i.e. the date of
the restructuring] for the Cerro Negro Project and after 23 November
2006 [i.e. the date of the restructuring] for the La Ceiba project and in
particular as far as they relate to the dispute concerning the

99278

nationalization measures taken by the Republic of Venezuela’
191. The Parties disagree on the interpretation to be given to the Decision. Specifically,
they disagree on which disputes relating to the Cerro Negro Project were born after

21 February 2006 and, as a consequence, they disagree on which claims fall within

the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

192. The Claimants first state that, as a consequence of the Decision on Jurisdiction, they
“are no longer asserting in this proceeding the following claims, which arose before
the respective Treaty Application Date: (i) claim arising out of the premature
termination of the 1% royalty rate reduction (that is, the royalty-rate increase to 16

1/3%) in breach of the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Royalty Reduction Agreements

*8 Decision on Jurisdiction {| 209.

and the Royalty Procedures Agreement; (ii) claim arising out of the royalty-rate
increase to 30% on production over 120,000 bpd; (iii) claim arising out of the
imposition of the extraction tax on the La Ceiba Project; (iv) claim arising out of
the frustration of the De-Bottlenecking Project; and (v) claim arising out of the right

to early production beyond the evaluation phase of the La Ceiba Project”””.
193. The Claimants add that, in accord with the Decision on Jurisdiction, they are now

“.pursuing only the following four claims:

(i) claim arising out of the imposition of the extraction tax on the
Cerro Negro Project;

(ii) claim arising out of the increase in the income-tax rate for the
participants in the Cerro Negro Project;

(iii) claim arising out of production and export curtailments imposed
on the Cerro Negro Project in 2006 and 2007; and

(iv) claim arising out of the 27 June 2007 expropriation of the

Claimants” investments in the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Projects”**’.

194, The Respondent contests jurisdiction over claims (i) and (ii), but concedes that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction over claims (iii) and (iv) (with the exception of the increase

in production claim).

195. Therefore, the main question in dispute today is whether the claims relating to the
creation of the extraction tax and the increase of the income tax rate fall within the

jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

196. The Respondent denies it. The Respondent states that the Tribunal had already
decided that “there were already pending disputes relating to royalties and income
tax” at the time of the Dutch restructuring, and contends that the Claimants
themselves recorded those disputes in their letters of 2005, prior to the restructuring.

Moreover, according to the Respondent, “In fact, the record is clear that the dispute

*” Mem. M. fn. 501.
280 Reply M. (41.

over the right of the government to change the fiscal regime dates back not only to

39281

2005, but actually to 2004, when the first royalty measure was taken’

197. According to the Respondent, “it makes a mockery of the system of international
arbitration to argue that if a government announces a measure on day one and enacts
the legislation to implement it on day three, a non-treaty investor can acquire ICSID
jurisdiction by transferring its investment to an affiliate in a treaty jurisdiction on
day two, particularly after the non-treaty investor has specifically notified the

39282

government of an investment dispute. That is the very definition of treaty abuse’

198. The Claimants acknowledge that the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction is res
judicata. However, they submit that the Tribunal has not already declined

jurisdiction over any royalty and tax claim”***. According to the Claimants:

(a) The Respondent imposed the extraction tax by a statutory amendment that was

adopted on 16 May 2006 and took effect on 25 May 2006.

(b) The Respondent increased the income tax rate applicable to extra-heavy oil
projects by means of a statutory amendment adopted on 29 August 2006 with

effect on 1 January 2007.

199. The Claimants consider that both dates are well after the date of the restructuring for

the Cerro Negro Project.

200. The Claimants further submit that none of the letters cited by the Respondent or sent
by the Claimants on 2 February 2005, 18 May 2005 and 20 June 2005 refer to any
“extraction tax” or to the effective increase of the royalty to 33 1/3% that resulted
from that measure. They add that the letter of 20 June 2005 refers to “a potential

dispute that would arise if and when the increase in the income-tax rate were

°S!_ R-PH Brief 15.
282 ©. Mem. M. { 119.
83 Reply M. (43.

284 Reply M. 46.

enacted”. This happened only in August 2006. Therefore, there was no actual

dispute and no claim of a Party that was positively opposed by the other.

201. Finally according to the Claimants, the present case concerns concrete measures, as
opposed to “an abstract, single dispute regarding the Respondent’s ‘right to adopt
fiscal measures in the face of changing circumstances in the international oil
market’”***, The Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider the disputes born from such

measures and the corresponding claims.

287s

202. The Parties refer to various cases*’ in support of their respective positions.

203. The Tribunal observes that several disputes had arisen between the Claimants and
the Respondent with respect to royalties and tax measures taken from October 2004
to June 2007. All these measures might have been prompted by a single reason: the
evolution of the oil market during that period. However, they were distinct
measures taken and contested at different dates, and the Tribunal has to take into

account those dates when deciding upon its jurisdiction.

204. With respect to the extraction tax, the Tribunal recalls that, in its Decision of 20
June 2010, it stated that “in June 2006, there were already pending disputes between
the Parties regarding the increase of royalties”. However, it did not specify what

those disputes were and it did not mention the extraction tax.

205. In fact, that tax was established by a statutory amendment adopted on 16 May 2006
with effect on 29 May 2006. That law imposed a tax of 33.33% on all liquid

hydrocarbons extracted from the ground. Under the new scheme, former royalty

85 Reply M. 49

°° C_PH Brief { 13

°87 Both Parties refer to Mavromatis Palestine Concessions (Greece v. Britain), PCIJ, Judgment No. 2 (30 August
1924), (Ex. R-249). They also refer to the decision by the International Court of Justice in the Headquarters
Agreement Case (26 April 1988) and to the Gabctkovo-Nagymaros Project (Hungary/Slovakia), Judgment (25
September 1977) (Ex. CL-103). They also refer to several ICSID cases (in particular, Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic
Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3), Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. 1 Ltd. v.
Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/28), Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/7) and Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/23),
(See Mem. M. fn. 504; C-Mem. M 115; and Reply M. fn. 147).

payments (at the rate of 16 2/3 or 30%) were to be credited to the liability for the

extraction tax.

206. By letter dated 26 May 2006, Cerro Negro protested against the creation of the Tax,
“which would have the practical consequence of increasing the royalty applicable to

”88 and would thus

participants in the Cerro Negro Strategic Association to 33.33%”
constitute a breach of the existing agreements. In the same letter, the Cerro Negro

parties reserved their rights to submit that dispute to ICSID Arbitration.

207. The Tribunal did not find in the record any previous protests by the Claimants
relating to the extraction tax. In particular, the Tribunal notes that the letter of 20
June 2005 referred to in the Tribunal’s Decision of 20 June 2010 does not mention
that tax. It merely contests the legality of a previous increase of the royalty tax to
30%. In fact, the extraction tax was never mentioned in any of the letters exchanged
between the Parties in 2005*°. Accordingly, the Tribunal arrives to the conclusion
that the dispute concerning the extraction tax was born after the date limit of 21
February 2006. Therefore, the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the claim relating to

that dispute.

208. The situation is different with respect to the increase of the income tax. It appears
from press reports that in April 2005, Mr. Rafael Ramirez, Ministry of Energy, told
local television that President Chavez had “announced that the Servicio Nacional
Integrado de Administraci6n Aduanera y Tributaria (SENIAT) tax agency will
reclassify taxes and a company that drills, produces, operates or processes oil must

>9200

pay income tax of 50% Then, on 16 June 2005, according to a LexisNexis

report, the Ministry of Energy and Venezuela’s tax authority, the SENIAT, were

“reportedly in the advanced stages of drafting the legislation that reflects the higher

8 Ex. C-14,

8° See the Claimants’ letters of 2 February 2005 (Ex. C-9), 18 May 2005 (Ex. C-10) and 20 June 2005 (Ex. C-12),
and the Respondent's letters of 8 June 2005 (Ex. C-40) and 23 June 2005 (Ex. C-41).

290
Ex. R-219.

tax rates”. According to the same source, this move would “increase the tax rate on

the four Orinoco heavy oil upgrading projects from 34% to 50%".
209. As a consequence, in its letter of 20 June 2005, Cerro Negro dealt not only with the
increase of the royalty rate to 30%, but also with the increase of the income tax rate

to 50%. On this last point, it noted:

“As reported by news services, on 15 June 2005, Minister Ramirez
announced that the government will introduce a bill in the National
Assembly that would increase the income tax rate applicable to the
income of participants in Orinoco Oil Belt Project from 34 to 50%. In
1991, the Venezuelan Congress reduced the income tax rate to 34% as
a financial incentive for investors to invest in those projects. This
reduction was an essential inducement to MCN’s predecessor to
participate in the Cerro Negro project and a key element of the
agreement between the participants and the Venezuelan
Government.”292 The Mobil parties considered that these measures
were “in breach of the obligations of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela under the Royalty Reduction Agreement, the Procedures
Agreement, the [Investment Law] and other applicable provisions of
Venezuelan law and international law’293. As a consequence, the
Mobil parties requested consultations with the Government “on the
broadened dispute, in an effort to reach an amicable resolution of this

matter and avoid dispute resolution proceedings”.

210. Thus, although the increase of the income tax was formally enacted only in August
2006, a dispute relating to the Government’s decision to increase the income tax
already existed in June 2005, before the date limit fixed in the Tribunal’s Decision

on Jurisdiction. This was not a potential dispute relating to a measure to be taken,

1 Bx, R-222.
°°? Bx. C-12.
°° Ibid.

4 Ibid.

295

211.

212.

213.

214.

but a real dispute concerning a decision already made, as recognized by the Tribunal
in its Decision on Jurisdiction. That dispute would have been resolved if President
Chavez and its Government had abandoned the idea to propose to the Congress the
adoption of the increase they had already decided or if the Congress had rejected the
bill, but that was not the case. Accordingly, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the

claim relating to the increase in the income tax dispute.

A third jurisdictional issue divides the Parties. It relates to the production volume to
be taken into account for the determination of the compensation due for the
expropriation of Cerro Negro. The Respondent contends that production was
limited to 120,000 barrels per day before the Dutch restructuring. Accordingly, a
dispute over production volume already existed before the restructuring date, which
means that any claim based on this dispute is beyond the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and
may not be taken into account for the purposes of calculating the compensation due

for the expropriation.

The Claimants deny that any such limit existed. They submit that the dispute that
arose before the restructuring date relates to the imposition of a 30% royalty on
production above 120,000 barrels per day. According to the Claimants, this dispute
is no longer at issue because they are not contesting the increased royalty, but the

expropriation of their right to increase production at the higher royalty”.

In fact,
the Claimants contend that production could go up to 344,000 barrels per day.
Accordingly, the compensation due for the expropriation must be calculated on that

basis.

The jurisdictional objection relating to the production increase, as well as the other
objections raised by the Respondent in relation to the calculation of the quantum,
will, if necessary, be examined by the Tribunal at a later stage, when conducting

such a calculation (see paragraph 314 below).

The Tribunal will now consider the merits of the claims relating to the alleged

breach of FET, arbitrary or discriminatory treatment and expropriation. However,

Reply M, 457.

before doing so, the Tribunal will consider the effects of the ICC Award on the

present case and determine the applicable law.
Vv. EFFECTS OF THE ICC ARBITRATION

215. The Tribunal recalls that, at the Hearing, it specifically requested the Parties to
address the question whether the ICC Award should have any impact on the award
to be rendered in these proceedings.” According to the Claimants, “the ICC Award
should have no impact on the award to be rendered in this case, either on liability or
quantum, simply because there is no legal basis for any such impact.” By
contrast, the Respondent submits that the ICC Award “should end the compensation

dispute and effectively put an end to this case”.***

According to the Respondent,
“Tthe] Claimants have argued from the beginning that this is the proceeding
contemplated under the Cerro Negro Association Agreement to mitigate the
‘damages payable’ as a result of the Government’s measures. Now that the
‘damages payable’ have been determined by the ICC tribunal and the ICC Award has
been paid, there is no point or basis for a continuation of the Cerro Negro
compensation controversy.”””

216. The Tribunal finds the Respondent’s position ill-founded. The Tribunal recalls that
the ICC arbitration was initiated pursuant to Clause 15 of the CNAA™, which
affords Mobil Cerro Negro a right to be indemnified by PDVSA-CN in the event of
certain governmental measures, but requires Mobil Cerro Negro to initiate a legal
action against the Government to mitigate the damages suffered as a result of those

measures. The parties to the ICC arbitration were Mobil CN, PDVSA and PDVSA-

2° Tr, Day 8 43:12-18.

°°” C-PH Brief. { 2.

°°8 R-PH Brief. 5.

2° R-PH Brief 15.

5 CNAA, Clause 15(1)(a), Ex. C-68: “To the extent any legal recourse is available to reverse or obtain relief from
such Discriminatory Measure, [MCN] shall commence and pursue legal actions to mitigate any damages suffered
as a result of the Discriminatory Measure. [...] Any net benefits received by [MCN] as a result of the pursuit of
the aforesaid legal actions (after deduction of the legal costs incurred by [MCN] in connection therewith) sha
(i) applied against any amount ultimately determined to be owed by [PDVSA-CN] pursuant to this Clause or (ii)
reimbursed to [PDVSA-CN] if [PDVSA-CN] has previously made payments to [MCN] with respect to the
Discriminatory Measure in question.”

       
   

 

CN. The ICC Award established the contractual liability of PDVSA and PDVSA-
CN to pay the limited indemnity required by the CNAA. It is clear that the ICC
Award and the present case concern the liability of different parties under different
normative regimes. The State was not a party to the ICC arbitration. Neither are
PDVSA and PDVSA-CN parties to this case. These proceedings concern the
responsibility of the State for breach of the Treaty and international law, a matter
that was not (and could not) have been resolved by the ICC tribunal, which

jurisdiction was limited to the contractual dispute.

217. As a result, the Tribunal finds that the ICC Award does not, as the Respondent
contends, put an end to this case. However, it is true that some facts that were
relevant in the ICC arbitration are also relevant in the present case, such as the facts
underlying the production and export curtailments claim. In its analysis, the
Tribunal has thus considered the findings of the ICC tribunal in an attempt to avoid

inconsistent outcomes whenever possible.

218. The Tribunal further notes that the CNAA limits the compensation due by PDVSA,
a limitation reflected in the amount awarded by the ICC tribunal. No such limitation
applies, however, to the State's responsibility under the BIT. The Government was
neither a party to the CNAA nor a third-party beneficiary. Neither has the
Respondent advanced any relevant argument that the limitations on PDVSA-CN’s
contractual liability under Clause 15 should be transmuted into limitations of the

State’s responsibility under international law.

219. The Tribunal will assess the effect of the ICC Award on quantum where relevant in

section VIII.C.5 below.

VI. APPLICABLE LAW
220. Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention provides the following:
“The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of

law as may be agreed by the parties. In the absence of such agreement,

the Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the

dispute (including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of

international law as may be applicable.”

221. In the present case, the Parties have made a choice of law, which is reflected in
Article 9(5) of the BIT. The Respondent consented to this choice of law when
ratifying the BIT, and the Claimants have done so when they accepted to arbitrate
under the Treaty, or, at the latest, when they filed the request for arbitration with

ICSID.

222. Article 9(5) of the Treaty designates the following sources of law to govern disputes

under the Treaty:

“The arbitral award shall be based on:

the law of the Contracting Party concerned;

the provisions of this Agreement and other relevant Agreements
between the Contracting Parties;

the provisions of special agreements relating to the investments;

the general principles of international law; and

such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties to the dispute.”

223. Accordingly, the Tribunal will apply the BIT and the other agreed sources of law
where appropriate. Article 9(5) of the Treaty does not allocate matters to any of
those laws. Accordingly, it is for the Tribunal to determine whether an issue is
subject to national or international law. Further, if and when an issue arises, the
Tribunal will determine whether the applicable international law should be limited
to general principles of international law under Article 9(5) of the BIT or whether it
includes customary international law. Moreover, with respect to the interpretation
of the BIT, the Tribunal will resort to the Vienna Convention on the Law of

301

Treaties,’ which both States have ratified, as a "relevant Agreement between the

Contracting Parties".

**! Vienna Convention (Ex. CL-71).

224.

225.

VII.

226.

Article 9(5) of the Dutch Treaty quoted above includes “the law of the Contracting
Party” and “the provisions of special agreements relating to the investments” among
the sources of applicable law. In reliance on these provisions, the Respondent
appears to argue that the Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions of the Cerro Negro
Framework of Conditions (i) relieve the Republic from its obligation to comply with
the standards set forth in the Treaty, and/or (ii) import the contractual limitations to
PDVSA-CN’s indemnity obligations under Clause 15 of the CNAA into the State’s

responsibility for breach of the Treaty.*”

The Tribunal disagrees with this position. The Tribunal recalls that it is a
fundamental principle of international law that “[a] party may not invoke the
provisions of its internal law as justification for its failure to perform a treaty.”*”
Under this principle, international obligations arising from a treaty cannot be
discarded on the grounds of national law. Among the legal systems on which the
Award “shall be based” pursuant to Article 9(5) of the Treaty, the Tribunal has no
doubt in concluding that this issue must be governed by international law.
Consequently, the Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions cannot exempt or excuse
the Respondent from its obligations under the Treaty or under customary
international law. Bearing this in mind, the Tribunal has considered the effect of the
Eighteenth and Twentieth Conditions of the Cerro Negro Framework of Conditions

in the section on quantum below.

FET AND ARBITRARY OR DISCRIMINATORY MEASURES

The Tribunal will not address the claims over which it has no jurisdiction, namely,
the FET and the arbitrary/discriminatory claims concerning the increase in the
income tax (see paragraph 210 above). The Tribunal will successively consider the
FET and the arbitrary/discriminatory claims concerning (A) the extraction tax; (B)
the production and export curtailments; (C) the coertion and the expropriation

measures; and (D) the severance payments.

°C. Mem. M. { 132.
* Vienna Convention, Article 27 (Ex. CL-71).

A.

227.

228.

229.

230.

231.

THE EXTRACTION TAX

The Tribunal has found that it has jurisdiction over the extraction tax claim (see
paragraph 207 above). It will thus now consider whether that tax was imposed by
the Respondent in violation of the FET and arbitrary or discriminatory treatment

standards.

The FET standard is contained in Article 3(1) of the Treaty. The Respondent
submits that Article 4 precludes claims under Article 3(1) “with respect to taxes,
fees, charges, and to fiscal deductions and exemptions”.** According to the
Claimants, there is nothing in Article 4 of the BIT that carves out fiscal measures
from the FET standard contained in Article 3(1).*° The Tribunal will start by
determining whether fiscal measures are covered by the FET standard in Article 3(1)

of the Treaty.

The Respondent considers that Article 4 of the Treaty is the only provision
addressing fiscal measures in the BIT, and that “it is appropriate to accord priority to

39306

the more specific provision, even absent an express carve-out or exception”*”° under

the well-established principle of lex specialis.

According to the Respondent’s interpretation, Article 4 of the BIT sets forth the
standard of treatment with respect to fiscal measures. Since Article 4 only protects
investors from discriminatory treatment, the Respondent contends that FET
treatment does not apply to fiscal measures. Once the limited standards of treatment
under Article 4 are met, the provision precludes claims under other provisions of the
Treaty “with respect to taxes, fees, charges, and to fiscal deductions and

exemptions”*”.

The Respondent submits that Article 4 of the Treaty imposes a requirement of non-

discriminatory treatment, but it does not contain any references to FET. Since the

°C. Mem. M. { 138.

5 Reply M, {{ 103.

5 Rej. M. { 108; see also {ff 101-107.
°C, Mem. M. { 138.

80

Claimants have not alleged that the fiscal measures in question were discriminatory
under Article 4, and the FET standard of Article 3(1) does not apply to fiscal

measures, the Claimants’ claims must be dismissed*”.

232. In support of its position, the Respondent compares the exemptions from non-
discriminatory treatment in Article 4 with those in Article 3(3) of the Treaty.
Article 4 provides that a Contracting State’s obligation of non-discrimination inter
alia with regard to taxes, fees, charges and fiscal deductions does not extend to
“special fiscal advantages”, which it may accord on the basis of reciprocity with a
third State or under double taxation treaties. By contrast, Article 3(3) of the Treaty
provides that a Contracting State’s non-discrimination obligation does not extend to
“special advantages” accorded by virtue of agreements establishing customs unions,
economic unions, monetary unions, or similar institutions, or on the basis of interim
agreements leading to such unions or institutions. It makes no reference to double
taxation agreements or to special treatment based on reciprocity. The Respondent
considers that “[t]he inclusion of these latter two exemptions in Article 4, and their
absence from Article 3, demonstrates that Article 4 was intended as the exclusive
provision addressing fiscal measures. If this were not the case, then an investor
whose claim for fiscal measures was barred by one of the ‘special fiscal advantage’
exemptions in Article 4 would be permitted to circumvent the bar by pursuing the
claim under Article 3, a result that would make Article 4’s exemptions

meaningless”.

233. According to the Respondent, accepting the Claimants’ submission that “[n]othing
in [Article 4] carves out fiscal measures from the FET standard of Article 3(1)”,
would render Article 4 superfluous. Article 4 does not provide additional
requirements to FET. According to the Respondent, Article 4 is more restrictive

than Article 3, not more expansive.*"”

*8 Rej. M. {41 20, 99; C. Mem. M. 135.
* ©. Mem. M. { 139.
5! Rej. M. ff 100-101.

234. The Respondent considers that “entertaining Claimants’ FET claims based on fiscal
measures would be tantamount to rewriting the Dutch Treaty to create a new form of
claim for non-discriminatory fiscal measures”, which would be contrary to the rules

established in the Vienna Convention.*"

235. The Claimants submit that nothing in Article 4 of the Treaty carves out fiscal
measures from the FET standard of Article 3(1).*” Just because Article 4 regulates
some aspects of fiscal measures, it cannot be inferred that Article 4 regulates all

aspects of fiscal measures.*"

According to the Claimants, Article 4 does not
exclude all other provisions of the Treaty that apply to the State’s treatment of
investments (such as the FET standard of Article 3(1), the umbrella clause in Article

3(4) and the expropriation standards of Article 6).*"*

236. It is the Claimants’ position that, if Article 4 were to be construed as an exception to
Article 3, then it should have included language to that effect. The Tribunal cannot
do violence to the terms of Article 4 and read language into the provision that is not
there. This is all the more so, according to the Claimants, when Article 4 can be

given meaning without adding language.

237. In response to the Respondent’s reliance on Article 3(3) of the Treaty, the Claimants
submit that “at most, Article 4 of the Treaty provides a special rule that supersedes
the more general rule of Article 3(3) in the matter in which both rules overlap, that
is, in respect of the State’s obligation to afford MEN treatment.”** According to the
Claimants, the Respondent wrongly extends Article 4 of the Treaty beyond the area
of its overlap with Article 3(1). There is no basis for applying Article 4 to standards
(such as FET and expropriation) that are not set forth in Article 3(3), but in other

provisions of the Treaty*"’.

°C. Mem. M. { 141.

5 Reply M. { 103.
°° Tid.
$4 Reply M. { 104.
* Ibid.
*6 Tid.

238. The Claimants submit that, as Article 4 itself requires MFN treatment for taxation
measures, “‘it is absurd to construe Article 4 as (i) excluding taxation measures from
most of the substantive standards of the Treaty while (ii) allowing the MFN
principle of Article 4 to subject taxation measures to analogous substantive
standards incorporated from other treaties made by Venezuela.”*"’ The Claimants
also contend that the Respondent’s reliance on other treaties and on decisions of
other arbitral tribunals is misplaced. In fact, the authorities cited by the Respondent
explicitly state that substantive protections do not extend to taxation measures.
Since that explicit language is absent in Article 4, the Claimants contend that, by

contrast, Article 4 was not intended to carve out taxes from its scope of protection**.

239. Before analyzing the Parties’ positions on the interaction between Articles 3 and 4
of the Treaty, it is helpful to quote the relevant provisions. Article 3 of the BIT

reads as follows:

“(1) Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and equitable treatment of
the investments of nationals of the other Contracting Party and shall
not impair, by arbitrary or discriminatory measures, the operation,
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal thereof by those

nationals.

(2) More particularly, each Contracting Party shall accord to such
investments full physical security and protection which in any case
shall not be less than that accorded either to investments of its own
nationals or to investments of nationals of any third State, whichever is

more favourable to the national concerned.

(3) If a Contracting Party has accorded special advantages to nationals
of any third State by virtue of agreements establishing customs unions,
economic unions, monetary unions or similar institutions, or on the

basis of interim agreements leading to such unions or institutions, that

57 C_PH Brief { 26.
318 Reply M. { 105.

Contracting Party shall not be obliged to accord such advantages to

nationals of the other Contracting Party.

(4) Each Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it may have
entered into with regard to the treatment of investments of nationals of
the other Contracting Party. If the provisions of law of either
Contracting Party or obligations under international law existing at
present or established hereafter between the Contacting Parties in
addition to the present Agreement contain a regulation, whether
general or specific, entitling investments by nationals of the other
Contracting Party to a treatment more favourable than is provided for
by the present Agreement, such regulation shall to the extent that it is

more favourable prevail over the present Agreement.”

240. Article 4 of the BIT provides the following:

“With respect to taxes, fees, charges, and to fiscal deductions and
exemptions, each Contracting Party shall accord to nationals of the
other Contracting Party with respect to their investments in its territory
treatment not less favourable than that accorded to its own nationals or
to those of any third State, whichever is more favourable to the
nationals concerned. For this purpose, however, there shall not be
taken into account any special fiscal advantages accorded by that
Party;

(a) Under an agreement for the avoidance of double taxation; or

(b) by virtue of its participation in a customs union, economic union, or
similar institutions; or

(c) on the basis of reciprocity with a third State.”

241. The Claimants postulate that nothing in Article 4 carves out fiscal measures from
the FET standard of Article 3(1) of the Treaty. To the contrary, the Respondent
contends that Article 4 of the Treaty carves out fiscal measures from the FET

standard of Article 3(1).

242. To resolve this issue, the Tribunal must interpret Articles 3 and 4 of the Treaty, for
which it turns to the Vienna Convention. Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention
requires that a treaty be interpreted “in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its
object and purpose”. To confirm the meaning of the provision of a treaty, recourse
may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, which include the

circumstances of the treaty’s conclusion*”.

243. Broadly put, Article 4 of the Treaty guarantees national and most favored nation
treatment to investors with respect to “taxes, fees, charges, and to fiscal deductions
and exemptions.” Article 4 is more specific than Article 3, which is generally
concerned with the “treatment of investments”. However, Article 4 contains no
mention of “fair and equitable treatment”. In addition, the treatment guaranteed by
Article 4 is subject to three exceptions, two of which are not included in Article
3(3). The Tribunal considers that Article 4 comprehensively regulates the standards
of treatment with respect to fiscal measures by providing for national and most

favored nation treatment, and a list of applicable exceptions.

244. If the Claimants’ argument were followed, namely that Article 3(1) operates in
parallel with Article 4 regarding fiscal measures, the two exceptions in Article 4
that do not appear in Article 3(3) would be rendered meaningless, as they could be

circumvented by relying on the broader provisions of Article 3(1) of the BIT.

245. Conversely, the one exception covered by both Article 4 and Article 3(3) would be
duplicated and therefore redundant. In particular, Article 3(3) of the BIT contains
an exception in respect of “agreements establishing customs unions, economic
unions, monetary unions or similar institutions”, which is essentially reproduced in
Article 4: “participation in a customs union, economic union, or similar
institutions.” Thus, the Claimants’ interpretation would result in at least one
provision being rendered redundant — an outcome that should be avoided in treaty

interpretation.

* Vienna Convention, Article 32 (Ex. CL-71).

°° The Tribunal notes that the same conclusion was
ConocoPhillips Hamaca B.V. and Conoco Phillips Gulf of Paria B.V. v Bolivarian Republic of Veneuzela
(ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30), Decision on Jurisdiction and the Merits of 3 September 2013, {ff 297-317.

246.

247.

248.

249.

Moreover, if the purpose of the Treaty had been not to carve out fiscal measures
from the more general Article 4, then the easiest way to achieve it would have been
to incorporate the exceptions contained in Article 4 in Article 3(3) itself. There
would have been no need to draft an article dealing with fiscal measures and
containing specific exceptions (double-taxation agreements, customs, economic or

similar unions and special treatment based on reciprocity with a third State).

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal considers that the Claimants’ interpretation
is not supported by the structure and wording of Articles 3 and 4 of the Treaty, and
that the correct interpretation is that Article 3 and Article 4 are distinct provisions,
the latter governing fiscal measures exclusively. Therefore, the Tribunal finds that
fiscal measures are subject only to the national and most favored nation treatment
obligations contained in Article 4 of the Treaty, and are carved out of Article 3(1),
which contains the obligation to provide fair and equitable treatment.**” The
Tribunal notes that the claim relating to the extraction tax is based only on Article
3(1) of the Treaty, not on Article 4. Since Article 3(1) does not apply to fiscal
measures, the extraction tax claim based on the breach of the FET standard is

rejected.

The Tribunal’s conclusions regarding FET also apply to arbitrary or discriminatory
treatment relating to the extraction tax. The extraction tax claim for arbitrary or
discriminatory treatment is made under Article 3(1) of the Treaty, which, for the
reasons given, is inapplicable. As a result, the arbitrary or discriminatory claim

relating to the extraction tax is equally rejected.

THE PRODUCTION AND EXPORT CURTAILMENTS

The Claimants submit that the series of production and export curtailments imposed

by the Respondent on the Cerro Negro Project from late 2006 through the first part

 

recently reached in ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V.,

250.

251.

252.

of 2007*"' reduced its production by approximately 560,000 barrels of extra-heavy
crude in 2006, as compared with the production target for 2006, and reduced its
exports by about 5.5 million barrels of synthetic crude oil by the end of June 2007,

when compared to the export target for the first half of 2007*.

The Claimants’ contend that these production and export cuts violated both the
Framework of Conditions of the Cerro Negro Project and the Association
Agreement, which permitted “production cuts only if they were necessary to comply
with Venezuela’s international commitments, and only if they were applicable on a

pro rata basis to all producers in Venezuela”.

According to the Claimants, the
production cut imposed in October 2006 was not required to comply with any
international obligation of the Republic, and none of them were applied on a pro

rata basis to all producers in Venezuela™.

To the contrary, the Claimants contend
that they were in breach of FET as well as arbitrary and discriminatory treatment,

and thus violated Article 3(1) of the BIT**.

The Claimants contend that they have sustained damages amounting to a total of

US$ 53.6 million as a result of the curtailments imposed during this period®*.

According to the Respondent, the 2006 curtailments did not meet the de minimis
exception set forth in the Cerro Negro Association Agreement, and the same would
have been true for 2007 had Mobil Cerro Negro remained in the Project*’. The
Respondent contends that the discriminatory treatment claim cannot be sustained
given that the export curtailments were not directed at the Cerro Negro Project
because of the nationality of Mobil Cerro Negro. In fact, all of the upgrading
projects of the Orinoco Oil Belt were curtailed, regardless of nationality. Finally,

the Respondent alleges that the differences of the Cerro Negro Project when

31 Mem. M. (156.

* Mem. M. (160.

33 Mem. M. (161.

34 Mem. M. (162. See also Reply M. [152 to 160.

°°5 Mem. M. 279 and {[ 283; Reply M. (141 and 143.

6 Mem. M. 312; Graves First Expert Report, Section IV.B.
7 C.Mem. M. (79.

compared to the other projects in Venezuela render any discrimination claim

without merit**.

253. The Respondent considers that any adverse impact of the 2007 measures has been

329

grossly inflated by the Claimants

254. At the outset, the Tribunal would like to point out that it is seized of a treaty claim,
which must be carefully distinguished from the contract claims submitted to the ICC
tribunal. Thus, and as explained in paragraph 218 above, the contractual limitation
contained in Clause 15 of the Association Agreement concluded between PDVSA
and the Claimants and referred to in the ICC arbitration does not apply in the present
case, which concerns Venezuela’s responsibility under the Treaty. The arguments
developed by the Respondent to the contrary, as well as those based on the
Twentieth Condition of the Cerro Negro Congressional Authorization, cannot be

upheld.

255. The Tribunal has only to consider whether the measures taken by Venezuela
regarding production and exports were compatible with the fair and equitable
treatment standard and with the prohibition of arbitrary or discriminatory treatment

contained in Article 3(1) of the BIT — quoted in paragraph 239 above.

256. The Tribunal will first consider the alleged breach of the FET standard. In the
Tribunal’s opinion, this standard may be breached by frustrating the expectations
that the investor may have legitimately taken into account when making the
investment. Legitimate expectations may result from specific formal assurances
given by the host state in order to induce investment*”. The Tribunal will thus
consider whether in the present case legitimate expectations could reasonably have

been the result of such assurances.

8 C.Mem. M. (226.

°° C. Mem. M. fn. 176; Rej. M. | 175.

33° Glamis Gold Ltd. v. United States (NAFTA Ch. 11, 8 June 2009), (Ex. CL-189); Parkerings-Compagniet AS v.
Republic of Lithuania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/8), (Ex. R-303); Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9), (Ex. CL-167); Saluka Investments BV v. Czech Republic (PCA-
UNCITRAL, LIC 210 (2006)), (Ex. CL-123).

257.

258.

259.

260.

261.

262.

In this respect, the Tribunal recalls that the Framework of Conditions of the
Association Agreement for the exploitation, upgrading and marketing of extra-heavy
crude oil to be produced in the Cerro Negro area of the Orinoco Oil Belt was

approved by the Congress of Venezuela on 24 April 1997.

Condition Ninth of the Framework of Conditions specified that “an optimal
production level was to be obtained “by the time the upgrading installations start
commercial operations”. The level of said production would be specified in the
Association Agreement. Clause 8 of the Association Agreement fixed that level at
120,000 barrels per day of extra-heavy oil (with the possibility of some increase,

which the Tribunal will consider further on (see paragraphs 320 and 321below).

Condition Thirteenth of the Framework of Conditions added that “[i]f the Parties are
required to reduce their production as a result of the international commitments of
the Republic of Venezuela, such reduction shall not exceed the reduction percentage
generally applicable to the national oil industry as a whole. This percentage shall be
calculated based on the available production capacity. The Parties shall agree on an
appropriate extension of the terms of the Association in the event of a reduction as

those indicated herein”.

The Tribunal considers that, when making their investment, the Claimants could
reasonably and legitimately have expected to produce at least 120,000 barrels per
day of extra-heavy crude oil and that their production would not be unilaterally
reduced at a lower level except as provided for in Condition Thirteenth of the
Framework of Conditions. Accordingly, the Tribunal will now examine whether the

measures taken by Venezuela in 2006 and 2007 were contrary to those expectations.

The Tribunal considers that a distinction must be made between the production

curtailment decided in October 2006 and the curtailments imposed later.

On 9 October 2006, Venezuela imposed a production cut of natural hydrocarbon to
all oil producers, applicable on a pro rata basis. It is not contested that this

reduction was not the result of an OPEC decision. It was a measure imposed by

263.

264.

265.

266.

Venezuela in spite of the assurances given in Condition Ninth of the Framework of
Conditions, as specified in Clause 8 of the Association Agreement, and it did not fall

within the requirements of Condition Thirteenth of the Framework of Conditions.

A new production curtailment was decided on November 2006, followed from
January 2007 to March 2007 by export curtailments. All these curtailments
constituted measures adopted as a consequence of OPEC decisions, and in this sense
it is not contested that they fall within the requirements of Condition Thirteenth of
the Framework of Conditions. However, these measures only concerned the
Orinoco oil producers. They were not shared on a pro rata basis as required by

Condition Thirteenth.

It thus appears that the production and export curtailments imposed from November
2006 were incompatible with the Claimants’ reasonable and legitimate expectations,
and thus breached the FET standard contained in Article 3(1) of the BIT. The

Respondent is responsible for the damage resulting from this breach.

In order to calculate the quantum of the damages suffered as a consequence of this
breach, the Claimants produced an Expert Report by Mr. R. Dean Graves evaluating
the damages resulting from the production and export curtailments at US$ 53.6

million.

The Expert calculates the volume of extra heavy oil that the Cerro Negro project
would have produced between October 2006 and June 2007 had the curtailments not
been imposed, and determines the corresponding curtailed SCO sales. The figure of
Al 2/3% reached by Mr. Graves for Mobil Cerro negro must be revised for the

following reasons:

(a) The Respondent draws the Tribunal’s attention to the fact that the export
curtailments were not a limiting factor on SCO production and sales since
April 2007. Instead, SCO production and sales were constrained because of

“repairs to the coker drums that reduced the EHCO feed rates to the upgrader

90

by almost half?**!,

Moreover, according to the Respondent, in 2007 the
Project was not in a position to produce at the levels relied on by the Claimants
because of the large inventory of inactive wells that existed in the first half of
2007**?. The Claimants did not persuasively contest these statements either at

the hearing or in their post-hearing briefs.

(b) Mr. Graves bases his calculations on the difference between the sales that
would have been achieved if the Project had produced 120,000 barrels per day
of EHCO and the sales that were actually made. However, starting in
November 2006, the figure must be lowered to reflect the pro rata production
cut which was legally imposed in accordance with Condition Thirteenth of the

Framework of Conditions as a result of the OPEC decision.

267. Taking these elements into account, the Tribunal evaluates the impact of the
curtailments on the Claimants’ SCO volume of sales at a total of 815,068 barrels of

EHCO.

268. The Tribunal accepts the oil prices used by the Claimants’ Expert, which from
October 2006 to March 2007 vary from US$ 39.96 to US$ 44.74 per barrel of SCO.
It is on that basis that the Tribunal has calculated the value of the Claimants’

curtailed SCO sales at US$ 30,781,144 for the relevant period.

269. The curtailed co-production sales, amounting to US$ 850,442, must be added to this
amount. The balance amount must then be reduced by deducting: (i) production
costs, which amount to US$ 2,716,663; (ii) taxes, which amount to US$ 655,195 in
science and technology tax, US$ 239,169 in drug and alcohol tax, US$ 31,631 in
export registration contribution; (iii) US$ 34,868 in co-production royalties; and (v)
US$ 10,667,359 in extraction tax at the rate of 33 1/3% (see paragraph 96 above). It

must also be reduced by deducting the income tax at the rate of 34% for 2006 and

3 Rej. M. 175.
5? Rej. M. 175.

270.

271.

272.

273.

50% for 2007, for a total amount of US$ 8,104,531. Finally, capital expenses must
be deduced, in the amount of US$ 139,688.

On the basis of these calculations, the Tribunal evaluates the damages suffered by
the Claimants as a result of the production and export curtailments at US$

9,042,482.

The ICC tribunal had decided that the export curtailments taken in 2007 constituted
discriminatory measures under the Association Agreement and awarded
compensation to Cerro Negro Ltd (Bahamas) for the damages suffered as a result of
those measures. It is not contested that these damages have been paid by Lagoven
CN, the respondent in the ICC proceeding. It is also not contested that, under clause
15(1) of the Association Agreement, the Claimants must, upon payment of the
compensation awarded in this proceeding for the same measures, reimburse
Lagoven CN the sum already recovered as compensation for the prejudice resulting
from the 2007 curtailments. The Claimants have expressly stated that they will
make the required reimbursement to PDVSA-CN. Although this statement is based
on a contractual obligation that is foreign to the present case, the Tribunal has no
reason to doubt the Claimants’ representation. Double recovery will thus be

avoided.

The Claimants add that the Respondent’s conduct was not only contrary to the FET
standard, but also arbitrary and discriminatory. On that ground too, the Respondent
would be in breach of Article 3(1) of the BIT and therefore responsible for the

damage suffered by the Claimants as a result of this breach.

The Tribunal has already decided that the production and export curtailment
measures breached the FET standard contained in Article 3(1) of the Treaty (see
paragraph 264 above). The Tribunal does not consider it necessary to separately
examine whether the Respondent’s conduct was also arbitrary and/or discriminatory.
Indeed, the Claimants would not be entitled to greater relief even if the Tribunal

were to establish a breach of these BIT protections.

c.

333

274.

275.

276.

THE COERCION AND THE EXPROPRIATION MEASURES

In addition to their expropriation claims under Article 6 of the BIT, the Claimants
briefly submit that “each of the Respondent's measures giving rise to claims is in
breach of the unqualified Fair and Equitable Treatment standard”** and that “the
Respondent's measures discussed earlier as violations of the Fair and Equitable

Treatment standard were arbitrary”*™™.

The inference seems to be that the alleged
coertion and expropriation measures are also claimed to breach Article 3(1) of the

BIT**.

In respect of the claims regarding the alleged coercion of the Claimants into
migration and the claim relating to the expropriation measures, the Tribunal has
found that the expropriation was conducted in accordance with due process (see
paragraph 297 below), that it was not carried out contrary to undertakings given to
the Claimants in this respect (see paragraph 299 below) and that the Claimant have
not established that the offers made by Venezuela were incompatible with the “just”
compensation requirement of Article 6(c) of the BIT (see paragraph 305 below).
The Tribunal has concluded that the expropriation itself was conducted in a lawful

manner (see paragraph 306 below).**

On this background, the Tribunal finds no additional elements in the record
establishing a violation of FET or the arbitrary or discriminatory treatment standard
in respect of these measures. These claims have been too briefly and too
unconvincingly developed to enable the decision sought from the Tribunal.

Accordingly, these claims are dismissed.

Mem. M. { 271.

*4 Mem. M. {{ 280.
5 Mem. M. {| 284.

°° The expropriation of the Claimants’ “discrete rights” is
for this claim (reproduced at para. 282 below) are the
Tribunal has examined the cons
longer needs to decide this claim.

also claimed to be arbitrary. The measures in question
me as those challenged in this section VII, in which the
tency of the measures with Article 3(1) of the Treaty. Hence, the Tribunal no

     

  

D.

277.

278.

Vill.

279.

280.

THE SEVERANCE PAYMENTS

The Claimants refer to the removal of Operadora Cerro Negro from its role as the
operating company for the Cerro Negro Project by Decree-Law 5200, which took
effect in April 2007. They submit that this change was arbitrary and discriminatory
and violated the fair and equitable treatment standard contained in Article 3(1) of
the BIT. According to the Claimants, as a consequence of the removal, the
company was required to make severance payments to Operadora Cerro Negro’s
displaced Venezuelan employees. On the basis of Mr. R. Dean Graves’ report, the
Claimants contend that the damages resulting from those payments amount to US$
2.7 million*’, and request the corresponding compensation. The Respondent
contested this claim in its Counter-Memorial on the Merits** and the matter was not

further addressed in any detail.

Under the circumstances and bearing in mind the findings recalled in paragraph 275
above, the Tribunal is unable on the basis of the record to conclude that the removal
of Operadora Cerro Negro from its role as the operating company for the Cerro
Negro Project by Decree-Law 5200 constituted a violation of Article 3(1) of the
Treaty. In any case, besides relying on the expert report of Mr. Graves, the
Claimants have not furnished any evidence of damage suffered as a consequence of

this alleged breach. Therefore, this claim must be dismissed.

EXPROPRIATION

The Claimants submit that Venezuela has breached Article 6 of the BIT by
wrongfully expropriating its investments in the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Projects.
The Respondent does not dispute that the Claimant's investments were expropriated,

but contends that that expropriation was lawful.

Article 6 of the BIT provides the following:

7 Mem. M. §313
*8 C._Mem M. §215

“Neither Contracting Party shall take measures to expropriate or
nationalise investments of nationals of the other Contracting Party or
take measures having an effect equivalent to nationalisation or
expropriation with regard to such investments, unless the following
conditions are complied with:

a) the measures are taken in the public interest and under due process
of law;

b) the measures are not discriminatory or contrary to any undertaking
which the Contracting Party taking such measures may have given;

c) the measures are taken against just compensation.

Such compensation shall represent the market value of the investments
affected immediately before the measures were taken or the impending
measures became public knowledge, whichever is earlier, it shall
include interest at a normal commercial rate until the date of payment
and, shall, in order to be effective for the claimants, be paid and made
transferable, without delay, to the country designated by the claimants
concerned and in the currency of the country of which the claimants

are nationals or in any convertible currency accepted by the claimants.”

A. EXPROPRIATION OF “DISCRETE RIGHTS” BEFORE JUNE 2007

281. The Claimants submit that before “Decree-Law 5200 directly expropriated the
Claimants’ rights and interests in the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Projects, they had
already been permanently deprived of the benefit of discrete rights pertaining to
their investments*” by measures having an effect equivalent to expropriation*®. The
indirect expropriation of the Claimants’ rights was wrongful under the BIT because
it was carried out without due process of law, contrary to undertakings and without

compensation™'.

282. According to the Claimants, the following measures permanently deprived them of

the benefit of their rights:

3° Mem. M, 255.
0 Mem. M. 4 14.
*! Mem. M. 243.

283.

284.

285.

286.

Imposing a higher income-tax rate to the participants in extra-heavy oil projects;
Adopting an extraction tax;

Imposing unjustified and discriminatory production and export curtailments;
Appointing a new operator for the Cerro Negro Project by decree (severance

payments claim).

The Claimants state that each of the expropriated rights falls within the definition of
investment given in article 1(a) of the BIT and is separately protected by Article 6 of
the BIT”.

The Respondent submits that, in the absence of special circumstances, such as it
would be in the case of confiscatory taxes, taxation does not constitute
expropriation.“ According to the Respondent, the fiscal measures adopted did not
prevent the Claimants from enjoying profitable operations in Venezuela due to the
unprecedented environment of high oil prices. Accordingly, the fiscal measures
may not be considered “confiscatory” and therefore did not constitute

expropriation™.

Regarding the non-fiscal measures, the Respondent considers that they do not satisfy
the “substantial deprivation” test for expropriation’. Moreover, according to the
Respondent, “there is no authority to support the theory of partial expropriation on
the basis of a right that is not capable of independent economic exploitation

99346

severable from the remainder of the investment’ According to the Respondent,

the proper analysis for determining whether an expropriation has occurred is the

effect on the investment as a whole*”.

The Tribunal has to determine whether the measures referred to by the Claimants

had an effect equivalent to expropriation within the meaning of Article 6 of the BIT.

* Hearing Tr. Day 1, 102:22-23.
*8C Mem. M. (228.

“4C. Mem. M. (239.

“5 C.Mem. M. (244.

© Hearing Tr. Day 2, 156:5-9.
*7C. Mem. M. (250.

The Tribunal considers that, under international law, a measure which does not have
all the features of a formal expropriation may be equivalent to an expropriation if it
gives rise to an effective deprivation of the investment as a whole. Such a
deprivation requires either a total loss of the investment's value or a total loss of

control by the investor of its investment, both of a permanent nature.

287. It is undisputed that those conditions are not fulfilled in the present case with respect
to either the Cerro Negro Project or the La Ceiba Project. Accordingly, the pre-
migration measures enumerated by the Claimants cannot be characterized as

equivalent to an expropriation of the Claimants' investments.
B. EXPROPRIATION OF THE CERRO NEGRO AND LA CEIBA PROJECTS IN JUNE 2007

288. The Parties agree that the Claimants’ investments were expropriated on 27 June
2007 in implementation of Decree-Law 5200 (see paragraphs 111 to 113 above).
The Claimants submit that that expropriation was unlawful and that, as a
consequence, the Respondent is under the obligation to make full reparation for the
damages caused, in conformity with international law**. By contrast, the
Respondent contends that the expropriation was lawful and that the indemnity to be
paid to the Claimants must represent the market value of the investment in June
2007, as provided for in article 6 of the BIT.*° The Respondent considers that the
same rules would apply even if the expropriation was deemed to have been

unlawful**°.

289. The Tribunal will first consider whether the expropriation of the Claimants’

investments was carried out lawfully, and then address the compensation claim.

290. The Claimants submit that the measures taken by Venezuela fail to meet at least
three of the requirements of Article 6 of the BIT in that: (i) they were taken without

due process of law; (ii) they were contrary to the Respondent’s undertakings; and

+8 Mem. M. 9295 to 304, referring in particular to the Factory of Chorzow case (Germany v. Poland, Judgment on
the merits, 13 September 1928), (Ex. CL-150) {| 47.

*°C. Mem. M. { 260.
*.C. Mem. M. { 262.

(iii) they were not taken against any compensation, let alone just compensation.
Non-compliance with any of these requirements would render the expropriation

wrongful under the BIT*".

291. On the first point, the Claimants submit that the process through which the
expropriation was carried out was a coercive process which did not follow any
established legal procedure to determine their rights before title of the assets was
transferred to a PVDSA subsidiary*”. On the second point, the Claimants submit
that the expropriation was made against specific commitments regarding the legal
frameworks applicable to the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Projects**. On the third
point, the Claimants contend that the Respondent has not provided any
compensation to the Claimants. Failure to pay compensation itself renders the

expropriation wrongful.

292. The Respondent contends that the nationalization was carried out pursuant to a law
of public policy, in an orderly and non-discriminatory manner and for a public

purpose, in accordance with a process established by duly enacted laws which in

355

fact satisfied most of the oil companies operating in the country*’. The Respondent

denies that specific commitments were made by Venezuela surrendering its
sovereign right to regulate or even expropriate interests in the oil sector. The
Respondent further contends that it engaged in bona fide negotiations with the

Claimants regarding compensation, but an agreement was not possible due to the

356

Claimants’ demands**. Failure to agree upon the amount of compensation does not

render an expropriation unlawful*”’.

293. The Tribunal recalls that, under the 2001 Hydrocarbon Law, oil production activities

were reserved to the State and that private Parties were authorized to participate in

351 Mem. 257.

* Mem. M. {if 262, 264.
* Mem. M. {{ 265.

4 Mem. M. {{ 259.

555 Rej. M. fff 230-231.
556 Rej. M. 230.

7G, Mem. M. { 266.

those activities only through mixed enterprises in which the State owned more than
50% of the shares. However, the Orinoco Oil Belt Associations (such as the Cerro
Negro Project) and the Profit Sharing Agreements (such as the La Ceiba Project)

remained outside that legal framework.

294. Six years later, the Venezuelan authorities decided to put an end to this special
regime. On | February 2007, the National Assembly adopted a law enabling the
President to take the measures required to that effect. In implementation of the
Enabling Law, Decree-Law 5200 ordered that the Associations located in the
Orinoco Oil Belt and the At-Risk-and-Shared-Profits Associations be “migrated”
into new mixed companies under the 2001 Hydrocarbon Law. Article 4 of Decree-
Law 5200 gave the oil company four months, until 26 June 2007, to agree to
participate in the new mixed companies. Article 5 provided that, if no agreement
was reached on such a migration by the end of that period, Venezuela would

“directly assume the activities of the Associations”**.

295. Throughout those four months, discussions took place between Mobil Cerro Negro,
Mobil Venezolana and the Respondent about the potential participation of the

Claimants in the new mixed enterprises. No agreement was reached.

296. As a consequence, on 27 June 2007, the Respondent seized the investments of
Mobil Cerro Negro in the Cerro Negro Project and the investments of Mobil
Venezolana in the La Ceiba Project. The Law on Effects of the Migration, enacted
on 5 October 2007, ratified the expropriation and ordered that the interests and
assets formerly belonging to the companies that had not agreed to migrate be
formally transferred to the new mixed companies (see paragraphs 113 and 114

above).

297. The Tribunal considers that the expropriation of the Claimants’ investments was the
result of laws enacted by the National Assembly and of decisions taken by the
President of the Republic of Venezuela, the purpose of which was to create new

mixed companies in which the State would own more than 50% of the shares.

358 Mem. M. | 174.

Negotiations with the oil companies were foreseen to that effect for a period of four
months, and nationalization was contemplated only in case of failure of those
negotiations. In the present case, the negotiations failed. In other cases recalled by
the Respondent, the negotiations were successful, e.g. with Chevron, Total, Statoil,
Sinopec or BP. The Tribunal considers that this process, which enabled the
participating companies to weigh their interests and make decisions during a
reasonable period of time, was compatible with the due process obligation of Article

6 of the BIT.

298. Regarding the Claimants’ allegation that specific commitments were made by the
Respondent that the 2001 Hydrocarbon Law would not be applied to the existing
associations, the Tribunal notes that (i) the Cerro Negro Congressional
Authorization specifically indicates that the Association Agreement and all activities
and operations conducted under it would not impose any obligations on the
Respondent, nor restrict its sovereign powers; and that (ii) the Congressional
Authorization covering La Ceiba stated that the Agreement, as well as all activities
and operations derived from it, would in no case create liability for the Respondent

nor diminish its sovereign rights.

299. Both Authorizations provided that Venezuelan Law would govern the Agreements.
Both Agreements referred to those Authorizations. In reserving its sovereign rights,
the Respondent reserved inter alia its right to expropriate the Claimants’
investments. There is no indication that Venezuela later committed not to exercise
that right. Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that the expropriation was not

carried out contrary to undertakings given in this respect to the Claimants.

300. Regarding the Claimants’ allegation that the Respondent “has not determined, has

99359

not tendered, and has not paid the compensation required by the Treaty”*”’, which is

360

enough to render the expropriation wrongful*”, and the Respondent’s counter-

argument that it has always been willing to provide compensation and that in any

* C_PH Brief {{[31-32.
* C_PH Brief (31.

100

301.

302.

303.

304.

case the mere fact of not having received compensation does not render a

nationalization unlawful, the Tribunal observes the following.

It is not disputed that the Claimants did not receive compensation and that
Venezuela did not fulfil its obligation to pay compensation in accordance with
Article 6(c) of the BIT. However, the mere fact that an investor has not received
compensation does not in itself render an expropriation unlawful. An offer of
compensation may have been made to the investor and, in such a case, the legality
of the expropriation will depend on the terms of that offer. In order to decide
whether an expropriation is lawful or not in the absence of payment of

compensation, a tribunal must consider the facts of the case.

There are no provisions in Decree-Law 5200 envisaging compensation. In fact, the
Tribunal also notes that the Law on the Effects of Migration contains a reference to
a “reversion principle” which could be construed as excluding compensation.
However, it is undisputed that discussions took place in 2007 between the Parties on

the compensation that was due to the Claimants on account of the expropriation.

The Tribunal has limited information concerning those discussions*’. The

362

Claimants largely rely on press reports to substantiate their position They also
rely on a statement made on 14 February 2008 by Minister Ramirez (the Minister of
Energy at the time) in the National Assembly stating that the Government would
only pay book value for the extra-heavy oil assets in the Orinoco Oil Belt.** But
these press reports and public statements do not constitute evidence of what exactly

happened during the discussions in 2007.

In this respect, Mr. Cutt (the then President of Mobil Oil Cerro Negro) testified that:
“We had several meetings with the Ministry of Energy regarding compensation for
the government’s taking of our interests in [the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba] ... joint

ventures. We engaged in those meetings with the understanding that the content of

**! For a case in which more information was available, see fn. 320 above.

50 Ex, C-439,
*6 Ex. C-483.

101

those discussions was not going to be used in any contentious proceeding between
the Government, including its state-owned entities, and Mobil Cerro Negro”.**
However, at the hearing, the Respondent denied that the Claimants were under any

365

kind of confidentiality obligation*” and even released them from that commitment

should one exist*®.

Despite the Respondent’s confirmation, the Claimants have not
sought leave to make a late filing of contemporaneous correspondence that would

support their position.

305. It was the Claimants’ burden to prove their allegations concerning the position taken
by Venezuela during the discussions regarding the compensation to be paid. It is
not disputed that negotiations too place, and it has been established that Venezuela
made proposals during those negotiations. It seems likely that there were
discussions at the time on the method of valuation of the expropriated interests, on
the relevance of the cap provisions referred to by Venezuela and on the exact
amount of the compensation payable to the Claimants.*” The Tribunal finds that the
evidence submitted does not demonstrate that the proposals made by Venezuela
were incompatible with the requirement of “just” compensation of Article 6(c) of
the BIT. Accordingly, the Claimants have not established the unlawfulness of the

expropriation on that ground.

306. In light of the above, the claim that the expropriation was unlawful is rejected.
Accordingly, the Tribunal does not need to consider the standard for compensation
in case of unlawful expropriation or whether it would differ from the standard for
compensation to be paid in case of lawful expropriation. The compensation must be

calculated in conformity with the requirements of Article 6(c) of the BIT.**

* Cutt WS 57.

56 Hearing Tr. Day 3, 109:14-25.

56 Hearing Tr. Day 2, 159: 22-24.

367 On that last point, the Tribunal has been presented with contemporaneous press report indicating that “Exxon
demanded $5 billion in redress of its assets; but PVDSA claims $750 million would be fair compensation” (First
Cline Expert Report).

   

 

568 Neither Party has questioned the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to fix the compensation payable to the Claimants in
conformity with Article 6 of the BIT.

102

c. QUANTUM OF THE EXPROPRIATION OF THE CERRO NEGRO PROJECT

307. Article 6 of the BIT requires that “just compensation” be paid to the Claimants.
Such compensation must “represent the market value of the investments affected
immediately before the measures were taken or the impending measures became
public knowledge, whichever is the earlier”. In the present case, the market value
must be determined immediately after the failure of the negotiations between the
Parties and before the expropriation, i.e., on 27 June 2007*”, and it must correspond
to the amount that a willing buyer would have been ready to pay to a willing seller

at the time in order to acquire the expropriated interests.

308. With respect to Cerro Negro, the Parties agree that this evaluation must be made in
accordance with a discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis for the Claimants’ lost
interests*”. Accordingly, the Parties have evaluated the net cash flows that would

have been generated by the investment over its remaining life, i.e., until June 2035,

and discount them to their present value. However, they diverge in their

determination of the net cash flows and the discount rate.

1. Net Cash Flow

309. To calculate the net cash flows, one must forecast the future revenues and expenses
of the Cerro Negro Project. In the present case, the revenues forecast is mainly
determined by the volume of production of oil and by the oil price level, while the
expenses forecast depends on the cost of the operations, the capital investment, if
any, and the royalties and taxes to be paid to the Government. On these points, the
Parties have developed detailed legal arguments and produced several witness

statements and expert reports, which have been most helpful to the Tribunal.

5 See, for instance Libyan American Oil Company (LIAMCO) v. The Government of the Libyan Arab Republic
(Award, 12 April 1977), (Ex. R-340) p.p. 138-139.

5 Tn this respect, the Tribunal notes that the Parties have consistently used the date of 27 June 2007 in their
calculations for this purpose. (See, Mem. M. {ff 330-331; Reply M., fn. 642).

103

a) Volume of Production

310. The Parties disagree with respect to the future volume of production to be taken into
consideration in order to calculate the compensation. The Claimants submit that:
“At the time the Cerro Negro Project was built, the participants and the Venezuelan
Congress set an initial production target of 120,000 barrels per day of extra-heavy
oil” (EHCO), but they add that that was “without prejudice to the right to expand

2371

production later’ Accordingly, the Claimants contend that the initial production
facilities were designed to produce 120,000 barrels per day, but they retained the
right to expand this amount. They submit that, by applying thermal EOR
techniques, improving existing facilities and constructing a second upgrader, they
would have produced 344,000 barrels of EHCO per day as soon as 2014°”. They

request compensation on the basis of such volume of production.

311. By contrast, the Respondent submits that the proper valuation needs to consider a
maximum EHCO production of 120,000 barrels per day, not any other increased
number’. According to the Respondent, a production limit of 120,000 barrels per
day was fixed and implemented long before the Dutch restructuring. In fact, a
dispute arose between the Parties at that time on the subject. Accordingly, the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider that dispute and, as a consequence, it also
lacks jurisdiction over any claim for a project expanded beyond 120,000 barrels per
day of EHCO. Such a project may not be taken into account for the purposes of

determining compensation.

312. In addition, the Respondent contends that the Claimants would have required the
approval of the Venezuelan authorities for the contemplated expansion, and such
approval could only have been given in conformity with the 2001 Hydrocarbons
Law, under conditions which the Claimants twice found to be unacceptable.
Finally, the Respondent adds that the expansion scenario depicted by the Claimants
is not technically feasible and relies on unrealistic economic assumptions. As an

*7! Mem. M. ¥ 326.

* Mem. M. {{ 327.
Rej.M 4227.

 

104

313.

314.

315.

316.

4 Bx C214,

alternative, the Respondent points out that there would be no basis for using the

discount cash flow method to assess the value of a new project.

In response to these arguments, the Claimants contend that the Respondent never
imposed a production limit to the Project. According to the Claimants, in 2005
Venezuela imposed a 30% royalty rate on production volumes exceeding a monthly
average of 120,000 barrels per day of EHCO. At the time, the Claimants
complained about that new royalty. However, they retained their right to increase
production despite the imposed royalty. Accordingly, the dispute that existed at the
time about the royalty does not affect the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to consider the
expanded project, which was technically and economically feasible, and to take it

into account when determining the amount of compensation.

With respect to jurisdiction, the Tribunal observes that the Claimants’ claim is not
directed against the measures adopted in 2005 by the Respondent. It is a claim for
compensation for the expropriation done in 2007. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to
consider that claim and to establish the amount of compensation to be paid to the
Claimants as a result of that expropriation. Accordingly, the analysis of the
Tribunal must include the volume of production forecasted from 27 June 2007 to 30
September 2035. In order to determine that volume, the Tribunal must decide
whether a willing buyer would have taken into account in June 2007 that the
Claimants had the right to increase their production beyond 120,000 barrels per day

of EHCO. The Tribunal has jurisdiction to make this determination.

In this respect, the Tribunal first notes that, under article 5 of the 1975
Nationalization Law, the execution of association agreements such as the Cerro
Negro one required the prior authorization of the Congressional Chambers in joint
session, within their established conditions and having been duly informed by the

National Executive of all the pertinent circumstances*”.

The Cerro Negro Association Agreement, approved by the National Assembly,

contemplated a volume of production of 120,000 barrels per day of EHCO.

105

317.

318.

However, Article 8(1)(c) did not exclude the possibility to “increase the capacity of
the upgrader or the production of Extra-Heavy Oil”, and specified that the
consequential amendments to the Association Agreement and the other agreements
relating to the Project would have to be agreed upon by the parties. No agreement
would be required where the increase was carried out by one or more of the parties
to the Association Agreement at their own risk and expense and assuming the title of
all assets and rights derived from it. While this provision reserved the possibility of
increasing the production of EHCO by increasing the capacity of the existing

upgrader, it did not contemplate the possibility of building a new upgrader.

In 2004, all the participants to the Association Agreement considered a “de-
bottlenecking” project, intended to increase the production from 120,000 to 144,000
barrels per day of EHCO. This increase would have been achieved by enhancing
the capacity of components of the Project in order to allow full use of the capacity
already available in other components*”. However in December 2004, PDVSA-CN
informed its partners that the agreement of the company and of the Ministry would
be subordinated to the payment of a higher royalty, the use of EOR production
techniques and the signature of a memorandum of understanding called Cerro Negro
II, under which the incremental production would be commercialized by PVDSA. It
added that the new 2001 Hydrocarbon Law would apply to the project*”. In light of

these requirements, the project was abandoned.

In 2005, the Venezuelan authorities accused some oil associations of producing
more than they had been authorized to produce. The companies were informed that
production limits had to be respected and that any excess production would be
subject to higher royalties. This was specified in particular in a letter*” from the
Minister of Energy and Mines to the Cerro Negro Association dated 23 June 2005,

which stated the following:

 

106

“.. the volumes of hydrocarbons that exceed the average monthly
production of 120 MBD are subject to the royalty of thirty percent
(30%) provided for in Article 44 of the above-mentioned Decree with
Force of Organic Law on Hydrocarbons. The same amount of royalty
must be paid in cases of volumes related to the mixture of extra-heavy
crudes [...]

The payment of the royalty referred to above does not legitimize the
over-production indicated above and, consequently, does not imply any
authorization of the activies referred to above or of the situations

created.”

319. It appears that the Claimants abided by the production limit at all times after that

decision was made and notified to the Projects participants*”.

320. The Tribunal observes that the Project as contemplated today by the Claimants
would almost triple the production of oil. This volume of production would require
the construction of a new upgrader, at a cost evaluated by the Claimants at US$ 2.3
billion, as well as the extension of the existing facilities and of the maritime terminal
at the San José Complex. A project of this magnitude does not fall within the scope
of Clause 8(1)(c) of the Association Agreement approved by the Venezuelan
legislature. This new project would require the approval of the Venezuelan
authorities. In view of the position taken by the Administration in 2004 and 2005,

such approval could not have been taken for granted by a prospective buyer in 2007.

321. In these circumstances, the Tribunal concludes that it cannot use the production
volume that would have resulted from the adoption and implementation of this new
project. The net cash flows must be calculated on the basis of an average monthly
production of 120,000 barrels per day of EHCO. Based on the past experience

analyzed in the experts’ reports, this volume of production would, in the opinion of

578 Mommer Supplemental WS { 12.

107

the Tribunal, allow for an average monthly production of 108,000 barrels per day of

synthetic crude oil (SCO)*”.

322. The experts agree that it would not be possible to achieve such a level at all times.
Prof. Myers, the expert appointed by the Claimants, calculated the impact on
production of risks such as “episodes of civil unrest”, “major unplanned outrages
due to accidents or equipment failures” and the possibility of OPEC curtailments.
On these grounds, he proposes to reduce the expected production by 3.2%*°. Prof.
Myers specifies that this percentage does not take into account “operational down
time, typical failures and maintenance”**'. Mr. Brailovsky and Prof. Wells, the
experts appointed by the Respondent, consider that the reductions made by Prof.
Myers understate the effects of the events they address. Mr. Brailovsky and Prof.
Wells stress that certain types of minor incidents and turn around factors must also

be taken into account, and propose a reduction of approximately 5%.

323. The Tribunal has carefully considered this question in light of the expert reports.
The Tribunal concludes that the future average planned production must in the long
run be reduced by approximately 4%, and that it could accordingly be fixed at
104,300 barrels per day of SCO. The corresponding production, year by year,

appears in column 2 of the table annexed to this Award*™®.

b) Oil Price

324. The Parties have produced detailed expert reports containing price forecasts for the
Cerro Negro Synthetic Crude Oil (CN - SCO). These reports forecast SCO prices
by benchmarking SCO to other price series for which there is more forecast
information. In this respect, the experts (i) refer first to the price to be paid for West
Texas Intermediate light sweet crude oil (WTI); and then (ii) derive the CN - SCO
price from WTI in two steps, using a Mexican heavy sour crude oil called Maya as

°C. Mem. M { 354, fn. 689.
38° Myers Second Expert Report, Exhibit 59, table 6, p. 3.

58! Myers First Expert Report, Appendix D.
5® Calculations made on the basis of 188 days for 2007 and 273 days for 2035.

108

an intermediary. The experts differ on their forecast of WTI prices and on the

discount to be applied from the benchmark WTI price to the SCO price.

325. In her second report, Ms. Sarah Emerson, of Energy Security Analysis (ESAT),
expert for the Claimants, forecasts WTI prices as of 27 June 2007 on the basis of
market analyses made by ESAI in 2007 and, in particular, on the basis of a report of
that firm entitled “Atlantic Basin Stockwatch”, published on 16 July 2007. Ms.
Emerson anticipates a price of US$ 72.91 per barrel of WTI in the second half of
2007, ** decreasing to US$ 67.60 in 2013, then going up to US$ 105.52 in 2035™.

326. The three experts of Econ One Research, appointed by the Respondent, analyzed
this differently. They collected twenty-three publicly available WTI price forecasts
“representing a view of the market formed during the first half of 2007”**. They
then chose the average WTI price forecast for each future year, and forecast a WTI
price of US$ 67.97 per barrel in 2007, decreasing to US$ 59.69 in 2013, and finally
increasing to US$ 92.78 in 2035.

327. The Tribunal has carefully considered these reports. It first notes that from 2003 to
2006, WTI oil prices rose significantly above the US$ 20 / US$ 30 range of the late
1980s and 1990s. It peaked in the summer of 2006, reaching the US$ 70 range, but
started to fall in autumn that year. In October 2006, OPEC decided to cut
production in order to protect prices around US$55 / US$ 60. There was then some
expectation of an increased production from non-OPEC countries, and analysts
considered that the price could stay in the US$ 55/ US$ 65 range. However, there
was no such increase, and the International Energy Agency tried in April and May
2007 to obtain an increase of production from OPEC in order to avoid running out
of oil in 2007***. On 18 June 2007, OPEC formally rejected this option®’. It then

became clear that oil prices would rise again.

58 Hearing Tr. Day 6, p.50

54 ‘This calculation is made in nominal US$ (“actual dollars in the day”, Hearing Tr. Day 6, 29).
58 Econ One First Expert Report { 39.

*8° Hearing Tr. Day 6, pp. 78- 81.

109

328.

329.

330.

331.

It appears to the Tribunal that the forecast of WTI prices made by the Econ One
experts is based on data which, to some extent, no longer correspond to the situation
as it was at the end of June 2007. By contrast, the forecast made by Ms. Emerson
took those circumstances into account. Accordingly, the Tribunal has decided to use

Ms. Emerson’s forecast.

To determine the discount to be applied from WTI prices to SCO prices, Ms.
Emerson first observed that the spread between ultra-low-sulfur diesel and high
sulfur fuel oil constitutes a fairly good comparison of the spread between WTI and
Maya prices. She then forecasted that spread, taking into account the foreseen
evolution of the markets. In this respect, Ms. Emerson noted that OPEC
intervention supported heavy sour crude**, that complex refiners sought heavy
crude when crude quality differentials widened*” and that European diesel demand
had grown*”’. On those grounds, she forecasted that the WTI-Maya spread would be
reduced in the future. Then, Ms. Emerson used the SCO price formula contained in
the Association Agreement to forecast the price of CN - SCO, and finally evaluated
the spread WTI/SCO at around 22% for the second half of 2007, decreasing later to
19%.

The Econ One experts analyzed the past relationship between WTI, Maya and SCO
prices. From that analysis, they derived equations, which they used for their
forecasts. On those grounds, they concluded that, as of mid-2007, Maya prices
would fall 21% below WTI prices, while SCO prices would fall 7% below Maya

prices.

The Tribunal notes that, under the method used by the experts of Econ One, the
spread between WTI, Maya and SCO prices will essentially remain unchanged in

percentage in the future. The Tribunal considers that their method does not take into

 

*7 Tid.
588 Emerson Expert Report, p. 15.

58 Emerson Reply, p. 17.
5° Emerson Reply, p. 16.

110

account the changes that could be foreseen in the market of oil products, or their
consequences on the price of the different types of oil. Ms. Emerson’s approach
takes these elements into account, and therefore her method seems preferable to the

Tribunal. Accordingly, the Tribunal will adopt Ms. Emerson’s approach.

c) Future Revenues

332. In her second report, Ms. Emerson produced a table indicating the CN - SCO prices
forecasts from 2007 to 2035*"'. For the reasons mentioned above, the Tribunal will
use Ms. Emerson’s price forecasts (see Annex 1, column 3), and multiply them for
each year by the annual SCO production on the basis of the figures referred to in
paragraph 323 above. As a result of this calculation, the Tribunal obtains the SCO
revenue forecast for the period that amounts to US$ 69,515.5 million (see Annex 1,

column 4).

333. This figure must be increased by adding the revenues from products other than SCO,
such as petroleum coke, sulfur and natural gas. Prof. Myers considered that there
could be some variations from year to year of the gross revenue resulting from the
sale of those by-products. It results from these calculations that the revenue would
generally amount to 2.20% to 2.70% of the gross revenue resulting from the

synthetic crude oil sale*”.

The Respondent’s experts evaluated them at 2.15%.
Having carefully examined these reports in light of past experience and market
forecasts in June 2007 (in particular for natural gas), the Tribunal has decided to fix
that percentage at 2.50%. Accordingly, the by-products revenue forecast from 2007

to 2035 is calculated at US$ 1,737.9 million (see Annex | column 5).

334. The tribunal concludes that, on 27 June 2007, the future revenues of the Cerro

Negro Project could be forecasted at US$ 71,253.4 million (see Annex 1, column 6).

*" See p. 11, table A, second column.
5 Myers First Expert Report, table 2.

11

d) Royalties and Extraction Tax

335. In order to obtain the net cash flow, this figure must be reduced by deducting the
royalties and the extraction tax to be paid to Venezuela on oil production at the rate
of 33 1/3% under the regime in effect at the date of the expropriation (see para 96
above). Since the royalties and the extraction tax are applied to the value
attributable to EHCO, the amount to be paid must be calculated by converting the
SCO prices and volumes into EHCO prices and volumes. The Tribunal used
94.09%*? for SCO and 110% for EHCO, and arrived to the conclusion that the
deduction to be made for the royalties and the extraction tax amounts to US$

23,982.6 million (see Annex 1, column 7).

336. The royalties and the extraction tax are also applicable to the by-products referred to
in paragraph 333 above. Applying a rate of 16 2/3%, the royalties and extraction tax
deduction applicable to by-products amounts to US$ 289.6 million (see Annex 1,

column 8).

337. Therefore, the total amount to be deducted from the gross revenue in application of
the royalties and the extraction tax amounts to US$ 24,272.3 million (see Annex 1,

column 9).

e) Cost of Operation and Capital Investment

338. The second type of deduction to be made concerns the Project’s costs of operation

and the disbursements necessary to maintain oil production at the required level.

339. The Claimants produced detailed reports from Muse Stancil, which evaluate the cost
of maintaining and improving upstream and downstream Cerro Negro installations

in order to achieve a production of 344,000 barrels per day. In turn, Prof. Myers

°° The 94.09% had been agreed by the parties to the ICC arbitration (Econ One First Report 12).

112

340.

341.

342.

analyzed the risks that could affect those forecasts and made upward adjustments to

account for inflation and uncertainty in currency exchange rates .

The Respondent's expert, Econ One, started the evaluation of costs with the 2007
budget of the Cerro Negro Project. Econ One considers that this budget
substantially underestimated inflation, did not take into account additional labor
costs and did not include sufficient funds for repairs to the coker drums. It states
that, “in light of the low level of production capacity and the 11% rate of natural
field decline, the Cerro Negro Project would have been required to undertake an
immediate aggressive program both to repair inactive wells and to drill additional

wells”.

Accordingly, Econ One calculates the costs of such a program and adds
the costs for well repairs and major maintenance of the upgrader, plus inflation in

US dollars and overvaluation of the Bolivar**.

The Claimants contend that Econ One's cash-flow analysis exaggerates production
costs. According to the Claimants, “Econ One has assumed that capital
expenditures would be incurred between 2008 and 2034 to prepare every well for
EOR even though the Project would not use EOR”*’. They add that the
Respondent's experts have also overestimated the capital cost of the well pads and
the cost of major maintenance campaigns, and made unjustifiable adjustments to the

amounts budgeted in 2007 because of local inflation*”.

With respect to the costs of operation, the Tribunal recalls that, on 2 November
2006, a business plan prepared by OCN was presented to the Cerro Negro Board of
Directors. This plan budgeted US$ 145.1 million in operating expenses for the
whole year 2007, and the Tribunal regards it as the best indicator of what the Project

participants expected to happen in the future in the absence of any adverse measures

34 Mem. M. {[ 337.

*°5 C, Mem. M. {{ 362.
°C, Mem.M. { 368.

*7 Reply M. { 230.

%°8 Reply M. 9232-234.

113

343.

344.

taken by the Venezuelan authorities*’. The plan would have been available to any
prospective buyer, and the Tribunal considers that such a buyer would have relied
on it when forecasting the Project’s operational costs for a production of 120,000

barrels per day. Accordingly, the Tribunal will also use it.

The Respondent considers that the 2007 budget requires various adjustments in
order to develop the operating costs projections. It contends that the Cerro Negro
Project had a serious labor issue due to OCN’s failure to pay a large number of

workers the entire amount that was due to them regarding overtime”.

According to
Venezuela, the future operating costs must for that reason be annually increased by
US$ 6.3 million, as calculated by Econ One on the basis of the testimony of Mr.

Pereira‘.

By contrast, one of the Claimants’ witnesses, Mr. Lawless, testified that,
during the time when OCN operated the Cerro Negro Project, workers were paid in
accordance with the provisions of the labor law then in effect. He added that he was
“not aware of any outstanding grievances relating to unpaid compensation of any
sort that had been made against OCN through the time of the expropriation in June

2007".

The Tribunal has been presented with a labor liability agreement signed on 30
October 2007 between the Sindicato de Trabajadores de la Empresa Operadora
Cerro Negro and PDVSA, granting various indemnities to certain categories of
workers“. However, the Tribunal has no evidence relating to the costs of that
agreement. Moreover, the Tribunal considers that a prospective buyer could not
have foreseen in June 2007 that such an agreement would be signed several months
later. Accordingly, the Tribunal will not take into account the alleged increased

labor costs in its calculation.

*° ICC Award { 677.

“°C. Mem. M. {358

4°! Econ One First Report J 16

4 Lawless WS 4 15.

43 | abor Liability Agreement, Pereira Second Supplementary WS, Appendix 26.

114

345. On the other hand, the Tribunal considers that every five years extra expenses must
be added to the budget to account for the maintenance of the upgrader and the CPF
turnaround. In light of the expert reports, the Tribunal considers that the cost of
each turnaround should be fixed at US$ 32.6 million for the upgrader and at US$ 0.5
million for the CPF turnaround. In addition, when projecting annual expenses after
2007, the figures must be corrected by applying an inflation factor of 2% per year
and increasing costs by 6% to take into account the overvaluation of the Bolivar.
On these bases, the Tribunal considers that the total operating costs amount to US$

6,056.7 million (see Annex 1, column 10).

346. With respect to investments to be made, the Tribunal notes that the experts of both
Parties are roughly in agreement about the number of wells to be drilled, and that
they have limited divergences on the cost and timing of the work to be done in order

to maintain production at the appropriate level with the existing technique*”.

347. In addition, the Respondent contends that the Claimants were under an obligation to
make further investments in order to prepare every well for EOR. The Tribunal is
not aware of the existence of any legal or contractual obligation of that kind and will
not take the proposed EOR investments into account. Accordingly, the Tribunal
will determine the deduction corresponding to the investments to be made in
accordance with the proposal made by Mr. Cline, expert for the Claimants, in table 5
of exhibit 1 to his first report. When projecting the deduction by year, the Tribunal
has applied an inflation rate of 2% per year and increased costs by 6% to take into
account the overvaluation of the Bolivar. On these bases, the reduction
corresponding to the investments to be made amounts to US$ 1,779.9 million (see

Annex 1, column 11).

#4 Econ One First Report {22; Appendix 5, table 3.
495 Hearing Tr. Day 5, p.124 to 128.

115

f) Special Contributions

348. It is not disputed that the Cerro Negro Project had to pay special contributions,
which must be deducted from the cash flows before applying the income tax. These
special contributions are: (i) a contribution to science and technology of 2% of the
gross revenue two years prior; (ii) an anti-drug enforcement contribution of 1% of
the prior year’s taxable income; and (iii) an export registration tax of 0.1% of the

value of the exported hydrocarbons.

349. The Tribunal has evaluated these contributions in accordance with the method used
by the Econ One experts in their first report, and arrived to the conclusion that the
sums to be paid on account of special contributions amount to (i) US$ 1,382.8
million for science and technology; (ii) US$ 387.6 million for anti-drug
enforcement; and (iii) US$ 69.5 million for export registration (see Annex 1,

columns 12, 13 and 14).

g) Income Tax

350. Under the applicable Income Tax Law at the date of the expropriation, income tax is
to be paid on the taxable income at a rate of 50% (see paragraph 99 above). The
taxable income corresponds to the gross revenue less the OPEX, extraction taxes
and other contributions, and it has been established at US$ 39,084.6 million (see

Annex 1, column 15).

351. According to the Respondent, the Claimants have failed to take into account the full
impact of income tax regulations in Venezuela.*” In particular, the Parties disagree
on the consequences to be drawn from Venezuela’s inflation. The Claimants’
expert, Prof. Myers, recalls that depreciation “is a tax deductible expense” and adds

that “depreciation is determined by Venezuelan tax accounting rules, which are

496 Rej. M. [408

116

352.

353.

354.

based on the inflation adjusted cost of capital investment’*”. As a consequence, he

computed future depreciation expenses and deducted them from the taxable income.

The Respondent’s expert, Econ One, recognizes that inflation increases depreciation
deductions over time. However, Econ One stresses that inflation also drives up the
value of the assets. Therefore, it concludes that the income tax effects of inflation
“reflect the combined result of the additional tax owed on the appreciation less the
reduction associated with the (...) added depreciation“. As a result, the effects of
inflation on depreciation would increase, while the asset appreciation effects would
diminish over the remaining life of the asset*”.

The Claimants do not contest that inflation will create appreciation of taxable assets,
but contend that Econ One has ignored other offsetting inflation adjustments to the
taxable income*”. In particular, the Claimants refer to Articles 179 and 184 of the
Venezuelan Income Tax Law and submit that, “[b]y considering only the inflation
adjustment for non-monetary assets and liabilities, but disregarding the
corresponding adjustment to equity, Econ One has substantially overstated tax

expenses in its forecasted flows’’*"'.

The Respondent contends that Venezuela’s Income Tax Law requires that a second
set of accounts, independent from those used for financial reporting, be maintained
for tax purposes. In these accounts, the appreciation of assets that has been caused
by inflation is counter-balanced by an account called “Readjustment for inflation’,
not by an increase to equity. According to the Respondent, “[i]n the end, the
increase depreciation allowance (a tax benefit) will equal the increased asset value

p42

(a tax liability)

Myers Expert Report, p. 49 and table 2. See also Graves Expert Report, p. 13.
Econ One First Report {{ 26.

Ibid.

Reply. M. 235.

Ibid.

Rej. M. 409.

355.

356.

357.

The Tribunal observes that the Claimants have calculated the taxable income by
deducting only the future depreciation expenses from the income. They agree with
the Respondent that non-monetary assets and liabilities must also be re-evaluated, as
provided for in Article 179 of the Income Tax Law, but add that this is also the case
for equity under Article 184. According to the Claimants, in the past “Mobil-CN’s
net equity balance exceeded its net non-monetary assets and liabilities balance,
resulting in a net inflation readjustment that reduced Mobil-CN’s taxable income” .“"?
The Claimants consider that this would be the situation in the future, and explain
that, in order to avoid complex calculation which in any case would have been in
their favor, they have limited their claim to the deduction of the future depreciation
expenses“, The Respondent contests both the application of Article 184 and the

result of this calculation.

The Tribunal notes that both Parties have offered a rather simplified view of the
readjustments to be made under Venezuela’s Income Tax Law in case of inflation.
The Claimants’ expert, Mr. Graves, recognized at the hearing that “[t]he tax return
includes not just 179 and 184; it includes a whole of inflation adjustments”*"*. The
Respondent’s expert, Econ One, specified that :“[a] complete application of the 21
articles in the Income Tax Law and the 34 articles in the rules of the Income Tax
Law dealing with inflation readjustments would require, among other things,
evaluating which assets and liabilities are to be treated as monetary and non-
monetary, and considering whether and how the law requires readjustments for
inflation on inventories (...) retained earnings and assets outside of Venezuela,

among other issues”*"*.

The Tribunal considers that, for the purposes of this calculation, it cannot take into
account some of the provisions of Venezuelan tax law relating to the consequences
of inflation on the taxable income and ignore other provisions. Accordingly, it

cannot proceed to a readjustment of the depreciation expenses without considering

433 Reply M. 235.

444 Hearing, Day 5, p. 164.
45 Hearing, Day 5, p.159:24-25
416 Econ One Reply Report, fn. 130.

118

the other legally required readjustments. The Tribunal notes that it has not been
provided with the relevant information for this purpose. Accordingly, the Tribunal

concludes that it cannot uphold the Claimants’ submissions on this point.

358. The Tribunal concludes that the income tax to be paid on oil and by-products
amounts to US$ 19,542.3 million (see Annex 1, column 16). After payment of the

tax, the balance amounts to US$ 19,542.3 million.

359. In order to obtain the net cash flow amount, the balance (US$ 19,542.3 million)
must be reduced by deducting the CAPEX (US$ 1,779.9 million). As a
consequence, the forecasted net cash flow of the Cerro Negro Project from 2007 to
2035 is US$ 17,762.4 million. It is not disputed that the Claimants own 41 2/3% of
Cerro Negro. Accordingly, the net cash flow of the Cerro Negro Project from 2007
to 2035 corresponding to the Claimants amounts to US$ 7,399.8 million (see Annex

1, columns 17 and 18).

2. Discount Rate

360. Having established the net cash flow amount, the Tribunal still has to determine how

that cash flow should be discounted to its value in June 2007.

361. Prof. Myers submits that the appropriate discount rate for a project's cash flow is the
cost of capital. The cost of capital is defined as the expected rate of return offered

by other investments with the same risk as the project*”’

, and it is determined by
using the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), which depends upon three
components: the ratio of return for risk free investments, the market risk premium
that is generally expected by investors and a measure of a particular investment's
contribution to the risk of a diversified portfolio, which is known as the beta

value**. Professor Myers made the corresponding assessments and calculations,

+7 Myers Reply Expert Report, Appendix A, p. 1.
418 Myers Expert Report, p. 22.

119

362.

363.

364.

and arrived to the conclusion that the discount rate in June 2007 could be fixed at

8.7%.

The Respondent contends that the CAPM methodology is of little relevance in
determining the value of an international oil project*” because it does not take into
consideration the country risk. According to the Respondent, Prof. Myers has relied
on a single, inappropriate method, whereas Respondent’s experts have used four
separate methods, ICAPM and country risk survey (“market acquisition approach”),
and backward- and forward-looking data (“make-whole approach”)*”. These four
methods resulted in discount rates “within a relatively narrow range”, which the

Respondent’s experts averaged, yielding a discount rate of 19.8%".

The Claimants contend that the country risk is largely composed of the risk of
uncompensated expropriation, which cannot be taken into consideration in order to
valuate such an expropriation. Similarly, the Claimants consider the “make-whole
approach” to be incompatible with article 6 of the BIT and the principle of full

422

reparation’ According to the Claimants, the methods used by the Respondent’s

expert indicate a wide range of discount rates that have been “de-emphasized by the

liberal use of averaging”.

The Tribunal observes that the basic divergence between the Parties concerns the
question of what they refer to as the “confiscation risk’**, or more specifically,
whether the risk of confiscation should be taken into account when calculating the
discount rate applicable to the compensation due for an expropriation. The
Claimants submit that under Article 6(c) of the BIT, “a valuation of the expropriated
property that complies with the Treaty cannot include the risk that the property

99425

might be expropriated later without the compensation required by the Treaty’ In

“°C. Mem. M. {1 304.
°C. Mem. M. 321.
*©'C. Mem. M. 91321, 344.
#2 Reply M. 9.247.

#3 Reply M. 4 243.

4 C_PH Brief { 48.

5 C_PH Brief { 49.

120

their opinion, the discount rate can take into consideration country risks such as
those resulting from a volatile economy or civil disorder, but not the confiscation
tisk. The Respondent does not share that interpretation of article 6(c) and contends
that elements such as the risk of taxation, regulation and expropriation are essential
to the country risk*® and must be taken into consideration in the determination of

the discount rate.

365. Article 6(c) of the BIT requires that the compensation due in case of expropriation
represent “the market value of the investments affected before the measures are
taken or the impending measures became public knowledge, whichever is earlier”.
This means that the compensation must correspond to the amount that a willing
buyer would have been ready to pay to a willing seller in order to acquire his
interests but for the expropriation, that is, at a time before the expropriation had
occurred or before it had become public that it would occur. The Tribunal finds
that, it is precisely at the time before an expropriation (or the public knowledge of
an impending expropriation) that the risk of a potential expropriation would exist,
and this hypothetical buyer would take it into account when determining the amount
he would be willing to pay in that moment. The Tribunal considers that the
confiscation risk remains part of the country risk and must be taken into account in
the determination of the discount rate. Accordingly, the Tribunal is unable to adopt
the approach used by the Claimants’ expert, which does not take this risk into

account.

366. The Tribunal observes that the Respondent's experts have used different methods to
calculate the discount rate, which take into account the confiscation risk and a
number of other relevant elements. On these bases they arrive to discount rates

ranging from 18.5% to 23.9%.

#6 C_PH Reply { 46.

367. Other arbitral tribunals have adopted discount rates in circumstances comparable to
47

the present case. In those cases, they have used rates ranging from 18.5% to 21%*”’.

The Tribunal in the ICC Award applied a discount rate of 18%’.

368. In the Tribunal’s view, that 18% discount rate appropriately reflects the existing
risks in the present case. Accordingly, the Tribunal has decided to adopt it, and
arrived to a discounted net cash flow of US$ 1,411.7 million (see Annex 1, column

19).
3. Price Cap

369. The Respondent considers that the price cap set forth in the Cerro Negro
Association Agreement in implementation of the Twentieth Condition of the Cerro
Negro Congressional Authorization is applicable in this case. The Eighteenth
Condition of the Association Agreement establishes that “it shall not be considered
that a Party has suffered an adverse and significant economic consequence as a
result of any said decisions or changes in legislation, at any time when the Party is
receiving income from THE ASSOCIATION equal to a price of crude oil above a

maximum price that shall be specified in the Association Agreement”.

According
to the Respondent, that limitation was embodied in Clause 15(2)(a) of the
Agreement, which establishes that, under certain conditions, “compensation would
not be granted for any fiscal year if the price of the benchmark crude oil (Brent) has
exceeded US$ 27 per barrel in 1996 dollars’*” (corresponding to US$ 25.07 in
2007 dollars). According to the Respondent, compensation must be limited in

accordance with this price cap.

#7 Himpurna California Energy Lid v. PT (Persero) Perusahaan Listruik Negara (Award, 4 May 1999), (Ex. R-
354); Patuha Power Ltd (Bermuda) v PT (Persero) Perusahaan Listruik Negara (Award, 4 May 1999), (Ex. R-
473); Joseph Charles Lemire v. Ukraine, \CSID Case No. ARB/06/18 (Ex. R-474); Phillips Petroleum Company
Iran v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, The National Iranian Oil Company, Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal (CL-152).

8 ICC Award {{f 768, 777.
“°C. Mem. M. {{ 289 and following {{; Reply M. {{ 224 and following {.
°C. Mem. M. 298.

122

370. The Claimants submit that the Respondent was not a party to the Cerro Negro
Association Agreement and that this case does not involve a claim under Clause
15*"_ Therefore, the price cap provided for in the Agreement is not applicable. The
Respondent considers that the Claimants’ argument does not address the issue, since
“Tt]his is not a matter of enforcing a contract; it is a question of respecting the terms

39432

and conditions under which the Project was authorized (...) According to the

Respondent, any prospective buyer would have taken this price cap into

consideration when evaluating Mobil Cerro Negro’s interests.**

371. The Tribunal observes that the Twentieth Condition of the Congressional
Authorization refers to the income to be provided to the parties by the association,
and to a price cap to be established in the association agreement. In the present
case, Clause 15(1) of the Association Agreement provides for the consequences of
Governmental actions, covering discriminatory measures taken by the Government
that result in a materially adverse effect for the foreign party to the Agreement, and
allowing that foreign party to initiate arbitration proceedings against Lagoven (a
subsidiary of PDVSA) in order to obtain compensation for the economic

consequences of those measures.

372. In accordance with the Twentieth Condition of the Congressional Authorization,
Clause 15(2)(a) of the Agreement fixes a price cap for the compensation. Clause
15(1) establishes that: “[t]o the extent any legal recourse is available to reverse or
obtain relief from such Discriminatory Measure, the Foreign Party shall commence
and pursue legal actions to mitigate any damages suffered as a result of the
Discriminatory Measure ”, and adds that any net benefit received as a result of these
legal actions “shall be (i) applied against any amount ultimately determined to be
owed by Lagoven CN pursuant to this Article; or (ii) reimbursed to Lagoven CN if
Lagoven CN previously has made payments to the Foreign Party with respect to the

Discriminatory Measure in question”.

41 Reply M. 1 66.
42 Rej. M. 9314.
*3°C. Mem. M. 297.

123

373.

374.

The Tribunal notes that the Twentieth condition of the Congressional Authorization
does not impose a specific price cap, but provides for a price cap to be established in
the Association Agreement. In the present case, Clause 15(1) of the Association
Agreement makes a clear distinction between the action that the Foreign Party may
initiate against Lagoven CN on the one hand, and the action that it may initiate
against the Government on the other. The price cap contained in Clause 15(2)(a) is
applicable only to the compensation payable by Lagoven CN. Since the Respondent
in this proceeding is the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, not Lagoven CN, the

Tribunal concludes that it may not oppose this price cap to the Claimants.

As a consequence, the compensation to be paid by the Respondent for the
expropriation of the Cerro Negro Project remains in the amount of US$ 1,411.7

million (see para 368 above).

4, Offset Claim

375.

376.

377.

In its analysis of the compensation due to the Claimants, the Respondent has
included an offset request in the amount of US$ 238,139,797. According to the
Respondent, this figure representas the amount of debt relating to the Cerro Negro

Project that was paid on behalf of the Claimants™.

The Claimants contend that the Respondent has failed to explain why it is entitled to
an offset for purported debts to PDVSA, which is not a party to these proceedings.
In any case, the Claimants note that the Respondent has not brought or substantiated
any counterclaim based on this alleged debt. The Claimants consider that this
alleged obligation to PDVSA is irrelevant and outside the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal**.

The Tribunal notes that this offset request has been enunciated and contested
without any elaboration or substantiation. The Tribunal has not been provided with

the grounds or with cogent evidence to decide this request, including convincing

“°C. Mem. M. (371, fn. 737.
45 Reply M. { 268-269.

124

reasons why it should have or lack jurisdiction over a request involving a third
party. Accordingly, to the extent that the Tribunal has jurisdiction, the offset request

must be dismissed in any case.

5. Double Recovery

378.

379.

380.

The prohibition of double recovery for the same loss is a well-established principle,
also referred to as enrichessement sans cause. The issue has arisen in a number of

ICSID cases“*, and should be assessed on a case-by-case basis.

In the parallel ICC case, the tribunal decided that the expropriation caused by
Decree-Law 5200 constituted a discriminatory measure in the sense of the
Association Agreement, and awarded Mobil Cerro Negro Ltd (Bahamas), one of the
Claimants in this proceeding, compensation covering the damage suffered as a result
of that measure. It is not contested that the compensation awarded by the ICC
tribunal has been paid*’. Although the dispute before the ICC Tribunal and the
dispute before this Tribunal are different, the measure that gave rise to the dispute
before the ICC Tribunal is also a measure at issue in this proceeding, and one of the
Claimants in the present case has already been compensated for the loss incurred as
a consequence of that measure. Therefore, there is a risk of double recovery in the

present case for the Cerro Negro Project.

Clause 15(1) of the Association Agreement requires the “Foreign Party” to pursue
legal action which is available to it in order to mitigate any damages it may have
suffered as a result of the alleged discriminatory measures. In addition, Clause
15(1) establishes that any net benefits received by the “Foreign Party” as a result of
such legal action, (and after deduction of the legal costs incurred by the “Foreign

Party” in this connection) shall be reimbursed to Lagoven CN if Lagoven CN had

8° Pan American Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Company v. Argentina (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/13),
(CL-176) 219. See also Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala (ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/23) (265; and Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1)

155.

437 Hearing Tr. Day 8 24:19-23.

381.

D.

382.

383.

384.

385.

previously made payment to the “Foreign Party” with respect to the discriminatory
measures in question. The Claimants have expressly stated that “‘in the event of an
award in this case in favor of the Claimants, the Claimants are willing to make the
required reimbursement to PDVSA”**. The Tribunal has no reason to doubt the

Claimants’ representation.

Effectively, the total compensation payable to the Claimants is the amount specified
in paragraph 374 above, less the amount already received by the Claimants under

the ICC Award for the same damage. Double recovery will thus be avoided.

QUANTUM OF THE EXPROPRIATION OF THE LA CEIBA PROJECT

It is not disputed that, at the time of the expropriation, the La Ceiba Project was in a
phase of development, which excludes the application of the DCF method in order
to evaluate the market value of the Claimants’ interests in accordance with Article 6

of the BIT.

The Claimants submit that, under the circumstances, the more appropriate form of
reparation would be compensation measured by the Claimants’ actual investment in

the Project*”. On that basis, they ask for US$ 179.3 million.

The Respondent observes that the Claimants had a 50% interest in the La Ceiba
Project. The other 50% was the property of Petro Canada, which accepted the sum
of US$ 75 million as compensation for the expropriation of its interests in the
Project. According to the Respondent, that sum corresponds to the value of the

Claimants’ investment in June 2007.

The Tribunal recalls that the market value under Article 6 of the BIT must
correspond to the sum that a willing buyer would have been ready to pay to a willing
seller at the time of the expropriation, none of them being under pressure to buy or

to sell. This was not the situation of Petro Canada when it accepted to sell its

“8 C_PH Brief { 9.
“° Mem. M. { 350.

126

interests in the La Ceiba Project for US$ 75 million, one day before the expiry date
established by Decree-Law 5200. Accordingly, the Tribunal considers that it cannot
rely on the figure proposed by the Respondent, and that the market value of the
Claimants’ interests in the La Ceiba Project must be established at the total of their

investment in that Project, i.e., US$ 179.3 million.
Ix. TAXES AND INTEREST

A. PROTECTION AGAINST TAXATION OF THE AWARD

386. The Claimants contend that compensation should be calculated and payable in an
amount net of any taxes, domestic or foreign. Accordingly, they request that
compensation be calculated on an after-tax basis and that the quantum of the
compensation be increased to include the amount of any tax levied by the
Respondent and the amount of any tax liability that may be incurred as a result of
the Award and as a consequence of the Respondent’s wrongful measures“. The
Claimants consider that, “at the very least”, the Tribunal should specify that the
compensation established in the Award “is net of taxes and shall be automatically
grossed up to offset any Venezuelan tax liability that may be imposed or purportedly

may arise from that compensation’”“'.

387. The Respondent contends that there should be no increase in the amount of the
compensation to account for the hypothetical tax consequences of the Award, since

this claim is speculative, contingent and uncertain“? .

388. Regarding foreign taxation, the Claimants contend that there is a risk that other
jurisdictions will seek to impose taxes that would have been prevented in the

absence of the expropriation. According to the Claimants, such taxation would

+0 Mem. M. 358.
#1 Reply M. 4 264.
“°C. Mem. M. 1374.

389.

B.

390.

391.

constitute additional consequential damages**. The Tribunal considers that this

claim is speculative and uncertain. Accordingly, the claim is dismissed.

Regarding taxation by Venezuela, the Tribunal recalls that the compensation
awarded to the Claimants has been calculated taking into account all taxes to be paid
to the Venezuelan authorities. As a consequence, that compensation should be paid

net of any Venezuelan tax*“.

INTEREST

The Claimants submit that Article 6(c) of the BIT requires that pre-award interest be
paid at a normal commercial rate. The Claimants consider that a normal commercial
rate includes compounding of interest, and therefore claim compound pre- and post-

award interest for both the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Projects.

Regarding accrual of pre-award interest for the Cerro Negro Project, the Claimants
consider that, (i) for the first tranche, between 29 May 2006 and 26 June 2007, pre-
award interest should accrue at the times when those damages occurred as a result of
the extraction tax, curtailments of production and exports and severance
payments“; (ii) for the second tranche, representing net cash flows that would have
been received between 27 June 2007 and 30 September 2010 (as a placeholder for
the date of the Award), pre-award interests must be calculated from the times when
the lost net cash flows would have been received during that period“*; and (iii) for
the third tranche, measured by the fair market value of the lost interests in the Cerro
Negro Project, pre-award interests should begin to accrue on the final valuation date

which is used*”.

+8 Mem. M. 357.

444
403.

See Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8), Award of 6 February 2007 (CL-112)

“5 Mem. M. 1364.
#6 Mem. M. {365 and Reply M. { 13.
“7 Mem. M. 1366.

128

392.

393.

394.

395.

396.

Regarding accrual of pre-award interest for the La Ceiba Project, the Claimants
contend that pre-award compound interests should accrue from 27 June 2007, i.e.,

the date of the expropriation.

The Claimants contend that post-award compound interest should be paid on the
quantum of compensation from the date of the Award until payment in full “at the

rate reflected by the yield for the Respondent’s sovereign debt as of the date of the

Award”“*, This rate could also be used for pre-award interest“. In the alternative,
the Claimants refer to a prime lending rate, to be increased by an additional 3.1
percentage points “to encompass the ‘sovereign spread’ that the market demands to
account for the Respondent's risk of default”*®.

The Respondent submits that the Claimants should be granted no pre-award interest
“given their choice of pursuing worldwide litigation rather than negotiating

3451

reasonable compensation’ In the alternative, simple pre- and post- award interest

452

should apply According to the Respondent, there is no reason to depart from

international law, which does not require compound interest, and Venezuelan law,
(253,

which does not provide for compound interest With respect to the interest rate,

the Respondent contends that the LIBOR or US Treasury rate should be used.

The Tribunal will address first the applicable rate of interest, then turn to the
question of the date from which interest should accrue and finally decide whether

interest should be simple or compound.

Article 6 of the BIT requires that the compensation to be paid in case of
expropriation “include interest at a normal commercial rate”. Accordingly, the
Tribunal rejects the Claimants’ request to apply the rate reflected by the yield for the

Respondent’s sovereign debt. Considering the circumstances of the case, the parties

“8 Mem. M. { 369.
“° C_PH Brief { 82.
8° Ibid.
'C. Mem. M. 1379.

Rej. M. 427.

5 C. Mem. M. 382.

129

397.

398.

399.

involved and the fact that the compensation is to be awarded in United States
dollars, the Tribunal considers that the current US prime rate of 3.25% is the

appropriate rate for the whole period.

The Tribunal observes that the practice of awarding pre-award interest is common in
cases of expropriation and that, in order to ensure full compensation, such interest
generally accrues from the date of the expropriation. In the present case, the
Tribunal considers that the valuation date under Article 6 of the BIT should be the
date of the expropriation. Accordingly, accrual of pre-award interest would start on
27 June 2007 and continue until the date of the Award. Post-award interest will

accrue from the date of the Award and until compensation has been paid in full.

The production and export curtailments have also been found to breach the Treaty
(see paragraph 264 above). Interest is payable in respect of this breach as well. The
Tribunal notes that the last measure regarding this breach occurred in April 2007,
less than three months prior to the starting date from which interest is payable for
the expropriation of the Claimants’ investments. For the sake of convenience, the
Tribunal decides that the interest payable on account of the production and export

curtailments shall also be calculated from 27 June 2007.

According to the Respondent, Venezuelan law provides for simple rather than
compound interest. However, the compensation due to the Claimants has been
determined under the BIT and not under Venezuelan law. Accordingly, the Tribunal
must decide in accordance with Article 6 of the BIT, which provides for a “normal
commercial rate”. The Tribunal considers that a normal commercial rate generally
includes compounding of interest, and notes that there is a growing tendency of
international tribunals to award such interest in order to ensure full compensation of
the damage. Therefore, the Tribunal decides that interest shall be compound and
that, in the present case, compounding of interest shall be done annually. For any

period less than a full year, interest shall be calculated on a prorated basis.

130

400. The Tribunal concludes that the interest due on the sum to be paid in
implementation of paragraph 385 above (La Ceiba quantum) shall be calculated

from the same date and in the in the same manner.

131

X.

XI.

401.

402.

403.

404.

COSTS

The Claimants submit that “the Tribunal should assess all costs against the
Respondent, because it violated the Treaty, erroneously contended that this Tribunal
lacked competence over any claims, and advocated amounts of quantum that utterly

disregard the standard of compensation required by the Treaty”**.

By contrast, the Respondent submits that the costs of the proceeding should be
assessed against the Claimants because of the abusive manner in which they have
pursued compensation in national courts and presented exorbitant compensation
claims in the present case, as well as their insistence on relitigating claims that are

manifestly beyond the jurisdiction of this Tribunal*®.

Taking into account the conduct of both Parties, the Tribunal decides that each of
them shall bear its own costs and counsel fees, and that the fees and expenses of the
Tribunal, as well as the costs of the ICSID Secretariat, shall be equally shared

between them.

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL

For the foregoing reasons, The Tribunal unanimously decides as follows:

(a) the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the claim arising out of the increase in the

income tax rate for the participants to the Cerro Negro Project;
(b) the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the remaining claims, i.e.:

a. the claim arising out of the imposition of the extraction tax on the Cerro

Negro Project;

b. the claim arising out of the production and export curtailments imposed

on the Cerro Negro Project in 2006 and 2007; and

454 C_PH Reply { 51.
“5 R-PH Brief { 87.

132

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i

@

(k)

c. the claim arising out of the expropriation of the Claimants’ investments

in the Cerro Negro and La Ceiba Projects;

the Respondent shall pay to the Claimants the sum of US$ 9,042,482 (nine
million, forty two thousand, four hundred and eighty two United States
dollars) in compensation for the production and export curtailments imposed

on the Cerro Negro project in 2006 and 2007;

the Respondent shall pay to the Claimants the sum of US$ 1,411.7 million
(one thousand, four hundred and eleven million, seven hundred thousand
United States dollars) in compensation for the expropriation of their

investments in the Cerro Negro Project;

the Tribunal takes note in both cases of the Claimants’ representation that, in
the event of favourable award, the Claimants are willing to make the required

reimbursements to PDVSA. Double recovery will thus be avoided;

the Respondent shall pay to the Claimants the sum of US$ 179.3 million (one
hundred seventy nine million, three hundred thousand United States dollars)
in compensation for the expropriation of their investments in the La Ceiba

Project;
these sums shall be paid to the Claimants net of any Venezuelan tax;

these sums shall be increased by annual compound interest on their amount at
the rate of 3.25% from 27 June 2007 up to the date when payment of this

sums has been made in full;
each Party shall bear its own costs and counsel fees;

the Parties shall equally share the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the

costs of the ICSID Secretariat; and

all other claims are rejected.

133

[Signed] [Signed]

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler Dr. Ahmed Sadek El-Kosheri

Arbitrator Arbitrator
24 September 2014 16 September 2014
[Signed]

Judge Gilbert Guillaume
President
30 September 2014

134

 

ANNEX 1

 

Period

Annex 1

Total SCO
Volumes.
(MB)

19,600

1,076,234.7

69,515.5,

Joint Total
Revenues Revenues
(BS) (BS)
27.7 1135.5
52.7 2,159.7
514 2,095.7,
51.0 2,089.1
51.3 2,102.0
516 2,115.2
519 2,127.3
523 2,145.3
528 2,162.8
54.0 2,213.7
54.9 2,252.1
56.0 2,296.2
57.4 2,340.3,
58.4 2,396.0
59.5 2,438.6
60.7 2,486.9
618 2,535.3
63.2 2,590.4
64.3 2,636.7
65.6 2,689.4
66.9 2,742.0
68.3 2,801.6
69.5 2,851.2
70.9 2,908.2
729 2,987.4
75.4 3,077.3,
769 3,152.4
79.0 3,237.8
60.7 2,487.3
1,737.9 71,2534

837.2

23,982.6

Extraction

24,272.3,

OPEX

6,056.7

CAPEX

1,779.9

Contribution
for Science
and

Technology

Anti-drus

9 Export
Contribution Contribution

Taxable
Income

39,084.6

Income Prolect
as!

Tex Flow
3253 3208
608.6 598.1
583.0 540.6
5788 534.7
563.2 527.5
585.2 531.0
586.5 530.8
590.7 519.4
594.8 540.1
588.0 537.2
620.0 582
6322 565.0
643.9 584.5
660.1 592.2
648.1 601.5
684.4 609.3
698.0 6258
7132 6353
7255 6502
7143 643.2
754.6 676.1
7709 681.0
7843 7026
800.0 630.7,
794.8 687.7
849.9 741.6
8709 8525
894.9 876.0
678.2 668.7

19,542.3 17,7624

41 2/3 %
Share
Cash
Flows

281.6
283.7
292.7
262.7
286.5
308.9
355.2
364.9
278.6

7,399.8

Discounted
Cash Flows
18%

