INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the proceeding between
VICTOR PEY CASADO AND FOUNDATION “PRESIDENTE ALLENDE”

Claimants

AND

THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2

DECISION ON THE PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY
SIR FRANKLIN BERMAN QC AND MR. V.V. VEEDER QC

Chairman of the Administrative Council
Dr. Jim Yong Kim

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Benjamin Garel

Date: 21 February 2017

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS, 9
The Clai ” Position 9
The Appearance of a Conflict Of Interest <<tsssxovasoaesocnseucsvoors cs vssnstussssaTsowsstoswoscosvers sv issstse 5539 9
The Circumstances of This Case 14
The Respondent’s Position Is
Relevant Background 15
The Clai ” Proposal is Inadmissibl 17
The Claimants’ Proposal is Unfounded 18
. ANALYSIS 19
. DECISION. 24

L.

Page |1

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 18 June 2013, Victor Pey Casado and the Foundation Presidente Allende (the
“Claimants”) submitted a Request for Resubmission of their dispute against the Republic of
Chile (“Chile” or “Respondent”) to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”).!

On 8 July 2013, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for Resubmission
pursuant to Article 52(6) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States (“ICSID Convention”), and Rule 55(2) of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules”).

On 24 December 2013, the Secretary-General of ICSID notified the Parties that all three
arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was deemed to have been
constituted on that date, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1). Mr. Paul Jean Le
Cannu, ICSID Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal. Mr.
Benjamin Garel, ICSID Legal Counsel, was subsequently designated to serve as Secretary of
the Tribunal in the stead of Mr. Le Cannu.

The Tribunal was composed of Sir Franklin Berman QC, a national of the United Kingdom,
President, appointed by the Chairman of the Administrative Council pursuant to Article 38 of
the ICSID Convention; Professor Philippe Sands QC, a national of France and the United
Kingdom, appointed by the Claimants; and Mr. Alexis Mourre, a national of France,
appointed by the Respondent.

The Tribunal was reconstituted on 31 January 2014, following the resignation of Professor
Philippe Sands QC. The Claimants appointed Mr. V.V. Veeder QC to replace Professor Sands
QC. The Parties received copies of the curricula vitae and declarations of each member of
the Tribunal upon acceptance of their appointment. The curricula vitae of Sir Franklin
Berman QC and Mr. V.V. Veeder QC indicated that they are members of Essex Court
Chambers.

' The Request for Resubmission followed the partial annulment, on 18 December 2012, of the initial award rendered in this case
on 8 May 2008.

Page |2

On 11 March 2014, the Tribunal held its first session with the Parties. During the first session,
the Parties confirmed that the Tribunal was properly constituted and that they had no objection

to the appointment of any member of the Tribunal.

On 17 March 2016, the Tribunal closed the proceeding and on 13 September 2016, the

Tribunal rendered its Award (the “Award”).

By letter dated 20 September 2016 addressed to the Secretary-General of ICSID, the
Claimants requested that Sir Franklin Berman QC and Mr. V.V. Veeder QC make a number
of disclosures concerning the relationship between their chambers — Essex Court Chambers —

and the Republic of Chile.

By letter dated 9 October 2016 addressed to the Chairman of the Administrative Council of
ICSID and the Secretary-General of ICSID, the Claimants requested that the Secretary-
General confirm whether the Republic of Chile had complied with its obligation to disclose
its relationship with Essex Court Chambers during the resubmission proceeding. The

Claimants requested that the Republic of Chile make full disclosure before 17 October 2016.

. By letter dated 12 October 2016, the Secretary-General of ICSID advised that Sir Franklin

Berman QC and Mr. V.V. Veeder QC had each confirmed that no circumstance had arisen
during the resubmission proceeding that required disclosure under ICSID Arbitration Rule

6(2).

. By a second letter dated 12 October 2016, the Secretary-General of ICSID replied to the

Claimants’ letter dated 9 October 2016 and confirmed that all correspondence received from
the Respondent in the resubmission proceeding had been transmitted to the Claimants and the

Tribunal.

. By letter dated 13 October 2016 addressed to Sir Franklin Berman QC and Mr. V.V. Veeder

QC, the Claimants advised that after the issuance of the Award, they had learned of the
existence of a professional relationship between members of Essex Court Chambers and the
Republic of Chile during the bmission p ding. The Clai req d that Sir

Franklin Berman QC and Mr. V.V. Veeder QC inquire into and make disclosures concerning

 

Page |3

this relationship so the Claimants could assess whether a legitimate doubt existed as to the

impartiality and independence of the arbitrators.

13. By letter dated 17 October 2016, Sir Franklin Berman QC replied to Counsel for the Claimants

as follows:

Dear Me Garcés,

You wrote on 13 October posing a long series of questions to me in my
capacity as President of the Resubmission Tribunal in the dispute between
Mr Victor Pey Casado and others and the Republic of Chile. With the
delivery of its Award last month, the Tribunal completed the task conferred
on it. It has not subsequently been called into being for any other purpose
under the ICSID Arbitration Rules. I am nevertheless responding to your
letter in the same spirit of friendly courtesy as has characterized the conduct
of the resubmission proceedings.

The Secretary-General of ICSID has, so I understand, already replied to an
earlier letter from you, after consultation with me, to convey my confirmation
that there was nothing subsequent to my appointment as presiding arbitrator
that had called for any supplementary declaration by me under the
Arbitration Rules.

You are, I am sure, aware that an English barristers' chambers is not a law

firm, and that all barristers in chambers operate in strict independence of
one another, with the sole exception of the circumstance in which more than
one of them is retained by the same client to act in the same matter. I would
not therefore in any case be able to answer your questions, as the governing
rules impose on each barrister the strictest confidence over the affairs of his
clients, so that it would be prohibited for me to make enquiries of fellow
members of chambers about the work undertaken by them.

I hope that it is not necessary for me to add that at no stage during the
resubmission proceedings have I had any discussion of any kind about the
case other than with my co-arbitrators, the Secretary to the Resubmission
Tribunal, and Dr Gleider Hernandez, the Tribunal's assistant. I would have
been deeply distressed had you thought otherwise.

With kind and collegial regards,

14. By letter dated 17 October 2016, Mr. V.V. Veeder QC replied to Counsel for the Claimants

as follows:

Cher M. Garcés,

Je me référe a : (i) votre lettre du 20 septembre 2016 (adressée a Mme la
Secrétaire générale du CIRDI) ; (ii) votre lettre du 13 octobre 2016

15s

Page |4

(adressée a Sir Frank Berman et moi-méme) ; et (iii) la lettre du 12 octobre
2016 de Mme la Secrétaire Générale (adressée a vous-méme).

Je confirme ce que Mme la Secrétaire Générale vous a écrit dans sa lettre :
a@ ma connaissance, aucune circonstance n'est survenue, depuis ma
déclaration du 3I janvier 2014 jusqu'a la sentence du 13 septembre 2016,
justifiant d'étre notifiée en application de l'article 6(2) du Réglement
d'arbitrage du CIRDI.

Je confirme, aussi, que je n'ai eu aucune relation professionnelle d'affaires
ou autre avec les parties dans cet arbitrage.

Si je comprends bien les questions que vous m'avez posées dans votre
seconde lettre, vous demandez des informations confidentielles concernant
d'autres barristers exergant leurs professions d'avocats au sein de Essex
Court Chambers.

Etant donné que tous les barristers de Essex Court Chambers (comme
d'autres chambers en Angleterre et au Pays de Galles) exercent a titre
individuel et ne constituent donc pas une « law firm », un « partnership » ou
une « company », je regrette de ne pas étre en mesure de vous répondre.
D'aprés le Code of Conduct du Bar Standards Board, chaque barrister est
indépendant et « must keep the affairs of each client confidential » (Core
Duty 6). En bref, ces informations confidentielles, quelles qu’elles soient, ne
peuvent étre ni ne sont connues de moi.

Je vous prie d'agréer, mon cher confrére, l'expression de mes salutations
distinguées.

V.V. Veeder OC

By letter dated 18 October 2016, the Claimants notified ICSID of two alleged errors in the
Award, and asked the Tribunal to make the previously requested disclosures and to hear the
Parties regarding the alleged conflict of interest arising from the relationship between the

Respondent and Essex Court Chambers.

. By letter dated 20 October 2016, the Secretary-General of ICSID reminded the Claimants that

no proceeding had been initiated under Articles 49, 50 or 51 of the ICSID Convention and
therefore the requests addressed to the Tribunal by the Claimants in their letter dated
18 October 2016 could not be transmitted to it.

. On 27 October 2016, the Claimants submitted a Request for Rectification of the Award

pursuant to Article 49 of the ICSID Convention. The Request for Rectification reiterated the
request for inquiry and disclosure by Sir Franklin Berman QC and Mr. V.V. Veeder QC. The

20.

21.

One

(235

24.

25.

26.

Page |5

Claimants asked them to resign from the rectification tribunal should they not make such

inquiry and disclosure.

. The Request for Rectification further d that the rectification pr ding be ded

i iS P

until the tribunal called upon to interpret the initial award of 8 May 2008 had issued its

interpretation decision.

. By email dated 4 November 2016, the Respondent asked the Secretary-General of ICSID for

four weeks to file its response regarding the proper procedure to follow in the circumstances

presented by the Claimants’ submissions.

By email dated 5 November 2016, the Claimants opposed the Respondent’s request for a four-

week time limit.

On 8 November 2016, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for
Rectification of the Award. By letter of the same day, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID
invited the Parties to submit their requests regarding the procedure, conduct and timetable of

the rectification proceedings to the Tribunal.

By letter dated 10 November 2016, the Claimants submitted requests for suspension of the

rectification proceeding and for further disclosure by the Tribunal.

By letter dated 16 November 2016, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to indicate by

30 November 2016 whether it consented to the requested rectifications.

By letter dated 17 November 2016, the Respondent asked the Tribunal to order the Claimants

to submit a Spanish translation of the Request for Rectification.

By letter dated 21 November 2016, the Tribunal indicated that Sir Franklin Berman QC and
Mr. V.V. Veeder QC had nothing further to add to their previous correspondence.

By a second letter dated 21 November 2016, the Tribunal denied the Claimants’ request to
suspend the rectification proceeding, and set the procedural timetable for the rectification

proceeding.

27.

28.

29.

30.

Page |6

On 22 November 2016, the Claimants proposed the disqualification of Sir Franklin
Berman QC and Mr. V.V. Veeder QC (the “Challenged Arbitrators”) in accordance with
Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9 (the “Proposal”).

By letter dated 29 November 2016, the Centre informed the Parties that the rectification
proceeding was suspended until the Proposal was decided, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule
9(6). The Centre also established a procedural calendar for the Parties’ submissions on the

Proposal.

By letter dated 2 December 2016, the Respondent requested an amendment of the procedural
calendar for the Parties’ submissions. By letter dated 4 December 2016, the Centre informed

the Parties that the procedural calendar had been amended as requested.

By letter dated 4 December 2016, Sir Franklin Berman QC submitted his explanations

concerning the Proposal. The letter read:

Dear Dr Kim,

I have been informed by the Secretary-General that a proposal has been
lodged for my disqualification as an arbitrator in respect of the ancillary
proceedings in relation to the resubmission, following a partial annulment,
of the dispute between Mr Victor Pey Casado and the Foundation President
Allende and the Republic of Chile (ARB/98/2). As you know, the
resubmission tribunal, over which I presided, completed its mandate with the
issue of its award on 13 September 2016, but was subsequently called back
into being on a request for rectification of that award.

In order not to impose any unnecessary delay in your consideration of the
matter, I write to say at once that there is nothing I wish to say, or need to
say, on the substance of the proposal for my disqualification; I am content
for you to decide the matter on the record as it stands, though I naturally
stand ready to answer any questions you may wish to put to me.

In saying this, I wish merely to draw attention to certain aspects of the
record: -

1) It is not correct to say that I declined to make disclosure. The request was
originally put to me through the Secretary-General, and my reply was
promptly conveyed, through the Secretary-General, that disclosure had
been made in the standard terms at the time of my appointment, and that
nothing had happened since then to call for further disclosure. I drew
attention to this in my letter to counsel for the claimants. When counsel
subsequently wrote to me direct to convey his personal esteem and

Page |7

admiration, I understood this to mean that he recognized that there could
be no objection to the impartiality and independence with which I had
carried out my functions in the case. Both letters are attached for ease of
reference. 4

2) I note that the disqualification proposal bases itself on a professional
engagement said to have been made by the respondent state with a fellow
member of my Chambers a short while before the issue of the
resubmission award, a matter of which I was entirely unaware (nor could
I have been aware of it) until it was raised by counsel some weeks after
the resubmission award had issued.

3) Inote finally a suggestion in the papers that the resubmission tribunal had
pressed ahead with the rectification proceedings in undue haste, and
attach therefore, for completeness' sake, a copy of the Centre's letter to
the parties which sets out the schedule laid down by the tribunal under
Arbitration Rule 49(3).

31. On 5 December 2016, the Claimants submitted a Spanish version of their Proposal.

32. By email dated 11 December 2016, Mr. V.V. Veeder QC submitted his explanations

concerning the Proposal. The email read:

Dear Mr Garel (as Secretary to the Tribunal),

I refer to the timetable established by the ICSID Secretariat’s second letter
dated 29 November 2016 under ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3), whereby Iam
invited to respond in writing to the formal challenge made by the Claimants
to my independence as a co-arbitrator (nominated by the Claimants in this
arbitration), within the meaning of Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention.

Save for one matter, I think it inappropriate here to add to the written
response made by my letter dated 17 October 2016 addressed to the
Claimants’ counsel (copied to the Parties), the contents of which I here
confirm (a copy is attached; it is also Piéce 16 to the Claimants’ formal
challenge of 22 November 2016).

That matter relates to my voluntary resignation in 2007 as the presiding
arbitrator in the ICSID arbitration, Vanessa Ventures v Venezuela (ICSID
Case No ARB/05/24). The Claimants’ counsel (who was not personally
involved) has misunderstood the relevant circumstances in that case, citing
it several times in support of the Claimants’ challenge (e.g. see paragraph
39 of the Claimants’ said challenge and Piéces 1, 4, 10, 12, 13 & 17).

I resigned in that ICSID arbitration because I learnt at the jurisdictional
hearing, for the first time, that one of the counsel acting for the claimant
(Vanessa Ventures) was an English barrister who was, at that time, also co-
counsel with me acting for a different party in a different and unrelated

34,

35.

36.

Ss

38.

39:

Page |8

ICSID Case. I did not resign because he and I were both members of the
same barristers’ chambers. Before the jurisdictional hearing, I did not know
that this counsel was acting for Vanessa Ventures; nor could have I taken
any legitimate steps by myself to check for any such conflict owing to the
confidential nature of every English barrister’s professional practice.

The circumstances in Vanessa Ventures related to an actual conflict caused
by counsel within the same arbitration and not to counsel extraneous to the
arbitration. To my understanding, the former circumstances are not present
in this case (nor so alleged by the Claimants).

Yours Sincerely,

VV. Veeder OC

. On 16 December 2016, the Respondent submitted its response to the Proposal (the

“Response”).

By letter dated 30 December 2016, the Claimants asked ICSID to transmit to them certain
documents relating to the resignation of Mr. V.V. Veeder QC in the Vannessa Ventures Ltd.
v. Venezuela case (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/04/6, to allow the Claimants to assess the
validity of the explanations provided by Mr. V.V. Veeder QC.

By letter dated 1 January 2017, ICSID informed the Parties that case documents other than
those published on the ICSID website are not public and cannot be disclosed by the Centre.

By email dated 13 January 2017, the Claimants asked that ICSID seek the approval of the
parties in the Vannessa Ventures Ltd. v. Venezuela case to disclose the documents referred to

in their letter dated 30 December 2016.

On 13 January 2017, the Claimants submitted further observations regarding the Proposal (the

“Observations”).

By email dated 18 January 2017, ICSID invited the Claimants to contact the parties in the

Vannessa Ventures Ltd. v. Venezuela case directly.

By letter dated 27 January 2017, the Claimants informed ICSID that they invited the parties
in the Vannessa Ventures Ltd. v. Venezuela case to provide the relevant documents to the

Secretary of the Tribunal. The Claimants also requested that the Chairman of the

Il.

40.

41.

42.

43.

Page |9

Administrative Council be allowed to review the documents in question in camera, should

either party refuse to disclose these documents to the Claimants.

PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS
A. The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants’ arguments were set forth in their Proposal of 22 November 2016 and their

Observations of 13 January 2017. These arguments are summarized below.

1) The Appearance of a Conflict of Interest

The Claimants submit that on 18 September 2016, two days after the Award was rendered,
the Respondent publicly revealed in the Chilean press that Professor Alan Boyle and
Mr. Samuel Wordsworth QC, two barristers member of Essex Court Chambers, were

representing Chile in cases before the International Court of Justice (“ICI”)?

According to the Claimants, this fact could create an apparent conflict of interest arising from
the relationship between the Respondent, Essex Court Chambers and the Challenged
Arbitrators, who are also members of these chambers.

The Claimants submit that: (i) the Republic of Chile is one of the most important clients of
Essex Court Chambers, which is paid to provide legal advice and representation in relation to
matters of strategic importance; (ii) the Respondent has a financial interest in seeing the
remedies available to the Claimants under Articles 49, 50 and 51 of the [CSID Convention
decided in its favor; (iii) the circumstances establish that Essex Court Chambers has an interest
in the success of its client, the Republic of Chile; (iv) the Challenged Arbitrators’ explanations
did not comply with the standards for conflicts of interest applied by English courts and were
designed to maintain the lack of transparency and impropriety of the Chile-Essex Court
Chambers relationship; and (v) the refusal to make the requested disclosure breached ICSID
Arbitration Rule 6(2).3

2 Proposal, paras. 8-9.

> Observations, paras. 111-118.

44.

45,

46.

47.

48.

Page |10

The Claimants assert that an appearance of conflict was exacerbated by the refusal of the
Challenged Arbitrators to make the requested disclosure of the relationship between their
chambers and the Respondent. They contend that the Challenged Arbitrators’ responses to
the request for disclosure demonstrate that they were not transparent about such a

relationship.*
a) English Law

The Claimants assert that the Challenged Arbitrators’ refusal to disclose information about
the relationship between the Respondent and other barristers in their chambers is not justified

under English law.>

The Claimants rely on a decision from the High Court of England and Wales dated 2 March
2016, which they allege dealt with similar circumstances and where the barrister made

disclosures.®

The Claimants also rely on the Informational Note Regarding Barristers in International
Arbitration issued by the Bar Council of England and Wales, which refers to the IBA
Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration 2014 (“IBA Guidelines”). For
the Claimants, the position of the Bar Council of England and Wales contradicts the position
of the Challenged Arbitrators regarding their inability to reveal any links between members

of their chambers and the Respondent.”
b) IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest

The Claimants state that the IBA Guidelines are applicable in this case, and argue that the
Respondent has accepted this by previously invoking the Guidelines in these proceedings.
They add that the Secretary-General of ICSID previously applied the IBA Guidelines in this

case.

“Proposal, paras. 10-15.

5 Proposal, paras. 8-26.

6 Proposal, paras. 17-21.

Proposal, para. 22.

8 Proposal, paras. 56-58

49.

50.

51.

52

53.

Page |11

According to the Claimants, under the IBA Guidelines, a conflict may arise on the basis of an

appearance, rather than actual, partiality and dependence.?

They cite a passage from the IBA Guidelines, which states that, “Although barristers’
chambers should not be equated with law firms for the purposes of conflicts, and no general
standard is proffered for barristers’ chambers, disclosure may be warranted in view of the
relationships among barristers, parties or counsel.”"° In this respect, the Claimants submit
that the Challenged Arbitrators’ membership in Essex Court Chambers creates a “Non-
Waivable Red List” type of conflict, which the IBA Guidelines describe as follows: “1.4 The
arbitrator or his or her firm regularly advises the party, or an affiliate of the party, and the

arbitrator or his or her firm derives significant financial income therefrom. ""'

The Claimants submit that the Challenged Arbitrators had a duty to investigate possible
conflicts of interests under the IBA Guidelines, and to disclose them to the Parties. Yet, the
Claimants add, the Challenged Arbitrators exempted themselves from this duty in their letters
dated 17 October 2016.'” This, the Claimants argue, went against the principle of nemo iudex

ese debet in causa sua.

Under the IBA Guidelines, the Challenged Arbitrators should not have accepted their
appointment or should have resigned if they could not make a disclosure because of

professional secrecy or confidentiality rules.'°
c) ICSID Convention and Case Law

The Claimants assert that failure to disclose the Essex Court Chambers-Chile relationship is

incompatible with the ICSID arbitration system, which requires arbitrators to be independent

° Proposal, paras. 43-51.

'© Proposal, para. 23.

" Proposal, paras. 24-25.

"2 Proposal, paras. 60-64

'3 Proposal, paras. 65-68.

54,

55:

56.

Die

Page |12

and impartial, to judge equitably, and to continuously disclose any relationship or

circumstance that would cause their reliability for independent judgement to be questioned.'*

The Claimants cite the decision on disqualification in Caratube v. Kazakhstan which held that
an arbitrator could not be expected to maintain a Chinese wall in his own mind. The Claimants
argue that the Challenged Arbitrators seem to be relying on the existence of a Chinese wall to

refuse to make the requested disclosure.'*

The Claimants further rely on the decision on disqualification in Lemire v. Ukraine in which
an arbitrator disclosed that his firm had received instructions from the respondent regarding
an ICJ case and offered to resign. They note that the Challenged Arbitrators have not made

any disclosure and refused to resign in this case.'*

According to the Claimants, the response of the Challenged Arbitrators in their letters of
17 October 2016 contradicts the ruling of the tribunal in Hrvatska v. Slovenia, which stated
that :

For an international system like that of ICSID, it seems unacceptable for the
solution to reside in the individual national bodies which regulate the work
of professional service providers, because that might lead to inconsistent or
indeed arbitrary outcomes depending on the attitudes of such bodies, or the
content (or lack of relevant content) of their rules. It would moreover be
disruptive to interrupt international cases to ascertain the position taken by
such bodies. (...).!7

The Claimants also submit that the conduct of the Challenged Arbitrators in this proceeding
contradicts the conduct of Mr. V.V. Veeder QC in the Vannessa Ventures v. Venezuela case,
where Mr. V.V. Veeder QC resigned as president of a tribunal because a member of his

chambers acted as counsel for the claimant in the same case.'*

4 Proposal, paras. 27-33.

'S Proposal, para. 34, citing Caratube International Oil Company LLP and Devincci Salah Hourani v Republic of Kazakhstan
(ICSID Case No ARB/13/13), Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of Mr. Bruno Boesch, 20 March 2014.

‘6 Proposal, para. 35.

” Proposal, para. 38.

'S Proposal, paras. 39-40.

58.

59.

60.

61.

Page |13

The Claimants further submit that the IBA Guidelines apply to all arbitrators in ICSID cases,

regardless of their experience and reputation.!”

The Claimants argue that arbitrators have an obligation to disclose facts and circumstances
that give rise to doubts as to their impartiality or independence, stating that “impartiality” is
“absence of bias, prejudgment and conflict of interest”2° The Claimants contend that the
Challenged Arbitrators’ responses and decisions after 20 September 2016 were not justified,”!
and that their replies to ICSID were evasive, incomplete” and biased.??_ The Claimants add

that the decisions rendered by the Tribunal since 13 October 2016 are not impartial.”
d) Chilean Rules on Ethics

The Claimants refer to a statement from the Chilean Bar Association, that when several
attorneys are members of the same professional team, disqualifying circumstances for one
member constitute disqualifying circumstances for all members, regardless of the form that
team takes. The declaration further indicates that such a conflict of interest does not require
a formal business tie between individuals as long as they operate their business “under the

same roof.”

e) Other Sources

Finally, the Claimants cite an article by Professor William W. Park stating that conflicts of
interest might occur in the absence of shared profits between barristers from the same

chambers.”

'9 Proposal, paras. 43-51.

29 Proposal, para. 42; Observations, paras. 38-40, 89.

2! Observations, paras. 41-47.
2 Observations, paras. 41, 48-51, 74-87
23 Observations, paras. 41, 52-66, 74-87.

24 Observations, paras. 67-73.

25 Proposal, paras. 54-55.

2% Proposal, para. 26.

62.

63.

64.

Page |14

2) The Circumstances of This Case

a) The Respondent’s Previous Conduct

The Claimants submit that the failure to disclose by the Challenged Arbitrators is particularly
serious given that the initial award of 8 May 2008 found that the Respondent had committed
a denial of justice by concealing the existence of a Chilean court decision which had a major
effect on the course of the arbitration.?” The Claimants also allege that the Respondent has
continuously sought to place the Tribunal under its direct or indirect control or to derail the

proceeding, which prolonged the case and increased its costs.”
b) Admissibility and Promptness

The Claimants contend that Article 57 of the ICSID Convention applies to all proceedings
provided for in Chapter IV (“Arbitration”) of the Convention.?? They add that ICSID
Arbitration Rule 9 does not distinguish between arbitrators acting in proceedings governed by
Articles 50, 51 and 52 of the ICSID Convention from arbitrators acting in proceedings under

Article 49 of the Convention.”

The Claimants also submit that the Proposal was submitted one day after the Tribunal formally
rejected their requests for full disclosure, and therefore was submitted promptly under Article
57 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1).°! The Claimants state that they
became aware of the Chile-Essex Court Chambers relationship on 20 September 2016, two
days after the Respondent mentioned it in the Chilean press, and five days after the Award
was rendered. Therefore, they learned about the relationship after the Tribunal became
functus officio. The Claimants also assert that the Proposal was filed before closing the

rectification proceeding, in compliance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 9.°2

2 Proposal, para. 52.

8 Proposal, paras. 52-53 ; Observations, paras. 98-118,

2° Observations, paras. 1-2.

30 Observations, para. 3.

3! Proposal, paras. 74-84.
32 Observations, paras. 5-6, 14-16, 88.

65.

66.

67.

68.

Page |15

c) Waiver

For the Claimants, the Respondent’s argument that the “Claimants have waived their right to
object on the basis of Essex Court Barristers representing Chile before the ICJ’ has no merit,
for the following reasons. First, very little time elapsed between the time the Claimants
became aware of the relationship between Chile and Essex Courts Chambers and the
Claimants’ first requests for further disclosures.*? Second, under English and French law, an
arbitrator must disclose relevant facts even if those are in the public domain.** Third, the
Respondent had an obligation to disclose the relationship between Chile and Essex Courts

Chambers.?*

The Claimants therefore request that the Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID
uphold the Proposal and that all costs and fees incurred by the Claimants in connection with

it be borne by the Respondent.*°

B. The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent’s arguments opposing the Claimants’ Proposal were set forth in its

submission of 16 December 2016. These arguments are summarized below.

1) Relevant Background

The Respondent lists the background information that it contends is necessary to evaluate this
Proposal.>” In particular, the Respondent describes the process to constitute the resubmission
Tribunal.*® After the Claimants appointed Professor Philippe Sands QC to the Tribunal, the
Respondent asked the Centre to inquire with Professor Sands concerning his role in an ICJ

case between Chile and Bolivia. Professor Sands advised the Parties that he was not acting

+3 Observations, para. 89.

34 Observations, para. 89.

55 Observations, paras. 89-96.

3 Observations, para. 118.

57 Response, paras. 3-25.

38 Response, paras, 4-12.

Page |16

as legal counsel for Bolivia in that ICJ case, nor was he involved in any proceeding for or

against Chile. °°

69. The Respondent also recalls that the Secretary-General of ICSID attached Sir Franklin
Berman QC’s curriculum vitae to the letter informing the Parties of ICSID’s intention to
propose his appointment as President of the Resubmission Tribunal, and that the curriculum

vitae identified Sir Franklin Berman QC as a member of Essex Court Chambers.’°

70. The Respondent adds that the Essex Court Chambers website explains that it “is not a firm,
nor are its members partners or employees. Rather, Chambers is comprised of individual
barristers, each of whom is a self-employed sole practitioner.” The Essex Court Chambers
website further explains that members of chambers commonly appear on opposing sides in
the same dispute, including in arbitration proceedings, or in front of other Essex Court
Chambers members acting as arbitrators, with protocols in place to safeguard

confidentiality."!

71. The Respondent also notes that when Sir Franklin Berman QC was proposed by ICSID, other
members of Essex Court Chambers were acting as counsel in ICJ proceedings involving
Chile: Mr. Vaughan Lowe QC was representing Bolivia in a case against Chile and
Mr. Samuel Wordsworth QC was representing Chile in another case against Peru. The
Respondent submits that neither the ICSID Secretariat nor the Claimants raised any concerns
when Sir Franklin Berman QC was proposed and then appointed, *? nor did the Claimants
object when Sir Franklin Berman QC accepted his appointment.*? Rather, the Claimants
expressly stated that Sir Franklin Berman QC satisfied the requirements of Article 14 of the

ICSID Convention.“*

> Response, para. 4.
“© Response, para. 6.
41 Response, para. 7.
® Response, para. 9.
® Response, para, 10.

“4 Response, para. 9.

a2:

73.

74.

fis:

Page |17

The Respondent also notes that the Claimants appointed another barrister member of Essex
Court Chambers, Mr. V.V. Veeder QC, to replace Professor Sands QC on the Resubmission
Tribunal.4* The curriculum vitae of Mr. V.V. Veeder QC was provided to the Parties when
he accepted his appointment. It identified Mr. V.V. Veeder QC as a member of Essex Court
Chambers.*®

The Respondent adds that between the first session of the Tribunal on 11 March 2014 and the
hearing in London in April 2015, “various media outlets reported on the progress of the
Bolivia v. Chile dispute, and mentioned that Samuel Wordsworth — the Essex Court
Chambers barrister who had represented Chile in the Peru v. Chile dispute — had also joined
the team representing Chile in Bolivia v. Chile” and that the “Claimants never expressed any

concern about these developments.”*7

The Respondent notes that the Claimants complained and began asking for disclosures of
information about the relationship between Chile and members of Essex Court Chambers only
after the Award was issued to the Parties, on 13 September 2016, and after Chile’s Foreign
Affairs Minister announced on 18 September 2016 that Professor Alan Boyle of Essex Court

Chambers was also representing Chile in the most recent ICJ case against Bolivia.*®

2) The Claimants’ Proposal is Inadmissible

The Respondent submits that there has never been an arbitrator challenge in an ICSID
rectification proceeding and that Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rule 49 do not provide for this possibility. It argues that rectification proceedings

are incompatible with arbitrator challenges and allowing a challenge would undermine the

“5 Response, para. I.

“6 Response, para. 11.

“7 Response, para. 12 (footnotes omitted), referring to several press articles: Exhibit R-36, Wordsworth: ‘La frontera maritima
entre Chile y Perit es un tema zanjado hace mucho,’ LA NACION, 14 December 2012; Exhibit R-39, Chile cambia estrategia
ante La Haya, LA TERCERA, 12 April 2014; Exhibit R-40, Bolivia llevaré ‘El mar’, un texto de la demanda maritima, al G77,
LA RAZON, 24 May 2014; Exhibit R-41, La Haya: Defensa de Chile se retine con abogados internacionales por demanda de
Bolivia, LA TERCERA, 8 December 2014; Exhibit R-42, La Haya: Estos fueron los argumentos de Chile en el primer dia de
alegatos ante Bolivia, LA NACION, 4 May 2015; Exhibit R-43, Los equipos que representan a Chile y Bolivia en la Haya, EMOL,
4 May 2015; Exhibit R-44, Chile to World Court: No Negotiation on Sea Access for Bolivia, PAN AM POST, 11 May 2015;
Exhibit R-47, Chile defenderé ante La Haya validez y cardcter de tratado limitrofe con Peru, LA TERCERA, 6 December 2012

“8 Response, para. 14.

16.

TT.

78.

79.

Page |18

very nature of the rectification remedy.” In support, the Respondent cites the Commentary
to the 1968 version of the ICSID Arbitration Rules which explains that “[uJnlike an
interpretation, revision or annulment of an award . . . [,] the rectification of an award can
only be made by the Tribunal that rendered the award.” The Respondent also cites
Professeur Schreuer, who submits that if “for whatever reason, the original tribunal is no
longer available, the remedy of Art. 49(2) [i.e., supplementation and rectification] cannot

be used.”*!

The Respondent submits that rectification is a sui generis remedy, independent from the other ©
provisions of the ICSID Convention and that ICSID Arbitration Rule 49 expressly provides
that only ICSID Arbitration Rules 46 to 48 apply in a rectification proceeding. It notes that
the Claimants base their Proposal on Articles 57 and 58 of the ICSID Convention and on
ICSID Arbitration Rule 9 but never explain why these provisions should apply.*>

The Respondent therefore concludes that the Proposal is inadmissible because the ICSID
Convention and Arbitration Rules preclude arbitrator challenges in a rectification

proceeding.**

3) The Claimants’ Proposal is Unfounded

The Respondent submits that the party seeking disqualification under Article 57 of the ICSID
Convention must identify a fact that would cause a reasonable person to infer that the
challenged arbitrator manifestly cannot be relied upon to exercise independent and impartial

judgement. A simple belief or assertion of conflict of interest is insufficient.°°

The Respondent notes that the only facts relied on by the Claimants are that the Challenged

Arbitrators: (i) were acting as arbitrators in the resubmission proceeding while other members

Response, paras. 26, 27, 30.

5° Response, para. 27, citing ICSID Arbitration Rules (1968), Note D to Arbitration Rule 49 (emphasis added by the Respondent).

5! Response, para, 27, citing C. Schreuer et al., THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY, Art. 49, $36 (2d. ed. 2009)
(emphasis added by the Respondent).

52 Response, paras. 28, 29.

53 Response, para. 28.

54 Response, para. 30.

55 Response, para. 32.

80.

81.

Til.

82.

Page |19

of Essex Court Chambers were counsel in ICJ cases involving Chile; (ii) did not disclose this
in their ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(2) declarations; and (iii) did not respond satisfactorily to

the Claimants’ demands for information.*°

For the Respondent, these facts cannot justify disqualification for the following reasons:
(i) barristers’ chambers are not treated as equivalent to law firms for conflict purposes;*”
(ii) both Sir Franklin Berman QC and Mr. V. V. Veeder QC complied with their obligation to
disclose pertinent information to the Parties and were justified in not acceding to an
unreasonable demand for information that they did not and could not have had;** (iii) it was

public knowledge throughout the entire bmission ding that barristers from Essex

 

Court Chambers were representing the Respondent before the ICJ, and the Claimants waived
their right to rely on such a publicly known fact by not submitting their challenge promptly;°?
and (iv) the Claimants’ disagreement with the Tribunal’s adverse ruling not to suspend the

rectification proceeding is not a viable basis for disqualification.”

fo nded

The Respondent ludes that the Clai ” Proposal is inadmissible. and

frivolous, and requests that the challenge be summarily rejected with the Claimants paying

the Respondent’s costs and fees incurred in connection with this Proposal.*!

ANALYSIS

Three main issues were addressed by the Parties in relation to the disqualification Proposal:
it was the Proposal made promptly as required by ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1);

ii. can a proposal for disqualification be made in a rectification proceeding

pursuant to [CSID Arbitration Rule 49; and

5 Response, para, 33.

57 Response, paras. 34-36.

58 Response, para. 37.

59 Response, para, 38-39, referring to Burlington Resources, Inc. v. Ecuador (ICSID Case No, ARB/08/5), Decision on Proposal
for Disqualification (13 December 2013) (“Burlington”), para. 67.

© Response, para. 40.

51 Response, para. 42.

Page |20

iii. if the answers to (i) and (ii) above are affirmative, do the facts described in the
Proposal establish that the Challenged Arbitrators manifestly lack reliability to
exercise independent judgment, justifying a disqualification under Articles 57
and 14 of the ICSID Convention?

83. With respect to timeliness, ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(1) reads as follows:

A party proposing the disqualification of an arbitrator pursuant to Article 57
of the Convention shall promptly, and in any event before the proceeding is
declared closed, file its proposal with the Secretary-General, stating its
reasons therefor.
84. The ICSID Convention and Rules do not specify the period of time within which a proposal
for disqualification must be filed. Accordingly, the timeliness of a proposal must be

determined on a case by case basis.

85. As stated in Suez, “an orderly and fair arbitration proceeding while permitting challenges to
arbitrators on specified grounds also normally requires that such challenges be made in a
timely fashion.”® Previous tribunals have found that a proposal was timely when filed within
10 days of learning the underlying facts, but untimely when filed after 53 days,°° 147 days,

or 6 months.”

86. In this instance, the Claimants argue that the representation of Chile by Essex Court Chambers
barristers was made public for the first time a few days after the Award was issued on 13

September 2016, through a statement made by a Government official in a Chilean newspaper

a , para, 73; Ce B.V., ConocoPhillips Hamaca B.V. and ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria B.V. v.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela “IcsiD Case No. ARB/07/30) Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal
(May 05, 2014) (“Conoco”), para, 39; Abaclat and others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/S), Decision on the
Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal (February 04, 2014) (“Abaclat”), para. 68; ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V.,
ConocoPhillips Hamaca B.V. and ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/30) Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal (July 1, 2015) (“Conoco et al.”), para. 63.

 

© Suez, para. 18

& Urbaser, para. 19.

6 Suez, paras, 22-26.

6 CDC Group PLC v. Republic of Seychelles (\CSID Case No.ARB/02/14), Decision on Annulment (June 29, 2005), para. 53.

7 CEMEX Caracas Investments B.V. and CEMEX Caracas II Investments B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case
No. ARB/08/15), Decision on proposal for Disqualification of an Arbitrator (November 6, 2009), para. 41

Page |21

article.® This is disputed by the Respondent, which claims that the representation of Chile in
ICJ proceedings by Essex Court Chambers barristers was public knowledge throughout the

resubmission proceedings.

87. It is undisputed that both parties knew that Sir Franklin Berman QC and Mr. V.V. Veeder QC

were members of Essex Court Chambers since their respective appointments.

88. The evidence in the record of the case shows that information concerning Chile’s
representation by Essex Court Chambers barristers in ICJ proceedings had been publicly
available since December 2012. In particular, it was reported in the press that Mr. Samuel
Wordsworth QC, one of the Essex Court Chambers barristers identified by the Claimants, was

acting for Chile in certain ICJ proceedings.

89. The 18 September 2016 article relied on by the Claimants as evidence of a hitherto secret
relationship between Essex Court Chambers and Chile does not support this assertion. The
article simply notes Chile’s representation by another Essex Court Chamber barrister,

Professor Alan Boyle, in another ICJ case separate from that involving Mr. Wordsworth QC.”

°8 Exhibits 6 and 7 to the Proposal.

© By way of example, the Respondent appended several media articles published between December 2012 and May 2015 that
expressly referred to the participation of Essex Court Chambers barristers as counsel for Chile in ICJ cases: Exhibit R-47, article
published by LA TERCERA on 6 December 2012 regarding Mr. Wordsworth’s role in the Peru-Chile maritime border case at the
ICJ; Exhibit R-36, article published by LA NACION on 14 December 2012 regarding Mr. Wordsworth’s first intervention at the
hearing in the Peru-Chile maritime border case at the ICJ; Exhibit, R-39, articlepublished by LA TERCERA on 12 April 2014
regarding a change of Chile’s strategy in the in the Peru-Chile maritime border case at the ICJ and mentioning Mr. Wordsworth as
one of Chile’s counsel; Exhibit R-40, article published by LA RAZON on 24 May 2014 regarding the Bolivia-Chile Pacific Ocean
access case at the ICJ and mentioning Mr. Wordsworth as one of Chile’s counsel; Exhibit R-41, article published by LA TERCERA
on 8 December 2014 regarding a meeting of Chile’s legal team in the Bolivia-Chile Pacific Ocean access case and mentioning Mr.
Wordsworth as one of Chile’s counsel; Exhibit R-42, article published by LA NACION on 4 May 2015 Bolivia’s preliminary
objections in the Bolivia-Chile Pacific Ocean access case and mentioning Mr. Wordsworth as one of Chile’s counsel; Exhibit R-
43, article published by EMOL on 4 May 2015 presenting the legal teams of both parties in the Bolivia-Chile Pacific Ocean access
case and mentioning Mr. Wordsworth as one of Chile’s counsel; and Exhibit R-44, article published by PAN AM POST on 11
May 2016 regarding the hearing in in the Bolivia-Chile Pacific Ocean access case and mentioning Mr. Wordsworth as one of
Chile’s counsel.

 

70 Exhibits 6 and 7 to the Proposal. The relevant parts of the article read:

Stephen McCaffrey, Laurence Boisson de Chazournes and Alan Boyle, Chile’s legal counsel for the
Silala

Chile is currently working on the preparation of its memorial for the claim it has filed against Bolivia
for the Silala River, which has to be filed at the Court on July 3rd of next year.

fol

The Minister does not hide his enthusiasm when he speaks about the Silala's claim, and the strategy
followed in this regard, which included an “advanced” and secretive search for international counsel,

Page |22

90. The record further shows that, throughout the arbitration and resubmission proceedings, the

Claimants have referred to and cited numerous others press articles.”!

91. The regular introduction of press articles and statements into the evidentiary record by the
Claimants indicates that they have been following the press on a regular basis. The Claimants
have used the same or similar sources as those in which information about Essex Court

Chambers barristers representing Chile before the ICJ was published.”

who have been working for months — until now, in absolute secrecy - with the team lead by the agent
Ximena Fuentes and the co-agents Juan Ignacio Pifia and Maria Teresa Infante.

LJ]
Today, for the first time, the Minister of Foreign Affairs revealed the names of three of these counsel,

whom he does not hesitate to qualify as "eminent figures". They are Stephen McCaffrey, Laurence
Boisson des Chazournes and Alan Boyle.

ea

The Briton, Alan Boyle, is a professor at the University of Edinburgh, Scotland, and a specialist in the
law of the sea and environmental law. Like Samuel Wordsworth —Chile’s counsel in the maritime case-
he is a member of the prestigious chambers Essex Courts Chambers. (translated from Spanish)

' Exhibit C-172, Declaracién del Ministro de Bienes Nacionales, LA SEGUNDA, 14 May 2002, submitted with the Claimants’
supplementary submission on the merits dated 11 September 2002; Exhibit C-205, Declaracién del Ministro de Bienes Nacionales,
LA SEGUNDA, 22 August 2002, submitted with the Claimants’ supplementary submission on the merits dated 11 September
2002; resubmitted as Exhibit C-M39 with the Claimants’ Memorial on resubmission, dated 27 June 2014; Exhibit C-207,
Intervencién del CDE en caso “Clarin” es intransable, LA SEGUNDA, 21 August 2002; submitted with the Claimants’
supplementary submission on the merits dated 11 September 2002; resubmitted as Exhibit C-M40 with the Claimants’ Memorial
on resubmission, dated 27 June 2014; Exhibit C-209, Testa reconoce asesoria al Gobierno antes de defender a los indemnizados,
EL MERCURIO, 29 August 2002; submitted with the Claimants’ supplementary submission on the merits dated 11 September
2002; resubmitted as Exhibit C-M32 with the Claimants’ Memorial on resubmission, dated 27 June 2014; Exhibit DP041, Loan
Wolf, FINANCIAL TIMES, 23 September 2005, submitted with the Claimants’ Rejoinder on Annulment dated 28 February 2011;
Footnote 254, Weiniger and Page, An ad hoc Committee has granted annulment on unusual grounds. But does the Committee's
reasoning add up? GLOBAL ARBITRATION REVIEW, No. 1, 2007, pp.12-13, submitted in the Claimants’ Reply on Annulment
dated 15 October 2010; Exhibit 1, ndemnizacién al PC, EL MERCURIO, 3 March 2008, submitted with the Claimants’ Request
for Revision of the Initial Award of 8 May 2008 dated 2 June 2008; Exhibit C-M44, Declaracién del representante de Chile, LA
TERCERA, 20 April 2008, submitted with the Claimants’ Memorial on resubmission dated 27 June 2014; and Exhibit ND39bis,
El Gobierno no ha leido bien la sentencia del CIADI 0 se esta equivocando en la interpretacién, EL CLARIN DIGITAL, 22 January
2013, submitted with the Claimants’ Request for Resubmission dated 18 June 2013.

 

” The Chairman of the Administrative Council notes that this information also was and still is widely reported in a number of other
online sources, easily accessible to the public. For instance, another Chilean press article published on 5 May 2015 referred to
“Samuel Wordsworth, another London lawyer, from Essex Street [sic] Chambers” as counsel for Chile in the Chile-Bolivia case
before the ICI (See ‘Chile mostré sus cartas en La Haya; llega el turno de Bolivia’, LA RAZON, 5 May 2015 (translated from
Spanish: “Samuel Wordsworth, otro abogado londinense, de Essex Street [sic] Chambers”), available at http://la-
razon.convindex.php?_url=/nacional/demanda_mar%C3%ADtima/Chile-mostro-cartas-tumo-Bolivia_0_2265373488.html. An
article published by Global Arbitration Review on 29 January 2014 reporting on the [CJ decision in the Chile-Peru case, and freely
available through a Google search, also mentions: “Chile's advocates included [...] Samuel Wordsworth QC of Essex Court
Chambers (See ICJ draws Peru-Chile maritime boundary, GLOBAL ARBITRATION REVIEW, 29 January 2014. Available at
http://www.bmaj.cl/pdf/900_icj-draws-peru-ch.pdf) Mr. Wordsworth QC’s biography on the Essex Court Chambers’ website also
mentions expressly “Notable cases as counsel include: before the ICJ, the Bolivia v Chile case concerning the obligation to
negotiate access to the Pacific Ocean (for Chile), [...]the Peru v Chile [...] maritime boundary case (for Chile [...])” The
involvement of Essex Court Chambers barristers as counsel for Chile in ICJ proceedings is also mentioned on the ICJ website:
http://www. icj-cij.org/docket/index.php?p1=: 3

  

I= —

 

 

Page |23

92. It is standard practice for a party to perform a conflict search of arbitrators at the time they
are appointed, and, in particular, regarding its own candidate for appointment. The Claimants
appointed Mr. V.V. Veeder QC in January 2014, long after several public sources had
mentioned Mr. Wordsworth’s representation of Chile. If the Claimants were concerned about
potential conflicts of interests arising out of the client relationships of other barristers at Essex
Court Chambers, they could have raised this point at the time the Challenged Arbitrators were
appointed. This would have been prudent in particular since, as is widely known, barristers’
chambers take the view that barristers operate in strict independence of one another and
chambers are not treated as equivalent to law firms for conflict purposes. There is no

indication in the record that the Claimants had any concern of this kind.

93. When the Claimants appointed Mr. V.V. Veeder QC and agreed to the appointment of Sir
Franklin. Berman QC, they knew that the Challenged Arbitrators were both members of Essex
+Court Chambers. At the same time, media regularly reported on Mr. Wordsworth’s
representing Chile in an unrelated case, and Claimants regularly relied on evidence from these
same media outlets during the proceedings. In the specific circumstances of the present case,

it appears that sufficient information was publicly available to the Claimants during the
resubmission proceeding and they therefore knew or should have known that other barristers

from Essex Court Chambers were acting for the Republic of Chile in the ICJ proceedings.

94. For the challenge to have been filed promptly in this case, it should have been filed early in
the resubmission proceeding, and in any event before the closure of those proceedings. The
resubmission tribunal, as reconstituted, commenced proceedings in January 2014, closed the
proceedings in March 2016 and rendered the Award dismissing the Claimants’ case on
13 September 2016. The Claimants made an inquiry into the representation of Chile by Essex
Court Chambers barristers for the first time on 20 September 2016 and their Proposal was
submitted on 22 November 2016. The Chairman of the Administrative Council finds that the
Proposal cannot be considered as having been filed “promptly” for the purposes of ICSID
Arbitration Rule 9(1), and must be dismissed. y

Page |24

IV. DECISION
95. Having considered all the facts alleged and the arguments submitted by the Parties, and for
the reasons stated above, the Chairman dismisses the Claimants’ Proposal to disqualify Sir

Franklin Berman QC and Mr. V.V. Veeder QC.

 

Dr. Am Yong Kim

