INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

VICTOR PEY CASADO AND FOUNDATION « PRESIDENTE ALLENDE »

Claimants to the arbitration
Defendants to the annulment

REPUBLIC OF CHILE
Respondent to the arbitration

Applicant to the annulment

ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2
Annulment Proceeding — Supplementary Decision

 

DECISION ON THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE’S REQUEST
FOR A STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE
UNANNULLED PORTION OF THE AWARD

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee

Maitre L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C., President
Prof. Piero Bernardini,
Prof. Ahmed El-Kosheri,

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Eloise M. Obadia

Representing the Claimants Representing the Respondent
Mr. Juan E. Garcés Mr. Matias Mori Arellano
Madrid, Spain Executive Vice President

Foreign Investment Committee,
Santiago, Chile

Mr. Paolo Di Rosa
ARNOLD & PORTER, L.L.P.
Washington, D.C., USA

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION 2

THE PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS 3

RELEVANT ICSID CONVENTION ARTICLES AND ICSID ARBITRATION RULES..

 

THE COMMITTEE’S VIEWS 10

DECISION 16

THE COMMITTEE

Composed as above,

After deliberation,

Makes the following Decision:

INTRODUCTION

On 18 December 2012, the Committee issued its Decision on the Application for
Annulment of the Republic of Chile (the “Annulment Decision’) partially annulling the
award rendered on 8 May 2008 in ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2 (the “Award”) between
Victor Pey Casado and the Foundation “President Allende” (the “Claimants”) and the
Republic of Chile (the “Republic” or “Respondent’”).

On 1 February 2013, the Republic submitted a Request for Supplementation of the
Annulment Decision (“Supplementation Request”) regarding the application of
moratory interests to the amounts owed for costs and expenses pursuant to the unannulled
portion of the Award, the Tribunal’s Revision Decision dated 18 November 2009 (the
“Revision Decision”) and the Annulment Decision.'! Further to the Parties’ agreement
on the schedule for written observations regarding the Supplementation Request, the
Republic filed its observations in support of its Supplementation Request on 4 March

2013 and the Claimants filed a response on 29 March 2013.

On 3 April 2013, the Respondent submitted a request for a stay of enforcement of the
unannulled portions of the Award (the “Request”) during the pendency of the current
proceedings related to the Republic’s Supplementation Request. Upon the invitation of
the Committee, the Claimants filed observations on the Request on 8 April 2013 (the

“Stay Observations”).

' See Request at para. 4.

4. The Parties submitted further pleadings on the Supplementation Request: on 12 April
2013 the Republic filed its reply (the “Reply”) and on 26 April 2013 the Claimants filed

their rejoinder (the “Rejoinder”).

5. Having decided to give priority to the consideration of the Request, the Committee on 25
April 2013 issued its decision to reject the Respondent’s Request, with reasons to follow

later. This Decision sets out the Committee’s reasons.

IL. THE PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS

6. The Republic submits that a stay of enforcement is necessary to avoid confusion and
duplication of proceedings with respect to the unannulled portions of the Award or

inconsistent attempts regarding the enforcement thereof.”

7. It argues that Rule 54(3) of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the
“Arbitration Rules”) of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or the “Centre”) establishes this Committee’s power to order the temporary

stay of enforcement of the unannulled portions of the Award.

8. The Republic, citing Professor Schreuer, refers to the “lopsided situation” that can occur
when an award has been annulled in part and upheld in another, and asserts that an
attempt at enforcement of the unannulled costs provision of the Award will inevitably

result in confusion and further dispute between the Parties:*

The power to stay the enforcement of the unannulled portions of an award is
intended to help manage the “more complicated case [of execution]” of a partially
annulled award. In that scenario, “[p]art of the award remains in existence and

? [bid at paras. 3 and 5.
$ [bid. at para. 6.

* Tid. at paras. 7 and 8, referring to Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (Cambridge
University Press, 2009) Art. 52 at para. 653 (hereinafter “Schreuer Commentary”).

would, in theory, be enforceable. But an award that has been annulled in part and
upheld in another is likely to create a lopsided situation.” [Footnote omitted]

9. The Republic makes reference to other ICSID cases in which several committees have

found that when a partial annulment affects monetary aspects of an award, stay of

enforcement is appropriate:>

10. The Re,

For example, the Committee in MINE v. Guinea recognized the necessity of a stay
when it annulled part of the award related to damages. Conversely, in CMS v.
Argentine Republic, the Committee did not grant a stay because the partial
annulment of the award did not affect the final monetary amount owed. Similarly,
in Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. Argentine Republic,
the Committee refused to grant a stay under Article 54(3) of the ICSID
Convention because, although it annulled only the portions of the award on
damages and liability, its decision rendered the rest of the award unenforceable.
[Footnotes omitted]

public also refers to the Tribunal’s decision in the present case granting a stay of

enforcement during the Revision Proceeding as it considered that the immediate

execution of the Award would likely have created problems for the Parties and the

Tribunal.° The Republic argues that the same concerns are present here:”

* Ibid. at para. 9.
© Ibid. at para. 10.
" [bid. at para. 11.

* Ibid.

The question left open by the Annulment Decision regarding the application of
interest to the costs amounts the parties owe each other places in doubt the
ultimate sum that the Republic is obligated to pay to Claimants for costs. In view
of this uncertainty, any enforcement of the Award would require a judicial court
to substitute its judgment for that of the Committee when applying interest, with
the risk of an enforcement for the wrong amount, or, conceivably, to deny
enforcement of the Award. These outcomes would frustrate the purpose of the
Convention, the finality of the Award, and the efforts of the parties to resolve this
dispute.

The Republic offers to pay the amount it undisputedly owes Claimants
(US$2,470,684.89),” as a demonstration of its good faith to comply with both the
Annulment Decision and the Award, and requests that the Committee issue an order
requiring the payment of this undisputed sum in order to fulfill the legal and

administrative requirements of the Republic.”

Additionally, the Republic points to its long history of honoring its financial
commitments, maintaining that because of this previous history, the risk of
noncompliance by the Republic or prejudice to the Claimants is non-existent or de

minimis."!

Finally, the Respondent notes that the time limit to file a request for the supplementation
of a decision (45 days from the issuance of said decision pursuant to Arbitration Rule
49(1)) and the pleading schedule established by the Committee will ensure that no

prejudicial delay would result from the granting of a stay of enforcement. R

In response to the Republic’s Request, the Claimants aver that the Republic is asking the
Committee to reconsider that part of its Annulment Decision regarding the execution of
the unannulled portion of the Award, despite the clarity of the terms of the Annulment
Decision.'? The Claimants consider that the Republic’s Request is unfounded and is only
intended to further delay the compliance by the Republic of its obligations under the

Award.’

° See Respondent's Reply at para. 28.

' See Request at para. 12.

" Tid. at para. 13.

!? Ibid. at para. 14.

'S See Stay Observations at para. 3.

'4 Ibid. at para. 4.

15. The Claimants maintain that the Republic’s obligation to pay the Claimants’ costs and
expenses related to the arbitration procedure as stated in the Award is res judicata since
18 December 2012.'° In the absence of payment from Chile, the Claimants state that

they had to initiate enforcement procedures in Spain:

[...] les Demanderesses ont été dans |’obligation de commencer une procédure
d’exécution en Espagne pour forcer le paiement de ces sommes que le Chili a
refusé de verser volontairement. Contrairement aux allégations du Chili, cette
procédure est parfaitement justifiée et légitime. Les cours espagnoles ont
simplement imposé au Chili de respecter ses obligations conformément a la
Sentence. '®

16. More specifically, the Claimants submit that this Committee is not competent to stay the
enforcement of the Award at this stage of the proceedings or to grant the other requests
made by the Republic. '7 They argue that Arbitration Rule 54(3) clearly states that all
stays automatically terminate when the final annulment decision is rendered. The Rule
also provides that a committee may only order a temporary stay of enforcement when it
grants a partial annulment of an award in order to give either party an opportunity to
request a stay to a new tribunal to be constituted further to a resubmission of the dispute.
The Claimants submit that this is not the nature of the request made by the Republic of

Chile.'®

En réalité, la demande de suspension sollicitée est provisoire pendant « la
demande actuelle de procédure supplémentaire ». On relévera que le Chili
a été dans V’incapacité de citer une quelconque disposition de la
Convention ou du Réglement octroyant au Comité la compétence
d’accéder a une telle requéte.!°

'S Ibid. at para. 5.
© Ibid.

"" Ibid. at para. 6.
'8 Tbid. at para. 10.

'° Ibid. at para. 13.

20.

In addition, the Claimants submit that no provision of the Convention on the Settlement
of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the “Convention”)
or the Arbitration Rules allow the Committee to order the payment of the uncontested

sum due pursuant to the unannulled portions of the Award.”

Under reserve of their submission with respect to the competence of the Committee, the
Claimants assert that the Request is groundless and constitutes an abuse of process. The
Claimants maintain that the Republic’s repeated statements regarding its history of
honoring its financial commitments are futile, and submit that “non seulement le Chili n’a
pas payé les sommes dues en vertu de la Sentence ; mais il a tout mis en ceuvre, en ce
inclus le déclenchement de procédures abusives et sans fondement, pour éviter d’honorer

ses engagements.””!

Claimants allege that the Request is prejudicial to them since, they say, the Republic
seeks to prevent them from proceeding with the resubmission of the dispute. The
Claimants conclude that the Respondent’s proposal that they should suspend the
enforcement proceedings in Spain in exchange for an order from the Committee that the

Respondent should pay the undisputed sum, is not acceptable.”

Claimants maintain that the Committee should abstain from intervening in the
enforcement proceedings in Spain as the decision of the Court of 1“ instance n° 101 in
Madrid — granting forced enforcement — is well founded considering the res judicata
effect of the unannulled portions of the Award, as confirmed by the Committee in its
Annulment Decision, and in compliance with the obligations of the Convention.”?

Additionally, the Claimants state that the provisions of the Spanish law on civil procedure

20 Thid. at paras. 14-15.

2! Ibid. at para. 18.

? Td. at para. 20.

> Tid. at paras. 28, 30 and 32.

21.

22.

Il.

23.

enable the Respondent to claim an offset of the sums owed by the Claimants pursuant to
the Revision and Annulment Decisions. The Respondent failed to have recourse to those

provisions.

The Claimants offer to suspend the enforcement proceedings in Spain if the Respondent
pays the principal and interest due pursuant to the Award after subtraction of the sums
owed by the Claimants pursuant to the Revision and Annulment Decisions. In addition,
they are prepared to offer a bank guarantee for the amount equivalent to the accumulated

interest until the Committee issues its decision on the Supplementation Request.”*

Finally, the Claimants request that the Respondent be ordered to pay the litigation costs
and expenses incurred with respect to this Request with additional interest from two
weeks following the Committee’s Decision at an annual rate of 5 percent until complete

payment.”°

RELEVANT ICSID CONVENTION ARTICLES AND ICSID ARBITRATION
RULES

Article 49(2) of the Convention provides:

(2) The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45 days after
the date on which the award was rendered may after notice to the other
party decide any question which it had omitted to decide in the award,
and shall rectify any clerical, arithmetical or similar error in the award.
Its decision shall become part of the award and shall be notified to the
parties in the same manner as the award. The periods of time provided
for under paragraph (2) of Article 51 and paragraph (2) of Article 52
shall run from the date on which the decision was rendered.

*4 Tid. at para. 42.

°5 Tid. at para. 44.

24.

25.

26.

Article 52(5) of the Convention provides:

(5) The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so require,
stay enforcement of the award pending its decision. If the applicant
requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his application,
enforcement shall be stayed provisionally until the Committee rules on
such request.

Article 53 of the Convention provides:

Article 53

(1) The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to
any appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for in this
Convention. Each party shall abide by and comply with the terms of the
award except to the extent that enforcement shall have been stayed
pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention.

(2) For the purposes of this Section, “award” shall include any decision
interpreting, revising or annulling such award pursuant to Articles 50, 51
or 52

Arbitration Rule 54 applies to the present case and provides:

Stay of Enforcement of the Award

(1) The party applying for the interpretation, revision or annulment of an
award may in its application, and either party may at any time before the
final disposition of the application, request a stay in the enforcement of
part or all of the award to which the application relates. The Tribunal or
Committee shall give priority to the consideration of such a request.

(2) If an application for the revision or annulment of an award contains a
request for a stay of its enforcement, the Secretary-General shall,
together with the notice of registration, inform both parties of the
provisional stay of the award. As soon as the Tribunal or Committee is
constituted it shall, if either party requests, rule within 30 days on
whether such stay should be continued; unless it decides to continue the
stay, it shall automatically be terminated.

(3) If a stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to paragraph (1) or
continued pursuant to paragraph (2), the Tribunal or Committee may at
any time modify or terminate the stay at the request of either party. All
stays shall automatically terminate on the date on which a final decision
is rendered on the application, except that a Committee granting the
partial annulment of an award may order the temporary stay of

IV.

27.

28.

29.

enforcement of the unannulled portion in order to give either party an
opportunity to request any new Tribunal constituted pursuant to Article
52(6) of the Convention to grant a stay pursuant to Rule 55(3).

(4) A request pursuant to paragraph (1), (2) (second sentence) or (3) shall
specify the circumstances that require the stay or its modification or
termination. A request shall only be granted after the Tribunal or
Committee has given each party an opportunity of presenting its
observations.

(5) The Secretary-General shall promptly notify both parties of the stay
of enforcement of any award and of the modification or termination of
such a stay, which shall become effective on the date on which he
dispatches such notification.

THE COMMITTEE’S VIEWS

The first question to be addressed is whether the Committee is competent to order a stay
of enforcement of the unannulled portions of the Award following the Respondent’s
Request. As noted earlier, the Committee rendered its Annulment Decision on 18
December 2012. Within 45 days of the issuance of that Decision, the Respondent filed
the Supplementation Request pursuant to Articles 52(4) and 49(2) of the Convention and
Arbitration Rules 53 and 49. It is in the context of the Supplementation Request that the
Respondent is now asking for a stay of enforcement of the unannulled portions of the

Award.

The Respondent founds its Request on Arbitration Rule 54(3) which establishes that
“[...] a Committee granting the partial annulment of an award may order the temporary
stay of enforcement of the unannulled portion in order to give either party an opportunity
to request any new Tribunal constituted pursuant to Article 52(6) of the Convention to

grant a stay pursuant to Rule 55(3).”

The Respondent states that this stay is required to avoid the complicated and lopsided
situation in which the Parties are since the Claimants sought enforcement of the principal
and interest which they claim Respondent owes in accordance with the Award while the

Respondent argues that there are uncertainties with respect to the application of interest.

-10-

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

Claimants, on the other hand, argue that Arbitration Rule 54(3) does not grant the
Committee the power to order any stay of enforcement in the present circumstances since
that provision only applies when a committee issues a decision on an application for
annulment and grants the partial annulment of an award. The Claimants recall that the
Committee when it granted such a partial annulment expressly decided that there was no

need to order the temporary stay of enforcement of the unannulled portion of the Award.

While the Committee agrees with the Claimants that Arbitration Rule 54(3) does not
allow the Committee to grant a stay at the stage of a supplementary decision, the
Committee also notes that Arbitration Rule 54(1) provides that “[...] either party may at
any time before the final disposition of the application, request a stay in the enforcement

of part or all of the award to which the application relates [...]”.

Thus, it appears to the Committee that, by submitting a request for supplementation, the
annulment application becomes subject to a new disposition which will become final with
the decision on the supplementary decision. Therefore, a party should be allowed to

make a request for a stay of enforcement.

The Committee further notes that Article 52(5) of the Convention provides that a
committee “may, if it considers that the circumstances so require, stay enforcement of the
award pending its decision [...]”. The Committee reads this provision as giving
committees a general discretion to grant a stay while an annulment proceeding is
pending. The annulment proceeding ended with the issuance of the Annulment Decision
on 18 December 2012 but was revived with the registration of the Supplementation

Request.

Although the provisions of the Convention and the Arbitration Rules on requests for
supplementary decisions and rectification do not foresee specifically the possibility of a
stay of enforcement of an award, it appears to the Committee that since such a request
takes place within the context of an annulment proceeding the party making the

application can make the request on the basis of Article 52(5) of the Convention.

-ll-

35.

36.

37.

38.

However, the Committee does not need to rule on this question as it has decided to deny

Respondent’s Request as explained below.

The Committee noted in its Decision on the Republic of Chile’s Application for a Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, dated 5 May 2010, that although Article 52(5) of the
Convention uses the verb “may”, thereby conveying an element of discretion to the
Committee, a review of the many decisions by ad hoc annulment committees since the
MINE decision in 1988 led the Committee to the conclusion that, absent unusual
circumstances, the granting of a stay of enforcement pending the outcome of the

annulment proceedings had become almost automatic.”°

This does not mean that a stay should be granted automatically. A committee needs to be
satisfied that the requesting party has discharged its burden of proving that there are
specific circumstances justifying a stay. As is well established, factors supporting a stay
are: (i) prospects for compliance with the award; (ii) absence of dilatory tactics; (iii)
prospects of recoupment of the relevant payment if the award is annulled; and (iv)

absence or minimal prejudice to the opposing party by delaying the payment.””

In the present Request, the Respondent relies essentially on the last two factors above-
mentioned insisting on the complications that the risk of an enforcement for the wrong
amount would trigger and the minimal prejudice that would result from a further stay of

enforcement of the Award.

°6 See Committee’s Decision on the Republic of Chile’s Application for a Stay of Enforcement of the Award, dated
5 May 2010, at para. 25.

°? The Republic had referred to these factors when requesting the continuation of the stay of enforcement of the
Award at the beginning of the proceeding: see letter of 15 January 2010 from Arnold & Porter, L.L.P. to Ms. Eloise
Obadia and Transcript Hearing of 29 January 2010, pages 140 to 157 [English Transcripts].

-12-

39.

40.

Al.

The Committee disagrees with the Respondent on both counts. Any discrepancy between
the amount of enforcement judgment from the Spanish court and the final accounts to be
determined further to the Committee’s Decision on the Supplementation Request could
easily be resolved. The Claimants have always paid the advances requested by ICSID in
relation to this case. They have also offered to provide a bank guaranty for the
unliquidated amount of the interest.°* Since the Claimants will certainly resubmit the
dispute to a new tribunal for the annulled part of the Award, the Republic of Chile will

have the opportunity of claiming any shortfall.

Above all, the Committee notes the binding nature of awards set forth in Article 53 of the
Convention. Annulment and other post-award remedies are the exception. As stated in
the Background Report on Annulment by the ICSID Secretariat Provided to Contracting
States, “[t]he choice of remedies offered by the ICSID Convention reflects a deliberate
election by the drafters of the Convention to ensure finality of awards.””? When a
revision or annulment proceeding is instituted, the presumption is that the award must be
enforced. The stay of enforcement of the award is the exception granted only when

specific circumstances so require.

Additionally and without prejudice to the decision of the Committee on the
Supplementation Request, supplementary decisions and rectifications are not meant to
afford a substantive review or reconsideration of the decision.” Supplementary decisions
will most likely have a limited effect on the original decision. This provides an

additional reason to preserve the binding force of the unannulled portion of the Award.

°8 See Stay Observations at para. 42(2).

* See Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, dated August 10, 2012, at para. 9
and available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid.

°° See Schreuer Commentary, Article 49, at para. 28.

-13-

42.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

As to the prejudice the Claimants could suffer from any further delay in the payment of
the sum owed by Respondent, the Committee finds that since the Award was issued more
than 5 years ago, any further delay in the payment of final elements of the Award would

be prejudicial to the Claimants.

From a practical point of view, the Committee stresses that if it granted any further stay
the question of whether interest continues to run during that stay, which is the main issue
of the Supplementation Request would arise. Accordingly, by granting a stay, the
Committee would add another issue to the issues identified in the Supplementation

Request.

For the foregoing reasons, the Committee concludes that the Republic of Chile’s request

for a stay of the unannulled portions of the Award must be denied.

Accordingly, the other Republic’s requests to order (i) Claimants to suspend any ongoing
enforcement proceedings and desist from any further enforcement efforts until the
Decision on the Supplementation Request; and (ii) Respondent to pay Claimants the

undisputed sum of USD 2,470,684.89 are also denied.

However, the Committee is of the view that it would be in the interest of all the Parties if
they complied with their respective obligations arising from the Award, the Revision
Decision and the Annulment Decision. While the Parties argue the specific issue on the
interest which may be due, if any, they do not contest the principal amounts.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Respondent pay Claimants the
“undisputed” sum of USD 2,470,684.89 which is the sum total of the various obligations

of the Parties as described in the table below.

-14-

47.

 

 

 

 

 

Date Ruling Order Amount

8 May 2008 Award Respondent ordered to | USD 2,000,000.00
pay part of Claimants’
costs

8 May 2008 Award Respondent ordered to | USD 1,045,627.78
pay Claimants part of
costs of arbitration

18 November Revision Claimants ordered to pay | (USD 200,000.00 +

2009 Decision entirety of costs of | 1,305.11)
Revision Proceeding

18 December Annulment | Claimants ordered to pay | (USD 373,637.78)

2012 Decision half of the costs of

Annulment Proceeding

 

 

 

 

TOTAL

 

USD 2,470,684.89

 

Lastly, with the view to facilitate the enforcement process and taking into account the

Committee’s intention to decide the Supplementation Request within a reasonable period

of time, the Committee recommends that the Claimants suspend the enforcement

proceedings presently pending before the “Tribunal de 1° Instance No. 101 de Madrid”

until such time as the Committee issues a decision on the Supplementation Request.

-15-

 

Vv. DECISION

48. For the foregoing reasons, and independently of the question whether, at this stage of the
proceeding, a committee is competent to grant a stay of enforcement of an award, the

Committee unanimously:
- Denies the Republic of Chile’s Request;

- Recommends to the Republic of Chile that it pay forthwith to the
Claimants the “undisputed” sum of USD 2,470,684.89;

- Recommends to the Claimants that they suspend the enforcement
proceedings presently pending before the “Tribunal de 1®° Instance No.
101 de Madrid” until such time as the Committee issues its decision on the

Supplementation Request.

Signed on behalf of the Committee on 16 May 2013,

"We Cop

Maitre L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C.
President of the ad hoc Committee

-16-

