VICTOR PEY CASADO AND FONDATION « PRESIDENTE ALLENDE »

Claimants to the arbitration
Defendants to the annulment

REPUBLIC OF CHILE
Respondent to the arbitration

Applicant to the annulment

ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2
Annulment Proceeding

 

DECISION ON THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE’S
APPLICATION FOR A STAY
OF ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee

Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C., President
Prof. Piero Bernardini,
Prof. Ahmed El-Kosheri,

Representing the Claimants Representing the Respondent
Mr. Juan E. Garcés HLE. the Minister of Economy,
Madrid, Spain Development and Reconstruction,

Mr. Eduardo Escalona Vasquez

Mr. Mauricio Alvarez Montti, and

Ms. Marcela Klein

Ministry of Economy, Development
and Reconstruction

Santiago, Chile

Mr. Paolo Di Rosa

Ms. Mara V.J. Senn, and
Mr. Rodolfo Fuenzalida,
ARNOLD & PORTER, L.L.P.
Washington, D.C., USA

Mr. Jorge Carey and
Mr. Gonzalo Fernandez
Carey Y Cia

Santiago, Chile

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION 2

THE PARTIES’ CONTENTION: 4

RELEVANT ICSID CONVENTION ARTICLES AND ICSID ARBITRATION RULES ..

 

THE COMMITTEE’S VIEWS 10

DECISION 15

THE COMMITTEE
Composed as above,
After deliberation,

Makes the following Decision:

IL INTRODUCTION

1. On 5 September 2008, the Republic of Chile (the “Republic” or “Respondent”) filed
with the then Acting Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre’”) an application (the “Application”)
requesting the annulment of an award rendered on 8 May 2008 in ICSID Case No.
ARB/98/2 (the “Award”) between Victor Pey Casado and the Fondation “President
Allende” on one side (the “Claimants”) and the Republic on the other side. The Centre
acknowledged receipt of the Application and forwarded it to the Claimants on 10

September 2008.

2. The Application was filed while the Award was the subject of a revision proceeding
initiated by the Claimants on 2 June 2008. The revision application was registered on 17
June 2008. Further to the Republic’s request of 16 July 2008, the Tribunal, composed of
the same arbitrators who had drafted the Award, decided on 5 August 2008 to stay the
enforcement of the Award pending its decision. The Tribunal rendered its Decision on

18 November 2009 and lifted the stay.

3. The Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application on 6 July 2009 and
transmitted a Notice of Registration to the parties on that date. In that Notice, the
Secretary-General noted that the Application contained a request for a provisional stay of
the Award (the “Request”) pursuant to Article 52(5) of the Convention on the Settlement
of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the “Convention”)

and Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the

“Arbitration Rules”). She further stated that: “Rule 54(2) of the Arbitration Rules
provides that the Secretary-General shall, together with the notice of registration of the
application, inform the parties of the provisional stay of the award. I note, however, that
in the context of the application for revision of the Arbitral Award, the enforcement of
the Arbitral Award was stayed on August 5, 2008 by the Arbitral Tribunal before which

the issue is currently pending.”

By letter of 2 December 2009, the stay having been lifted by the Tribunal, the Republic
asked the Centre to confirm that the execution of the Award was suspended pursuant to
Article 52(5) of the Convention providing that: “If the applicant requests a stay of
enforcement of the award in his application, enforcement shall be stayed provisionally
until the Committee rules on such request.” The Acting Secretary-General confirmed, by
letter of 4 December 2009, that pursuant to Arbitration Rule 54(2), the enforcement of the

Award was provisionally stayed.

The ad hoc Committee was constituted on 22 December 2009. In order to give the
parties an opportunity to fully present their observations on the issue of the continuation
of the stay of enforcement, and for the Committee to rule on this issue, the parties were
asked on 6 January 2010 to file written observations by 15 January 2010 for the

Respondent and by 25 January 2010 for the Claimants.

The parties complied with the prescribed time limits. Accordingly, the Republic filed its
observations on 15 January 2010. It specifically referred to Arbitration Rule 54(2),
second sentence, which provides that: “As soon as the Tribunal or Committee is
constituted it shall, if either party requests, rule within 30 days on whether such stay
should be continued; unless it decides to continue the stay, it shall automatically be
terminated.” Therefore, the Republic asked the Committee to affirmatively extend the
stay until such time as it had heard the parties and reached a final determination on
continuation of the stay. The Committee did so by letter of 21 January 2010. The

Claimants submitted their response on 25 January 2010.

7. The parties were also given the opportunity to make oral presentations during the First

Session, held in Paris on 29 January 2010.

8. By Decision of 4 May 2010, the Committee rejected the Claimants’ request to declare the

Application inadmissible.

IL. THE PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS

9. In making its Request, the Republic has submitted as follows:

As far as the Republic is aware, no ICSID tribunal has ever refused to
grant a stay of execution pending outcome of the annulment proceeding.
Although neither the ICSID Convention nor the Arbitration Rules
provide guidance on the type of circumstances that justify a stay under
Article 52(5) of the Convention and Rule 54(1) and (2), annulment
committees in past cases have identified the following factors as
relevant: (i) prospects for compliance with the award; (ii) whether the
party seeking the annulment is merely seeking to delay enforcement of
the award, (iii) prospects for recoupment of the relevant payment if the
award is subsequently annulled; and (iv) prejudice to Claimants by the
delay in payment of the award. In the present case, each of these factors
support a grant of stay of enforcement of the Award until issuance of the
annulment decision.’ [footnotes omitted]

10. Regarding the prospects for compliance with the Award, the Republic argues, inter alia,

that:

The recognition that the Republic approaches its obligations and the
fulfillment of its national and international commitments and duties with
faithfulness and utmost seriousness should itself constitute a sufficient
assurance to the Committee and to the Claimants of the Republic’s
intention and commitment to honor any enforcement obligation in
connection with the present case in an appropriate and timely fashion
should the Republic’s Annulment Application ultimately be rejected. As
the Committee in MTD v. Chile held, “As a general matter a respondent
State seeking annulment should be entitled to a stay provided it gives
reasonable assurances that the award, if not annulled, will be complied
with.” [footnote omitted]

' See letter of 15 January 2010 from the Republic to Ms. Eloise Obadia at page 2.
* Id. at page 3.

11. On the issue of whether it is seeking to delay the enforcement of the Award, the Republic

makes the following submission:

In fact, Chile itself has repeatedly sought to speed up the annulment
proceeding, whereas it was the Claimants who caused the delay of a year
and a half by filing a revision petition that was entirely baseless (which is
likely why the decision was rendered in favor of Chile with costs).*
[footnote omitted]

12. In terms of prospects of recoupment, the Republic maintains as follows:

If a stay were denied, Chile were required to honor forthwith the Award,
and then the Award were ultimately annulled, the Republic could end up
in a situation in which it would have already paid the Award but would
then need to recoup the relevant amount from the Claimants. The
Republic submits that such recoupment would be very difficult if not
impossible — an in any event, very costly — for the Republic. Chile
believes the risk of dissipation of assets in the present case is high, and
accordingly, so is the risk irreparable harm if a stay were denied. As the
MTD Tribunal stated in granting Chile a stay, “A respondent State ...
should not be exposed, while exercising procedural rights open to it
under the Convention, to the risk that payment made under an award
which is eventually annulled may turn out to be irrecoverable from an
insolvent claimant.” In this situation it would be entirely unfair for the
Claimants to benefit from what would have amounted to a windfall in the
event the Award were ultimately annulled.’ [footnote omitted]

13. Finally, the Republic submits that the Claimants would not be prejudiced by a stay:

since the Award provides for the granting of compound interest until the
date of actual payment on the amount granted. In this regard, the MTD
Committee held that “... in the Committee’s view Chile has
demonstrated that MTD will not be prejudiced by the grant of a stay,
other than in respect of the delay which is, however, incidental to the
Convention system of annulment and which can be remedied by the
payment of interest in the event that the annulment application is
unsuccessful.”

In light of the foregoing, staying the award pending the annulment
decision would, serve the goals of fairness, efficiency and practicality, by
obligating Chile to execute the Award only in the event that Chile’s
annulment petition were denied. Chile submits that its public policy and

* Id. at page 4.
“Td.

conduct, along with its legal framework, provide adequate assurances
with respect to the fulfillment of its international obligations, including
that of arbitration awards and decisions.” [footnote omitted]

14. In response to the Republic’s Request, the Claimants have taken the position that the
Government of Chile cannot guarantee that the Republic will honor its obligations, and
refer in this regard to delays relative to the intervention of various Chilean institutions,
including the Parliament, the Chilean Executive and the Chilean General Contralor. In

the words of the Claimants:

Le pouvoir exécutif n’est donc pas en mesure de garantir que ces
institutions de la République du Chili exécuteront la Sentence, si elle
était confirmée.

Quand bien méme, le Gouvernement de la République du Chili prendrait
un engagement solennel d’exécution de la Sentence, celui-ci ne serait pas
suffisant compte tenu du rdle, légalement établi, desdites institutions
chiliennes, sur lesquelles le pouvoir exécutif n’a aucun contréle légal ni
politique.

Il reste qu’a ce jour aucune des institutions concernées de la République
du Chili n’a pris aucun engagement formel de ce qu’elle exécutera la
Sentence, condition requise pour maintenir la suspension de l’exécution.°
[footnote omitted]

15. The Claimants also allege that the Republic’s Request is abusive. However, in the event
a stay of the Award was ordered, the Claimants request that it be made conditional on the
provision of some security, either by way of a sequestred account or an irrevocable bank

guarantee. Regarding a sequestred account, the Claimants argue:

Cette mesure démontrerait la volonté sans équivoque de la République
du Chili de respecter ses engagements internationaux en exécutant
promptement la Sentence. Elle attesterait de la bonne foi de la
République du Chili en démontrant que la demande en nullité n’a pas de
caractére abusif. Le paiement sur un compte séquestre protégerait
également la République du Chili du risque de non recouvrement
évoqué, sans fondement, dans la lettre du 15 janvier 2010. En outre,
contrairement a la mise en place d’une garantie bancaire, l’ouverture

* Id.

© See letter of 25 January 2010 from the Claimants to Ms. Eloise Obadia at page 3.

d’un compte séquestre auprés d’une banque n’a qu’un coiit négligeable
largement compensé par la rémunération du compte séquestré.’

16. And regarding an irrevocable bank guarantee, the Claimants add:

17. With respect to the affirmation made by counsel for the Respondent at the First Session
that Chile would honor the Award should it not be annulled, the Claimants stated that in
view of the developments which took place in relation to the question of the admissibility

of the Application, this commitment was not sufficient and some sort of security was

Contrairement aux termes de la lettre du 15 janvier 2010, la mise en
place d’une garantie n’a pas pour effet de placer les investisseurs
espagnols dans une position plus favorable si |’Etat du Chili avait la
volonté d’exécuter de bonne foi la Sentence, i.e. sans délai. Dés lors la
mise en place d’une garantie vient simplement assurer le respect des
engagements de |’Etat au titre de la Convention. C’est d’ailleurs ce qu’il
ressort de l’analyse des décisions des précédents Comités ad hoc, qui ont
relevé que le critére essentiel qui s’opposait 4 la mise en place d’une
garantie était |’assurance de recouvrement sans délai du montant de la
sentence si celle-ci n’était pas annulée. Cette assurance n’existe pas dans
la présente affaire, et ne peut étre valablement donnée par un
représentant du pouvoir exécutif de la République du Chili diment
autorisé vu les circonstances spécifiques A la présente affaire.* [footnote
omitted]

required:

En effet, ces événements, qu’ils soient le résultat d’une absence totale de
rigueur de l’administration chilienne, comme le prétend aujourd’hui la
République, ou de faits bien plus graves tels que nous les soupgonnons,
démontrent que, dans cette affaire, |’affirmation faite dans |’audience du
29 janvier 2010 par un conseil que la République du Chili exécutera
volontairement et sans délai la Sentence, si elle était confirmée par le
Comité ad hoc, n'est pas suffisant (sic) pour prononcer la suspension de
V’exécution de la Sentence sans contrepartie.”

 [bid. at page 4.

§ Ibid. at page 5

° See letter of 17 February 2010 from the Claimants to Ms. Eloise Obadia at page 6.

IH. RELEVANT ICSID CONVENTION ARTICLES AND ICSID ARBITRATION
RULES

18. Article 27(1) of the Convention states:

No Contracting State shall give diplomatic protection, or bring an
international claim, in respect of a dispute which one of its nationals and
another Contracting State shall have consented to submit or shall have
submitted to arbitration under this Convention, unless such other
Contracting State shall have failed to abide by and comply with the
award rendered in such dispute.

19. Article 52 of the Convention provides:

(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in
writing addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the
following grounds:

(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

(c) that there was corruption on the part of a member of the
Tribunal;

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental
tule of procedure; or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is
based.

LJ

(5) The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so require,
stay enforcement of the award pending its decision. If the applicant
requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his application,
enforcement shall be stayed provisionally until the Committee rules on
such request.

LJ

20. Articles 53 to 55 of the Convention provide:

Article 53

(1) The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to
any appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for in this

Convention. Each party shall abide by and comply with the terms of the
award except to the extent that enforcement shall have been stayed
pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention.

(2) For the purposes of this Section, "award" shall include any decision
interpreting, revising or annulling such award pursuant to Articles 50, 51
or 52

Article 54

(1) Each Contracting State shall recognize an award rendered pursuant to
this Convention as binding and enforce the pecuniary obligations
imposed by that award within its territories as if it were a final judgment
of a court in that State. A Contracting State with a federal constitution
may enforce such an award in or through its federal courts and may
provide that such courts shall treat the award as if it were a final
judgment of the courts of a constituent state.

(2) A party seeking recognition or enforcement in the territories of a
Contracting State shall furnish to a competent court or other authority
which such State shall have designated for this purpose a copy of the
award certified by the Secretary-General. Each Contracting State shall
notify the Secretary-General of the designation of the competent court or
other authority for this purpose and of any subsequent change in such
designation.

(3) Execution of the award shall be governed by the laws concerning the
execution of judgments in force in the State in whose territories such
execution is sought.

Article 55

Nothing in Article 54 shall be construed as derogating from the law in
force in any Contracting State relating to immunity of that State or of any
foreign State from execution.

21. Rule 54 of the Arbitration Rules applies to the present case and provides:

Stay of Enforcement of the Award

(1) The party applying for the interpretation, revision or annulment of an
award may in its application, and either party may at any time before the
final disposition of the application, request a stay in the enforcement of
part or all of the award to which the application relates. The Tribunal or
Committee shall give priority to the consideration of such a request.

(2) If an application for the revision or annulment of an award contains a
request for a stay of its enforcement, the Secretary-General shall,

22.

23.

together with the notice of registration, inform both parties of the
provisional stay of the award. As soon as the Tribunal or Committee is
constituted it shall, if either party requests, rule within 30 days on
whether such stay should be continued; unless it decides to continue the
stay, it shall automatically be terminated.

(3) If a stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to paragraph (1) or
continued pursuant to paragraph (2), the Tribunal or Committee may at
any time modify or terminate the stay at the request of either party. All
stays shall automatically terminate on the date on which a final decision
is rendered on the application, except that a Committee granting the
partial annulment of an award may order the temporary stay of
enforcement of the unannulled portion in order to give either party an
opportunity to request any new Tribunal constituted pursuant to Article
52(6) of the Convention to grant a stay pursuant to Rule 55(3).

(4) A request pursuant to paragraph (1), (2) (second sentence) or (3) shall
specify the circumstances that require the stay or its modification or
termination. A request shall only be granted after the Tribunal or
Committee has given each party an opportunity of presenting its
observations.

(5) The Secretary-General shall promptly notify both parties of the stay
of enforcement of any award and of the modification or termination of
such a stay, which shall become effective on the date on which he
dispatches such notification.

THE COMMITTEE’S VIEWS

As noted earlier, the Award in the present case was issued on 8 May 2008. On 2 June
2008, the Claimants filed an application for a partial revision of the Award. On 16 July
2008, the Republic requested a stay of enforcement of the Award which was granted by
the Tribunal on 5 August 2008. On 18 November 2009, the Tribunal declared
inadmissible the Claimants’ application for revision and lifted the stay of enforcement of

the Award.

On 5 September 2008, the Republic filed its Application for Annulment of the Award and
applied for a provisional stay of the enforcement of the Award pending the eventual

decision of the ad hoc Committee to be constituted.

-10-

24.

25.

26.

27.

On 4 December 2009, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 54(2), the Acting Secretary-General
of ICSID informed the parties of the provisional stay of the Award which stay was
continued by the Committee on 21 January 2010 pursuant to Article 52(5) of the
Convention. The Republic now requests the continuation of the stay of enforcement of
the Award pending the Committee’s decision on its Application. The Claimants oppose

the continuation of the stay of enforcement.

Turning first to the Republic’s Request that the stay of enforcement of the Award should
be continued pending its decision on the Application, the Committee notes that, although
Article 52(5) of the Convention uses the verb “may”, thereby conveying an element of
discretion to the Committee, a review of the many decisions by ad hoc annulment
committees since the MINE decision in 1988'° leads the Committee to the conclusion
that, absent unusual circumstances, the granting of a stay of enforcement pending the

outcome of the annulment proceedings has now become almost automatic. "

In the present case, the Committee is satisfied that the Republic has discharged its burden
of proving that there are no unusual circumstances and that all the factors which the
Republic has referred to”? support the continuation of the stay of enforcement of the

Award pending the Committee’s decision and it so rules.

The Committee will now turn to the Claimants’ request that the stay be made conditional
on the provision of some form of security by the Republic. In this connection, the
Committee recalls the submission of the Claimants:

[...] les investisseurs espagnols ne s’opposent pas au maintien de la
suspension de l’exécution de la Sentence, si, en contre partie, la

© See Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea, (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4), Interim
Order No. 1, 12 August 1988, 5 /CSID Rev.—FILJ 129 (1990) (“MINE Stay Decision”).

"See Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7), Decision on the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award of 30 November 2004, 20 JCSID Rev.—FILJ 587 (2005), at para, 28, and Enron v.
Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3), Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued
Stay of Enforcement of the Award (7 October 2008) at para. 42 (“Enron Stay Decision”).

” See letter of 15 January 2010 from Arnold & Porter, L.L.P. to Ms. Eloise Obadia and Transcript Hearing of 29
January 2010, pages 140 to 157 [English Transcripts].

-ll-

28.

29.

République du Chili prenait les mesures adéquates suivantes -qui sont du
ressort du seul pouvoir exécutif- permettant d’assurer |’exécution
effective et immédiate de la Sentence dés sa confirmation.

Le versement des sommes dues par la République du Chili au titre de la
Sentence sur un compte séquestre, portant intérét, détenu par une banque
de premier rang domiciliée sur le territoire européen ou nord américain,
et qui pourra étre actionné par l’une ou l’autre des parties sur
présentation de la décision du Comité ad hoc confirmant ou annulant la
Sentence, serait une mesure adéquate permettant de protéger les intéréts
de chacune des parties dans cette procédure.

[...] A titre subsidiaire, les investisseurs espagnols accepteraient en

contrepartie de la suspension la mise en place d’une garantie bancaire

irrévocable, inconditionnelle et 4 premiére demande, émise par une

banque de premier rang, domiciliée en Europe ou sur le continent nord

américain, au bénéfice des demandeurs pour le montant de la

condamnation prononcée dans la Sentence, soit la somme de

16.682.947,17US$ (date valeur 06-08-2008) plus intéréts de 5%

composés annuellement commengant a courir 4 la date du 6 aotit 2008,

ou toute autre mesure équivalente.'*
While neither the Convention nor the Rules expressly states whether an ad hoc
Committee can grant a request for a stay subject to conditions, such as a condition that
the party seeking the stay provide security for the enforcement of the award in the event
that annulment is not granted, the Committee, guided by Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties (the “Vienna Convention”) considers that a
discretionary power to allow or deny a remedy “may implicitly include a power to allow
the remedy subject to conditions and that such an interpretation would be consistent with
the objects and purposes of Article 52(5) [of the Convention], which is designed to
enable the ad hoc Committee to balance the rights of the parties pending annulment
proceedings”.'*
The Committee, therefore, will now consider whether or not the stay should be subject to
a condition of security. The Claimants bear the burden of proving that security should be

ordered and that, if it is not ordered, they will suffer a prejudice.

'S See letter of 25 January 2010 from the Claimants to Ms. Eloise Obadia at pages 4 and 5.

'4 See Enron Stay Decision at para. 26.

-12-

30. The Committee starts from the premise that the primary security for the Claimants’
Award is provided through the obligations the Republic of Chile has assumed under
Article 54 of the Convention. In addition, the Committee notes that the Republic’s
constitutional and municipal law enforcement regimes are in conformity with the

Convention.'°

31. The Republic has represented that it has always complied with its international payment
obligations and with all judgments or awards of international courts and tribunals.
Through its authorized representative, it affirmed before the Committee that it will do so

in the present case if the Award is confirmed.'®

32. It is a fact that, because of the Application, the satisfaction of the Award (assuming that
the Application is unsuccessful) will be delayed. In the view of the Committee that is the
only prejudice which the Claimants can point to. But, the provision for compound interest
in the “dispositif” of the Award compensates the Claimants adequately for the delay.'’ As
the Azurix ad hoc Committee said, after quoting Article 53(1) of the Convention:'* “... if

an ad hoc Committee considers, as we do, that the circumstances require a stay, then the

19

award creditor’s rights are themselves qualified by the Convention.”’” (emphasis in the

original)

'S See Azurix Corporation v. Argentine Republic, (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Decision on the Continued Stay of
Enforcement of the Award (28 December 2007), para. 33 (“Azurix”); see also MTD v. Republic of Chile (ICSID
Case No. ARB/O1/7), Ad hoc Committee’s Decision on the Respondent’s Request for a Continued Stay of Execution
(1 June 2005), paras. 32 et seq. (“MTD Stay Decision”).

'© Transcript of 29 January 2010 at page 157, Mr. Di Rosa [English Transcripts].

"” See, inter alia, Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the
Award (20 August 2007) at para. 40; and MTD Stay Decision at para. 36.

'8 Article 53(1): “The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to any appeal or to any other
remedy except those provided for in this Convention. Each party shall abide by and comply with the terms of the
award except to the extent that enforcement shall have been stayed pursuant to the relevant provisions of this
Convention.”

'° See Azurix at para. 42.

-13-

33.

34.

For the foregoing reasons, the Republic has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Committee that the Claimants will not be prejudiced by the grant of the stay save in
respect of the delay which is incidental to the Convention system of annulment and which
will be remedied by the payment of compound interest if the annulment application is

unsuccessful.

There is an additional reason why the Committee has decided not to require the Republic
to provide a guarantee, particularly a guarantee such as the Claimants propose in the
present case, as a condition to the continuation of the provisional stay of enforcement of
the Award. Not only would the posting of such a guarantee at this time place the
Claimants in a much more favourable position than it enjoyed prior to the provisional
stay, but it could also prevent the Republic from opposing a legal defense of sovereign
immunity under Article 55 of the Convention” if, in the event the application was
unsuccessful, forcible execution of the Award was resorted to by the Claimants. In the
words of the MINE ad hoc annulment Committee, to which the Committee subscribes:
“such a one-sided change in the relative position of the parties is [not] justified.”?! It

would truly be a form of conditional payment in advance.

? Article 55 of the Convention: “Nothing in Article 54 shall be construed as derogating from the law in force in any
Contracting State relating to immunity of that State or of any foreign State from execution.”

>! See MINE Stay Decision at para. 22 and paras 23-25.

-14-

Vv. DECISION

35. For the foregoing reasons, the Committee unanimously:

Continues in force the stay of the enforcement of the Award pending its decision

on the Application for Annulment.

Signed on behalf of the Committee on 5 May 2010,

 

President of the ad hoc Committee

-15-

