INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

VICTOR PEY CASADO AND FOUNDATION « PRESIDENTE ALLENDE »

Claimants to the arbitration
Defendants to the annulment

REPUBLIC OF CHILE
Respondent to the arbitration

Applicant to the annulment

ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2
Annulment Proceeding — Supplementary Decision

 

DECISION ON THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE’S REQUEST
FOR SUPPLEMENTATION OF THE ANNULMENT
DECISION

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee

Maitre. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C., President
Prof. Piero Bernardini,
Prof. Ahmed El-Kosheri,

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Eloise M. Obadia

Representing the Claimants
Dr. Juan E. Garcés

Garcés y Prada, Abogados
Madrid, Spain

With the cooperation of:

Ms. Carole Malinvaud
Ms. Alexandra Mufioz
Gide, Loyrette, Nouel,
Paris, France

Mr. Samuel Buffone
BuckleySandler LLP
Washington D.C., USA

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 11 September 2013

Representing the Respondent
Mr. Matias Mori

Mr. Carlos Dettleff

Ms. Victoria Fernandez-Armesto
Foreign Investment Committee,
Ministry of Economy

Santiago, Chile

Mr. Paolo Di Rosa

Ms. Gaela K. Gehring Flores
Ms. Amy Endicott

Arnold & Porter, LLP
Washington, D.C., USA

Mr. Jorge Carey
Carey & Cia,
Santiago, Chile

L
Il.

A.

9 OF >

VI.

VII.

NA wR WN DS

SNA YM KR WN DS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION
THE PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS

 

The Republic’s C

General

 

Interest on the Amounts Awarded by the Tribunal......

 

Interest on the Amounts due for Costs of the Revision Proceeding....

Interest on the Amounts due for Costs of the Annulment Proceeding

 

Necessity of a Suppl

The Republic’s Good Faith.

‘y Decision

 

 

 

The Republic’s R

THE Claimants’ Contentions

 

Waiver of the Right to Submit the Request for a Supplementary Decision.

Interest on the Amounts Awarded by the Tribunal......

 

Interest on the Amounts due for Costs of the Revision Proceeding....

 

Interest on the Amounts due for Costs of the Annulment Proceeding

 

Necessity of a Suppl ‘y Decision
The Republic’s Dilatory Tacti
Modification of the Republic’s Original Request........

The Claimants’ Re

 

 

Coe NDAD HH RR BRD

 

 

 

 

The Republic’s Reply to the Claimants’ Contention on Waiver by the Republic of the Right to
1

Submit the Request for a 1 Decision

RELEVANT ICSID CONVENTION ARTICLES AND ICSID ARBITRATION RULES..
LEGAL STANDARDS
COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

 

 

Questions Related to the Award

 

Questions related to the Revision P1

 

Questions related to the Annul Pi di

 

Impact of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award on Interest......
COSTS.
DECISION

 

15
16
20
20
23
25

 

30
31

THE COMMITTEE
Composed as above,
After deliberation,

Makes the following Decision:

L INTRODUCTION

1. On 18 December 2012, the present Committee issued its Decision on the Application for
Annulment of the Republic of Chile (the “Decision on Annulment’) partially annulling the
award rendered on 8 May 2008 in ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2 (the “Award”) between Victor
Pey Casado and the Foundation “President Allende” on one side (the “Claimants”) and the

Republic of Chile (the “Republic” or “Respondent” or “Chile”) on the other side.

2. On 1 February 2013, the Republic submitted an electronic copy of a Request for
Supplementation of the Annulment Decision dated 18 December 2012 (“Supplementation
Request”) regarding the application of moratory interest to the amounts owed for costs and
expenses pursuant to the unannulled portion of the Award, the Tribunal’s decision on
revision dated 18 November 2009 (the “Decision on Revision”) and the Decision on

Annulment.

3. The Secretariat of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”
or the “Centre”) transmitted the Supplementation Request to the Claimants on 4 February
2013 upon receipt of the hard copies. The ICSID Secretary-General registered the
Supplementation Request on 7 February 2013 and transmitted it to the members of the

Committee.

4. By letter of 8 February 2013, the Committee informed the parties that pursuant to Rules
49(3) of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”), it had
to fix time limits for the parties to file their observations on the Supplementation Request and

determine the procedure for its consideration. The Committee indicated that, in the

circumstances, it believed that two rounds of written observations would be necessary to
properly consider the Supplementation Request and invited the parties to agree on the
schedule for such filings. The Committee further specified that the Republic should be the

first to file observations with a view to substantiate its Supplementation Request.

By letter of 21 February 2013, the Committee confirmed the schedule agreed upon by the
parties for the filing of their written observations and indicated that it did not foresee the need
for a hearing on this matter. Accordingly, the Republic filed its observations in support of its
Supplementation Request on 4 March 2013 (the “Observations”), followed by a translation
into Spanish of the filing on 11 March 2013. The Claimants filed a response on 29 March
2013 (the “Response”), followed by its translation into Spanish on 3 April 2013. The
Respondent submitted a reply on 12 April 2013 (the “Reply”) and its Spanish translation on
19 April 2013. Finally, the Claimants filed a rejoinder on 26 April 2013 (the “Rejoinder”)
and its Spanish version on 2 May 2013.

In parallel, the Respondent submitted on 3 April 2013 a request for a stay of enforcement of
the unannulled portions of the Award. Upon the invitation of the Committee, the Claimants

filed observations on the request on 8 April 2013.

Having decided to give priority to the consideration of that request, the Committee issued its
decision rejecting the Respondent’s request on 25 April 2013, with reasons to follow later.

The Committee issued its reasoned decision on 16 May 2013.

On 30 July and 31 July 2013, the Claimants and the Respondent respectively submitted their

statements of costs in relation to the Supplementation Request.

IL.

A.

1

1

1

0.

1.

2.

THE PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS

The Republic’s Contentions
L. General

According to the Republic, a Supplementary Decision would serve the purpose of finally
determining the applicability or non-applicability of interest to the costs awarded to the
Republic, on the one hand, and to the Claimants, on the other hand, in the Arbitration,

Revision, and/or Annulment Proceedings in this case.!

The Republic submits that it complied with all the specific requirements that must be
satisfied in a request for Supplementary Decision as set out in Arbitration Rule 49(1). The
Republic has (a) identified the award to which it relates, in this case, the Decision on
Annulment dated 18 December 2012, (b) indicated the date of the request which falls within
the 45-day deadline established by Article 49(2) of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the “Convention”, (c)
stated in detail the question which, in its opinion, the Committee omitted to decide in the

Decision on Annulment, and (d) has lodged the required fee.

The Republic avers that, by virtue of Article 52(4) of Convention, Article 42(2) of the

Convention is applicable not only to an award but also to annulment decisions.*

The Republic maintains that a supplementary decision is appropriate in the present case and,
in support of its argument, quoting Professor Christoph Schreuer’s Commentary, writes that
“an omission in the relevant decision with respect to the determination of costs is a classic
example of the type of issue that can be addressed by means of a supplementary decision

pursuant to Art. 49(2)."4 Professor Schreuer wrote:

' See Supplementation Request at para. 2.

Ibid. at paras. 6-10.

5 See Observations at para. 6.

* Ibid. at para. 7.

“Supplementation under Art. 49(2) will be useful where the omission is due
to an oversight on the part of the tribunal which is likely to be corrected by
it once this oversight is pointed out. This oversight should however
concern a ‘question’ before the tribunal; that is, an issue that affects the
award and is of sufficient importance to justify the procedure leading to a
supplemental decision. Typical examples would be the inadvertent
omission of an item in the calculation of damages or of a factor
determining costs.” [Emphasis in the Observations]

2 Interest on the Amounts Awarded by the Tribunal

13. The Republic submits that it “wishes to comply in good faith with the portion of the Award

5

[...] which relates to costs, and wishes to do so as promptly as possible”” but that, in order to

do so, it requires a precise determination by the Committee of the final amounts of costs.®

14. The Republic contends that the Decision on Annulment did not determine “whether
paragraph 7 of the Award’s dispositif [providing for moratory interest] should be deemed to
apply to the costs amounts identified in paragraphs 5 and 6 of such dispositif during the
periods of time in which the Revision and Annulment proceedings were pending”’ and “the
impact (if any) of the fact that the enforcement of the Award had been stayed continuously
from a point in time that predated the expiry of the 90-day grace period contemplated in the

Award’s dispositif, until the issuance of the Annulment Decision itself.”*

3. Interest on the Amounts due for Costs of the Revision Proceeding

15. The Republic states that “the Annulment Decision also did not determine whether interest
should apply to the costs awarded to the Republic in the Revision Decision dated 18

November 2009 (the ‘Revision Decision’), which had rejected Claimants’ application for

5 See Supplementation Request at para. 3.
° Ibid.
7 [bid. at para. 27.

8 See Observations at para. 3.

revision of the Award, and imposed on Claimants the obligation of bearing the totality of the

costs of the Revision Proceeding.”°

4 Interest on the Amounts due for Costs of the Annulment Proceeding

16. The Republic also submits that “the Annulment Decision did not determine whether interest
should apply to the costs that must now be reimbursed to Chile given the Committee’s
imposition on Claimants of the obligation to pay half of the costs of the Annulment

Proceeding.”'”

17. Finally, and in connection with the Annulment Proceedings, the Republic requests from the
Committee the determination, if applicable, of the dies a quo on which any interest began to
accrue, and the determination of the lapse of time (if any) during which the accrual was

interrupted. "
5 Necessity of a Supplementary Decision

18. As for the necessity of a supplementary decision, the Republic argues that “[i]nternational

tribunals have understood that an Article 49(2) request for supplementation should concern

the omission of a material issue but should not seek to modify a decision already made,”

and affirms that the “the Republic has no interest in reopening arguments or reexamining the

Committee’s reasoning.” 8

° Ibid. at para. 4.
” Ibid.

 

"! Thid. at paras. 28 and 32.

° [bid, at para. 24, citing Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case
No. ARB/97/3, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Request for Supplementation and Rectification of its Decision of 28
May 2003 (hereinafter “Aguas Supplementary and Rectification Decision”); Alex Genin and others. v. Republic of Estonia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/99/2, Decision on Claimants’ Request for Supplementary Decisions and Rectification of 4 April 2002
(hereinafter “Genin Supplementary and Rectification Decision”), LG&E Energy Corp. LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E
International Inc. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Claimants’ Request For Supplementary
Decision of 8 July 2008 (hereinafter “LG&E Supplementary Decision”); The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v.
United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, Decision on Respondent's Request for a Supplementary Decision of
13 September 2004.

3 Tbid. at para. 27.

    

19. The Republic submits that, while it is able to calculate the total amounts of costs, without
interest, which it owes to the Claimants, it is not able to determine the precise amounts owed,
until the Committee makes certain determinations concerning the application of interest to

this sum.'4

20. According to the Republic, “this question creates, in effect, a legal impossibility in obtaining
the required governmental authorization for payment of the award. Chilean laws stipulating
the procedure for payment of an award with public funds are of public order (de orden
ptblico), and thereby subject to particular legal and constitutional safeguards that demand a
much greater degree of legal precision and certainty than the laws governing the payment of
judgments between private entities. In short, when the exact amounts at issue remain
undetermined, it is not possible for the Republic to proceed with a good faith execution of the

Award.”!>
6. The Republic’s Good Faith

21. The Republic also alleges that “because enforcement of the Award was subject to a
continuous stay from before the moratory interest was triggered until the time the Annulment
Decision was issued, it cannot be said that the Republic failed ‘to comply with a judgment or
an arbitral award without delay’, or entered into the situation of default that Paragraph 7 of

the Award’s dispositif was intended to avert.”

22. More specifically, the Republic contends that the moratory interest provided for in paragraph
7 of the Award’s dispositif “was to become applicable only if the Republic were to fail to pay
within the required ninety-day grace period.”'7 The Republic asserts that it “never reached
the point of default, because the tribunal granted a stay of enforcement of the Award starting

from 5 August 2008 — the day before the moratory interest was to begin accruing pursuant to

' Ibid. at paras. 20-21.
'S Tbid. at para. 30.
'© Ibid. at para. 33.

"7 See Reply at para. 12.

the Award” and “[s]uch stay then remained continuously in force [...] until 18 December

a l8

2012, when the stay was lifted in the Decision on Annulment. [Emphasis in the original]

2:

o

. Finally, in the words of the Republic, it assumes that “at the very least, interest should not
accrue during this period [i.e., the period of time in which the Revision Proceeding was
ongoing], given that the corresponding delay was attributable entirely to the Claimants, for

having commenced a Revision Proceeding in which it was ultimately entirely unsuccessful

and with respect to which it was obligated to pay the total sum of the costs.”
7. The Republic’s Requests
24. The Republic requests that the Committee:””
“a. Issue a Supplementary Decision to the Annulment Decision

wherein it determines a sum certain the Republic is obligated to pay

Claimants, after assessing:

i. how the moratory interest contemplated in Paragraph 7 of the
Award’s dispositif should be applied to the amounts in costs and
expenses the Republic is obligated to pay Claimants, given that the
Republic was never in default due to the stays of enforcement that
were in effect from 5 August 2008 until 18 December 2012;

ii. if applicable, the dies a quo of any interest on costs imposed on the
Republic for the Arbitration proceeding, and whether the relevant
accrual period was interrupted for any lapse of time;
whether interest has accrued — and continues to accrue— on the
costs imposed on Claimants for the Revision Proceeding;

iv. if applicable, the dies a quo of any interest on costs for the Revision
Proceeding, and whether the relevant accrual period was interrupted
for any lapse of time;

v. whether interest should be deemed to accrue on the costs imposed on

Claimants for the Annulment Proceeding; and

if applicable, the dies a quo of any interest on costs for the

Annulment Proceeding, and whether the relevant accrual period was

interrupted for any lapse of time.

b. Order Claimants to pay the full costs of this proceeding, plus

applicable interest.”

iii.

vi.

8 Ibid.
'° See Observations at para. 35.

? See Reply at para. 32.

B.

2!

2

n

a

The Claimants’ Contentions

L Waiver of the Right to Submit the Request for a Supplementary Decision

. In their Response to the Republic’s Supplementation Request, the Claimants aver firstly that,

in the Annulment Proceeding, the Republic never asked the Committee to decide the specific
requests that it is making now.”! Accordingly, a supplementary decision by the Committee
on this issue, argue the Claimants, would violate the letter and spirit of Article 49(2) of the
Convention, as it would amount to revisiting the merits of the Decision on Annulment.” In
the words of the Claimants, “si l’article 49(2) de la Convention CIRDI permet de remédier 4
une omission du tribunal arbitral, il doit impérativement s’agir d’une question déja posée au
tribunal et sur laquelle il avait omis de se prononcer. Le Professeur Schreuer souligne que
lobtention d’une décision supplémentaire est liée a I’ article 48(3) de cette méme Convention

qui dispose que la sentence doit répondre 4 toutes les questions posées au tribunal arbitral.”??

. According to the Claimants, “dans la mesure ot les demandes formulées par la Défenderesse

dans sa demande de décision supplémentaire sont des demandes nouvelles, il ne peut en

aucun cas s’agir d’une omission au sens de l’article 49(2)."4

27. The Claimants quote Professor Christoph Schreuer’s Commentary in respect of Article 46 of

the Convention and argue that moratory interest must be denied when it has not been
specifically requested. Professor Schreuer wrote:

“Post-award (moratory) interest is usually addressed separately by the

tribunals. It_must_be requested expressly by the claimant. In some
cases post-award interest was denied because it had not been

2! See Response at para. 3.
® Ibid. at para. 4.
> Ibid. at para. 8.
* Ibid. at para. 9.

specifically mentioned in claimants’ memorials.””°

Response and footnote omitted]

[Emphasis in the

2 Interest on the Amounts Awarded by the Tribunal

28. According to the Claimants, the Republic seeks to cap the amount that it is required to pay

“soit en suspendant |’ application des intéréts moratoires lorsque ces derniers ont été décidés,

926

soit en appliquant des intéréts moratoires en l’absence de décision,”~” and they conclude that

“il est de principe que si un tribunal ou un comité ne prévoit pas dans sa sentence ou sa

décision l’octroi d’intéréts moratoires, il convient de considérer qu’il a décidé de ne pas en
accorder.”?”

29. The Claimants refer the Committee to decisions of annulment committees which, they say,

determined that “[l]es intéréts moratoires courent pendant la suspension de |’exécution
provisoire et ce jusqu’a la date du complet paiement.”*

30. The Claimants also submit that the Tribunal determined in paragraph 7 of the Award’s
dispositif the interest to be applied, the dies a quo and the dies at quem,” that the Republic
has never before requested the modification of this part of the dispositif and that this
paragraph 7 was specifically confirmed by the Annulment Committee.*” The Claimants
further state that, even if the Republic had made such a request, the Committee would not

have had jurisdiction to modify this paragraph of the Award without annulling it!

5 Ibid. at para. 13.
°6 Ibid. at para. 12.
27 Ibid. at para. 15.

8 Jhid. at para. 27-35 citing Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 4 Nov. 2008, para. 40; Azurix Corp. v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 28 Dec. 2007, (hereinafter
“Azurix Decision on the Stay of Enforcement”), para. 40; CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case
No. ARB/OI/8), Award of 12 May 2005, p. 139; and Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, 1 Sept. 2006, (hereinafter “CMS Decision on the Stay of Enforcement”), p. 50; Southern Pacific
Properties (Middle East) Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/84/3, Award of 20 May 1992; MTD Equity
Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. c. Republic of Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7, Award of 25 May 2004.

 

» Ibid. at para. 36.
*° Ibid. at paras. 37-38.
3! Ibid. at para. 42.

-10-

31. The Claimants contend that the interest awarded by the Tribunal must be considered as
having accrued according to the terms of the Award, without any modification. Accordingly,
“les intéréts composés au taux de 5% annuel ont commencé 4 courir depuis le 8 mai 2008
(date d’envoi de la Sentence) sans interruption et continueront de courir jusqu’au complet

. 993:
paiement des sommes dues. 2

3. Interest on the Amounts due for Costs of the Revision Proceeding

3

N

. As for the costs of the Revision Proceeding, the Claimants affirm that the Republic had never
before requested the application of interest to these costs, and that in the absence of such an
express request, the Tribunal could not grant them. The Claimants further contend that the
Republic cannot submit such a request to the Committee since it has no jurisdiction to

address it.**

4 Interest on the Amounts due for Costs of the Annulment Proceeding

3

o

. As for the costs of the Annulment Proceeding, the Claimants state that the Republic never
requested that interest accrue on those costs and, in addition, that the Committee had clearly
decided to order the Claimants to reimburse half of the costs of this proceeding to Chile

without interest.**

3 Necessity of a Supplementary Decision

3

&

. The Claimants also submit that a supplementary decision is not necessary for the Republic to
fulfill its obligations under the Decision on Annulment. They write that “la Sentence était
immédiatement exécutoire et la République du Chili avait 90 jours a partir du 8 mai 2008

pour payer les sommes auxquelles elle a été condamnée, 4 défaut de quoi et conformément a

* Ibid. at para. 43.
5 Ibid. at par
* Ibid. at para. 54.

 

. 50-51.

-ll-

la Sentence, des intéréts composés seraient appliqués 4 compter de la date d’envoi de la

Sentence.”**

35. The Claimants recall that the Republic itself has repeatedly stated that “le préjudice des
Demanderesses du fait de la suspension provisoire de l’exécution de la Sentence [était]
compensé par la capitalisation des intéréts pendant cette période.”*° “Ainsi, le maintien de la
production d’intéréts capitalisés pendant la suspension provisoire de |’exécution de la
Sentence a été proposé et accepté par la République du Chili elle-méme 4 chaque fois qu’elle

”37 The Claimants submit that the

a argumenté en faveur de la suspension d’exécution.
Republic cannot now revoke its statements and reduce the amount owed pursuant to the

Award.**

36. The Claimants allege that the Republic has not introduced any evidence with respect to the
impossibility of obtaining the required governmental authorization for payment of the
amounts owed and add that, in any event, “conformément aux articles 26 et 27 de la
Convention de Vienne sur le droit des traités, de 1969, ratifiée par 1’ Espagne et le Chili, une
partie ne peut invoquer les dispositions de son droit interne comme justifiant la non-

anti . weg on
exécution d’un traité.”*?

6. The Republic’s Dilatory Tactic

37. The Claimants maintain that the purpose of the Republic’s Request for Supplementation is to
delay the payment of the amount owed and state that “[l]a demande de décision
supplémentaire procéde de la méme volonté des autorités chiliennes de ne pas indemniser les
parties Demanderesses ; de ne pas exécuter ni reconnaitre conformément a ses termes la
Sentence. Cette procédure, initiée le ler février 2013, a vocation a constituer un alibi en vue
de suspendre la procédure en exécution forcée, préalablement initiée en Espagne (i.e. le 14

% Ibid. at para. 20.

% Ibid. at paras. 21-26.

*7 Ibid. at para. 24.

%* Ibid. at para 24.

* See Rejoinder at para. 29.

-12-

janvier 2013), afin d’obtenir le paiement des sommes dues au titre des points 5 4 7 du
Dispositif de la Sentence. En effet, le 22 mars 2013, le représentant de la République du Chili
dans cet arbitrage déclarait que les termes de la sentence ‘ne seraient pas fermes, il existe un
recours en cours aux EE.UU.’ (déclarations du 22 mars 2013 de l’agent de la République du
Chili -le Vice-Président du Comité des Investissements Etrangers- publiés dans des

nombreux moyens de communication).”*°

38. The Claimants allege that this Request is nothing more than a dilatory tactic: “[o]n relévera
que les deux suspensions de |’exécution de la Sentence ont été accordées sur la seule
demande et a l’avantage exclusif de la Défenderesse, et ne sauraient par aucune approche étre
présentées comme autre chose que des interdictions faites aux Demanderesses de mettre en
ceuvre l’exigence de paiement du principal et des intéréts figurant aux points 5 a 7 du
dispositif de la Sentence, jusqu’a la levée de ces suspensions - retard au seul détriment des
Demanderesses estimé, selon le Tribunal Arbitral et le Comité ad hoc respectivement,

compensé par l’accumulation des intéréts moratoires a laquelle il donnerait lieu.”*!

7. Modification of the Republic’s Original Request

39. The Claimants argue that, in its Reply, the Republic has modified its original request for a
supplementary decision by requesting that the Committee “issue a Supplementary Decision
to the Annulment Decision wherein it determines a sum certain the Republic is obligated to
pay Claimants [...]”.?) The Claimants submit that “[e]n premier lieu, on rappellera que le

Comité ad hoc n’étant pas compétent pour décider de la demande initiale de la République

du Chili, il est également incompétent pour statuer sur cette ‘nouvelle’ demande. Comme

cela a déja été indiqué, les demandes relatives 4 la Sentence et a la décision du Tribunal dans
la procédure en révision auraient di étre formulées, en application de l’article 49(2) de la

Convention, dans les 45 jours suivants la décision concernée, en particulier lorsque celle-ci

* See Response at para. 78.
4! Thid. at para. 82.

® See Rejoinder at para. 3.

-13-

n’a fait l’objet d’aucune demande devant le Comité dans le cadre de la procédure en

«9943
annulation.”*

4

So

. The Claimants also note that the Republic has already taken advantage of the Request for
Supplementation in order to avoid the payment of the sum owed to the Claimants and, in
support of this assertion, affirm that “en effet, le 22 avril 2013 la République a introduit la
présente demande dans la procédure en Espagne 4 l’appui de son opposition, tous azimuts, a

Vexécution de la Sentence.”“

8 The Claimants’ Requests

4

. The Claimants request that the Committee dismiss the Request for Supplementation of the
Decision on Annulment and, confirm (1) that paragraphs | to 3 and 5 to 8 of the Award’s
dispositif are res judicata; (2) that according to the Award as well as the 18 November 2009
and 18 December 2012 Decisions, the Claimants are not required to pay interest to the
Republic; (3) that the Committee did not omit to decide any question; and (4) that the
Republic should pay for all the costs of the present proceeding, including the representational
costs, with additional compound interest from two weeks following the Committee’s

Decision at an annual rate of 5 percent until complete payment.*°

Cc. The Republic’s Reply to the Claimants’ Contention on Waiver by the Republic of
the Right to Submit the Request for a Supplementary Decision

4

vv

. With respect to the Claimants’ argument regarding the waiver of the rights to submit the
Supplementation Request, the Republic submits that “it is preposterous to assert that the
Republic waived its right to have these questions decided by not having requested expressly

that the Committee do so during the Annulment Proceeding. A party cannot be expected to

% Thid. at para. 4.
* Thid. at para. 44.
4 Thid. at para. 49.

-14-

43.

Il.

44.

4S.

46.

anticipate and raise issues that it reasonably expects the tribunal or Committee to address as a
9946

result of the questions that such party did in fact present to the adjudicator for decision.
The Republic also states that “under Claimants’ logic, the Republic would have had to
expand its request for relief to account for every conceivable outcome, expressly asking the
Committee to decide all issues that could logically flow from each potential outcome. This
cannot possibly be the applicable standard, as it would defy common sense. An annulment
applicant in the ICSID system is entitled to expect that the annulment decision, in addressing
the issues explicitly raised for determination, will also address all residual questions that

logically flow from its decision on the issues presented.”*7

RELEVANT ICSID CONVENTION ARTICLES AND ICSID ARBITRATION
RULES

Article 49(2) of the Convention provides:

“(2) The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45 days after the
date on which the award was rendered may after notice to the other party
decide any question which it had omitted to decide in the award, and shall
rectify any clerical, arithmetical or similar error in the award. Its decision
shall become part of the award and shall be notified to the parties in the
same manner as the award. The periods of time provided for under
paragraph (2) of Article 51 and paragraph (2) of Article 52 shall run from
the date on which the decision was rendered.”

Article 52(4) of the Convention provides:
“(4) The provisions of Articles 41-45, 48, 49, 53 and 54, and of Chapters
VI and VII shall apply mutatis mutandis to proceedings before the

Committee.”

Arbitration Rule 49 applies to the present case and provides:

4 See Reply at para. 7.

7 Thid. at para. 9.

-15-

“Supplementary Decisions and Rectification

(1) Within 45 days after the date on which the award was rendered, either
party may request, pursuant to Article 49(2) of the Convention, a
supplementary decision on, or the rectification of, the award. Such a
request shall be addressed in writing to the Secretary-General. The request
shall:
(a) identify the award to which it relates;
(b) indicate the date of the request;
(c) state in detail:
(i) any question which, in the opinion of the requesting party, the
Tribunal omitted to decide in the award; and
(ii) any error in the award which the requesting party seeks to have
rectified; and
(d) be accompanied by a fee for lodging the request.
(2) Upon receipt of the request and of the lodging fee, the Secretary-
General shall forthwith:
(a) register the request;
(b) notify the parties of the registration;
(c) transmit to the other party a copy of the request and of any
accompanying documentation; and
(d) transmit to each member of the Tribunal a copy of the notice of
registration, together with a copy of the request and of any
accompanying documentation.
(3) The President of the Tribunal shall consult the members on whether it
is necessary for the Tribunal to meet in order to consider the request. The
Tribunal shall fix a time limit for the parties to file their observations on
the request and shall determine the procedure for its consideration.
(4) Rules 46-48 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to any decision of the
Tribunal pursuant to this Rule.
(5) If a request is received by the Secretary-General more than 45 days
after the award was rendered, he shall refuse to register the request and so
inform forthwith the requesting party.”

IV. LEGAL STANDARDS

47. Before addressing the issues raised by the Republic’s Supplementation Request, the
Committee considers it appropriate to review the standards applicable for the

supplementation of an annulment decision.

-16-

4

oo

. Both parties agree that the purpose of the procedure set forth in Article 49(2) of the
Convention is to give an opportunity to a tribunal (or a committee pursuant to Article 52(4)
of the Convention) to decide a question that it would have omitted to resolve in its award (or

decision for a committee).”®

4

©

. The parties also agree that a request for supplementation may not be used to ask a committee

to revisit in any way the merits of its decision.”

5

So

. The Committee subscribes to these views and notes that the power of a committee to decide a
question which it had omitted to decide is discretionary. Article 49(2) of the Convention
provides that the committee “‘may after notice to the other party decide any question which it

had omitted to decide” (Emphasis added).

5

. In the present case, the central issue lies with the precise questions which the Committee

would have omitted to decide.

5

N

. On the one hand, the Respondent submits that the Committee should issue a supplementary
decision in order that the exact sum it owes to the Claimants may be determined. To arrive at
such determination, the Republic asks four series of questions to the Committee. They are:
(i) whether any moratory interest should be applied to the amount of costs and expenses that
the Republic is obligated to pay to the Claimants pursuant to the Award and, if so, what is the
dies a quo for the calculation of such interest; (ii) whether the Claimants should pay interest
on the amount due for the costs of the Revision Proceeding which were granted by the
Tribunal, and, if applicable, what is the dies a quo for the application of such interest; (iii)
whether the Claimants should pay interest on the amount due for the costs of the Annulment
Proceeding which were granted by the Committee, and, if applicable, what is the dies a quo
for the application of such interest; and (iv) more generally, what is the impact of the Stay of

Enforcement of the Award on any interest which may have accrued.”

 

48 See Observations at para. 22 and Response at para. 3.

* See Observations at para. 24; Response at para. 4; LG&E Supplementary Decision at para. 16; and Aguas Supplementary and
Rectification Decision at para. 11.

* See Reply at para. 32.

-17-

53. On the other hand, the Claimants argue that none of these questions were actually submitted
by the Respondent to the Committee and that, therefore, the Committee should reject the

Supplementation Request.*!

54. It is well settled that a committee is only competent to issue a supplementary decision if it
failed to deal with and dispose of a question that was put to it. In the Genin case, the tribunal

noted:

“10. With respect to the supplementary decisions requested by Claimants,

the Tribunal considers it necessary to state that these do not concern
questions which it omitted to decide. Rather, they relate to issues that
Claimants themselves failed virtually altogether to address in either their
written or oral submissions in the arbitration.”

55. The Committee finds apposite the statement of the Enron tribunal that:**

“42. The issue lies in a different proposition, namely whether this can be

done by a tribunal in the absence of a request to that effect. The
Tribunal concluded and now reiterates that, just as it must decide a matter
that has been duly submitted and petitioned, the same is conversely true
that this cannot be done if not requested, as this would amount to an
excess of power which, as the Respondent explains, can result in a
decision that is ultra petita and thus subject to the sanction of an
annulment.” [Emphasis added]

56. Although the decision of an ad hoc committee may not be the subject of an annulment, it is
evident that a committee cannot decide a matter that has not been submitted to it. In the
Background Paper on Annulment For the Administrative Council of ICSID, the Committee
notes the following:

“52. The procedure before an ad hoc Committee normally corresponds to
the procedure before a Tribunal. Ad hoc Committees must afford both
parties the right to be heard and must respect the equality of the parties.”

5! See Rejoinder at paras. 4 and 7.

* See Genin Supplementary and Rectification Decision at para. 10.

*3 See Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic

(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3), Decision on Claimants’ Request for Rectification and/or Supplementary Decision of 25 October
2007 (hereinafter “Enron Rectification and Supplementary Decision”) at para. 42

 

* See Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative Council of ICSID, dated 10 August 2012, available at
http://www.worldbank.org/icsid, (hereinafter “ICSID Background Paper on Annulment’) at para. 52.

- 18 -

57. The Committee is further comforted in its view by the obligation which it has pursuant to
Article 48(3) of the Convention (and Article 52(4)) to “deal with every question” submitted

to it. The corollary of this obligation is that every question must have been submitted to it.

58. The Respondent replies to this argument of the Claimants by stating that an issue can be

deemed subsumed within, or implicit in the larger question presented.*° It adds that:*”

“Under Claimants’ logic, the Republic would have had to expand its
request for relief to account for every conceivable outcome, expressly
asking the Committee to decide all issues that could logically flow from
each potential outcome. This cannot possibly be the applicable standard,
as it would defy common sense. An annulment applicant in the ICSID
system is entitled to expect that the annulment decision, in addressing the
issues explicitly raised for determination, will also address all residual

questions that logically flow from its de n_on the presented.”
[Emphasis added]

 
 

 

59. While the Committee does not agree that it is competent to address all residual questions that
flow logically from its decision on the questions actually submitted to it by the Republic, it
does agree that it is competent to deal with and dispose of a question that has been impliedly

raised by the Respondent.
60. The tribunal in Enron adopted a similar approach:> 8

“43. In this case it is quite evident that pre-award interest was expressly
requested, but not so with respect to post-award interest. If not expressly
requested, the next question for the Tribunal is whether post-award
interest can be considered as having been impliedly requested.”
61. The Committee will therefore analyze each question put to it by the Republic in its Request
to determine if the question was, expressly or impliedly, submitted to it in the Annulment

Proceeding.

55 See Rejoinder at paras. 4 and 7.
%° See Reply at para. 8.
*T Thid. at para. 9.

°8 See Enron Rectification and Supplementary Decision at para. 43.

-19-

62. Although the arguments of the parties were presented differently, the Committee finds it
more convenient to address “‘seriatim” the four categories of questions detailed above: (i)
questions related to the Award; (ii) questions related to the Decision on Revision; (iii)
questions related to the Decision on Annulment; and (iv) the impact of the stay of

enforcement of the Award.

Vv. COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

63. The Committee recalls that, by virtue of its Supplementation Request, Chile seeks mainly to
determine the exact amount it needs to pay to the Claimants pursuant to paragraphs 5 to 7 of

the operative part of the Award.

64. While such a determination appears to come within the scope of the Committee’s
competence since the Committee annulled the Award partially and also issued a decision on
the costs of the proceeding, the Committee needs to address each specific category of

questions in order to determine whether it is competent to answer Chile’s central question.

A. Questions Related to the Award

65. The Respondent phrased its questions related to the Award as follows:°°

“i. how the moratory interest contemplated in Paragraph 7 of the Award’s
dispositif should be applied to the amounts in costs and expenses the
Republic is obligated to pay Claimants, given that the Republic was
never in default due to the stays of enforcement that were in effect
from 5 August 2008 until 18 December 2012;

. if applicable, the dies a quo of any interest on costs imposed on the
Republic for the Arbitration proceeding, and whether the relevant
accrual period was interrupted for any lapse of time.”

* See Reply at para. 32.

- 20 -

66. In connection with these questions, Chile alleges that:

“Although in the Annulment Decision the Committee decided that
Paragraph 7 of the Award’s dispositif was not annulled, it did not decide if
the moratory interest contemplated therein ought to be applied to the costs
and expenses awarded Claimants. Such a determination was necessary
given the dual fact that at no time was the Republic ever in default of the
Award, and that the Republic was not unsuccessful in its annulment
petition.”
67. According to the Respondent, it never reached the point of default because a stay of
enforcement of the Award was granted by the Tribunal starting from 5 August 2008 and
confirmed by the Committee until 18 December 2012 when the stay was lifted in the

Decision on Annulment.*!

68. For the following reasons, the Committee considers that it is not competent to decide these

questions.

69.The Respondent in its Supplementation Request is asking questions regarding the
implementation of the Award that were not put to the Committee during the Annulment
Proceeding. Indeed, the Respondent never raised any ground for annulment with respect to
the granting of moratory interest by the Tribunal. While it asked for the annulment of the

entirety of the Award, it did not specifically raise the question of post-award interest.

70. Assuming, arguendo, that this question could be a question subsumed in the ones related to
the consequences of a partial annulment, the Committee recalls that it was very clear on the
consequences of the partial annulment which it issued. Paragraph 4 of the operative part of
the Decision on Annulment provides as follows:

“4. Finds that paragraphs | to 3 and 5 to 8 of the dispositif as well as the
body of the Award but for Section VIII are res judicata.”

© Ibid. at para. 6.
°! Thid. at para. 12.

-21-

71. For ease of reference, the Committee will set out paragraphs 5 to 7 of the dispositif of the
Award:
“5. met a la charge de la défenderesse une contribution aux frais et dépens

exposés par les demanderesses, d’un montant de USD 2.000.000,-
(deux millions) ;

6. décide que les frais de procédure seront supportés par les parties dans
la proportion de : 3/4 du montant total (soit USD 3.136.893,34) pour la
défenderesse et 1/4 du montant total (soit 1.045.631,11) pour les
demanderesses ; ordonne en conséquence 4 la défenderesse de payer
aux demanderesses la somme de USD 1.045.579,35 ;

7. ordonne a la République du Chili de procéder au paiement dans un
délai de 90 jours 4 compter de la date d’envoi de la présente sentence,
des sommes figurant dans le présent dispositif (points 4, 5 et 6), faute
de quoi le montant portera intéréts composés annuellement au taux de
5%, 4 compter de la date d’envoi de la présente sentence jusqu’a celle
du parfait paiement.” [Emphasis added]

72. As is abundantly clear, the Tribunal granted post-award interest accruing from 8 May 2008,
date of dispatch of the Award, until full payment. The Tribunal did not include in its Award
any circumstance where the Respondent could be relieved from its obligation to pay interest.
Accordingly, the Committee, which was not asked any question about moratory interest,
confirmed the res judicata effect of these parts of the Award which were not annulled,

including paragraph 7 of the dispositif.

7

o

. It appears to the Committee that the Respondent is requesting an interpretation of the Award
rather than a decision from the Committee in respect of questions it would have omitted to

decide.

7:

-

. The interpretation of an award is available to assist the parties with a question of practical
relevance for an award’s implementation.” Under Article 50 of the Convention, a request

for interpretation must however be submitted to the tribunal that has rendered the award.

® See Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on the Claimant's Application for
Interpretation of the Arbitral Award dated December 8, 2000 of 31 October 2005, at paras. 87-88.

-22-

7:

an

. In addition, annulment decisions are not subject to interpretation under the Convention. The
Committee notes that Article 50 of the Convention which provides for the interpretation of an
award is excluded from the list of provisions of the Convention which apply “mutadis

mutandis” to annulment proceedings.

7

a

. In the view of the Committee, this exclusion, in the context of one of the central objects of
the Convention, to wit, the finality of awards, makes perfect sense. Otherwise, the finality of
awards could be jeopardized which would run contrary to the intention of the drafters of the
Convention.

77. As was stated in the ICSID Background Paper on Annulment, “[t]he choice of remedies

offered by the ICSID Convention reflects a deliberate election by the drafters of the

Convention to ensure finality of awards.”

T

oo

. Since there cannot be any interpretation of an annulment decision, it stands to reason that
there can never be an interpretation of an award by a committee after it has rendered its

annulment decision.

7

oS

. Accordingly, the Respondent’s Supplementation Request related to these questions is

rejected.

B. Questions related to the Revision Proceeding

8

So

. The Claimants requested a revision of the Award in June 2008. The request was rejected by
the Tribunal on 18 November 2009 and, as a result, the Award was not modified. In its
decision, the Tribunal ordered the Claimants to pay the costs of the Revision Proceeding.
The relevant part of the dispositif reads as follows:

“4) Ordonne, quant aux frais de la présente procédure en révision,

quills seront supportés par les Parties demanderesses, qui succombent,
pour un montant de 431.000 USD.”

® See Article 52(4) of the Convention.

© See ICSID Background Paper on Annulment at para. 9

-23-

81. As both parties had advanced the costs of the Revision Proceeding in accordance with
Administrative and Financial Regulation 14(3)(d), the Claimants were obliged to reimburse

half of the costs to the Respondent.

82. The Republic argues that in order to calculate the sum certain that it must pay the Claimants,
it must know the exact amount owed by the Claimants which needs to be subtracted.©
Accordingly, the Respondent submits that the Committee should decide whether interest

applies to the amount owed by the Claimants.

83. The Republic argues that “if moratory interest is deemed applicable with respect to the costs
imposed in the Award, such interest should be applied in a similar fashion and terms to the

costs imposed on Claimants [.. 47

84. The Respondent’s questions related to the Revision proceeding are phrased as follows:

“tii. whether interest has accrued — and continues to accrue— on the costs
imposed on Claimants for the Revision Proceeding;

iv. if applicable, the dies a quo of any interest on costs for the Revision
Proceeding, and whether the relevant accrual period was interrupted
for any lapse of time.”

85. For the reasons which follow, the Committee considers that it is not competent to address

these questions.

86. Article 52 of the Convention provides that a committee can only review an award. The
Committee is of the view that, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 50(3)(b)(i), if the award is
followed by a revision, the annulment shall have regard to the award as so revised. However,
there cannot be any annulment of a decision rejecting a revision request, which is the case

here.

87. The Committee agrees with the Claimants that Chile could have asked these questions to the

Tribunal within 45 days of the issuance of the Decision on Revision provided that it had

®5 See Reply at para. 20.
© Thid. at para. 21.

° Tid. at para. 32.

-24-

claimed such moratory interest during the Revision Proceeding.®* The Committee also
agrees with the Claimants that it is not clear from the record before it whether the

Respondent asked for such interest.

8

oo

. Accordingly, the Respondent’s Supplementation Request related to these questions is

rejected.

Cc. Questions related to the Annulment Proceeding

89. With respect to the Decision on Annulment, the Respondent asks the following questions to

the Committee:

“v. whether interest should be deemed to accrue on the costs imposed on
Claimants for the Annulment Proceeding; and

vi. if applicable, the dies a quo of any interest on costs for the Annulment
Proceeding, and whether the relevant accrual period was interrupted
for any lapse of time.”

90. The Committee recalls that, in its 18 December 2012 Decision, it decided inter alia that:

“6. [...] each party shall bear one half of the ICSID costs incurred in
connection with this annulment proceeding.”

91. As the advance payments for the Annulment Proceeding were made by the Applicant — Chile
— in accordance with Administrative and Financial Regulation 14(3)(e), the Claimants, as a
result of the Committee’s decision, were obliged to reimburse half of these costs to the

Republic.

92. These two questions, on their face, relate to the Decision on Annulment. Accordingly, the
Committee must first ascertain whether the Republic had actually put these questions to the
Committee.

93. The Committee notes that, in its Memorial on Annulment, the Republic asked the Committee
to “award the Republic of Chile all of its costs and expenses associated with this Annulment

®8 See Response at para. 51.

© See Reply at para. 32.

-25-

Proceeding, including attorney[s’] fees and all fees and costs incurred in connection with the

‘admissibility’ objections presented by the Claimants at the outset of the proceeding.””°

9.

&

.In its Reply on Annulment, Chile requested that the Committee “[g]rant the Republic of
Chile an appropriate award of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in this annulment
proceeding.””! While the Respondent added a note on the appropriateness of granting costs,
it did not claim any post-decision interest on the costs imposed on the Claimants for the

Annulment Proceeding.

9:

n

. Thus it is clear, and the Committee so finds, that Chile did not expressly request from the

Committee interest on costs.

or

a

. Nor, in the view of the Committee, can the Republic’s words in its request for relief

“grant[ing] an appropriate award of costs...” be considered as an implied request to the

 

Committee for the granting of interest.

9

x

. Accordingly, the Respondent’s Supplementation Request related to these questions is

rejected.

D. Impact of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award on Interest

9%

os

. Finally, the Respondent argues that its obligation to pay moratory interest “had not yet begun
at all by the time of the Annulment Decision, due to the continuous stay of enforcement of

the Award”.””

9

6

. More specifically, the Republic asserts that moratory interest accrues during periods in which
a stay of enforcement is in place “only if (a) the annulment petitioner was the party that
requested the stay; and (b) such party is unsuccessful in its post-award challenge.”

(Emphasis in original)

7 See Respondent's Memorial on Annulment of 10 June 2010 at pp. 368-369.
7! See Respondent's Reply on Annulment of 22 December 2010 at para. 550.
” See Observations at para. 31

7 See Reply at para. 13.

- 26 -

100. Thus, concludes the Respondent, since “[it] was never on the losing side of a proceeding
that needlessly delayed payment”, the payment of the costs that the Republic owes to the
Claimants pursuant to the Award “did not become truly due and payable until the date of the

Decision on Annulment”.”*

101. The precise question asked by the Republic to the Committee is “whether the relevant

accrual period was interrupted for any lapse of time”.”°

102. The Committee reiterates that it is only competent to decide this question if it was posed

to it.

103. The Committee acknowledges that, if the Republic had raised the question during the
Annulment Proceeding, the Committee could have ruled on the impact of the stay of
enforcement — that it granted while the Annulment Proceeding was on-going — on the accrual

of interest.

104. However, the Committee finds that the Republic did not ask this specific question, nor

could it be said that it was implied, therefore no supplementary decision can be made today.

105. In this connection, the Committee recalls that it dealt specifically with this matter in its
Decision of 5 May 2010 on the Republic of Chile’s Application for a Stay of Enforcement of
the Award when it stated:

“32. It is a fact that, because of the Application, the satisfaction of the
Award (assuming that the Application is unsuccessful) will be delayed. In
the view of the Committee that is the only prejudice which the Claimants
can point to. But, the provision for compound interest in the ‘dispositif? of
the Award compensates the Claimants adequately for the delay.”

106. The Committee notes that the Republic itself endorsed this position in support of its
request for a stay. It submitted expressly that the Claimants would not be prejudiced by a

stay:”°

7 Ibid. at para. 16.
% Ibid. at para. 32.
7 See Letter of 15 January 2010 from the Republic to Ms. Eloise Obadia at page 4.

-27-

“since the Award provides for the granting of compound interest until the
date of actual payment on the amount granted. In this regard, the MTD
Committee held that ‘... in the Committee’s view Chile has demonstrated
that MTD will not be prejudiced by the grant of a stay, other than in
respect of the delay which is, however, incidental to the Convention
system of annulment and which can be remedied by the payment of
interest in the event that the annulment application is unsuccessful.’”
107. In the circumstances, interest has continued to accrue on the sums due pursuant to the

Award while the enforcement was stayed.

108. Many ad hoc committees have referred to the fact that if an award granted interest,
particularly compound interest, up to the date of payment, it was logical to deny a request by

the respondent to provide a guarantee in exchange for a stay.
109. For example, in CMS v. Argentina, the committee concluded that:””

“having regard to this commitment, the Committee is of the opinion that

Argentina had demonstrated that CMS will not be prejudiced by the grant
of a stay, other that in respect of the delay which is, however, incidental to
the Convention system of annulment and which can be remedied by the
payment of interest in the event that the annulment application is
unsuccessful.”

110. In Azurix Corp. v. Argentina, the committee explained that “the determinative issue is
whether, beyond delay compensated for by interest, there is any factor here militating for the
imposition of security for payment over and above that provided for by Argentina’s
commitments under the ICSID Convention.””® In this regard, the committee stated that “the
Committee does not accept that Azurix suffers any prejudice of a kind warranting the

provision of security. The provision for interest compensates for the delay.”””

111. In response to the Republic’s argument that it was successful in the Annulment

Proceeding and that the remedy of the interest did not come into play, the Committee notes

7” CMS Decision on the Stay of Enforcement at para 50.
78 Azurix Decision on the Stay of Enforcement at para. 44.

” Ibid. at para. 40.

- 28 -

that the Respondent was only partially successful. The portions of the Award which were not

annulled include paragraph 7 of the dispositif reproduced earlier in the present decision.

112. Finally, the Republic argues that the application of moratory interest during the Revision
Proceeding would be illogical since, on the one hand, it was initiated by the Claimants and,

on the other hand, the Claimants were unsuccessful.

113. The Committee finds this argument of the Republic unpersuasive. There is no basis for
differentiating between a stay granted during a proceeding initiated by one party and a stay

granted pursuant to a proceeding initiated by the beneficiary of the stay.

114. In so far as the Revision Proceeding is concerned, it was indeed initiated by the
Claimants but the Respondent requested the stay. It was Chile’s choice to request such a stay
and the Committee notes that the Republic could have asked for a partial stay of the Award
while paying the amounts due as costs and expenses. The Revision Proceeding was directed
to the sections of the Award and the conclusions dealing with liability and damages, not the

costs.*°

115. The Committee concludes that the Republic must pay to the Claimants the sum it owes

under paragraphs 5 to 7 of the operative part of Award that are res judicata.

116. For the avoidance of doubt, this means that Chile must pay compound interest accruing
annually at 5% on USD 2,000,000.00 and USD 1,045,627.78 (sums indicated by the Tribunal
in its Award as adjusted by ICSID in April 2013), from 8 May 2008 until 19 June 2013, date
when the principal amount due minus the sums owed by the Claimants was paid by Chile.
Additionally, compound interest will continue to run on the interest accrued (from 8 May

2008 until 19 June 2013) until complete payment.*!

*° See Application for Revision of 2 June 2008, at para. 54 (CN-244) and Claimants’ Reply on Revision of 3 November 2008, at
para 73 (CN-245).

S! The Committee notes that since the Respondent has paid the principal amount on 19 June 2013, the compound interest will
continue to run on the balance of the total sum due as of 19 June 2013 minus USD 3,045,627.78.

-29 -

VI. COSTS

117. It remains for the Committee to deal with the question of costs for this phase of the
Annulment Proceeding. The Republic asked the Committee to “order Claimants to pay the

full costs of this proceeding, plus applicable interest.”*?

In turn, the Claimants asked that the
Committee order the Republic to pay for all the costs of the present proceeding, including the
representational costs, with additional compound interest from two weeks following the

Committee’s Decision at an annual rate of 5 percent until complete payment.®?

118. In its Decision on Annulment, the Committee decided that each party would bear its own

litigation costs and that the costs of the proceeding would be shared equally by each party.

119. However, for this phase of the proceeding, the Committee considers that the Respondent
should pay the costs of the proceeding. All of the Respondent’s requests were rejected on the
ground either that the Committee was not competent or that the questions had not been
submitted to it. In addition, the Committee rejected the Respondent’s request for a stay of
enforcement of the unannulled portions of the Award. In these circumstances, the
Committee finds it appropriate to order that the costs of the present phase of the proceeding

should follow the event.

120. The Committee notes that other tribunals and committees have applied the same principle

when requests for supplementation and/or rectification were rejected.**

121. Therefore, the Committee orders the Republic to pay the ICSID costs incurred in
connection with this phase of the Annulment Proceeding. In practical terms, the Committee
notes that no further payment needs to be made by Chile since it has already made the
advance payments. The ICSID Secretariat will refund any balance of the advance payments

after disbursement of the costs.

® See Reply at para. 32.
83 See Rejoinder at para. 49(5).

* See e.g., Genin Supplementary and Rectification Decision at para. 20; Enron Rectification and Supplementary Decision at
para. 58.

-30-

122. This being said, the Committee does not find that Chile’s Supplementation Request was
frivolous or made in bad faith. Consequently, the Committee orders that each party shall bear

its own litigation costs and expenses.

VII. DECISION

123. For the foregoing reasons, the Committee unanimously:

1. Rejects the Request for Supplementation of the Decision on Annulment;

2. Confirms that paragraphs | to 3 and 5 to 8 of the dispositif as well as the body of
the Award but for Section VIII are res judicata. Consequently, the Republic must
pay compound interest at the annual rate of 5% on USD 3,045,627.78 from 8 May
2008 to 19 June 2013 and compound interest at the annual rate of 5% on the

interest accrued as from 19 June 2013 until complete payment;

3. Orders the Republic to pay the ICSID costs incurred in connection with this phase

of the Annulment Proceeding; and

4. Determines that each party shall bear its own litigation costs and expenses

incurred with respect to this part of the Annulment Proceeding.

-31-

Done in English, French and Spanish, all versions being equally authoritative.

 

“MaitrelL. Yves Fortier, C.E5Q.C.
Presideht of the ad hoc Committee

Date: (, SxkBnnber Z0\3

 

 

 
  

    

Préfessor PieroBernardini Professor Ahmed El-Kos
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee

Date: Augagt 30, Loi3 Date: Arte 287 20\2

