INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the annulment proceeding between

VICTOR PEY CASADO AND FOUNDATION “PRESIDENTE ALLENDE”

Claimants in the arbitration
Defendants in the annulment

and

REPUBLIC OF CHILE

Respondent in the arbitration
Applicant in the annulment

ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2

DECISION ON THE APPLICATION FOR
ANNULMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Maitre L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C., President
Professor Piero Bernardini
Professor Ahmed El-Kosheri

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Eloise Obadia

Assistant to the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Renée Thériault, until 24 December 2011

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 18 December 2012

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Claii

Mr. Juan E. Garcés
Garcés y Prada, Abogados
Madrid, Spain

With the cooperation of:

Ms. Carole Malinvaud
Ms. Alexandra Mufioz
Gide, Loyrette, Nouel,
Paris, France

Mr. Samuel Buffone
BuckleySandler LLP
Washington D.C., USA

Repr ing the Resp
Mr. Matias Mori Arellano

Mr. Carlos Dettleff

Foreign Investments Committee
Santiago, Chile

Mr. Paolo Di Rosa

Ms. Jean E. Kalicki

Mr. Samuel M. Witten

Ms. Mallory B. Silberman

Ms. Geraldine B. Fuenmayor F.*
Mr. Rodolfo Fuenzalida*

Mr. Andrés Lyon*

Arnold & Porter LLP
Washington D.C., USA

Mr. Jorge Carey

Mr. Gonzalo Fernandez Ruiz
Carey y Cia

Santiago, Chile

*Former Arnold & Porter foreign attorneys;
no longer at the firm

TABLE OF CONTENTS

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES 2

L
IL.

Ill.

THE ANNULMENT PROCEEDINGS
THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS...
A. Historical d

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B. Procedural History 13
THE TRIBUNAL’S AWARD 15
A. The Tribunal’s Findings on Jurisdiction With Regards to Mr. Pey Casado..... wee 5
() ot 15
(2) Nationality 16
(3) Consent 18
B. The Tribunal’s Findings on Jurisdiction With Regards to the Foundation ..

 

Gd) ot
(2) Nationality
(3) Consent
C. The BIT
Gd) ot
(2) Nationality
(3) Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis under the BIT.

 

 

 

 

 

(4) Conclusion
Dz The Tribunal’s Findings on the Violations of the BIT...

(1) Application of the BIT Ratione Temporis

(2) Denial of Justice and Fair and Equitable Treatment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

E. The Tribunal’s of Damages

LEGAL STANDARD

A. Manifest Excess of Powers

B. Serious Departure From a Fund: Rule of Pi 32
Cc. Failure to State Reasons

D. Scope of r

GROUND FOR ANNULMENT

A a

 

(1) Manifest Excess of Powers ....
(2) Failure to State Reasons:

 

(3) — Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure...

 

 

 

(1) Ownership of the

(2) it Made in A with the BIT.

(3) The Ratione Temporis Application of the BIT...

(4) The Investment by the Foundation — Manifest Excess of Powers .
Cc. Denial of Justice

 

 

 

(1) — Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure...

VI.

VIL.

(2)

Manifest Excess of Powers ....

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) Failure to State Reasons.
Dz Discri
(1) — Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure
(2) Manifest Excess of Powers
(3) Failure to State Reasons.
E. The Tribunal’s Decision on Provisional Measures
F. Damages.
(1) Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure...
(2) Failure to State Reasons.
G. The May 2003 Hearing
(1) Right to Be Heard
(2) Unfair / Unequal Treatment of the Parties...
H. The January 2007 Hearing...
L Document Requests
J. Bias by Arbitrator Bedjaoui
K. The Tribunal’s Ex Aequo et Bono Decision
L. The Claimants’ i Challenge
COSTS
DECISION

 

 

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Arbitration Rules

Award

BIT

Cl. Anc. Req.

Cl. C-Mem. Annulment

Cl. Pre-H. Skel.

Cl. Rej. Annulment

Cl. RfA.

Cl. Rep. Jur. and Merits

CN

CPP
DP
EPC

ICSID or the Centre

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings

Award of Arbitral Tribunal rendered on 8 May
2008

The Investment Treaty Between the Kingdom
of Spain and the Republic of Chile, entered
into force on 29 March 1994

Claimants’ Ancillary Request dated 4
November 2002 [Arbitration Proceeding]

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Annulment

Claimants’ Pre-Hearing Skeleton on
Annulment

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Annulment

Claimants’ Request for Arbitration dated 3
November 1997 [Arbitration Proceeding]

Claimants’ Reply on Jurisdiction and Merits
dated 23 February 2003 [Arbitration

Proceeding]

Exhibit Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on
Annulment

Consorcio Periodistico y Publicitario S.A.
Exhibit Claimants’ Rejoinder on Annulment
Empresa Periodistica Clarin, Ltda.

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

ICSID Convention

RA

RALA

Resp. Mem. Annulment

Resp. Mem. Jur. Arb.

Resp. Pre-H. Skel.

Resp. Rep. Annulment

Tr. Annulment [day] [page: line] (Eng.), (Fr.),
or (Spa.)

Tr. Arb. [day] [page: line] (Spa.) or (Fr.)

Tr. Jur. [day] [page: line] (Spa.) or (Fr.)

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18 March 1965

Exhibit filed by Respondent in Annulment
Proceeding

Legal Authority filed by Respondent in
Annulment Proceeding

Respondent’s Memorial on Annulment

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction dated
20 July 1999 [Arbitration Proceeding]

Respondent’s Pre-Hearing Skeleton on
Annulment

Respondent’s Reply on Annulment

Transcript of the hearing on Annulment held: 7
and 8 June 201 1[English] [French] [Spanish]

Transcript of the hearing on jurisdiction and
merits held: 5 to 7 May 2003 [Spanish]
[French] [Arbitration Proceeding]

Transcript of the hearing on jurisdictional
questions held: 15 and 16 January 2007
[Spanish] [French] [Arbitration Proceeding]

THE ANNULMENT PROCEEDINGS

On 5 September 2008, the Republic of Chile (the “Republic” or “Respondent” or
“Chile”) filed with the then Acting Secretary-General of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) an application (the
“Application”) requesting the annulment of an award rendered on 8 May 2008 in ICSID
Case No. ARB/98/2 (the “Award”) between Victor Pey Casado and the Foundation
“Presidente Allende” on one side (the “Claimants”) and the Republic on the other side.
The Centre acknowledged receipt of the Application and forwarded it to the Claimants

on 10 September 2008.

The Application was filed while the Award was the subject of a revision proceeding
initiated by the Claimants on 2 June 2008. The revision application was registered on 17
June 2008 and the Tribunal, composed of the same arbitrators who had rendered the

Award, issued its decision on 18 November 2009 dismissing the application for revision.

By letter of 18 September 2008, the Claimants argued that the Application filed by the
Republic was inadmissible as it had been filed in English while the languages of the
original arbitration proceeding and the pending revision proceeding were French and
Spanish. By letters of 8 October and 22 October 2008, the Claimants reiterated their
submission that the Application was inadmissible on the additional ground that the
Application had not been signed by the agents designated by the Republic of Chile
before ICSID.

The Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application on 6 July 2009 and
transmitted a Notice of Registration to the parties on that date. In her transmittal letter,
the Secretary-General indicated that she would refuse to register an application for
annulment only if the conditions set forth in Rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”) were not met and that her registration

of the Application was without prejudice to the powers of the ad hoc Committee under

Articles 41 and 42 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID Convention”) with respect to

jurisdiction and the merits.

In the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General noted that the Application contained
a request for a provisional stay of the Award (the “Request’”) pursuant to Article 52(5) of
the ICSID Convention and Rule 54(1) of the Arbitration Rules. The Secretary-General
further stated that: “Rule 54(2) of the Arbitration Rules provides that the Secretary-
General shall, together with the notice of registration of the application, inform the
parties of the provisional stay of the award. I note, however, that in the context of the
application for revision of the Arbitral Award, the enforcement of the Arbitral Award
was stayed on August 5, 2008 by the Arbitral Tribunal before which the issue is currently

pending”.

Further to the issuance of the Arbitral Tribunal’s decision on the revision on 18
November 2009, the Republic requested, on 2 December 2009, that the Centre appoint an
ad hoc Committee and confirm the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award
pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54(2) of the Arbitration
Rules. By letter of 8 December 2009, the Claimants argued that the Republic’s request

was inadmissible for the same reasons as those raised in connection with the Application.

On 4 December 2009, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 54(2), the Acting Secretary-General

of ICSID informed the parties of the provisional stay of the Award.

The ad hoc Committee composed of Professor Piero Bernardini (a national of Italy),
Professor Ahmed El-Kosheri (a national of Egypt) and Mr. L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C.,
(a national of Canada) was constituted on 22 December 2009. The parties were notified
that Ms. Eloise Obadia, Senior Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the
Committee. By letter of 4 January 2010, the Secretary informed the parties that the

Committee had designated Mr. L. Yves Fortier as President of the Committee.

The Committee invited the parties to submit further written observations on the issue of
admissibility and the stay of enforcement of the Award which stay was continued by the
Committee on 21 January 2010 pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention. The
parties were also given the opportunity to make oral presentations on these questions
during the First Session, held in Paris on 29 January 2010. The parties filed further

written observations on the question of admissibility after the First Session.

During the First Session, the parties approved the appointment of by Ms. Renée Thériault
of Ogilvy Renault (as it then was), an associate of the President, as assistant to the
Committee. Ms. Thériault ceased her functions on 24 December 2011. The parties also
reached an agreement on the procedural languages: the Claimants would file their
submissions in French and submit a Spanish translation within 15 days of the filing
whereas the Respondent would file its submissions in English and submit a Spanish
translation within 15 days of the filing. The parties agreed that all decisions of the

Committee would be issued in the three official languages of the Centre.

On 4 May 2010, the ad hoc Committee issued a Decision rejecting the Claimants’
Request to declare inadmissible the Republic’s Application for the Annulment of the

Award (the Decision was transmitted to the parties on 6 May 2010).

On 5 May 2010, the ad hoc Committee issued a Decision on the Republic of Chile’s
Application for a Stay of Enforcement of the Award continuing the stay of the
enforcement of the Award pending its decision on the Application for Annulment (the

Decision was transmitted to the parties on 7 May 2010).

On 8 June 2010, the ad hoc Committee issued Procedural Order N° 1 concerning the
procedural calendar for the Parties to file their submissions. In accordance with that
calendar, the Republic of Chile filed its memorial on annulment on 10 June 2010 (Resp.
Mem. Annulment’). Victor Pey Casado and Presidente Allende Foundation filed a

counter-memorial on 15 October 2010 (“Cl. C-Mem. Annulment’). Chile filed its reply

20.

on 22 December 2010 (“Resp. Rep. Annulment”). Victor Pey Casado and Presidente
Allende Foundation filed their rejoinder on 28 February 2011 (“Cl. Rej. Annulment”).

On 18 April 2011, the ad hoc Committee issued Procedural Order N° 2 concerning
various procedural matters, including the maintenance of the hearing dates and
admissibility of evidence and a request to the parties to refrain from publishing or

disclosing sensitive documents pertaining to the annulment proceeding.

On 5 May 2011, the ad hoc Committee issued Procedural Order N° 3 concerning further
procedural matters including confirmation of the hearing dates, admissibility of evidence

and amending Procedural Order N° 2.

On 27 May 2011, the parties filed Pre-Hearing Skeletons (“Cl. Pre-H. Skel” and “Resp.
Pre-H. Skel.”).

The hearing was held in Paris on 7 and 8 June 2011.

At the conclusion of the hearing, the President closed the oral phase of the proceedings,
and indicated that the ad hoc Committee would notify the parties through the Secretariat

when it had reached its Decision.

The ad hoc Committee then deliberated by various means of communication, including
at meetings in Paris on 8 June 2011 and 29 September 2011. On 23 June 2012, pursuant
to Arbitration Rule 28(2), the Committee invited the parties to submit their respective
statements of costs by 6 July 2012. The Claimants did so on 6 July 2012 and the
Republic, with the approval of the Committee, filed its statement of costs on 13 July

2012.

On 23 June 2012, the proceeding was declared closed pursuant to Rules 53 and 38(1) of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules. In accordance with Rules 53 and 46 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, the Committee, by letter of 21 October 2012, extended by 60 days the

period to draw up and sign its Decision in the three official languages of the Centre.

10

21.

22.

23.

THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND THE ARBITRATION
PROCEEDINGS

As will be seen, this has been a very protracted arbitral proceeding. The factual matrix
consists of events which span more than four decades and the procedural history before
ICSID commenced in October 1997. The Award of the Tribunal was issued on 8 May
2008.

Chile, in its Memorial on Annulment, has presented a summary of what it avers
constitutes the relevant matrix to its challenge of the Award, including both the historical
background and the procedural history of the case. This summary is characterized by
Chile as being undisputed by the parties, except where otherwise noted.' The Committee
finds this summary very helpful in contextualizing Chile’s Application and thus will

reproduce it:

A. Historical Background

Chile summarizes the factual matrix of its dispute with the Claimants as follows.” The

Committee agrees that this summary is accurate.

19. Mr. Victor Pey Casado was born in Spain in 1915. He has been a Spanish
national from birth and throughout his life. This issue was not in controversy in
the arbitration, the principal disagreement between the parties being whether or
not he had been a Chilean national on certain critical dates for ICSID
jurisdictional purposes.

20. Mr. Pey moved to Chile at the age of 24, in 1939, and resided in Chile for
34 years until 1973. During that time he married a Chilean and had children in
Chile. In 1958 he applied to obtain the Chilean nationality by nationalization,
which was conferred upon him in December 1958.

' See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 18.
? Ibid. at paras. 19-31.

21. In 1970, Mr. Salvador Allende, who was a friend of Mr. Pey, became
President of Chile.

22. Throughout his decades of residence in Chile, Mr. Pey had had several
different jobs, but in the early 70’s he became associated with a Chilean
newspaper called “El Clarin.” This newspaper, which had been created and
was owned for many years by a well-known figure in the Chilean media named
Dario Sainte-Marie, was controlled by a company called Consorcio
Periodistico y Publicitario, S.A. (“CPP”), through a wholly owned subsidiary
of CPP called Empresa Periodistica Clarin, Ltda. (“EPC”).

23. “El Clarin” had a left-leaning political orientation and was one of the
principal media supporters of President Allende, who was a socialist. Mr. Pey
became a key figure in the management of “El Clarin” during the 1972-1973
time frame. (This too was not in dispute; rather, the main area of disagreement
between the parties was whether Mr. Pey had ever been an owner of CPP).

24. The 1972-1973 time period was one of very intense political and ideological
turmoil in Chile. On 11 September 1973, President Allende was overthrown in a
coup d’état led by General Augusto Pinochet. That same day, military troops
occupied the physical premises of “El Clarin,” seizing papers located in Mr.
Pey’s office there. The property thereafter remained under complete control by
the military (and was subsequently confiscated formally by means of Decree
No. 165 in 1975).

25. Soon after the 1973 coup d’état, Mr. Pey moved to Venezuela and
thereafter to Spain, where he resided until at least 1989, which was the year of
the return of democracy in Chile following 16 years of military government.

26. Upon his return to Chile, Mr. Pey applied for and obtained from the Chilean
Government benefits for returning Chilean political exiles.

27. In 1991, the Chile-Spain bilateral investment treaty (“BIT’’) was signed.
28. In 1994, the Chile-Spain BIT entered into force.

29. In 1995, Mr. Pey filed in the First Civil Court in Santiago a request for
compensation for the confiscation of a Goss printing machine that was on the “El
Clarin” premises when the property was seized by the military. This claim is
referred to hereinafter as “the Goss machine case.”

30. On 23 July 1998, Chile promulgated Law No. 19.568, which was designed to
compensate those persons who had suffered confiscations of property at the
hands of the military government through an administrative process. After being
informed of his right to recover under this law, in a letter dated 24 June 1999,
Mr. Pey expressly waived his right to seek compensation under Law 19.568
for the expropriation of the CPP and EPC.

12

31. On 28 April 2000, the Chilean Ministry of National Assets issued Decision
43, in which it authorized compensation to four individuals (or, as applicable,
their heirs) for the expropriation of CPP and EPC, as such individuals had proven
to the satisfaction of the Ministry to be the genuine owners of those companies.
These individuals were: Dario Sainte-Marie, Ramén Carrasco, Emilio
Gonzalez and Jorge Venegas.

B. Procedural History

24. Chile’s summary of the arbitration proceedings follows.* The Committee agrees that this

summary is accurate.

33. Mr. Pey consented to ICSID arbitration by means of a letter dated 2
October 1997, addressed to the Chilean Government. This was the first of the
two “critical dates” relevant to the ICSID Convention’s nationality-related
jurisdictional requirements for claimants who are natural persons (set forth in
Article 25(2)(a)). Mr. Pey filed his arbitration request at ICSID on 7 November
1997. The request was registered on 20 April 1998, which was the second
critical date.

34. The first Tribunal was constituted with Mr. Francisco Rezek as President,
Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui (appointed by the Claimants) and Mr. Jorge Witker
(appointed by Chile). Following a challenge to Mr. Witker by the Claimants, he
resigned, and Chile named Mr. Galo Leoro Franco in his place.

35. Between 1998 and 2000, the parties held a round of jurisdictional written
pleadings and a jurisdictional hearing. Only days after the Tribunal’s
deliberations had concluded, the Claimants submitted a letter dated 12 March
2001, in which Claimants asked Mr. Rezek to resign, on the basis that he had
improperly admitted into evidence certain documents submitted by Chile at the
jurisdictional hearing (and therefore, according to the Claimants, out of time).
Mr. Rezek resigned the very next day, on 13 March 2001. In his resignation
letter, Mr. Rezek denied the Claimants’ allegation but resigned anyway, invoking
the “loss of confidence” in him by one of the Parties.

36. Mr. Rezek was succeeded by Mr. Pierre Lalive, who asked that an entirely
new round of written submissions be made on the jurisdictional issues. This was
done in the 2000-2001 timeframe. Also during that timeframe, the Claimants
submitted a provisional measures request, asking the Tribunal to stay the
execution of Decision 43. The request was rejected by the Tribunal in a

3 bid. at paras. 33-45.

Provisional Measures Decision dated 25 September 2001, in part on the basis
that Decision 43 could not affect the Claimants’ rights since it did not involve the
Claimants but rather third parties.

37. On 8 May 2002, the Tribunal headed by Mr. Lalive issued its jurisdictional
decision, in which it declined to rule on Chile’s objections, and instead joined
the jurisdictional issues to the merits. The merits phase thus was resumed as of
that date.

 

38. Between January and April 2003 the parties exchanged written pleadings on
jurisdiction and the merits, culminating in a hearing on jurisdiction and merits
held in Washington in May 2003.

39. The Tribunal thereafter failed to issue its Award for well over two years. In
August 2005, following certain reports made by Mr. Leoro Franco to a Chilean
official (who was not involved in the arbitration) concerning irregularities in the
Tribunal’s deliberations, Chile challenged all three arbitrators on the Tribunal.
On 26 August 2005, Mr. Leoro Franco resigned, citing as a motive only the
loss of confidence of one of the parties.

40. On 21 February 2006, Mr. Bedjaoui was disqualified by ICSID (the first
and only disqualification in ICSID history). Thereafter, the Claimants named Mr.
Mohammed Chemloul. Mr. Emmanuel Gaillard was named as the third
arbitrator (by ICSID, because Mr. Leoro’s co-arbitrators had not accepted his
resignation, as a result of which under the applicable ICSID rules, the Centre
designates the replacement of the resigning arbitrator). Thus, on 14 July 2006,
the Tribunal was reconstituted, with Messrs. Lalive (President), Chemloul, and
Gaillard.

41. On 16 August 2006, the Republic sent a letter to the Tribunal in which, in
light of the Tribunal’s constitution with two new members, it set forth a request
for new written submissions and a hearing on all issues (both jurisdictional
and merits-related). This request was rejected and prompted a series of exchanges
between the parties and the Tribunal, the net result of which was a complete
rejection by the Tribunal of Chile’s proposal for new written submissions, and
a decision to authorize only a jurisdictional hearing of limited scope,
circumscribed to five specific jurisdictional questions circulated by the Tribunal
to the parties. The Republic asked that the scope be broadened to other issues, but
the Tribunal rejected that request as well. The jurisdictional hearing was held
on 5-6 January 2007, in Paris.

42. Almost a year and a half later, on 8 May 2008, the Tribunal issued its Award.
43. On 2 June 2008, the Claimants submitted a Request for Revision of the 8
May 2008 Award, invoking certain alleged new facts that in the Claimants’ view

justified having the Tribunal elevate the amount of the damages awarded to US$
797 million (up from the figure of over US$ 500 million they had requested in

14

Ill.

25.

26.

their Arbitration Request, and from the revised figure of almost US$ 400 million
cited in their 2003 Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Jurisdiction).

44. On 5 September 2008, the Republic filed its Annulment Request.

45. On 18 November 2009, the Revision Proceeding Tribunal (composed of the
same arbitrators as the panel that issued the Award) issued its Revision Decision,
in which it denied the Claimants’ request in its entirety, and moreover awarded
costs to the Republic. [Emphasis in original]

THE TRIBUNAL’S AWARD

A. The Tribunal’s Findings on Jurisdiction With Regards to Mr. Pey Casado
(1) Investment

After an extensive review of the oral and documentary evidence as well as the parties’
arguments, the Tribunal concluded that Mr. Pey Casado, in 1972, purchased all the
shares of Consorcio Periodistico y Publicitario S.A. (“CPP”) which owned all the shares
of Empresa Periodistica Clarin Ltda. (“EPC”) and that this acquisition constituted an

investment for purposes of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.

The pertinent findings of the Tribunal in respect of Mr. Pey Casado’s investment are the

following:

180. [...] Aprés un examen attentif des arguments et des piéces soumises par les
parties, le Tribunal, dans l’exercice de son pouvoir d’appréciation des preuves,
est parvenu a la conclusion que M. Pey Casado a acheté |’intégralité des actions
de la société CPP S.A. au cours de l’année 1972. Cette conclusion repose sur
trois éléments principaux que sont la conclusion de ce que les parties appellent
les « Protocoles d’Estoril », complétés par ce qu’elles appellent le « Document
de Geneve », les versements effectués au profit de M. Dario Sainte Marie pour un
montant total de 1,28 million USD et la remise 4 M. Pey Casado, en plusieurs
paquets, des titres de la société accompagnés de leurs formulaires de transfert
signés en blanc.

Ld
196. Au vu des éléments qui précédent, le Tribunal est en mesure de conclure

que M. Pey Casado a effectivement fait l’acquisition, pour la somme de 1,28

15

million USD, de la totalité des titres de la société CPP S.A., qui elle-méme
possédait l’intégralité du capital de la société EPC Ltda.

LJ

229. Le Tribunal conclut que, au moment ow a été effectuée la saisie du journal
El Clarin, M. Pey Casado devait étre considéré comme le seul propriétaire
légitime des actions de la société CPP S.A.

LJ

233. En lespéce, les trois conditions qui commandent la qualification de
l'investissement, l’existence d’un apport, le fait que cet apport porte sur une
certaine durée et qu’il comporte, pour celui qui le fait, certains risques, sont 4
lévidence satisfaites.

a) M. Pey Casado a en effet apporté ses propres capitaux afin d’ acquérir les
entreprises CPP S.A. et EPC Ltda. Il leur a également apporté son savoir-faire
d’ingénieur et s’est impliqué dans la gestion du journal en assumant les
fonctions de président du conseil d’ administration de la société CPP S.A.

b) M. Pey Casado a effectué son investissement pour une durée indéterminée,
au moins pour plusieurs années. Le fait que les titres des sociétés CPP S.A. et
EPC Ltda et leurs biens ait été saisis ne saurait sérieusement étre invoqué[]
pour conclure que la condition de durée n’est pas satisfaite en l’espéce.

c) Enfin, l’acquisition et l’exploitation d’un journal, certes largement diffusé,
est une opération présentant certains risques, le secteur d’activité étant
marqué[] d’une forte spécificité et le contexte économique et politique de
l’époque étant incertain.

LJ

235. Le Tribunal conclut des développements qui précédent que la condition
d’investissement au sens de l'article 25 de la Convention CIRDI est bien
satisfaite en l’espéce.

(2) Nationality
The Tribunal then inquired whether, for purposes of Article 25(2)(a) of the ICSID
Convention, Mr. Pey Casado, on the two “critical dates” of 2 October 1997 and 20 April
1998, had dual nationalities, that of Spain and that of Chile since, if he did, he would be

expressly excluded from the scope of the ICSID Convention.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

After having summarized the debated questions which it had to determine, the Tribunal
said:
252. [...] Les seules questions décisives en ’l’espéce sont celles de savoir si, aux
dates critiques, il avait conservé la nationalité chilienne, comme le prétend la

défenderesse dans son exception d’incompétence, ou si, comme |’ opposent les
parties demanderesses, il en avait été privé ou y avait renoncé valablement.

The Tribunal then proceeded to analyze the law applicable to the question of nationality
and concluded :
260 [...] c’est en appliquant le droit chilien que doit étre examinée la question de
savoir si en l’espéce les autorités chiliennes ont, comme il est allégué par
l’intéressé, privé M. Pey Casado de sa nationalité chilienne, ou bien, s’il s’avére

que tel n’a pas été le cas, si M. Pey Casado a valablement renoncé 4 la nationalité
chilienne.

The Tribunal then proceeded to inquire whether Mr. Pey Casado was deprived of or
renounced his Chilean nationality prior to the two critical dates. The Tribunal concluded

that Mr. Pey Casado was not deprived of his Chilean nationality.*

After having found that Mr. Pey Casado “demeurait double national espagnol/chilien
jusqu’en 1997”° the Tribunal addressed the crucial question whether “comme il l’a
allégué, M. Pey Casado a valablement renoncé 4 sa nationalité chilienne par ses

déclarations faites en 1997, ce qui est contesté par I’Etat défendeur.”°

After an exhaustive review of Chilean law on this question and an analysis of the expert
evidence adduced by the parties, the Tribunal concluded:

307. De l’avis du Tribunal arbitral, la défenderesse n’est pas parvenue 4 apporter
une démonstration convaincante de l’impossibilité ou l’illégalité, en droit chilien,

* See Award at para. 274.
° Tbid. at para. 285.
° Ibid. at para. 286 (emphasis in Award).

d’une renonciation volontaire 4 la nationalité chilienne, en l’absence de textes
précis et de jurisprudence pertinente. [...]

322. Il revient done au Tribunal arbitral d’apprécier le contenu et les effets du
droit chilien sur la nationalité et de l’appliquer au cas d’espéce. Ce faisant, le
Tribunal est conduit 4 conclure de ce qui précéde la validité d’une renonciation
volontaire 4 la nationalité chilienne lorsque la partie renongant est double
nationale, renonciation dont la réalité a été prouvée par la premiére partie
demanderesse.

323. Aussi pour les raisons indiquées ci-dessus, le Tribunal arbitral estime n’étre
pas en mesure d’admettre |’exception d’incompétence fondée sur l’allégation
selon laquelle la premiére partie demanderesse posséderait, 4 la date pertinente,
la nationalité chilienne.

(3) Consent
(i) Investment Under the BIT

Finally, the Tribunal sought to determine whether, under the terms of the Spain/Chile
BIT, Chile had consented to the arbitration of its dispute with Mr. Pey Casado.

There ensued a lengthy dissertation by the Tribunal with respect to the relevant Articles

of the BIT, particularly Articles 1(2) and 2. It then opined as follows:

368. La formulation de l'article 1(2) refléte une conception large de la notion
d’investissement. Le Tribunal constate d’emblée que |’achat des titres de CPP
S.A. et d’EPC Ltda est couvert par la définition de l’investissement établie par
l'article 1(2) qui considére comme un investissement les « actions et autres
formes de participation dans les sociétés ». La seule condition posée par cet
article est celle de I’ acquisition en conformité au droit de I’Etat d’ accueil.

369. L’article 2(2) précise que les investissements effectués antérieurement a
lentrée en vigueur de |’ API ne bénéficieront de la protection de |’ API que s’ils
peuvent étre qualifiés d’investissements étrangers au sens de la législation de
l’Etat d’accueil. Le Tribunal estime que la législation 4 laquelle fait référence
V’API est la législation chilienne en vigueur au moment auquel |’investissement
est réalisé, c’est-a-dire en 1972.

370. Pour que |’API soit applicable 4 une opération réalisée en 1972, il est
nécessaire que |l’opération litigieuse corresponde a la définition de
l'investissement établie par l’article 1(2) de API et qu’elle ait la qualité
d’investissement étranger au sens de la législation chilienne appliquée a
l’époque.

35.

36.

37.

The Tribunal then found:

375. En l’espéce, les articles 1(2) et 2(2) ne posent pas de difficultés particuliéres
d’interprétation. Le préambule, composé de trois brefs paragraphes et rédigés en
termes trés généraux, refléte essentiellement le souhait de créer des conditions
favorables a |’investissement entre les deux Etats parties. II est clair que ces trois
paragraphes ne contiennent aucune disposition de fond susceptible de créer des
conditions supplémentaires 4 l’octroi de la protection offerte par l’API. Si le
Tribunal ptait |’interprétati de la défend il ait une
interprétation particuligrement restrictive du terme investissement au sens des
articles 1(2) et 2(2) de l’API allant contre la lettre et l’esprit du préambule. Une
telle démarche serait de toute évidence contraire 4 article 31 de la Convention
de Vienne sur le droit des traités.

LJ

379. Il est clair, en revanche, que les articles 1(2) et 2(2) de Il’API exigent de
l’investisseur qu’il effectue un investissement qui soit conforme 4 la législation
chilienne en vigueur a I’époque et, s’agissant d’investissements existant au
moment de l’entrée en vigueur du traité, qui puisse étre qualifié d’investissement
étranger au sens de cette législation.

The Tribunal then set out Chile’s last argument on this issue:

380. La défenderesse a concentré son argumentation sur la Décision n°24 dont
elle affirme qu’elle est entrée en vigueur au Chili le 30 juin 1971, qu’elle était
applicable et effectivement appliquée et qu’elle n’a pas été respectée par
l'investissement étranger que M. Pey Casado prétend avoir réalisé en 1972.

 

The Tribunal dismissed Chile’s argument and concluded categorically that Mr.

Casado’s investment met the criteria of the BIT. It stated:

411. Au vu de Il’ensemble des développements qui précédent, le Tribunal conclut
qu’ il n’existait pas, dans le droit chilien en vigueur en 1972, de définition établie
de l’investissement étranger et que l’opération réalisée par M. Pey Casado s’est
conformée au droit chilien qui lui était applicable. En conséquence, le Tribunal
considére que I’investissement de M. Pey Casado, |’achat d’ actions d’une société
chilienne du secteur de la presse au moyen de paiements en devises étrangéres
effectués sur des comptes bancaires en Europe, satisfait les conditions posées par
l’API et plus particuliérement par ses articles 1(2) et 2(2).

38.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

(ii) Nationality Under the BIT

After referring to the definition of “investor” in Article 1 of the BIT, the Tribunal had no
difficulty in concluding that Mr. Pey Casado “remplit la condition de la nationalité au

sens de |’ API”.
Previously, the Tribunal had concluded:

416. Dans le cas d’espéce, il suffit pour M. Pey Casado de démontrer qu’il
possédait la nationalité espagnole au moment de |’acceptation de la compétence
du tribunal arbitral sur le fondement de |’ API et, pour bénéficier de la protection
de fond du traité, au moment de la ou des violations alléguées de |’ API. Comme
on I’a vu dans les développements qui précédent, cette condition est satisfaite.

(iii) Jurisdiction “Ratione Temporis” under the BIT

The Tribunal established that the investor’s 1972 investment in Chile “est couvert par

VAPI’® under Article 2(2).

The Tribunal then inquired whether the three disputes arose after the entry into force of
the BIT on 29 March 1994. According to the investor, the first one occurred in 1995, the
second in 2000 and the third in 2002.

In turn, the Tribunal, after having reviewed the evidence and made reference to prior
ICSID cases dealing with the issue of how to determine the date on which a dispute
crystalizes for purposes of assessing whether it falls under a BIT providing consent to
ICSID jurisdiction, ruled affirmatively that the three disputes crystallized after the entry
into force of the BIT and that it was thus competent “ratione temporis”. It found:

446. Le Tribunal en conclut que le différend est né aprés l’entrée [en] vigueur du
Traité, les parties n’ayant pas exprimé et opposé leurs différences de vues avant

7 Tbid. at para. 418.
8 Tbid. at para. 432.

20

l'année 1995. Les demanderesses ont précisé a plusieurs reprises qu’il fallait
distinguer le différend et les faits 4 l’origine du différend. Le Tribunal partage
cette analyse. Comme |’a récemment rappelé le tribunal arbitral constitué dans
V’affaire Duke Energy, « What is decisive of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione
temporis is the point in time at which the instant legal dispute between the parties
arose, not the point in time during which the factual matters on which the dispute
is based took place.

LJ

453. Au vu des prétentions respectives des parties exposées ci-dessus, le Tribunal
estime sans hésitation que |’ opposition qui s’est manifestée entre les parties lors
des audiences de mai 2000, dés que les parties demanderesses ont pris
connaissance de la Décision n°43, est constitutive d’un différend. La encore, le
différend étant survenu postérieurement 4 l’entrée en vigueur du traité, la
condition de compétence ratione temporis est satisfaite.

LJ

464. Le Tribunal estime que le dernier différend entre les parties, s’est cristallisé
au cours de la période 2002-2003. Avec I’introduction de leur demande
complémentaire le 4 novembre 2002, les demanderesses ont, pour la premiére
fois dans cette procédure, reproché a |’Etat chilien un déni de justice et ainsi
formulé une réclamation. C’est en demandant au Tribunal arbitral dans son
mémoire du 3 février 2003 de rejeter la demande complémentaire des
demanderesses que la défenderesse a confirmé l’existence d’un différend sur la
question du déni de justice.

(iv) Fork-in-the-Road Provision in the BIT

With respect to its jurisdiction over Mr. Pey Casado, it then remained for the Tribunal to
determine whether the investor, in the light of Article 10 of the BIT, had breached that

fork-in-the-road provision by instituting a claim before the courts of Chile.

The Tribunal then recalled the triple identity test and concluded categorically:

486. Si l’un des trois éléments de la triple identité rappelée ci-dessus fait défaut,
la clause d’ option irrévocable ne peut étre appliquée. Or, cette triple identité n’a
jamais existé dans la présente affaire.

21

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

(v) Conclusion
The Tribunal thus dismissed the challenge of Chile to its jurisdiction over Mr. Pey

Casado. It said, in conclusion:

500. Dés lors, le Tribunal arbitral ne peut que rejeter l'exception qui a été
soulevée par la défenderesse et admettre sa compétence pour statuer sur le fond
du litige pour ce qui concerne la premiére partie demanderesse, M. Pey Casado.

B. The Tribunal’s Findings on Jurisdiction With Regards to the Foundation
(1) Investment
The Tribunal first recalled that the “Fundacién Presidente Allende” was constituted under
Spanish law with its head-office in Spain by Mr. Pey Casado on 6 October 1989.

After having examined the evidence, the Tribunal concluded that:

525. De l’avis du Tribunal arbitral, la Fondation a démontré qu’elle était en
possession de 90% des actions de CPP S.A., qui lui ont été transmises par M. Pey
Casado au moyen d’écritures passées entre le 6 octobre 1989 et le 27 mai 1990.
Cette transmission a été parfaite 4 la date de l’inscription de cette derniére au
Registre des Fondations du Ministére espagnol de la Culture, le 27 avril 1990.

The Foundation had thus acquired the status of investor under the BIT.°
(2) Nationality

The Tribunal had no hesitation in concluding that “... la Fondation Presidente Allende,
étant incorporée et ayant son siége en Espagne, remplit 4 1’évidence la condition de la

nationalité au sens de I’ article 25 de la Convention CIRDI”.'°

° See Award at para. 543.
1° Tbid. at para. 550.

22

50.

51.

52.

53.

(3) Consent

The Tribunal also found that “... il est clair que la Fondation Presidente Allende a consenti
a l’arbitrage (a l’exclusion de ce qui concernait la rotative Goss) le 6 octobre 1997.71!
C. The BIT

(1) Investment
After referring to Article 1(2) of the BIT and calling in aid the Award of the Tribunal in
the CME Czech Republic B.V. v. The Czech Republic,” the Tribunal found that the
Foundation “satisfait la condition d’investissement au sens de l’ APT”. '°

(2) Nationality
The Tribunal referred to the definition of “investor” in Article 1(1) of the BIT and

concluded that the Foundation had the Spanish nationality.

(3) Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis under the BIT

The Tribunal reasoned that the conclusion it had reached in respect of its jurisdiction
ratione temporis over Mr. Pey Casado’s disputes also applied to its jurisdiction over the

Foundation. It said:

567. Pour ces raisons, le Tribunal estime que les conclusions auxquelles il est
arrivé quant 4 sa compétence ratione temporis pour connaitre des demandes de
M. Pey Casado s’appliquent également aux demandes faites par la Fondation
Presidente Allende et qu’il est donc compétent ratione temporis pour connaitre
des trois différends invoqués par la Fondation Presidente Allende.

"' Tbid. at para. 553.
"CME Czech Republic B.V. v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Award, dated 14 March 2003.
'S See Award at para. 560.

23

54.

55.

56.

(4) Conclusion

The Tribunal thus dismissed Chile’s challenge to its jurisdiction over the “Fundacién

Presidente Allende” in the following words:

568. En résumé, la seconde partie demanderesse a établi, aux yeux du Tribunal
arbitral, qu’elle remplissait bien les conditions posées pour la compétence tant
par l'article 25 de la Convention CIRDI que par |’API. Il en résulte dés lors que
le Tribunal arbitral est compétent pour statuer sur le fond du litige pour ce qui
concerne la deuxiéme partie demanderesse, la Fondation Presidente Allende.

D. The Tribunal’s Findings on the Violations of the BIT
(D Application of the BIT Ratione Temporis

The Claimants submitted to the Tribunal that: “L’ application combinée des paragraphes
2.2 et 2.3 permettrait de conclure que ‘le Traité [l’API] peut s’appliquer a des faits
antérieurs a l’entrée en vigueur du Traité’ car ’ API ne contient ‘aucune date butoir
excluant de son champ d’application des faits (actes de dépossession) a Vorigine d’une
controverse’. Dés lors qu’une controverse est née entre les parties en 1995,
postérieurement 4 I’ entrée en vigueur du traité, les dispositions de fond de ce dernier sont

applicables a des faits antérieurs 4 son entrée en vigueur.”!*

After a thorough review of the pertinent facts, various Chilean decrees and ministerial

decisions as well as the parties arguments, the Tribunal concluded as follows:

600. Aprés examen des faits et des prétentions des parties, le Tribunal est
parvenu 4 la conclusion que |’expropriation résultant du Décret n°165 ne peut
étre analysée comme un fait illicite continu et ne peut se voir appliquer les
dispositions de fond de |’ API. En revanche, les dispositions de fond de l’ API sont
applicables ratione temporis a la violation résultant de la Décision n°43 et au
déni de justice allégué par les demanderesses, ces actes étant postérieurs 4
Ventrée en vigueur du traité.

'4 Tbid. at para. 578.

24

(2) Denial of Justice and Fair and Equitable Treatment

57. The Tribunal’s reasoning and finding in respect of the breach by Chile of Article 4 of the
BIT are well illustrated in the following paragraphs of the Award. The Committee will

quote them in extenso:

653. La question se pose en particulier de savoir si le comportement des autorités
chiliennes, législatives, administratives et judiciaires, peut ou non étre considéré
comme constituant un « déni de justice » et une violation du devoir d’accorder &
l'investissement étranger une protection suffisante, soit plus précisément, un
« traitement juste et équitable » au sens de l'article 4 (1) de l’API ainsi concu :

« Chaque Partie garantira dans son territoire, en accord avec sa
législati ionale, un trai juste et équitable aux ii i
réalisés par des investisseurs de l'autre Partie, sous des conditions non
moins favorables que pour ses investisseurs nationaux ».

 

658. Dans le contexte spécifique du présent litige, tel qu’il a été résumé dans la
présente sentence dans sa partie Faits et dans les considérations juridiques qui
précédent, l’application de la notion de « déni de justice » et celle de I’ obligation
de « traitement juste et équitable » n’appellent pas de longue analyse. Elles se
laissent résumer 4 deux questions relativement simples :

+ La premiére est celle de savoir si l’absence de toute décision par les
juridictions chiliennes pendant une période de sept années (1995-2002),
d’une part, et l’absence de réponse de la Présidence aux requétes de M.
Pey Casado, d’ autre part, sont constitutives d’un déni de justice.

* La seconde est celle de savoir si les investissements reconnus par le
Tribunal arbitral comme ayant été faits par M. Pey Casado ont bénéficiés
du « traitement juste et Equitable » prescrit par l’ API.

659. Sur la premiére question, la réponse ne peut étre que positive, au regard des
faits établis et déja retenus par le Tribunal arbitral, l’absence de toute décision
par les tribunaux civils chiliens sur les prétentions de M. Pey Casado s’analysant
en un déni de justice. [...]

665. Sur la seconde question, celle de savoir si les investissements des
demanderesses ont bénéficié d’un traitement juste et équitable, une réponse
négative s’impose de l’avis du Tribunal arbitral, compte tenu des conclusions
auxquelles il est parvenu précédemment aux termes de son appréciation des
preuves et de son analyse juridique. En bref, il s’agit de la conclusion selon
laquelle M. Pey Casado a bien démontré avoir procédé 4 des investissements et

25

58.

59.

60.

@tre propriétaire de biens meubles ou immeubles qui ont été confisqués par
Pautorité militaire chilienne.

LJ

674. Dans le cas d’espéce, en résumé, en accordant des compensations — pour des
raisons qui lui sont propres et sont restées inexpliquées — 4 des personnages qui,
de l’avis du Tribunal arbitral, n’étaient pas propriétaires des biens confisqués, en
méme temps qu’elle paralysait ou rejetait les revendications de M. Pey Casado
concernant les biens confisqués, la République du Chili a manifestement commis
un déni de justice et refusé de traiter les demanderesses de fagon juste et
équitable.

E. The Tribunal’s Assessment of Damages

With respect to the Tribunal’s assessment of the damages suffered by the Claimants, the
Tribunal starts from the premise that, since in its Decision No. 43 Chile had already fixed
the amount of damages which it owed to those persons whose property it had
expropriated, “l’existance méme de dommages résultant de la confiscation n’appelle

aucune analyse particuliére”. s

The Tribunal then recalled that the Claimants were seeking from the Respondent
US$ 52,842,081 as “damnum emergens” and US$ 344,505,593 as “lucrum cessans” plus

unquantified moral damages for Mr. Pey Casado. 6

There then followed seven paragraphs which the Committee considers it should quote in
extenso because, as will be seen later, of the conclusion which it has reached in respect of
the breach by the Tribunal in its assessment of damages of two of the grounds set out in
Article 52 of the ICSID Convention:

689. Dans l’exercice de son droit et pouvoir d’appréciation des preuves, le
Tribunal arbitral ne peut que constater que les demanderesses n’ont pas apporté

'S Tbid. at para. 680.
'© Tbid. at para. 683.

26

de preuve, ou de preuve convaincante, ni par piéces, ni par témoignage, ni par
expertise, des importants dommages allégués et causés par les faits relevant de la
compétence ratione temporis du Tribunal arbitral, et cela qu’il s’agisse du
damnum emergens, du lucrum cessans, ou encore d’un dommage moral - la
simple vraisembl: dun d dans les ci é de
l'espéce ne suffisant évidemment pas.

LJ

691. Il est clair aussi, quoi qu’il en soit, que tout recours 4 une expertise,
l’expérience arbitrale le montre, est en soi généralement de nature 4 augmenter,
parfois fortement, la durée et les cofits d’un arbitrage. En tout état de cause, le
Tribunal arbitral est conscient de son devoir de mettre un terme, dés que |’ état du
dossier le permet, 4 une procédure d’une durée qui, dépassant la moyenne, a été
allongée, ainsi qu’on l’a vu, pour des raisons diverses, dont la complexité
inhabituelle des questions litigieuses et |’attitude méme des parties.

692. En l’absence de preuves convaincantes apportées par les demanderesses et
le recours 4 une ou plusieurs expertises devant étre exclu, le Tribunal arbitral est
cependant en mesure de procéder 4 une évaluation du dommage 4a l'aide
d’éléments objectifs dés lors que, selon les données incontestées résultant du
dossier, les autorités chiliennes elles-mémes, 4 la suite de la Décision n° 43, ont
fixé le montant de la réparation due aux personnes ayant, selon elles, droit 4 une
indemnisation.

693. Il convient de rappeler dans ce contexte que le préjudice 4 indemniser n’est
pas celui souffert 4 la suite de l’expropriation (demande qui n’est pas couverte
par les dispositions de fond de I’ API), mais celui souffert en raison des violations
de l’API que le Tribunal arbitral a constatées et 4 propos desquelles il est
compétent pour rendre une décision. Notamment, |’indemnisation doit servir 4
mettre les demanderesses dans la position dans laquelle elles seraient si les
violations en question n’avaient pas eu lieu, c’est-a-dire si, dans la Décision
n°43, les autorités chiliennes avaient indemnisé les demanderesses, et non pas
des tierces personnes non-propriétaires des biens en question. Dans cette
hypothése, les autorités chiliennes auraient accordé le montant d’indemnisation
qu’elles ont accordé en vertu de la Décision n°43 aux demanderesses dans la
présente instance, celles-ci étant, le Tribunal arbitral l’a constaté, les véritables
propriétaires des actions des sociétés CPP S.A. et EPC Ltda. Par conséquent,
c’est le montant payé comme indemnisation en vertu de la Décision n°43 qui
correspond au préjudice souffert par les demanderesses.

 

 

694. L’indemnisation décidée par la Décision n°43 du 28 avril 2000 a été
alloué[e] par le Ministére des Biens Nationaux en vertu des décrets
d’indemnisation n° 76-79, en date du 11 avril 2002. Il s’agit d’un montant global
d’indemnisation de USD 10 millions, bien que le montant exact soit contesté
entre les parties.

27

695. La demanderesse a communiqué, par une lettre en date du 19 juillet 2007,
au Tribunal les documents qui, selon elle[], lui permettent de connaitre les
montants précis alloués aux bénéficiaires de la Décision n°43 adoptée par [le]
Ministére chilien des biens nationaux le 28 avril 2000 et des décrets n°76-79.

61. Inconclusion, the Tribunal fixed the damages owed by the Respondent to the Claimants

at US$ 10,132,690.18.'7
62. In its dispositif, the Tribunal decided, as follows:

1. décide qu’il est compétent pour connaitre du litige entre les
demanderesses et la République du Chili ;

2. constate que la défenderesse a violé son obligation de faire bénéficier les
demanderesses d’un traitement juste et équitable, en ce compris celle de
s’abstenir de tout déni de justice ;

3. constate que les demanderesses ont droit 4 compensation ;

4, ordonne a la République du Chili de payer aux demanderesses le montant
de USD 10.132.690,18, portant intérét au taux de 5%, composé annuellement, 4
compter du 11 avril 2002 jusqu’a la date d’envoi de la présente sentence ;

5. met 4 la charge de la défenderesse une contribution aux frais et dépens
exposés par les demanderesses, d’un montant de USD 2.000.000,- (deux
millions) ;

6. décide que les frais de procédure seront supportés par les parties dans la
proportion de: 3/4du montant total (soit USD 3.136.893,34) pour la
défenderesse et 1/4 du montant total (soit 1.045.631,11) pour les demanderesses ;
ordonne en conséquence a la défenderesse de payer aux demanderesses la somme
de USD 1.045.579,35 ;

7. ordonne 4 la République du Chili de procéder au paiement dans un délai
de 90 jours 4 compter de la date d’envoi de la présente sentence, des sommes
figurant dans le présent dispositif (points 4, 5 et 6), faute de quoi le montant

"" Ibid. at para. 702.

28

portera intéréts composés annuellement au taux de 5%, 4 compter de la date
d’envoi de la présente sentence jusqu’a celle du parfait paiement ;

8. rejette toutes autres ou plus amples conclusions.

IV. LEGAL STANDARD

63.

64.

65.

The three specific grounds upon which Chile requests the annulment of the Award under

Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention are the following:

Article 52

qd) Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in
writing addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following
grounds:

(a) [..]

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

(©) [-]

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure;
or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

The Committee will now review these standards briefly as they have been interpreted by
a series of ad hoc committees which can be said to be mostly “ad idem”. The Committee
will then review and analyze each one of the grounds for annulment invoked by Chile'®

in respect of the eleven areas which it has identified.

B. Manifest Excess of Powers

The ground for annulment for manifest excess of powers is embodied in Article 52(1)(b)
of the ICSID Convention. As explained by Commentators, this ground is meant to

ensure, inter alia, that tribunals do not exceed their jurisdiction or fail to apply the law

'8 The Committee notes that it is also seized of an application by the Claimants for annulment of paragraph
8 of the dispositif of the Award.

29

66.

agreed upon by the parties. !° Independently of the methodology which will be followed,
an annulment committee must inquire whether the tribunal exceeded the scope of its
authority and whether this excess is manifest. As, the committee in CDC v. Seychelles

stated: 7°

A tribunal (1) must do something in excess of its powers and (2) that excess must
be “manifest.” It is a dual requirement.

With respect to the excess of powers, both parties agree that a tribunal can exceed its

power in two ways: (i) by inappropriately exercising its jurisdiction (or failing to exercise

21

jurisdiction); and (ii) by failing to apply the proper law.” As regards the failure to apply

the proper law, the parties agree that there is an important distinction between a failure to
apply the proper law which is a ground for annulment, and an incorrect or erroneous
application of that law, which is not a ground for annulment. The Committee agrees. As

the ad hoc committee in Amco I explained:

The law applied by the Tribunal will be examined by the ad hoc Committee, not
for the purpose of scrutinizing whether the Tribunal committed errors in the
interpretation of the requirements of applicable law or in the ascertainment or
evaluation of the relevant facts to which such law has been applied. Such
scrutiny is properly the task of a court of appeals, which the ad hoc Committee is
not. The ad hoc Committee will limit itself to determining whether the Tribunal
did in fact apply the law it was bound to apply to the dispute. Failure to apply
such law, as distinguished from mere misconstruction of that law, would
constitute a manifest excess of powers on the part of the Tribunal and a ground
for nullity under Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention. The ad hoc Committee has
approached this task with caution, distinguishing failure to apply the applicable

© See Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (Cambridge University Press, 2009)
Art. 52 at paras. 132 — 133 (hereinafter “Schrewer Commentary Art. 52”).

2° CDC Group PLC vy. Seychelles, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14, Decision on Annulment dated 29 June
2005 at para. 39 (hereinafter “CDC Decision”).

2! See Resp. Mem. Annulment at paras. 400-402; Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 216 and 389.

2 Amco Asia Corporation, Pan American Development Ltd. and P.T. Amco Indonesia v. Republic of
Indonesia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Annulment dated 16 May 1986 at para. 23 (hereinafter
“Amco I Decision”).

30

67.

68.

69.

law as a ground for annulment and misinterpretation of the applicable law as a
ground for appeal.

The Committee notes that Chile also contends that under certain circumstances a

misapplication of the law, even though the proper law was identified, can be so egregious
3

as to constitute, in practice, the non-application of the proper law.> In support of its

submission, Chile refers to the decisions of several committees, including Soufraki, Amco

I, Vivendi II, MTD and Sempra.”

The Respondent also submits that the proper application of a national law requires a
tribunal to interpret that law as it is interpreted by the nation’s courts, as well as its legal
scholars, and authorities.2> In this respect, the Committee agrees with the nuance

introduced by the ad hoc Committee in Soufraki:?*

It is the view of the Committee that the Tribunal had to strive to apply the law as
interpreted by the State’s highest court, and in harmony with its interpretative
(that is, its executive and administrative) authorities. This does not mean that, if
an ICSID tribunal commits errors in the interpretation or application of the law,
while in the process of striving to apply the relevant law in good faith, those
errors would necessarily constitute a ground for annulment.

The parties disagree as to the meaning and scope of “manifest”. According to Claimants,

the tribunal’s excess of its powers must be obvious simply on the face of the award,

3 See Tr. Annulment [1] [38:2-16] (Eng.); [16:31-37] (Fr.); [40:22-41:5] (Spa.).

* See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 253-255; Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision on the Application for Annulment dated 5 June 2007 (hereinafter “Soufraki
Decision”); Amco Asia Corporation, Pan American Development Ltd. and P.T. Amco Indonesia v.
Republic of Indonesia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Second Decision on Annulment dated 17 December
1992 (hereinafter “Ameo I Decision”); MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile,
ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7, Decision on Annulment dated 21 March 2007 (hereinafter “MTD Decision”);
Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Decision on Annulment
dated 29 June 2010; Compaiita de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Second Decision on Annulment dated 10 August 2010.

?5 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at paras. 415-418.

? Soufraki Decision at para. 97.

31

70.

71.

without any need for further analysis.7” For the Respondent, “manifest” can mean either
“obvious” or “substantial” and establishing the existence of an excess of power may
require a detailed analysis of complex factual and legal issues. This process does not per

se mean that an excess is not manifest.”*

The Committee agrees with the Respondent that an extensive argumentation and analysis
do not exclude the possibility of concluding that there is a manifest excess of power, as
long as it is sufficiently clear and serious. In addition, the Committee is of the view that
it has to follow a tenable standard of review of the tribunal’s approach. It agrees with the

committee in Kléckner I:

It is possible to have different opinions on these delicate questions, or even, as do
the Applicant for Annulment or the Dissenting Opinion, to consider the
Tribunal’s answers to them not very convincing, or inadequate. But since the
answers seem tenable and not arbitrary, they do not constitute the manifest excess
of powers which alone would justify annulment under Article 52(1)(b). In any
case, the doubt or uncertainty that may have persisted in this regard throughout
the long preceding analysis should be resolved “in favorem validitatis sententiae”
and lead to rejection of the alleged complaint.

C. Serious Departure From a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

The second ground for annulment of the Award invoked by Chile in its Annulment
application is that there has been a serious departure from fundamental rules of procedure
as provided for in Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. The Committee notes that
the parties agree on the meaning of this provision but disagree on the consequences of its

application to the present case.

27 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 224-225.
*8 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 412; Resp. Rep. Annulment at para. 252.

Klockner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others v. United Republic of Cameroon and Société
Camerounaise des Engrais S.A., 1CSID Case No. ARB/81/2, Decision on Annulment dated 3 May 1985 at
para. 52(e) (hereinafter “Kléckner I Decision”).

32

72.

723.

74.

75.

76.

The Committee agrees with Chile that this ground involves a three-part test: (i) the
procedural rule must be fundamental; (ii) the Tribunal must have departed from it; and

(iii) the departure must have been serious.*°

Fundamental rules of procedure are procedural rules that are essential to the integrity of
the arbitral process and must be observed by all ICSID tribunals. The parties agree that
such rules include the right to be heard, the fair and equitable treatment of the parties,

proper allocation of the burden of proof and absence of bias.

The second part of the test requires that the Committee examine the full record, including
the Transcripts and the Award to determine whether or not the Tribunal violated the rule

in question.

The third part of the test relates to the seriousness of the departure. Here the Committee
notes that there is significant disagreement between the parties as to how the seriousness

of the violation can be ascertained.

The Committee observes that there are two series of precedents relating to this important
requirement. They were well summarized by the Respondent at the Hearing on

Annulment: *!

- Some committees have looked at the importance of the right involved. If
the right is fundamental or substantial, its deprivation could jeopardize the
legitimacy or integrity of the arbitral process. Therefore, in the view of
those committees, the violation of such right deserves a remedy. As

described by commentators and certain committees, “the departure must be

°° See Tr. Annulment [1] [pp. 22-23] (Eng.)s[pp. 10-11] (Fr.); [pp. 25-26] (Spa.).
+! See Tr. Annulment [1] [35:1-19] (Eng.); [15:26-37] (Fr.); [38:1-18] (Spa.).

33

77.

78.

more than minimal” or “must be substantial and be such as to deprive a
9933

party of the benefit or protection which the rule was intended to provide.
- Other committees have opined that the fundamental rule must relate to an
outcome-determinative issue. In the Wena case, the committee held that
“the violation of such a rule must have caused the Tribunal to reach a result
substantially different from what it would have awarded had such a rule

been observed.” *

The parties disagree on the nature of the impact of the departure on the award. Claimants
argue that an applicant must prove that the denial of a fundamental rule of procedure did
lead the Tribunal to a result different than it otherwise would have reached if the rule had
been observed. The Respondent disagrees and argues that proving beyond the shadow of
a doubt that the Tribunal would have changed its award imposes an insurmountable
hurdle that ignores the inherent value of the rule itself.*° It concludes that the remit of
the Committee is to enquire whether, if the rule had been observed, there is a distinct

possibility (a “chance”) that it may have made a difference on a critical issue.

The Committee subscribes to the Respondent’s view. The applicant is not required to
show that the result would have been different, that it would have won the case, if the
tule had been respected. The Committee notes in fact that, in Wena, the committee stated

that the applicant must demonstrate “the impact that the issue may have had on the

* See Schreuer Commentary Art. 52 at para. 287.

* See Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4,
Decision on Annulment dated 2 December 1989 at para. 5.05 (hereinafter “MINE Decision”); Amco II
Decision at paras. 9.09 - 9.10; CDC Decision at para. 49.

™ See Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Annulment
dated 5 February 2002 at para. 58 (hereinafter “Wena Decision”); Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa
Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O1/10, Decision on Annulment dated 8 January 2007
at para. 81; CDC Decision at para. 49.

% See Tr. Annulment [1] [30:11-31:7] (Eng.); [14:9-19] (Fr.); [33:11-34:4] (Spa).

34

79.

80.

award.”*° The Committee agrees that this is precisely how the seriousness of the

departure must be analyzed.

The parties also addressed the question of whether a committee has the discretion not to
annul an award even where it finds that the tribunal seriously departed from a
fundamental rule of procedure.*” A review by the Committee of recent decisions of other
ad hoc committees reveals that many of them have concluded that they had some
discretion not to annul an award even where a ground for annulment is found, provided

8 Some committees, however, have

that such ground has no practical consequences.*
expressed the view that this reasoning does not apply to Article 52(1)(d) as the
requirement of a “serious” departure already incorporates the substantiality of the impact.

Therefore, if such ground is established, it requires annulment ipso facto.”

In the Committee’s view, it has no discretion not to annul an award if a serious departure
from a fundamental rule is established. The Committee exercises its discretion when it
determines whether or not the departure was serious. Examining the seriousness of the
departure implies a review of seriousness of the act concerned, i.e., the deprivation of the
legal right protected by the rule and a review of the seriousness of the consequence or
impact of the departure. The discretion of the Committee lies in the evaluation of the
impact. The impact will most likely be material and require an annulment if the

departure affects the legal right of the parties with respect to an outcome-determinative

* See Wena Decision at para. 61.

*7 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para 86; Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 41-42; Cl. Rej. Annulment at
para. 33.

8 See Wena Decision; CDC Decision; Soufraki Decision; Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and
Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment dated 3 July
2002 (hereinafter “Vivendi I Decision”); Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of Congo, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/99/7, Decision on Annulment dated 1 November 2006 (hereinafter “Mitchell Decision”).

*® See CDC Decision; Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri v. Republic of
Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16, Decision on Annulment dated 25 March 2010 (hereinafter
“Rumeli Decision”).

35

81.

82.

83.

issue. In other words, a finding that if the rule had been observed the tribunal could have
reached a different conclusion. As indicated earlier, the Committee does not consider,
however, that an applicant is required to prove that the tribunal would necessarily have
changed its conclusion if the rule had been observed. This requires a committee to enter
into the realm of speculation which it should not do. The Committee will therefore first
seek to determine if there is a departure from a fundamental rule of procedure and, if so,

then examine the impact of the violation to decide whether or not it is serious.

It remains for the Committee to address the question of the possible waiver of claims

which both parties have argued.”

Pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rules 27 and 53, a party may lose its right to object on the
ground of a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure if it has failed to
raise its objection to the tribunal’s procedure upon becoming aware of it, or “promptly”
as mentioned in Rule 27. Clearly, this “waiver” can only be triggered if the applicant
knew that the tribunal by its conduct had not complied with the rule and thus had a
reasonable opportunity to raise its objection. If the objecting party acquired actual or
constructive knowledge of a rule violation only after the award has become available, it

cannot be considered as having waived its right to object.

D. Failure to State Reasons

The first annulment committee in the Vivendi case discussed this ground in the following

terms:

[I]t is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that Article 52(1)(e)
concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an award, not
the failure to state correct or convincing reasons [...] Provided that the reasons

“° See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 38-40; Claimants’ remarks at the Hearing on Annulment, Tr.
Annulment [1] [199:16-200:20] (Eng.); [82:38-83:20] (Fr.); [216:14-217:21] (Spa.).

36

84.

85.

86.

given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues that were before the
tribunal, their correctness is beside the point in terms of Article 52(1)(e).
Moreover, reasons may be stated succinctly or at length, and different legal
traditions differ in their modes of expressing reasons. Tribunals must be allowed
a degree of discretion as to the way in which they express their reasoning.

In the Committee’s view, annulment under Article 52(1)(e) should only occur in
aclear case. This entails two conditions: first, the failure to state reasons must
leave the decision on a particular point essentially lacking in any expressed
rationale; and second, that point must itself be necessary to the tribunal’s
decision. It is frequently said that contradictory reasons cancel each other out,
and indeed, if reasons are genuinely contradictory so they might. However,
tribunals must often struggle to balance conflicting considerations, and an ad hoc
committee should be careful not to discern contradiction when what is actually
expressed in a tribunal’s reasons could more truly be said to be but a reflection of
such conflicting considerations.*'

Committees in other annulment cases have expressed similar views.”

The Committee subscribes to the interpretation of this standard enunciated by the first
annulment committee in the Vivendi case. Furthermore, the parties appeared to accept
this test. However, the parties disagree on how to address inconsistent or contradictory
reasons. While the Respondent contends that incoherent, inconsistent or frivolous
explanations on outcome-determinative points would constitute a failure to state reasons,
the Claimants submit that only a failure to state reasons that is manifest can lead to the
annulment of an award. In other words, only (i) a complete failure to provide any reason

or (ii) manifestly frivolous or contradictory reasons could be an annullable error.

The Committee believes that as long as there is no express rationale for the conclusions

with respect to a pivotal or outcome-determinative point, an annulment must follow,

4! See Vivendi I Decision at paras. 64-65.

*® See Amco I Decision at paras. 38-44; MINE Decision at paras. 5.07-5.13; Amco II Decision at paras.
7.55-1.5T; Wena Decision at paras. 77-82; CDC Decision at paras. 66-72; Mitchell Decision at para. 21.

* See Tr. Annulment [1] for the Respondent: [pp. 45-46] (Eng.), [pp. 18-19] (Fr.), and [pp. 44-47] (Spa.);
for the Claimants: [pp. 184-185] (Eng.), [p. 76] (Fr.), and [pp. 200-202] (Spa.).

37

87.

88.

89.

whether the lack of rationale is due to a complete absence of reasons or the result of

frivolous or contradictory explanations.

E. Scope of Annulment

As stated by several committees annulment is distinct from an appeal. The power for
review is limited to the grounds of annulment set out in Article 52(1) of the ICSID

Convention.“ The committee in the Soufraki case pointed out that:**

[T]he annulment review, although obviously important, is a limited exercise, and
does not provide for an appeal of the initial award. In other words, it is not
contested that “... an ad hoc committee does not have the jurisdiction to review
the merits of the original award in any way. The annulment system is designed
to safeguard the integrity, not the outcome, of ICSID arbitration proceedings.”
(quoting Guide to ICSID Arbitration). This has been stressed very recently in the
case MTD Equity and MTD Chile v. Republic of Chile:

“Under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, an annulment proceeding is not an
appeal, still less a retrial; it is a form of review on specified and limited grounds

which take as their premise the record before the Tribunal.”

The Committee endorses these statements without any reservation.

GROUND FOR ANNULMENT

Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention sets out the five grounds on the basis of which a
party may request annulment of an award. This is an exhaustive list. The Article reads

as follows:

See Wena Decision at para. 18 (citing to Kléckner I at paras. 3, 62, 119 and MINE Decision at para.
4.05).

5 See Soufraki Decision at para. 20.

38

90.

91.

92.

93.

Article 52

qd) Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in
writing addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following
grounds:

(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

(c) that there was corruption on the part of a member of the Tribunal;

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure; or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

As noted earlier, in the present case Chile has invoked three of those specific grounds,
manifest excess of powers, a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure and

the failure of the Tribunal to state the reasons on which its award is based.

In the course of this annulment proceeding, the parties have made extensive written

submissions. These submissions include:

Chile’s Annulment Application (130 pages);

Chile’s Memorial on Annulment dated 10 June 2010 (369 pages, English
version);

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Annulment dated 15 October 2010 (158
pages, French version);

Chile’s Reply on Annulment dated 22 December 2010 (287 pages, English
version);

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Annulment dated 28 February 2011 (74 pages,

French version).

The parties also filed “pre-hearing skeletons” on 27 May 2011. Finally, the parties made

lengthy and detailed oral submissions during the hearing on 7 and 8 June 2011.

At this juncture of its Decision, the Committee will distil the massive record which it has

considered carefully and identify the eleven specific areas which Chile has well

39

94.

95.

summarized in its skeleton. For each one of these areas, the Committee will attempt to
present, succinctly, the parties’ respective arguments in respect of the three grounds for
annulment, which it has invoked. The Committee will then deal with the Claimants’

application for annulment of paragraph 8 of the Tribunal’s dispositif.
The eleven areas are:

1

Nationality
2) Investment
3

Denial of Justice

4) Discrimination

5) The Tribunal’s Decision on Provisional Measures
6) Damages

7) The May 2003 Hearing

8) The January 2007 Hearing

9) Document Requests

10) Bias by Arbitrator Bedjaoui

11) The Tribunal’s Ex Aequo et Bono Decision.

B. Nationality

The parties agree that Mr. Pey Casado was at all times a Spanish national and also that he
became a Chilean national by nationalization in 1958. The issue in dispute was whether
Mr. Pey Casado thereafter ceased to be a Chilean national, prior to the two critical dates
contemplated in Article 25(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention, which are (1) the date of
consent (2 October 1997), and (2) the date of registration (20 April 1998). Claimants
argued that Mr. Pey Casado voluntarily renounced his Chilean citizenship prior to those
two dates, and submitted three documents as evidence of that renunciation. Chile argued
that none of those documents, on its face, could be considered a renunciation and that, in

any event, any attempted renunciation would not have had any legal effect because

40

96.

voluntary renunciation of citizenship was not permitted at the time under the Chilean
Constitution and did not become part of Chilean law until an explicit Constitutional
amendment to that effect was approved in 2005. Chile also asserted that even if it were
assumed, arguendo, that renunciation was legally possible in Chile at the time, the
“declaration” that Mr. Pey Casado made to a Spanish consulate in Argentina manifesting
his intent to renounce his Chilean citizenship could not have become effective until it
was formally notified to Chilean authorities — which it submitted did not occur until

well after the critical dates.

(1) Manifest Excess of Powers

The main issues raised by Chile regarding nationality in connection with Article 52(1)(b)

are:

- whether the Tribunal’s application of Article 11 of the Chilean Constitution
amounts to a manifest failure to apply the proper law;

- whether the Tribunal improperly asserted jurisdiction by failing to assess
and then determine whether Mr. Pey Casado’s actions had in fact been
sufficient to effect a renunciation of his Chilean nationality;

- if so, whether such renunciation occurred prior to the two critical ICSID
Convention dates; and

- whether or not, in light of the foregoing, the Tribunal manifestly failed to

apply Article 25(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention.

41

Parties’ Positions

Chile’s Position

97.

Chile argues that the Tribunal failed to apply the proper law*® by finding Article 11 of
the Constitution ambiguous and the decisions of Chilean courts which it submitted
inapposite. According to Chile, the Tribunal adopted an interpretation of the Chilean
Constitution that was fundamentally at odds with the plain text of the relevant
constitutional provision. Chile contends that it was not possible to renounce Chilean
nationality voluntarily prior to 2005 when the Chilean Constitution was amended.
Article 11 (“Bases for Loss of Chilean Nationality”) of the Chilean Constitution provides

as follows:*7

Article 11. la nationalité chilienne se perd :

1°. Par la naturalisation dans un pays étranger, sauf dans le cas des Chiliens visés
aux incises numéros 1, 2 et 3 de l’article précédent qui auraient obtenu une autre
nationalité sans renoncer 4 leur nationalité chilienne et conformément aux
dispositions du N° 4 de ce méme article.

La raison de la perte de la nationalité chilienne indiquée ci-dessus n’affectera pas
les Chiliens qui, en vertu de dispositions constitutionnelles, légales ou
administratives de I’Etat du territoire duquel ils résident, adoptent la nationalité
étrangére comme condition de leur permanence dans ce pays ou comme
condition d’égalité juridique des ressortissants du pays respectif dans I’exercice
des droits civils ;

2°. Par décret supréme, dans le cas de services rendus au cours d’une guerre aux
ennemis du Chili ou 4 leurs alliés ;

3°. Par un arrét condamnant les délits allant 4 l’encontre de la dignité de la patrie
ou des intéréts fondamentaux et permanents de V Etat, et considérés comme tels
par loi approuvée au quorum qualifié. Lors de ces procédures, les faits seront
toujours évalués en toute conscience ;

*© See Award at para. 307 et seq.
#7 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 436. Footnotes omitted.

42

98. Chile avers that this list does not include “unilateral voluntary renunciation”.

4°. Par l’annulation de la lettre de naturalisation, et

5°. Par loi révoquant la naturalisation concédée a titre gracieux. Ceux qui
auraient perdu la nationalité chilienne pour n’importe laquelle des raisons
prévues au présent article, ne pourront étre réhabilités que par la loi.

+» 48

submits: *”

437. [...] Chile presented abundant jurisprudential and doctrinal evidence
establishing that, under Chilean law, (a) the list of five grounds for losing
Chilean nationality in Article 11 — which was the only Article of the Chilean
Constitution that addressed this issue — was intended by the constitutional
drafters to be an exhaustive one; (b) the list in Article 11 had subsequently been
interpreted as exhaustive by courts and commentators; and (c) voluntary
renunciation therefore did not exist at the time of the critical dates. As described
below, Chile further noted at the 2007 jurisdictional hearing that this
interpretation was roundly and unequivocally confirmed by the fact that a
constitutional amendment was approved in Chile in 2005 that for the first time
established voluntary renunciation as a basis for loss of Chilean nationality.

99. Chile argues that the Tribunal completely ignored its argument. It says: 50

451. Given the plain text of the relevant Constitutional article before and after the
amendment, the situation was quite simple: before the amendment, there was no
voluntary renunciation under Chilean law; after the amendment — which came
into effect eight years after the initiation of the Pey Casado arbitration —
voluntary renunciation became possible for the first time. Despite the Tribunal’s
explicit recognition that its task was to ascertain and apply Chilean law on this
point, and despite the overwhelming evidence presented by Chile pointing to a
widespread (and uniform) understanding of the relevant principles of Chilean
law, it chose not to accept this uncontroverted legal truth. In doing so, it
impermissibly ignored the fact that the settled law in Chile at the time of Mr.
Pey’s three alleged renunciations (which according to Mr. Pey took place in
December 1996, January 1997, and September 1997, respectively) was that a
Chilean national could not lose his Chilean nationality simply by attempting to
voluntarily renounce it. This rule of law was plain, simple, unqualified, and

48 Tbid. at para. 437.

* Ibid.

°° Tbid. at paras. 451-454. Footnotes omitted.

4B

Chile

uncontroversial, and no legitimate source of Chilean law had ever stated
otherwise.

452. In sum, even though the Tribunal (a) had expressly asserted in the Award
that it deemed Chilean law to be exclusively the applicable law for purposes of
its determination on Mr. Pey’s nationality; (b) had accepted in its Award that Mr.
Pey had not been deprived of his nationality by the Chilean State; and (c) had
itself explicitly conceded in the Award that “the Chilean Constitution does not
expressly contemplate renunciation as a ground[] for loss of the Chilean
nationality,” the Tribunal nevertheless imposed its own, unsupported,
interpretation of Chilean law on the subject. More specifically, it ruled: (a) that
the list of bases for loss of nationality in Article 11 was not exhaustive (despite
the conjunction “and” at the end of the list in Article 11, and the overwhelming
jurisprudential and scholarly evidence showing that such list was indeed
exhaustive and had consistently been interpreted as such); (b) that it was in fact
possible under Chilean law to voluntarily renounce the Chilean nationality; (c)
what is more, that it had always been possible to do so; (d) that the 2005
Constitutional Amendment had not created a new ground for loss of nationality;
and (e) that the only new aspect of the 2005 constitutional amendment was that it
had created a new requirement that formal renunciations had to be effected
before a competent authority.

453. In light of the foregoing, it is patently clear that the Tribunal failed to apply
the unquestionably applicable principles of Chilean law, and by doing so, it failed
to apply the law that it had itself characterized as the exclusive applicable law to
the issue of nationality.

454. In reaching these conclusions, and as further explained below, the Tribunal
undertook two impermissible lines of analysis that justify annulment: First, it
interpreted Chilean nationality law in terms of what it thought such law ought to
be (to render it in the Tribunal’s view more sensible or logical), rather than in
terms of what that law actually was, according to both the plain text of the
relevant norms of Chilean law, and of the Chilean jurisprudence and doctrinal
literature. Second, the Tribunal tried to justify its conclusions — on an issue that,
by its own admission, required a determination solely under Chilean law — by
reference to a comparative international analysis that also demonstrates that the
Tribunal did not apply the proper law, which was Chilean law, and Chilean law
alone. [Emphasis in original]

44

100. Chile contends as follows in its Reply: 3

299. In sum, the Tribunal was obligated to determine not only whether Chilean
law permitted Mr. Pey to renounce his nationality, but also: (a) whether any of
the documents Mr. Pey presented were in fact sufficient for him to effectively
renounce his Chilean nationality; and (b) whether any such renunciation had in
fact been effected before the critical dates contemplated in Article 25(2)(a) of the
ICSID Convention. Had the Tribunal properly applied Chilean law; drawn the
conclusions that flowed logically—and necessarily—from the record; and
applied Article 25(2)(a) to those facts, its jurisdictional determination would have
been entirely different. This failure to apply the proper law (Chilean law of
nationality and Article 25(2)(a) of the Convention) and the Tribunal’s improper
assertion of jurisdiction ratione personae constitute a manifest excess of power,
which requires annulment of the Award under Article 52 (1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention. [Emphasis added.]

 

Claimants’ Position

101.

The Claimants submit that the Tribunal had discretion in interpreting Chilean law and
that, in any event, it applied Chilean law correctly.” They further assert that Chilean law
did in fact contemplate voluntary renunciation of Chilean nationality, and that Mr. Pey
Casado did in fact take the necessary steps to effect such a renunciation. In the words of
the Claimants: ©

317. Selon la République du Chili, le Tribunal aurait ignoré le droit chilien, et en

particulier la Constitution chilienne, en décidant que Monsieur Pey avait
valablement renoncé 8 sa nationalité chilienne.

318. Cette affirmation est inexacte.

319. Tout d’abord, comme le souligne la Défenderesse, le Tribunal a
expressément indiqué que la question de la nationalité de Monsieur Pey était
régie par le droit chilien. Ainsi, le paragraphe 260 de la Sentence précise :

5! See Resp. Rep. Annulment at para. 299.
* See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 280-281.

*} This is a long citation but the Committee considers that it should be reproduced in full. See Cl. C-Mem.
Annulment at paras. 317-341; 357-360. Footnotes omitted.

45

Suivant ces régles bien établies en droit international, le Tribunal arbitral
considére que c’est en Li le droit chilien que doit étre ge la
question de savoir si en l’espéce les autorités chiliennes ont, comme il est
allégué par l’intéressé, privé M. Pey Casado de sa nationalité chilienne, ou
bien, s’il s’avére que tel n’est pas le cas, si M. Pey Casado a valablement
renoncé a la nationalité chilienne. (soulignement ajouté)

320. C’est ce que le Tribunal arbitral a fait comme le démontre la lecture des
paragraphes 307 4 320 de la Sentence.

321. Ainsi, le Tribunal arbitral a d’abord analysé la Constitution chilienne de
1980 en vigueur a la date de la renonciation volontaire de Monsieur Pey. Sur ce
point, il indique « le texte méme de l'article 11 de la Constitution chilienne est
ambigu sur la question et ne permet nullement d’affirmer ou de postuler un
prétendu caractére limitatif des cas énumérés de perte de nationalité ».

322. Cependant, comme |’a reconnu le Tribunal arbitral, la Constitution chilienne
de 1980 prévoyait déja des cas de renonciation 4 la nationalité chilienne. En effet,
son article 11(1) disposait jusqu’é sa modification le 25 aofit 2005: «la
nationalité chilienne se perd par le fait d’avoir acquis la nationalité d’un pays
étranger, excepté dans le cas des chiliens entr[a]nt dans le cadre des
paragraphes I, 2 et 3 de Varticle précédent qui auraient obtenu une autre
nationalité sans avoir renoncé @ leur nationalité chilienne et ce en concordance
avec ce qui est stipulé au paragraphe 4 de ce méme article » (soulignement
ajouté).

 

323. C’est d’ailleurs ce qu’a admis le Professeur Cea lors de son intervention 4
l'audience de janvier 2007 par ces termes : «si un chilien obtenait la
nationalisation dans un pays étranger, la Constitution [de 1980] lui permettait de
conserver sa nationalité chilienne, si bien sir un traité international de
réciprocité était en vigueur et s’il décidait de ne pas renoncer a sa nationalité
chilienne » (soulignement ajouté).

324. La possibilité de renoncer 4 la nationalité chilienne avait d’ailleurs été
dé ée par les D deresses dans leur Mémoire complé ire sur la
compétence du 11 septembre 2002 citant plusieurs décisions de la Cour supréme
chilienne ou arréts de Cours d’appel chiliennes.

325. A cet égard, il convient également de relever que l’argument de la
République du Chili selon lequel le Tribunal arbitral aurait interprété la
Constitution chilienne en contradiction avec |’interprétation retenue par les
juridictions chiliennes est dénué de fondement.

326. Cela résulte de la lecture des jurisprudences citées par les Demanderesses
dans leurs différentes écritures. En tout état de cause, le Tribunal arbitral a
indiqué « quant aux quelques décisions des tribunaux chiliens en la matiére qui
ont été évoqués, aucune d’entre elles ne concerne une situation identique a celle

46

du présent litige, si bien qu’il est difficile ou méme impossible d’y trouver la
preuve du bien fondé de l'une ou l'autre des théses contraires qui ont été
développées sur la renonciation a la nationalité ».

327. Ayant constaté I’existence de la renonciation volontaire dans le cas de
V'acquisition de la nationalité d’un Etat étranger, le Tribunal a alors indiqué :
« Rien n’a été établi, aucun texte légal ni aucune décision n’ont été produits ni
aucun argument allégué qui soit susceptible de justifier, de l’avis du Tribunal
arbitral, un régime qui, en matiére de renonciation volontaire, serait

i ire: p issif en cas d’ isition d’une autre nationalité, prohibitif
en cas d’autre nationalité déja acquise, soit de double nationalité».

 

disc

328. Aux yeux du Tribunal, l’ensemble des éléments de droit chilien soumis par
les Parties s’opposait a l’interprétation de la République du Chili, 4 savoir que la
Constitution chilienne interdisait la renonciation volontaire 4 la nationalité
chilienne.

329. La conclusion a laquelle le Tribunal est parvenu est confortée par le fait que
certaines conventions internationales en vigueur au Chili prévoient la possibilité
de renoncer volontairement 4 la nationalité. C’est ainsi le cas de la Conven[tion]
Américaine des Droits de l’Homme dont I’art. 20.3 reconnait le droit 4 changer
de nationalité ; de la Convention panaméricaine de Rio de Janeiro de 1906,
comme l’a souligné le Tribunal dans sa Sentence. Ces conventions sont
d’application immédiate au Chili en vertu des articles 5 et 10.4 de la Constitution
chilienne.

330. Rappelons, s’agissant de la Convention Américaine des Droits de Homme,
qu’un Arrét du 2 avril 2001 de la Cour d’Appel de Valparaiso, confirmé par la
Cour supréme le 13 juin suivant, a indiqué que, selon les termes de cette
Convention, les autorités chiliennes ne pouvaient pas empécher un chilien de
changer de nationalité en lui interdisant de renoncer 8 sa nationalité chilienne. Or,
la Conven[tion] Américaine des Droits de |’ Homme a été incorporée au systéme
juridique chilien en 1991, soit bien avant que Monsieur Pey ait renoncé a sa
nationalité.

331. C’est également le cas de la Convention Bilatérale sur la Double Nationalité
signée entre l’Espagne et le Chili en 1958 (CDN), applicable 4 Monsieur Pey,
auquel renvoi I’article 10.4 de la Constitution de 1980 dans sa version en vigueur
entre 1989 et 2005. En effet, l’article 6 de la CDN dispose : « Les espagnols et
les chiliens qui auraient acquis la nationalité chilienne ou espagnole en
renoncant préalablement a leur nationalité d’origine, pourront récupérer cette
derniére, en déclarant qu’ils en ont la volonté devant le Préposé au Registre
correspondant » (soulignement ajouté).

332. En réalité, la République du Chili n’admet pas que le Tribunal arbitral soit
parvenu 4 cette conclusion en dépit de l’intervention de Monsieur Cea, Président

 

de la Cour Constitutionnelle chilienne, qui était venu affirmer, lors de l’ audience

47

du 15 janvier 2007, qu’il n’était pas possible de renoncer a la nationalité
chilienne avant la réforme constitutionnelle de 2005.

333. A cet égard, il convient tout d’abord de rappeler que Monsieur Cea est
intervenu en tant que représentant de la délégation chilienne et non en qualité
d’expert, en dépit de ce que la République du Chili tente de faire croire aux
membres du Comité ad hoc.

334. En second lieu, le Tribunal arbitral dispose d’un large pouvoir
d’appréciation concernant la force probante des éléments qui lui sont soumis et
ce, méme s’agissant de la nationalité, comme rappelé dans I’ affaire Soufraki.

335. Enfin, les propos de Monsieur Cea ont été immédiatement contredits par les
Demanderesses lors de l’audience du 15 janvier 2007.

336. En réalité, c’est bien en application du droit chilien que le Tribunal arbitral a
reconnu a Monsieur Pey le droit de renoncer volontairement a sa nationalité
chilienne. Tout au plus, le Tribunal a pu commettre une erreur de droit, quod non,
ce qui ne serait de toute facgon pas suffisant pour fonder l’annulation de la
Sentence, quand bien méme cette erreur serait manifeste.

337. Le recours formé par la République du Chili sur ce fondement n’est autre
qu’un appel au fond et ne saurait, en conséquence, étre admis par le Comité ad
hoc. La demande d’annulation du Chili sur ce fondement devra étre rejetée.

338. L’argument de la République du Chili consistant 4 soutenir que le Tribunal
arbitral aurait violé l’article 52(1)(b) en reconnaissant que Monsieur Pey avait
effectivement renoncé a sa nationalité chilienne est tout aussi mal fondé.

 

339. Ainsi le Tribunal arbitral indique au paragraphe 322 de la Sentence :

Il revient donc au Tribunal arbitral d’apprécier le contenu et les effets du
droit chilien sur la nationalité et de l’appliquer au cas d’espéce. Ce faisant, le
Tribunal est conduit a conclure de ce qui précéde la validité d'une
renonciation volontaire a la nationalité chilienne lorsque la partie renongant
est double ionale, re iation dont la réalité a été prouvée par la
premiére partie demanderesse (soulignement ajouté).

 

340. Cette conclusion du Tribunal arbitral est suffisante pour rejeter la prétention
de la Défenderesse. Néanmoins, dans un souci de clarté pour le Comité ad hoc,
les Demanderesses procéderont ci-dessous a |’analyse de la Sentence concernant
la réalité de la renonciation a sa nationalité chilienne par Monsieur Pey.

341. Pour les besoins de la démonstration, il convient tout d’abord de rappeler les

actes effectués par Monsieur Pey en renongant a sa nationalité chilienne tels que
résumés par le Tribunal arbitral dans sa Sentence aux paragraphes 288 4 292.

48

LJ

357. S’agissant de la date de la déclaration, le Tribunal arbitral fait référence a la
date du 16 septembre 1997 lorsque Monsieur Pey a expressément indiqué au
Consulat d’Espagne que sa lettre du 10 décembre 1996 au Département Etranger
et Immigration du Ministére de |’Intérieur chilien devait étre entendue comme
une déclaration solennelle de sa renonciation a la nationalité chilienne.

358. Ainsi, la déclaration de renonciation 4 la nationalité est intervenue le 10
décembre 1996, réitérée au plus tard le 16 septembre 1997, en tout état de cause
avant les dates pertinentes de I’ article 25 de la Convention de Washington.

359. L’allégation de la République du Chili selon laquelle la déclaration ne serait
intervenue que le 10 juillet 1998, date 4 laquelle l’Ambassade d’Espagne 4
Santiago du Chili a informé le Ministére des Relations Extérieures chilien de la
renonciation 4 sa nationalité chilienne par Monsieur Pey est donc erronée. En
réalité, avec cet argument, la République du Chili tente de former un appel au
fond de la décision du Tribunal, celui-ci ayant clairement indiqué que la
déclaration de renonciation était intervenue avant cette date en application de la
loi.

360. Il résulte des développements ci-dessus que le Comité ad hoc devra rejeter
la demande d’annulation de la République du Chili sur ce fondement. [Emphasis
in original]

Committee’s Analysis

102. The Committee, after a thorough review of this part of the Award — wherein it concludes
that Mr. Pey Casado had validly renounced his Chilean nationality prior to the two
critical dates — and careful consideration of the parties’ arguments, finds that the Tribunal
did apply and interpret the proper Chilean law of nationality. The Tribunal referred not
only to the Chilean Constitution but also to international conventions such as the Spain -
Chile Dual Nationality Convention, the Rio de Janeiro Pan-American Convention of
1906, as well as the Inter-American Convention of Human rights in order to reach its
conclusion. The Committee agrees with the Claimants that its remit is not to examine
whether or not the Tribunal’s interpretation complies with Chilean law but whether the
Tribunal’s interpretation is manifestly contrary to the principles of Chilean law. In the

light, inter alia, of the introductory paragraph of the Tribunal’s analysis on the question

49

of nationality, the Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal reached its conclusion on the

basis of its interpretation of the proper Chilean law: M4

De l’avis du Tribunal arbitral, la défenderesse n’est pas parvenue a apporter une
démonstration convaincante de l’impossibilité ou Villégalité, en droit chilien,
d’une renonciation volontaire 4 la nationalité chilienne, en l’absence de textes
précis et de jurisprudence pertinente. Ainsi, quant aux quelques décisions des
tribunaux chiliens en la matiére qui ont été évoquées, aucune d’entre elles ne
concerne une situation identique a celle du présent litige, si bien qu’il est difficile
ou méme impossible d’y trouver la preuve du bien fondé de l’une ou |’ autre des
théses contraires qui ont été développées sur la renonciation a la nationalité.

103. Chile may not agree with the Tribunal’s interpretation and may have wished that the

104.

Tribunal had adopted its thesis but it cannot say that the Tribunal’s assertion of

jurisdiction ratione personae rises to the level of a manifest excess of power. Chile’s

challenge is accordingly dismissed.

(2) Failure to State Reasons

Chile argues that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for its finding in respect of

nationality and thus breached Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention. Specifically,

says Chile, the Tribunal failed to state reasons:

for its determination that Mr. Pey Casado was no longer a Chilean national
at the time of the critical dates for purposes of Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention;

for its conclusion that voluntary renunciation of nationality was permissible
under Chilean law (in particular under Article 11 of the Chilean
Constitution);

for its conclusion that Mr. Pey Casado — as a matter of fact — renounced his

Chilean nationality;

* See Award at para. 307.

50

for its conclusion that any such renunciation occurred prior the critical dates
under Article 25(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention;

for placing the burden on Chile — after Chile had proven that Mr. Pey
Casado had become a Chilean national in 1958 — of further proving that
thereafter Mr. Pey Casado had not renounced his Chilean nationality

(probatio diabolica), rather than placing the burden on the Claimants to

prove that he had renounced it; and

- for its conclusions that the Chile-Spain BIT’s  nationality-based

jurisdictional requirements did not bar the Claimants’ claims.

Parties’ Positions

Chile’s Positi

 

ion

105. Chile submits as follows:°°

454. [...] In particular, it is impossible to discern how it reached the conclusion
that voluntary unilateral renunciation was permissible under Chilean law in 1996-
7 (which is the time period during which Mr. Pey allegedly renounced his
Chilean nationality). Such conclusion is particularly i ible given: (a) the
directly contrary textual content of the relevant Constitutional provision; (b) the
universally consistent Chilean jurisprudence and doctrine on this point; (c) the
fact that it was not until the Constitution was amended in 2005 that voluntary
renunciation became—for the first time—a basis for loss of nationality under
Chilean constitutional law.

LJ

462. In attempting to address this issue in their Counter-Memorial, Claimants
quote paragraphs 317 et seg. of the Award. However, those paragraphs merely
discuss the issue of the power of appreciation of the Tribunal; they do not address
the central point raised by Chile, which is the absence of any reasons for the
Tribunal’s conclusion that effective renunciation can occur without any notice to
the State concerned and/or for the Tribunal’s conclusion that Mr. Pey had in fact

* See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 454; 462. Footnote omitted.

Sl

renounced his Chilean nationality prior to the critical dates under Article
25(2)(a). [Emphasis added]

Claimants’ Position

106. The Claimants assert that the Tribunal, in its Award, did provide ample reasons. They

write:

361. La République du Chili soutient également que la Sentence doit étre annulée
pour défaut de motivation en application de l'article 52(1)(e). Selon elle, le
Tribunal n’aurait pas motivé sa décision reconnaissant la possibilité de renoncer
a la nationalité chilienne en droit chilien. Il n’aurait pas non plus expliqué quels
actes de Monsieur Pey étaient constitutifs d’une renonciation a la nationalité
chilienne. A cet égard, la République du Chili prétend que la conclusion du
Tribunal selon laquelle Monsieur Pey avait réitéré sa renonciation a la nationalité
par sa déclaration devant le Consulat d’ Espagne 4 Mendoza (Argentine), serait en
contradiction avec sa conclusion précédente selon laquelle la lettre de 1996 ne
constituerait pas une renonciation 4 sa nationalité.

 

362. En premier lieu, les développements ci-dessus démontrent que le Tribunal
n’a pas renversé la charge de la preuve, a effectivement appliqué le droit chilien
pour trancher la question de la nationalité de Monsieur Pey aux dates pertinentes
de l'article 25 de la Convention CIRDI et que la Sentence est suffisamment
motivée.

363. On rappellera que le contréle du Comité ad hoc doit se limiter 4 vérifier que
le Tribunal a motivé sa décision_sans qu’il ait besoin de se prononcer sur le bien
fondé de son rai: ou sur son caractére convaincant, sauf 4 admettre un
appel au fond. [Emphasis added]

 

364. S’agissant du point de savoir si les actes de Monsieur Pey étaient constitutifs
d'une renonciation 4 la nationalité chilienne, le Tribunal arbitral a exposé sa
position aux paragraphes 317 et suivants de la Sentence. Il indique « le 16
septembre 1997, Monsieur Pey Casado a procédé expressément auprés du
Consulat d’Espagne & Mendoza (Argentine) a une déclaration de renonciation
au cas ol serait requise par l’Administration chilienne une renonciation
formelle ».

%6 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 364 - 371. Footnotes omitted.

52

365. Cette affirmation doit se lire 4 la lumiére des paragraphes précédents de la
Sentence, et en particulier des paragraphes 288 et suivants, ce que fait d’ailleurs
la République du Chili.

366. Ceci étant, contrairement a |’allégation de la Défenderesse, le Tribunal ne se
contredit pas. En effet, lorsque le Tribunal indique que «la déclaration de
Monsieur Pey Casado de son changement de résidence vers l’Espagne a pour
conséquence un changement de la loi qui lui est applicable mais ne le prive
nullement de ses deux nationalités » (Sentence §294), c’est en tenant compte des
termes de la lettre du 10 décembre 1996 qui sont ambigus.

367. Dans cette lettre, Monsieur Pey indiquait :

J’accomplis [la formalité consistant 4] vous informer que depuis 1974 ma
résidence habituelle a été transférée en Espagne ou elle se situe actuellement
Ronda Granero n°13, 28043 Madrid. Par conséquent, ma nationalité étant
l’espagnole, durant mon séjour au Chili, je n’ai pas recours aux bénéfices de la
Convention bilatérale du 24 mai 1958.

368. Cependant, le Tribunal poursuit en précisant « la seule question est donc de
savoir si la déclaration et les autres actes de Monsi Pey Casado équivalent a
une renonciation a la nationalité chilienne » (Sentence §295).

369. Or, l’un des autres actes émis par Monsieur Pey et retenu par le Tribunal
arbitral est la déclaration de Monsieur Pey du 16 septembre 1997 dans laquelle il
précise « pour ne laisser place a aucun doute a cet égard, je déclare que la
communication du_10 décembre 1996 (...) doit s’entendre de la fagon qui
convienne le mieux en Droit aux x fins desquelles elle a été présentée, y compris
comme _preuve_de_ma_re ion_expresse et sol lle_a_la_nationalité
chili au_cas_ou_serait _requise_par_I’Adi hilienne__une
renonciation formelle a la nationalité chilienne, ce que j’affirme et a quoi je

souscris de nouveau par la présente » (soulignement ajouté).

370. Dés lors, si la lecture de la seule lettre du 10 décembre 1996 pouvait laisser
subsister une ambigiiité sur les intentions de Monsieur Pey, cette méme lettre, lue
a la lumiére de la déclaration faite par Monsieur Pey en 1997, ne laisse plus de
place au doute. Or, dans la déclaration de 1997, c’est bien la lettre de 1996 qui
constitue une renonciation.

  

371. Dés lors, comme pour les autres fondements relatifs 4 la nationalité de
Monsieur Pey, la demande d’annulation de la Sentence sur ce fondement sera
rejetée par le Comité ad hoc. [Emphasis in original]

53

107.

108.

109.

110.

Committee’s Analysis
The Committee has no hesitation in endorsing the submission of the Claimants. Even if
the Committee were to disagree with the Tribunal’s interpretation of the Chilean
Constitution and its analysis of Mr. Pey Casado’s effective renunciation of his Chilean
nationality (which we do not), by no stretch of the imagination can the Committee
conclude that the Tribunal failed to state reasons to support its conclusions. In fact, the
Tribunal provided ample reasons which (although this is not a question which the
Committee is called upon or empowered to decide) the Committee finds quite

compelling.

With respect to the interpretation of the 1980 Chilean Constitution, it is the Committee’s
view that the Tribunal articulated sufficient and, indeed, convincing reasons for
concluding that voluntary unilateral renunciation is permissible under the Constitution.
The Tribunal first determined that there is no case law forbidding voluntary unilateral
renunciation. The Tribunal then found that none of the court decisions submitted and
relied upon by the parties involves a situation similar to the present case.*’ It is not the

role of the Committee to review these decisions.

The Tribunal then focused on the text of Article 11 of the Chilean Constitution. It first
determined that the text is ambiguous as to whether it contains an exhaustive or non-
exhaustive list of the bases for loss of Chilean nationality. It then explained why, in its

view, the Article could not be interpreted as containing an exhaustive list of such bases.**

The Tribunal explained why, in its opinion, it would be illogical to conclude that the text

of the Constitution allows renunciation in the case of acquisition of a new nationality but

*7 See Award at para. 307.
%8 Thid. at paras. 308-310.

54

111.

112.

113.

114.

does not allow such renunciation in the case of a nationality already acquired (e.g., dual

nationality), or condition such renunciation on the acquisition of a third nationality.”

The Tribunal concluded that voluntary unilateral renunciation existed before the 2005
amendment to the Constitution.’ The Committee notes in this regard the reference by
the Claimants to the testimony of Dr. Cea, President of the Chilean Constitutional Court,
who, during the January 2007 Hearing, acknowledged that it is possible to renounce
voluntarily one’s Chilean nationality under the 1980 Constitution, thus corroborating the

Tribunal’s conclusion:*!

si un chilien obtenait la nationalisation dans un pays étranger, la Constitution [de
1980] lui permettait de conserver sa nationalité chilienne, si bien sir un traité
international de réciprocité était en vigueur et s’il décidait de ne pas renoncer 4 sa
nationalité chilienne. [Emphasis in original]

Finally, the Committee notes that the Tribunal referred at length in its Award to
international conventions and principles of international law regarding nationality to

support its conclusion.

Chile argues that even if one were to accept that voluntary renunciation was legally
possible before 2005, Mr. Pey Casado did not effect a valid renunciation before the two
critical dates of the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal according to Chile, failed to state
reasons for rejecting this argument and for its conclusion that Mr. Pey Casado did in fact

renounce his Chilean nationality before the critical dates.

The Committee disagrees and refers to paragraphs 288 to 292 of the Award where the

Tribunal summarized what it ultimately found to be the Claimants’ convincing arguments

* Tbid. at para. 311.

© Tbid. at para. 312.

°" See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 323 (referring to Tr. Jur. [1] [20:24-28] (Fr.) submitted as CN-213).
© See Award at paras, 313-315; 319-322.

55

115.

116.

on this question. As described in the Award, the Claimants argued that Mr. Pey Casado
renounced his Chilean nationality in three documents dated 10 December 1996, 7
January 1997, and 16 September 1997, respectively. The Claimants also submitted that
Chile was notified of Mr. Pey Casado’s renunciation on 10 July 1998 and that the
renunciation was formally registered by a Chilean official on 4 August 1998. Chile
replied that the 10 December 1996 and 7 January 1997 documents could not be construed
as expressing a wish to renounce one’s nationality and that the 16 September 1997
document was not presented to any Chilean official and was only received by Chile on 10
July 1998, i.e. after the two critical dates. In response, the Claimants argued that the
effective date of renunciation is in any case the date when such renunciation is declared,
which was clearly prior to the critical dates, rather than the date on which it is

registered.

In its analysis of the parties’ respective positions on this issue, the Tribunal found that
Mr. Pey Casado expressly renounced his Chilean nationality in the third document,
namely, the document of 16 September 1997. The renunciation was thus effected as of
that date. The Tribunal further found that this renunciation was formally registered by a

Chilean official on 4 August 1998.°

While the Award does not address the point raised by the Respondent regarding the date
of presentation of the 16 September 1997 document to the Chilean authorities, it is clear,
and the Committee so finds, that this is because the Tribunal evidently considered that
this point was not critical to its determination of whether or not Mr. Pey Casado validly

renounced his Chilean nationality, which the Tribunal found occurred with the document

© See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 660.
 Tbid. at para. 661.

°5 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 350.
°° See Award at para. 317.

56

117.

118.

of 16 September 1997. The Committee notes in this regard that the Tribunal relied in
particular on the Soufraki award, in which it was held that while a tribunal “[...] will
accord great weight to the nationality law of the State in question and to the interpretation
and application of that law by its authorities [...] it will in the end decide for itself
whether [...] the person whose nationality is at issue was not a national of the State in
question [...]”.°7 Thus once the Tribunal concluded that the renunciation validly occurred
with the 16 September 1997 document, prior to the critical dates, the entire question of
notification to the Chilean authorities, including whether such notification was or was not

made prior to the critical dates, became superfluous.

In sum, on the issue of nationality, the Committee finds the Tribunal’s reasoning to be

comprehensive. This ground is accordingly dismissed.

(3) Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

The main issue raised by Chile regarding nationality in connection with Article 52(1)(d)
is whether the Tribunal’s imposition of the burden of proof upon Chile on this issue was
proper. As noted earlier, the parties agreed that Mr. Pey Casado has been at all times a
Spanish national and also that he became a Chilean national by nationalization in 1958.
As we saw above, the parties disputed whether Mr. Pey Casado had ceased to be a
Chilean national before the two “critical dates”. Chile emphasizes that this issue was
central to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, because if the Tribunal had found that Mr. Pey
Casado had still been a dual Chilean-Spanish national on at least one of the critical dates,

it would have lacked jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention to hear Claimants’ claim.

® Thi. at paras. 318-319 (quoting Soufraki Decision at para. 55).

S7

Parties’ Positions
Chile’s Position

119. Chile contends that “[s]ince it was accepted even by the Claimants that Mr. Pey Casado
had been a Chilean national, the burden of proof should have been on Mr. Pey Casado to

prove that he had in fact renounced his Chilean nationality at some point prior to the

critical dates for purposes of Article 25(2)(a), as he claimed”. Chile submits: ®

350. Despite the fact that proof of Mr. Pey’s valid renunciation of his Chilean
citizenship was a necessary element for him to establish that he satisfied ICSID’s
jurisdictional requirements relating to nationality, and the fact that “[t]he investor
must evidence all the necessary conditions for the Arbitral Tribunal to affirm its
jurisdiction,” the Tribunal instead placed the burden of proof upon the Republic.
And it did so by imposing on Chile a probatio diabolica, requiring that it prove
that Mr. Pey had nor renounced his Chilean nationality. Given that Mr. Pey was
the proponent of the assertion that he had renounced, the burden should have
been on him to prove that he had in fact validly done so. However in the Award,
the Tribunal found that the Republic “n’est pas parvenue 4 apporter une
démonstration convaincante de l’impossibilité ou l’illégalité, en droit chilien,
d’une renonciation volontaire 4 la nationalité chilienne, en l’absence de textes
précis et de jurisprudence pertinente.” Because it used this statement to explain
its jurisdictional decision in favor of the Claimants, it is evident that the Tribunal
placed the burden of proof upon the Respondent on this issue.

LJ

354. Here, if the Tribunal had not improperly placed the burden of proof upon the
Respondent on the issue of Mr. Pey’s Chilean nationality, it is clear that a
“substantially different” award might have been reached, as Mr. Pey would not
have survived the Republic’s nationality-based jurisdictional challenge. The fact
that the Tribunal’s reversal of the burden of proof on nationality was outcome-
determinative is nowhere more evident than in the May 2002 jurisdictional
ruling: had the Tribunal there imposed on Mr. Pey the burden of proving that he
had renounced Chilean nationality, instead of placing it on the Republic to prove
that Mr. Pey had not validly renounced such nationality, the Tribunal would have
had to uphold Chile’s jurisdictional challenge and dismiss Mr. Pey’s claim. This

°8 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 348.
© Tbid. at paras. 350; 354. Footnotes omitted.

58

conclusion is compelled by the fact that the Tribunal explicitly indicated that
neither party had managed to prove its respective assertions, which a fortiori
means that if the burden of proof had been inverted, Chile rather than the
Claimants would have prevailed on the jurisdiction challenge. [Emphasis in
original]

Claimants’ Position

120. The Claimants submit that, after they had adduced evidence that Mr. Pey Casado had
renounced his Chilean nationality prior to the “critical dates”, the Tribunal rightly
concluded that the burden of proof shifted to Chile which had to demonstrate that the

renunciation was not valid. They write: 7m

296. En l’espéce, les Demanderesses ont démontré que Monsieur Pey avait
renoncé a sa nationalité chilienne antérieurement a la date pertinente pour
V’article 25 de la Convention CIRDI. Tant les autorités espagnoles que les
autorités chiliennes avaient reconnu et accepté cette renonciation. Ce faisant, les
Demanderesses ont satisfait aux exigences de l'article 25 de la Convention
CIRDI en démontrant que Monsieur Pey avait la nationalité exclusive espagnole
aux dates pertinentes.

297. Il appartenait donc a la Défenderesse de démontrer que la renonciation de
Monsieur Pey 4 sa nationalité chilienne, reconnue par |’Espagne et le Chili, était
contraire 4 la Constitution chilienne pour que son exception d’incompétence
prospére.

298. En outre, quelle que soit la partie sur laquelle repose le fardeau de la preuve,
le Tribunal ne s’est pas appuyé sur les régles relatives 4 la preuve pour fonder sa
décision. Le Tribunal a considéré que la thése soutenue par les Demanderesses
était bien fondée en dépit de l’exception soulevée par la République du Chili.

 

Committee’s Analysis
121. The Committee agrees with the Claimants. The Tribunal’s approach was proper.
Looking to Chile to prove that the Claimants’ renunciation was invalid after it had
concluded that the Claimants had discharged their burden of proving that Mr. Pey

” See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras 296-298. Footnote omitted.

59

122.

123.

Casado had renounced his Chilean nationality is not a departure from a fundamental rule

of procedure, let alone a serious one. Chile’s request is therefore dismissed.

C. Investment

(1) Ownership of the Investment

Chile submits that the question as to whether Mr. Pey Casado was the owner of the
investment, the CPP Shares in E/ Clarin, is extremely important since a conclusion by
the Tribunal that he was not the owner would have obviously led the Tribunal to
conclude that it lacked jurisdiction over the dispute. The Tribunal decided that Mr. Pey
Casado was the owner of the shares based on three sets of documents: (1) two documents
that Mr. Pey Casado claimed to be contracts for his purchase of the CPP shares (the so-
called “Estoril Protocol” and “Geneva Declaration”); (2) certain wire transfers that Mr.
Pey Casado claimed to have been payments for the shares; and (3) certain CPP share

certificates and blank transfer certificates that Mr. Pey Casado had in his possession.

(i) Manifest Excess of Powers

The main issues raised by Chile regarding ownership of the investment are:

- whether the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by failing to identify —
and therefore, to apply — the proper law to assess the validity of the Estoril
and Geneva documents as purchase agreements. To determine whether
these documents were valid purchase contracts entered into in Spain, the
Tribunal was required to apply the Spanish Civil Code, which is the code
that regulates contracts in general, and purchase contracts in particular;

- whether, assuming arguendo that the Tribunal identified the proper law, it
failed to apply such law by interpreting the Estoril and Geneva documents
as purchase contracts; and

- whether the Tribunal failed to apply the proper law by rejecting the

application of the Chilean legal norms that governed the transfer of

60

company shares in Chile at the time of the alleged investment (viz., Article
451 of the Chilean Commercial Code and Article 37 of Corporation
Regulations), and deciding instead that the transfer of the CPP shares to Mr.
Pey Casado was valid, without identifying the relevant rule on which the

Tribunal relied to support such conclusion.

(ii) Failure to State Reasons

124. The main issue raised by Chile regarding ownership of the investment in connection with

Article 52(1)(e) is whether the Tribunal failed to state reasons for its conclusions on the

issues relating to the validity of the transfer of the CPP shares and on Mr. Pey Casado’s

resulting ownership of the shares.

Chile’s Position

125. Chile summarizes its position as follows:’

Parties’ Positions

1

391. As demonstrated above, contrary to Claimants’ contention in their Counter-
Memorial, Chile is not arguing merely that the Tribunal misinterpreted or erred
in applying the proper law to determine whether Mr. Pey acquired the CPP
shares. Rather, it is Chile’s position that the Tribunal completely failed to apply
the proper law by applying the wrong set of rules to reach the various
determinations that led to its conclusion concerning Mr. Pey’s ownership of the
shares. Indeed, the Tribunal failed to apply: (a) the appropriate provisions of the
Spanish Civil Code to the issue of the validity of the alleged purchase agreements
or contracts (the Estoril Protocol and Geneva Declaration); and (b) the Chilean
Commercial Code and Chile’s Regulation of National and Foreign Companies to
the issue of the validity of the transfer of the CPP shares.

392. By basing key determinations concerning the issue of ownership of the CPP
shares on an application of the wrong law, and/or on a non-application of the
correct law, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, which warrants

7 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 391-392. Footnote omitted.

61

annulment of the Award under Article 52 (1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.
[Emphasis in original]

126. Chile further contends that there are several facets of the Tribunal’s determination
concerning the existence of an “investment” covered by the BIT that the Tribunal failed

to explain.”

Claimants’ Position
127. The Claimants reject Chile’s contention, they submit: B

239. N’ayant trouvé ni dans les textes, ni dans l’application qu’en avaient fait les
cours chiliennes, la confirmation de la thése de la Défenderesse, le Tribunal a
interprété ce silence comme la démonstration que la sanction ne pouvait pas étre
la nullité absolue, celle-ci ne se présumant, en principe, pas. Par cette conclusion,
le Tribunal n’a pas refusé, ou omis, d’appliquer le droit chilien pertinent en la
matiére. Tout au plus, la République du Chili pourrait prétendre que le Tribunal a
commis une erreur dans son appréciation, erreur qui n’est pas suffisante pour
justifier l’annulation de la Sentence, quand bien méme elle serait « manifestement
injustifiée ».

240. Le Tribunal arbitral poursuit en indiquant que, selon les dispositions de droit
chilien, l’accomplissement des formalités n’est enfermé dans aucun délai. Dés
lors, Monsieur Pey aurait pu y remédier s’il n’en avait pas été empéché par la
confiscation de ses titres et du Livre-registre des actionnaires par les autorités
chiliennes.

241. Il en résulte que le Tribunal arbitral n’a pas écarté une norme de droit
applicable, il I’a au contraire mise en ceuvre dans toute sa portée. Les discussions
de la République du Chili sur cette partie de la Sentence ont pour objet de faire
infirmer la conclusion du Tribunal arbitral par la voie d’un appel au fond, ce qui
est exclu par l’article 53 de la Convention CIRDI.

128. The Claimants also reject Chile’s contention that the Tribunal failed to state reasons in

this regard.”

” See list of sixteen examples at para. 683 and three additional examples at para. 475 of Resp. Mem.
Annulment.

* See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 239-242. Footnotes omitted.

62

129.

130.

131.

Committee’s Analysis

It is clear that Chile is here seeking in effect to appeal the Tribunal’s decision and is
asking the Committee to substitute its decision for that of the Tribunal. As is well
established, this is not the remit of an Annulment Committee. An ad hoc committee is
not an appeal body. In any case, the Committee finds that the Tribunal has not exceeded
its powers and that it has provided ample reasons for its conclusion that Mr. Pey Casado

was the owner of all the CPP shares.

Chile argues that the Tribunal completely failed to apply the proper law by applying the
wrong set of rules to reach its determination that Mr. Pey Casado was the owner of the
shares. Chile impugns two facets of the Tribunal’s reasoning, concerning: (i) the validity
of the share purchase agreements; and (ii) the validity of the transfer of the CPP shares.
With respect to the share purchase agreements (the Estoril Protocol and Geneva
Declaration), Chile argues that the Tribunal should have applied the Spanish Civil Code
rather than the Spanish Commercial Code. With regard to the transfer of the shares,
Chile contends that the Tribunal should have applied the Chilean Commercial Code and

the Regulation of National and Foreign Companies rather than the Chilean Civil Code.”°

The Committee notes that the Tribunal based its analysis regarding the ownership of the
CPP shares on a series of detailed findings of facts.’° The legal issue of the validity of
the contracts is introduced by the Tribunal in the following words:””

Dans le souci d’étre complet, le Tribunal examinera en dernier lieu |’ argument de

la défenderesse visant 4 contester la validité juridique du contrat de vente des
actions de CPP S.A.

 

™ Thid. at para. 447.

*5 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at para. 391.
7 See Award at paras. 202-218.

” Tbid. at para. 219.

63

132.

133.

The question of “Ja validité juridique du contrat de vente des actions” was not essential
to the Tribunal’s reasoning and conclusion concerning ownership of the CPP shares.
Therefore, even assuming, for the sake of argument, that the Tribunal applied the wrong
law to determine that question (which, to be clear, the Committee does not say was the
case), such an error would not amount to a manifest excess of power or a failure to state
reasons. In any event, the Committee is persuaded by the Claimants’ arguments that the
Tribunal implicitly applied the Spanish Civil Code (Article 1445 in particular) by
referring to the Claimants’ analysis made during the May 2003 Hearing and by stating
that there was an agreement on the object and the price.”* Finally, the Committee notes
that, as asserted by the Claimants, Chile never argued before the Tribunal that the
Spanish Civil Code was applicable to determine the validity of the purchase agreements.
Instead, Chile was focusing on the language used in the documents concerned. It goes
without saying that the Award cannot be annulled on the basis of an argument introduced

for the first time in the annulment proceeding.

With respect to the validity of the transfer of the legal title to the CPP shares, the
Tribunal recognized that Article 451 of the Chilean Commercial Code and Article 37 of
Corporation Regulations require compliance with specific norms; the Tribunal
considered that these norms must be observed to obtain a transfer of control with effect
erga omnes.” The Tribunal was not convinced by the Respondent’s arguments,
however, and concluded that the absence of registration in the respective Corporate
Shareholders’ Registry did not affect the validity of the transfer of control that is at issue

here, which concerns a transfer intra partes.*°

*8 See Cl. Rej. Annulment at para. 74.
” See Award at para. 226.
89 Thid. at para. 227.

64

134.

135.

136.

137.

In its Reply on Annulment, Chile contends that the Tribunal did not state under what rule
it analyzed the validity of the intra partes transfer of control. In the absence of any
specific explanation in this regard in the Award, Chile infers that the Tribunal implicitly
accepted the Claimants’ arguments and erroneously applied the Chilean Civil Code.*!
The Committee disagrees. The Committee does not see in the Award any reference,
explicit or implicit, to the application by the Tribunal of the Chilean Civil Code to this
question. The Tribunal analyzed the relevant cases and expert reports and concluded that
neither the Commercial Code nor the Corporation Regulations provide for the nullity of

the transfer in the event of non-compliance with the formality requirements.”

The Committee finds no manifest excess of powers by the Tribunal on these issues and,
as noted above, finds that the Tribunal provided ample reasons for its findings. Chile’s

request is accordingly dismissed.

(2) Investment Made in Accordance with the BIT

The parties disagreed on whether Mr. Pey Casado’s investment was in fact an
“investment” for purposes of Articles 1(2) and 2(2) of the Chile-Spain BIT. Those
articles required the investment to have been made “in accordance with” Chilean
legislation and to qualify as a “foreign” investment under the Chilean law applicable at

the time.

Chile maintains that the Tribunal was required to apply three key legal norms applicable
to investments in the newspaper industry in Chile in 1972, which the Tribunal explicitly
recognized were in force in Chile at the time: (1) the Chile-Spain Dual Nationality
Convention, which established the concept of “effective nationality,’ which in turn

governed which of those two nations’ legislations would be applicable at a given time to

81 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at para. 378.
® See Award at paras. 227-228.

65

138.

139.

140.

a Chilean-Spanish dual national; (2) Decision 24, which required that a capital
contribution be made by a foreign person for an investment to qualify as a “foreign
investment” and which barred foreign investment in the Chilean newspaper industry; and
(3) Chilean Law No. 16,643, which required that owners of newspapers in Chile be
Chilean.

Chile contends that these norms presented the Claimants with a “fatal dilemma”. If Mr.
Pey Casado was a foreigner at the time of his investment (1972), he could not have
invested in the Chilean newspaper industry “in accordance with Chilean law” as required
by the BIT, because foreign investment in the media industry was barred in 1972 by both
Decision 24 and Law No. 16,643; on the other hand, if he was a Chilean national at the
relevant time, then by definition he could not have made a “foreign” investment for
purposes of the BIT. According to Chile, the Tribunal could not rationally at the same
time deem Mr. Pey Casado to be a Chilean for purposes of Decision 24 and Law No.

16,643, and yet a Spaniard for purposes of the BIT.

(i) = Manifest Excess of Powers
Chile argues that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by failing to apply Articles
1(2) and 2(2) of the Chile-Spain BIT, which required that it determine whether Mr. Pey
Casado’s alleged investment was an investment made “in accordance with” Chilean law,

and also whether it was a “foreign” investment.

(ii) Failure to State Reasons

On this question, Chile also argues that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for its
conclusion that Mr. Pey Casado simultaneously was a foreigner for purposes of the BIT,
and yet a Chilean for purposes of the Chilean norms restricting foreign investment in the

newspaper sector. In other words, the Tribunal should have provided a reasoned solution

66

to the “fatal dilemma” rather than simply declaring ex cathedra that it was not a dilemma

at all.5

Parties’ Positions
Chile’s Position

141. Chile summarizes its position in relation to the Tribunal’s conclusion as to the

application of Decision 24 as follows:**

398. Had the Tribunal applied Articles 1 and 43 of Decision 24, it necessarily
would have concluded that Mr. Pey’s alleged investment was not a foreign
investment, but rather only a domestic one, and that as such it was not covered by
the Chile-Spain BIT. This conclusion in turn would have mandated a finding that
Mr. Pey’s claim was barred for failure to meet the jurisdictional requirement of
proving the existence of an investment covered by the BIT.

399. Instead, the Tribunal decided to disregard Decision 24, on the asserted basis
that, although in force, it was not adequately being enforced in Chile at the time
of Mr. Pey’s investment. In their Counter-Memorial, Claimants defend the
Tribunal’s decision. However, the fact that the Chilean government might not
have established comprehensive mechanisms for enforcing all rules of Decision
24 does not mean that Decision 24 was not the applicable law in Chile at the
time. It is not uncommon for new legislation to create new governmental
agencies or departments and to establish new requirements that have to be
processed by those agencies. It is understood that it takes time to create such
governmental offices and to put in place those processes. This does not mean,
however, that the whole legislation can be deemed ineffective, or can be set aside
as “not really” constituting the governing law, until such time as implementing
procedures are fully in place. The Tribunal failed to apply the proper law on this
point, in a way that clearly affected the outcome of the case. This requires
annulment under Article 52(1)(b).

85 See Resp. Pre-H. Skel. at p. 5.
4 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 398-399. Footnotes omitted.

67

142. As to Law 16,643, Chile submits:*°

404. As the Republic explained in its Memorial, it is illogical to suggest—as
Claimants and the Tribunal do—that simply by virtue of Mr. Pey’s dual
nationality it was possible, on the one hand, for him to wear his Spanish hat when
acquiring the newspaper for the purposes of the BIT, and yet at exactly the same
time wear his Chilean hat when acquiring the newspaper for purposes of the
Chilean law relating to acquisition of media companies. The Republic is not
suggesting, as Claimants insinuate, that Mr. Pey’s dual nationality in itself would
have rendered his investments in Chile unprotected by the BIT. Rather, because
of Law 16,643, any investment made specifically in the newspaper industry in
1972 a fortiori had to be considered a domestic investment, because foreigners
were prohibited from investing in this particular business sector.

405. The Tribunal exceeded its powers by failing to apply Chilean law 16,643
and also by failing to apply Article 2(2) of the BIT. By doing so, it accepted
jurisdiction over an investment that as a matter of Chilean law could not benefit
from the protection of the Chile-Spain BIT. Consequently, the Award should be
annulled under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention. [Emphasis in original]

143. Finally, Chile adds:*°

406. There is an additional aspect of the Tribunal’s finding of a “foreign”
investment by Mr. Pey that merits discussion. In addition to all of the problems
noted above relating to Mr. Pey’s legal inability at relevant times to renounce
Chilean nationality and his failure to take steps to actually do so, it is also
relevant that at the time of Mr. Pey’s alleged investment (1972), Mr. Pey was
formally domiciled in Chile pursuant to Article 2 of the Dual Nationality
Convention. Under that provision, and by the Tribunal’s express terms, Mr. Pey
had to be deemed fully Chilean for all legal purposes: “Dés cette inscription, les
Chiliens en Espagne et les Espagnols au Chili jouiront de la pleine condition
juridique des ressortissants de la fagon prévue dans cet accord et dans les lois des
deux pays.” Therefore, had the Tribunal applied Article 2 of the Dual Nationality
Convention to its analysis of the nature of the investment, it necessarily would
have concluded that Mr. Pey’s alleged investment was made as a Chilean
national, and therefore could not have qualified as a foreign investment for the
purposes of the BIT.

85 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 404-405. Footnotes omitted.
8 Thid. at paras. 406-408. Footnotes omitted.

68

407. Further, Article 3 of the Convention makes clear that “[lJes ressortissants
des deux parties Contractantes concernées ne seront pas soumis simultanément
aux législations des deux parties en leur condition de personne naturelle de ces
parties, mais uniquement a celle ot ils ont élu domicile.” Therefore, as stated in
the Republic’s Memorial, Mr. Pey could not have acquired the newspaper and
have been considered a Spanish investor for the purposes of the BIT, and yet at
exactly the same time have been considered a Chilean investor for the purposes
of the Chilean law relating to the acquisition of media companies. Since Mr. Pey
was Chilean for all legal purposes at the time he allegedly made the investment in
question, his alleged acquisition could not have constituted a “foreign”
investment under Chilean law.

 

408. The Tribunal’s failure to apply Articles 2 and 3 of the Dual Nationality
Convention had a determinative effect on the Tribunal’s conclusions, because as
a result [it] improperly asserted jurisdiction over an investment that could not
have qualified as a foreign investment under the relevant Chilean law as required
by Article 2(2) of the BIT. As a result, it also failed to apply Article 2(2) of the
BIT, and it manifestly exceeded its powers, which compels annulment of the
Award. [Emphasis in original]

144. As to its contention that the Tribunal failed to state reasons in respect of this issue, Chile
submits that the Tribunal’s reasoning in paragraph 410 of the Award*’ cannot explain its

conclusion that the posited dilemma was not fatal to Mr. Pey Casado’s ICSID claim.**

Claimants’ Position
145. The Claimants reject Chile’s contention regarding Decision 24 in the following words:*

405. Tout au long de la procédure d’ arbitrage, la République du Chili a soutenu
que les investissements étrangers étaient régis par la Décision 24 du Pacte de
Carthagéne entrée en vigueur au Chili en 1971, conformément aux décrets n° 482

87 See Award at para. 410: « Le Tribunal a déja conclu que la Décision n°24 n’avait en
Vobjet d'une application effective au Chili. Le dilemme mis en évidence par la défenderesse ne s’est donc
jamais réellement posé. En 1972, lorsque M. Pey Casado a effectué son investissement, il était titulaire de
la double nationalité hispano-chilienne. Résidant au Chili depuis 1947, M. Pey Casado bénéficiait de la
Convention sur la double nationalité depuis 1958. La loi n°16.643 ne contenant pas de disposition
spécifique relative aux doubles nationaux, la situation de M. Pey Casado était donc tout a fait compatible
avec les dispositions de ce texte. »

88 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 478 et seq.

® See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 405-412. Footnotes omitted.

éalité jamais fait

 
 

69

et 488. Dés lors, pour étre qualifié d’investissement étranger, il convenait de
démontrer |’existence de transferts de capitaux vers le Chili, par une personne
n’ayant pas la nationalité chilienne. En outre, l'investissement devait étre
préalablement autorisé et enregistré auprés des autorités compétentes. Ne
remplissant aucune de ces conditions, |’investissement réalisé par Monsieur Pey
en 1972 ne pouvait étre qualifié d’investissement étranger selon la délégation du
Chili.

406. La position des Demanderesses concernant I’application de la Décision 24
du Pacte de Carthagéne est résumée aux paragraphes 356 4 360 de la Sentence.

407. De fait, la question de |’entrée en vigueur et de l’application effective de la
Décision 24 a été trés largement débattue par les Parties.

 

408. Comme |’indique justement la République du Chili dans son Mémoire en
annulation, le Tribunal arbitral, aprés avoir analysé les arguments des deux
Parties, a considéré que la Décision 24 issue du Pacte de Carthagéne était entrée
en vigueur au Chili.

409. Partant, le Tribunal a continué d’analyser l’argumentaire des Parties sur la
Décision 24. Il indique ainsi, « dans I’hypothése ott la Décision n°24 serait
entrée en vigueur, les Demanderesses ont toutefois fait valoir que l’application
pratique de la Décision n°24 exigeait l’adoption d’un certain nombre de mesures
qui n'ont pas été prises et qu’en conséquence la Décision n°24 n’a jamais été
effectivement appliquée ».

410. Aujourd’hui, pour la premiére fois, la République du Chili reproche au
Tribunal arbitral d’avoir procédé a cet exercice. Selon elle, le Tribunal arbitral
aurait di appliquer les dispositions de la Décision 24 sans rechercher si celle-ci
6tait effectivement appliquée, comme le lui demandaient les Demanderesses.

411. Cet argument est curieux. Il consiste 4 soutenir que le Tribunal aurait di
appliquer les dispositions de la Décision 24 a l’investissement de Monsieur Pey
sans se soucier de savoir si ces dispositions étaient effectivement appliquées 4
tous les investissements étrangers au Chili 4 cette époque. En d’autres termes,
l'investissement de Monsieur Pey aurait di recevoir un traitement spécial,
discriminatoire, par rapport aux autres investissements étrangers.

412. La République du Chili ne peut sérieusement reprocher au Tribunal arbitral
de s’étre assuré de l’application concréte et effective des dispositions de la
Décision 24. Elle ne peut pas non plus demander au Comité ad hoc de
sanctionner la Sentence sur ce fondement. [Emphasis in original]

 

70

146. As for Chile’s contention regarding Law 16,643, the Claimants submit:”°

417. S’agissant du prétendu dilemme soulevé par la République du Chili, le
Tribunal arbitral précise « le Tribunal a déja conclu que la Décision n°24 n’ avait
en réalité jamais fait |’ objet d’une application effective au Chili. Le dilemme mis

en évidence par la défenderesse ne s’est donc jamais réellement posé ».

418. Aujourd’hui, pour la premiére fois, la République du Chili prétend que le
dilemme en question concerne |’incompatibilité du respect des dispositions de la
loi 16.643 et la qualité d’investisseur étranger au sens de |’ API. Elle soutient que

 

pour étre qualifié d’inves'
son investissement en qualité d’ espagnol en 1972.

sement étranger, Monsieur Pey devait avoir effectué

419. Ce n’est pas ce qu’a retenu le Tribunal dans sa Sentence. En effet, le
Tribunal constate que |’API retient une «conception large de la notion
d’investissement » la seule condition étant « celle de l’acquisition en conformité

au droit de I’ Etat d’ accueil ».

420. Or, le Tribunal a constaté que le droit chilien ne contenait pas de disposition
définissant l’investissement étranger et que celui-ci ne devait pas remplir de
condition particuliére. La loi 16.643 de 1967 quant a elle ne concerne pas
l'investissement. Elle impose simplement aux propriétaires de journaux d’étre de
nationalité chilienne, condition remplie par Monsieur Pey en raison de sa double
nationalité en application de la CDN de 1958. La République du Chili ne peut
done s’appuyer sur la loi 16.643 pour démontrer que l'investissement de

Monsieur Pey n’était pas un investissement étranger au sens de |’ API.

421. En réalité, la République du Chili entretient volontairement une confusion
entre différentes notions, l’application ratione materiae et V application ratione
personae de API. Or, l’argument du Chili ci-dessus mentionné concerne
V’'application ratione personae de l API. A cet égard, le Tribunal a considéré que
V’API ne contenait pas de disposition spécifique aux double-nationaux. Il a
également conclu qu’ « un double-national n’est pas exclu du champ de l’API,
méme si sa nationalité ‘effective et dominante’ est celle de l’Etat de
Vinvestissement (contrairement @ ce qui a été soutenu dans l’avis de droit du
Professeur Dolzer, produit par la défenderesse) ». En outre, le Tribunal arbitral a
considéré que « contrairement a l'article 25 de la Convention CIRDI, l’API ne
précise pas le moment de l’appréciation de la nationalité de la partie requérante.
De l’avis du Tribunal, la condition de nationalité au sens de V’'API doit étre

établie a la date du consentement de l’investisseur a l’arbitrage ».

°° Tbid. at paras. 417-423. Footnotes omitted.

71

147.

148.

149.

422. La position du Tribunal arbitral sur la condition d’application ratione
personae n’est donc en rien incompatible avec sa décision concernant le respect
de la loi chilienne 16.643 relative a I’ abus de publicité.

423. Contrairement a l’allégation du Chili, le Tribunal arbitral a bien appliqué le
droit chilien pour déterminer si l'investissement de Monsieur Pey avait été
effectué en conformité au droit chilien. [Emphasis in original]

The Claimants accordingly refute Chile’s contention that the Tribunal failed to state

wae 91
reasons in this regard.

Committee’s Analysis

This is a complex question. It was recognized as such by the Tribunal which analyzed all
facets of the question and considered all of the parties’ arguments in a very thorough
manner. Chile may not agree with the Tribunal’s conclusions but once again it bears
stating that this is not an appeal but an annulment proceeding, and it is not the role of an
annulment committee to act as a court of appeal. As explained below, the Committee can
see no manifest excess of power in the Tribunal’s conclusions with respect to Decision
24, Law 16,643 or the Dual Nationality Convention. In addition, the Committee finds
that the Tribunal provided ample and indeed very detailed reasons to support its

conclusions.

Contrary to Chile’s assertion, the Committee considers that the Tribunal applied the
“proper law”, i.e., Articles 1(2) and 2(2) of the BIT as well as the Chilean law to which
these provisions refer. This is clearly stated by the Tribunal in paragraph 370 of the
Award. In the same paragraph, the Tribunal determined that the applicable law was

Chilean law in force in 1972, at the time the investment was made.

°" Tbid. at paras. 439-448.

72

150.

151.

152.

According to Chile, the applicable Chilean law consisted of three norms applicable to the
newspaper industry. One of these norms is known as Decision 24.° The Tribunal
recognized that this Decision was in force in Chile but, on the basis of the evidence
submitted by the parties, it found that, by 1972, Decision 24 had not been effectively
applied by Chile “ ...[vu] l’absence d’adoption des mesures nécessaires 4 cette fin...”

For these reasons, the Tribunal concluded that Decision 24 was ineffective.

Chile argues that, by finding that Decision 24 was ineffective because it had not been
applied in Chile, the Tribunal added a requirement to Article 2(2) of the BIT and,
consequently failed to apply the proper law. It is not within the Committee’s mandate to
determine whether or not the Tribunal was justified in taking into account the
effectiveness of Decision 24 in order to decide whether it was part of the “/égislation de
la Partie contractante concernée” as required by Article 2(2) of the BIT. In any case, the
Committee notes that the Tribunal went on to analyse the regulations which Decision 24
was meant to replace and found that they were not applicable to the investment made by

Mr. Pey Casado.”*

The second norm discussed by Chile is Law 16,643 which requires that the owners of
Chilean newspapers be Chilean nationals. Chile argued that this law is relevant to
determine whether the investment was “acquired in accordance with the law” of Chile as
required in Article 1(2) of the BIT. As noted earlier in this Decision, Chile claimed that
the Claimants faced a “fatal dilemma” at the time the investment was made: acquiring the
newspaper as a Spanish investor for the purposes of Decision 24 and, at the same time

acquiring the newspaper as a Chilean investor for the purposes of Law 16,643. The

°* Document approved in 1970 by the Commission created by the Cartagena Accord (multilateral regional
integration treaty to which Chile is a party) regarding common regime for the treatment of foreign capital
in the Contracting States to the Accord.

°° See Award at para. 401; see also paras. 397-398.

° Tbid. at paras. 402-408.

73

153.

154.

155.

Tribunal resolved any issue in this regard very simply. No such dilemma existed, said
the Tribunal, for the reason that (as noted above) Decision 24 was not applicable.
Additionally, the Tribunal stated that, when the investment was made, Mr. Pey Casado
was a dual national and, since Law 16,643 did not include any specific provision
regarding dual nationals, the investment was perfectly compatible with such law.> In the
view of the Committee, by thus interpreting Law 16,643, the Tribunal applied the proper

law.

Chile also contends that a dilemma arises by virtue of the requirement of Law 16,643 that
a newspaper owner be Chilean, and the requirement of Article 2(2) of the BIT that an
investment be “foreign” (independently of Decision 24). In this connection, Chile
submits that the Tribunal failed to apply Articles 2 and 3 of the Dual Nationality

Convention, which is the third norm referred to by Chile.

Chile submits that, pursuant to the provisions referred to in the preceding paragraph,
since Mr. Pey Casado was domiciled in Chile in 1972, he is to be treated as a Chilean
national for all legal purposes. Chile asserts that, had the Tribunal applied these
provisions, it would necessarily have found that the investment was in fact Chilean and
not “foreign” for purposes of the BIT. The Claimants answer that this argument was

never raised before the Tribunal.

Whether or not Chile raised this argument before the Tribunal, the Committee notes that
the Tribunal interpreted Article 2(2) of the BIT as requiring that it determine whether Mr.
Pey Casado’s acquisition of the CPP shares constituted a “foreign” investment according
to the applicable Chilean law in 1972. In the context of that determination, and as the
Committee has already observed above, the Tribunal found that the applicable law did

not include Decision 24, that Mr. Pey Casado’s situation did not fall within the scope of

° Thid. at para. 410.

74

156.

157.

the other decrees that Decision 24 was meant to replace and that Law 16,643 was not
incompatible with Mr. Pey Casado’s dual nationality. The Tribunal then concluded that
there was no specific definition of a “foreign” investment in Chile in 1972 and that, since
Mr. Pey Casado had purchased the shares and paid for them using a foreign currency
drawn on European bank accounts, his investment could thus be treated as “foreign” and
in conformity with Article 1(2) and 2(2) of the BIT.”® Accordingly, the Tribunal did not
need to decide whether Mr. Pey Casado had made the investment as a Spanish national or
a Chilean national or a dual national in order for the investment to be considered

“foreign”.

The Committee notes that the Tribunal’s conclusion in this respect is consistent with
what it decided in the subsequent paragraphs of the Award with respect to the question of
nationality under the BIT.’ The Tribunal determined that the dates on which the
nationality requirement of the BIT had to be met were the date on which Mr. Pey Casado
gave his consent to arbitration and the date on which the alleged breaches of the BIT
occurred, not the date on which the investment was made.”* The Tribunal also concluded
that the BIT, unlike the ICSID Convention, does not bar a dual national from bringing a
claim against his or her own State.” In these circumstances, the Committee finds that

the Tribunal applied the proper law.

The Committee sees no manifest excess of powers in the Tribunal’s conclusions with
respect to Decision 24, Law 16,643 or the Dual Nationality Convention. The Committee
finds that the Tribunal provided ample and very detailed reasons to support its

conclusions in this respect.

°° Thid. at para. 411.
° Tbid. at paras. 412-418.
°8 Thid. at para. 414.
°° Tid. at para. 415.

75

158.

159.

160.

161.

Chile’s requests are accordingly denied.

(3) The Ratione Temporis Application of the BIT

Chile’s starting point in this regard is that the only investment of the Claimants was their
investment in El Clarin. The Tribunal concluded in the Award that E/ Clarin had been
definitively expropriated by no later than 1975: first de facto, by means of the physical
seizure of the newspaper facilities in 1973, and then de jure, by means of an
expropriatory decree promulgated in 1975. The Tribunal also concluded that the
expropriation had been instantaneous, expressly rejecting Claimants’ argument that it
constituted a “continuing act” and thus an ongoing violation at the time the BIT entered
into force. Further, the Tribunal determined that the post-BIT acts by Chile that it
ultimately considered to be treaty violations — namely, the execution of Decision No. 43
and the alleged denial of justice in connection with the Goss printer proceedings — were
completely separate and distinct from the 1975 expropriation. Specifically, the Award
stated: “The confiscation and transfer to the State of the property of the assets of CPP and
EPC constitute a consummated and distinct act from the violations that post-dated the

BIT’s entry into force py”

In the words of Chile in its Skeleton (at page 6), “since El Clarin had been definitively
expropriated by 1975, Claimants had no remaining investment in Chile by the time of the
BIT’s entry into force (1994) and a fortiori no investment by the date of the alleged post-
BIT acts for which the Tribunal found Chile responsible”.

(i) = Manifest Excess of Powers

In light of the Tribunal’s own conclusion that Mr. Pey Casado’s investment in El Clarin

had been fully extinguished upon its expropriation in the 1970s, the main issue raised by

1 Tid. at para. 620.

76

Chile in connection with Article 52(1)(b) is whether the Tribunal failed to apply the
proper law (Article 2(2) of the BIT) by not identifying the investment still owned by the
Claimants which could have been affected by the acts and omissions deemed to

constitute BIT violations.

(ii) Failure to State Reasons

162. The main issue raised by Chile in connection with Article 52(1)(e) is whether the
Tribunal failed to state reasons for asserting jurisdiction over alleged harm to an
investment that, by the Tribunal’s own reasoning, had been extinguished more than
twenty years prior to the BIT’s entry into force, and therefore could not have constituted
an “existing investment” either at that time, or at the time of the subsequent State acts

that the Tribunal considered to be the basis for liability.
Parties’ Positions
Chile’s Position

163. Chile’s sets out its submission that the Tribunal failed to apply Articles 1(2) and 2(2) of

the BIT in the following words: tol

416. Here, the Republic asserts that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers
because it improperly asserted jurisdiction over alleged post-BIT acts by Chile
that could not have affected any investment of Claimants, for the simple reason
that Claimants had no investment still existing at the time of the alleged acts. The
Tribunal correctly noted at the outset of its analysis in the Award that Articles
1(2) and 2(2) of the BIT permitted claims only for investments that were “already
existing at the time of entry into force of the BIT”:

Il est clair, en revanche, que les articles 1(2) et 2(2) de I’ API exigent de
V'investisseur qu’il effectue un investissement qui soit conforme a la

législation chilienne en vigueur a Il’époque et, _ s’agissant
d’investi existant au_moment de I’entrée en vigueur du traité.

10! See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 416-422. Footnotes omitted.

77

qui puisse étre qualifié d’investissement étranger au sens de cette
législation.

417. The foregoing necessarily means that an investment that had terminated
before the date of the BIT’s entry into force (i.e., that was no longer “existing” on
that date) would be outside the scope of the BIT. However, and incongruously,
the Tribunal then failed to identify an investment by Mr. Pey that was still
“existing” upon entry into force of the Chile-Spain BIT in 1994. In other words,
having first articulated correctly what the BIT required by way of analysis for
application of Articles 1(2) and 2(2), it then simply failed to apply such
requirements to Claimants.

418. It bears recalling that the investment Mr. Pey allegedly made ceased
altogether to exist in 1973, upon the de facto confiscation of El Clarin, or at the
latest in 1975, upon the issuance of Decree No. 165 formally expropriating El
Clarin and definitively dissolving the relevant corporate entities (CPP and EPC).
The Tribunal itself conceded this key point when it concluded that the
expropriation of El Clarin was an “instantaneous” act that concluded when it
happened in the 1970s. This means necessarily that Claimants’ investment was
extinguished at that time. The Tribunal did not purport to suggest that the
“investment” somehow continued to exist independently of the property that was
expropriated, or that every subsequent disposition by the Government of the
expropriated property constituted a new “expropriation” affecting the original
owners. To the contrary, the Tribunal’s conclusion was precisely the opposite:
that the expropriation of El Clarin was not a “continuing” act.

419. Given the Tribunal’s conclusions in this regard, it is impossible to discern
what “investment” the Republic harmed when it undertook the acts that the
Tribunal concluded were post-entry into force violations of the BIT. The
Tribunal simply does not address this issue at all in the Award. But if El Clarin
was expropriated definitively at the latest by 1975, as the Tribunal conceded, and
if Claimants furthermore did not allege the existence of any other investment,
what investment by Claimants could possibly have existed past 1994, the year the
BIT entered into force? What was the investment that was harmed by the post-
1994 acts that formed the basis of the Tribunal’s finding of responsibility against
Chile?

420. The Tribunal assumed jurisdiction despite the fundamental logical and legal
flaws identified above, eliding the absence of an investment and then ruling in
Claimants’ favor. The Republic could not have foreseen this outcome during the
underlying proceedings, as no acts other than the expropriation itself had been
the subject of a claim in the arbitration. Claimants had argued that the
expropriation of their original investment should be deemed a “continuing” one
that for that reason should be deemed to exist past the date of the BIT’s entry into
force, but they had never argued either (a) that the investment itself was
somehow a “continuing” one; or (b) that they had made some other (different)

78

investment that was covered by the BIT and that was harmed by Chile’s
purported post-BIT acts.

421. Accordingly, there was no reason for Chile to make any arguments in this
regard, and no way it could have predicted that the Tribunal would rule in
Claimants’ favor on the basis of events that occurred long after Mr. Pey’s
investment, which by the Tribunal’s own reasoning had long before been
definitively extinguished. It was only upon reviewing the Award that the
Republic realized this fundamental inconsistency of the Tribunal’s ruling, and
that it had based its finding of responsibility on alleged post-1994 violations
without identifying any investment still existing at the time of those acts.
Claimants’ waiver argument therefore fails.

422. Claimants also now contend, in their Counter-Memorial, that despite the
language of the treaty, and despite the Tribunal’s acceptance that such language
required an “existing” investment at the time of the BIT’s entry into force, the
BIT in fact does not require that the alleged investment still be in existence at the
time of the BIT violation. They therefore apparently argue that it is possible to
breach a particular BIT even if there is no investment in place that is subject to
the BIT’s protection. This is an unsustainable position, because it means that any
investment made at any point in the past (no matter how long before the BIT’s
entry into force) somehow continues to enjoy protection under the BIT ad
aeternitatem. As a matter of logic and common sense, this cannot be correct;
more importantly for purposes of this annulment proceeding, and in particular of
the question of manifest excess of powers, it is directly at odds with the actual
treaty language. As the Tribunal noted, the BIT requires an “existing” investment
at the time of the BIT’s entry into force, and yet, it failed to identify any
investment owned by Claimants that was still “existing” in 1994. This clear
failure by the Tribunal to apply Articles 1(2) and 2(2) of the BIT was a manifest
excess of powers, which compels annulment of the Award under Article 52(1)(b)
of the ICSID Convention. [Emphasis in original]

164. In connection with its contention that the Tribunal failed to state reasons in this regard,

Chile states: !

485. The Tribunal also failed to state reasons on what the “existing investment”
was; i.e. what investment Mr. Pey still had in Chile at the time the BIT entered
into force and/or at the time the Republic undertook the challenged post-BIT
acts. On this issue, the Tribunal reached the following conclusions in the Award:
(1) Articles 1(2) and 2(2) of the BIT required that there be an existing investment

'© Thid. at paras. 485-487. Footnotes omitted.

79

by Mr. Pey in 1994, when the BIT entered into force; and (2) the El Clarin
newspaper had been completely expropriated—and thus the relevant investment
had become extinguished—by 1975 at the latest; (3) the expropriation was
instantaneous, and thus contrary to Claimants’ argument, it did not constitute a
violation that was still continuing at the time the BIT entered into force; and (4)
the post-BIT acts by Chile that the Tribunal ultimately found to be treaty
violations—Decision 43 and the alleged delay in local court proceedings
regarding the Goss Machine—were completely different, and distinct from, the
1975 expropriation.

486. As a matter of pure logic, the foregoing cumulus of conclusions should have
led the Tribunal to conclude that Mr. Pey had no investment that was still an
existing one in 1994, at the time the BIT entered into force, and that therefore
there was no proper basis for exercising jurisdiction over Mr. Pey’s claim. Yet
the Tribunal simply proceeded to assert jurisdiction without explaining its
solution to the foregoing conundrum. It did not explain if it was basing its
assertion of jurisdiction on some theory that the investment made in El Clarin
was somehow a “continuing” one even though, as explained above, it had
determined that the exprop[rJiation of E/ Clarin had been definitely completed
and terminated no later than 1975. But on the other hand, the Tribunal also did
not explain if it was basing its assertion of jurisdiction on the existence of a
different investment; that is, some other investment by Mr. Pey or by the
President Allende Foundation—aside from the long-extinguished El Clarin
investment—that could have been deemed to exist in 1994, when the BIT entered
into force, or after that, when Chile committed the post-BIT acts that the Tribunal
found objectionable. Instead, the Tribunal simply assumed—without any
explanation or reasoning—the existence of some investment: “En revanche, les
dispositions de fond de I’API sont applicables ratione temporis a la violation
résultant de la Décision n°43 et au déni de justice allégué par les

demanderesse[s], ces actes étant post[é]rieurs a |’ entrée en vigueur du traité.

487. The Tribunal seemingly contented itself with noting that it had the authority
to take into consideration pre-BIT events in order to give context to the post-BIT
acts. However, this did not give the Tribunal the authority to elevate to the status
of an “existing” investment one that, by the Tribunal’s own finding, had been
clearly extinguished long before the BIT’s entry into force. [Emphasis in
original]

80

Claimants’ Position

165. The Claimants do not agree with Chile’s reasoning. They explain: 108

425. Par cet argument, la République du Chili entend enfermer le Tribunal
arbitral - et partant le Comité ad hoc - dans un syllogisme simpliste qui peut se
résumer ainsi : l’acte instantané et achevé qu’est le Décret n°165 de 1975
édictant la dissolution de CPP S.A. et EPC Ltée et le passage de tous leurs biens
a l’Btat équivaut a l’extinction pure et simple de tous les droits afférents A ces
biens, et en particulier de la protection conférée par I’ API.

LJ

433. S’agissant du point de savoir si l'investissement effectué par Monsieur Pey
en 1972 était couvert par |’API, le Tribunal fonde sa décision sur article 2.2 de
lV’ API qui prévoit :

Le présent Traité s’appliquera aux investissements qui seraient réalisés a
partir de son entrée en vigueur par des investisseurs de l'une des Parties
contractantes dans le territoire de lautre. Toutefois, il bénéficiera
égal aux_investi: réalisés_antérieurement_a_son_entrée_en
vigueur et qui, selon la législation de la Partie contractante_concernée,
auraient la qualité d’investissement étranger. (Emphasis added)

434. Or, rien dans cet article [de |’ API] n’impose que l’investissement réalisé
existe encore a la date de la violation par |’Etat d’accueil. Il impose seulement
que l'investissement réalisé antérieurement 4 |’entrée en vigueur ait été réalisé
conformément a la législation en vigueur dans |’Etat d’accueil 4 la date de
l'investissement. Le Tribunal a conclu que tel était le cas.

435. L’argument de la Défenderesse consiste 4 imposer un critére supplémentaire
dans la définition des investissements protégés par |’ API. Or, comme I’a indiqué
le Tribunal arbitral 4 propos de la définition du terme « investissement » « une
telle démarche serait de toute évidence contraire a l'article 31 de la Convention
de Vienne sur le droit des traités ».

436. En outre, l’imposition d’une telle condition supplémentaire contrevient 4
l'objet méme du droit international de protection des investissements. En effet,
suivre l’argument de la République du Chili équivaudrait 4 vider de son sens tout
traité de protection des investissements.

3 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 425; 433-438. Footnotes omitted.

81

166.

167.

168.

437. Ceci a d’ailleurs été rappelé dans plusieurs affaires portées devant des
tribunaux arbitraux CIRDI et encore récemment dans la sentence rendue le 15
avril 2009 dans l’affaire Phoenix Action Ltd c/ La République Tchéque qui
précise :

It is true that an investment that has come to a standstill, because of the host
State’s actions, would still qualify as an investment, otherwise the
international protection of foreign investment provided by BITs would be
emptied of its purpose.

438. Il résulte des développements précédents que le Comité ad hoc devra rejeter
la demande d’annulation de la République du Chili sur ce fondement celle-ci
étant irrecevable et 4 tout le moins mal fondée. [Emphasis in original]

In addition, the Claimants refute Chile’s contention that the Tribunal failed to state

reasons in this regard.'“

Committee’s Analysis

The Committee agrees with the Claimants. It is not within the remit of the Committee to
state that it agrees with the Tribunal’s reasoning and conclusion on any issue (although it
does on this particular question). However, it is strictly within its remit to review the
Tribunal’s reasoning and conclusion on every issue raised by the Respondent, as it has
done, and to determine, with respect of these specific grounds, that the Tribunal has not

exceeded its powers nor failed to provide reasons.

The Committee notes that this argument of the “existing investment” had not been raised
by Chile before the Tribunal. Nevertheless, the Committee considers that for the
purposes of the grounds invoked, the Tribunal applied Article 2(2) of the BIT and the
applicable Chilean law to conclude that the investment made by Mr. Pey Casado in 1972

was covered by the BIT.'® In addition, the Committee agrees with the Claimants that

14 Thid. at paras. 439 et seq.
105 See Award at paras. 431-432.

82

one could have made the argument that the duty to provide redress for violation of rights
persists even if the rights as such have come to an end, as long as the relevant treaty
obligation was in force for the State concerned at the time of the alleged breach. '°7
These principles were followed by the Tribunal in the section of the Award dedicated to
the application of the BIT ratione temporis.'% The Committee finds that the Tribunal
did not expressly deal with the question of the existing investment as it was not raised in
these terms by the parties in the arbitral proceeding. Therefore, the Tribunal cannot be

considered as having failed to provide reasons. The Respondent’s request for annulment

on the basis of this challenge is accordingly dismissed.

(4) The Investment by the Foundation - Manifest Excess of Powers

169. The main issue raised by Chile in this connection is whether the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers by failing to apply the proper law — Article 1(2) of the BIT and
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention — to determine whether the cession to the
Fundacion of Mr. Pey Casado’s claim rights constituted a qualifying “investment” for

purposes of the BIT and the ICSID Convention.
Parties’ Positions
Chile’s Position
170. Chile states its position as follows: !

411. The Republic could not have anticipated during the arbitral proceeding that
in its Award, the Tribunal would confuse a transfer of shares for ownership

16 See Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/04/13, Decision on Jurisdiction dated 16 June 2006, at para. 135.

'°T See Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award
dated 11 October 2002, at para. 68 (hereinafter “Mondev Award”).

18 See Award at paras. 419-466.
‘® See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 411; 413-414. Footnotes omitted.

83

purposes with the mere transfer of litigation rights, and that in doing so, it would
fail to analyze the real nature of the Foundation’s alleged investment as a matter
of Chilean law. This, like other annullable errors, became evident to the Republic
only upon review of the Tribunal’s Award.

LJ

413. Chile’s analysis in the Memorial of whether the claim rights received by the
Foundation from Mr. Pey could qualify as an investment was based on the
Tribunal’s reasoning in the Award regarding Mr. Pey’s alleged investment. As
Claimants concede, the Tribunal itself acknowledged a requirement of analyzing
whether the Foundation fulfilled the jurisdictional requirements established by
the ICSID Convention and the Chile-Spain BIT. However, the Tribunal failed to
assess whether the claim rights received by Foundation could in and of
themselves qualify as an investment. In its Memorial, the Republic applied to the
Foundation the same standard that the Tribunal used to determine whether Mr.
Pey’s alleged acquisition qualified as an investment, and demonstrated that the
Tribunal had not applied to the Foundation its own standard to determine whether
the Foundation held an “investment” covered by the BIT. Claimants have not
responded to the Republic’s arguments on this issue. For example, Claimants did
not meaningfully controvert the Republic’s assertion that the Tribunal failed to
analyze whether the Foundation’s alleged investment fulfilled the requirements
established by the ICSID Convention and the Chile-Spain BIT.

414. Had the Tribunal performed with respect to the Foundation’s alleged
investment the same analysis that it had applied to Mr. Pey’s alleged investment,
it necessarily would have concluded that the litigation rights transferred by Mr.
Pey to the Foundation did not qualify as an investment, either under the
provisions of the Chile-Spain BIT—Article 1(2)—or under Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention. Accordingly, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by
asserting jurisdiction over an alleged “investment” by the Foundation that clearly
did not arise out of any activity that could be considered an “investment” under
either the ICSID Convention or the BIT. The Award must therefore be annulled
under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention for this reason. [Emphasis in
original]

Claimants’ Position

171. The Claimants dispute Chile’s submission in this regard in the following words:'!°

" See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 454; 458. Footnotes omitted.

84

454. Au contraire, le Tribunal a indiqué "/a cession des actions n’a transmis que
la qualité d’investisseur a la Fondation, et non pas de ce fait et nécessairement le
droit de réclamation. Pour décider du sort des objections d’incompétence
soulevées par la défenderesse a l’égard de la Fondation Président Allende, le
Tribunal arbitral doit donc analyser la question de savoir si la Fondation
Président Allende remplit toutes les autres conditions posées tant par la
Convention CIRDI que par l’API quant a la compétence du Tribunal arbitral. En
V’espéce ceci concerne notamment les conditions de nationalité au sens de la
Convention CIRDI ainsi que le consentement des Parties a recourir a l’arbitrage
CIRDI pour résoudre leur litige".

LJ

 

458. De fait, la République du Chili tente une fois de plus d’interjeter appel de la
décision du Tribunal arbitral devant le Comité ad hoc en vue de son infirmation.
Le Comité ad hoc rejettera donc la demande d’annulation du Chili sur ce
fondement. [Emphasis in original]

Committee’s Analysis

172. Here again, the Committee agrees with the Claimants. In the view of the Committee,
this is yet another attempt by the Respondent to appeal to the Committee that it should overturn
the decision of the Tribunal and rule, in its stead, that the rights received by the Foundation
from Mr. Pey Casado do not qualify as an investment. This, the Committee will not do. The
Respondent attempts to challenge the Tribunal’s conclusion that there was a transfer of shares
by Mr. Pey Casado to the Foundation that gave the latter the status of investor. Respondent
argues that the shares had ceased to exist and, therefore, could not have been transferred. It
concludes that Mr. Pey Casado could only have transferred litigation or claims rights that
would not qualify as an investment. After having reviewed the parties’ arguments, the
Tribunal came to a different conclusion, namely that the Foundation had acquired the status of
an investor.'!' This meant that the investment remained the same and accordingly, there was

no need for the Tribunal to re-examine whether the rights transferred to the Foundation

"! See Award at para. 543.

85

qualified as an investment under the BIT’s provisions and the ICSID Convention.

Tribunal summarizes its position at paragraph 558 of the Award:

558. Cette conclusion est renforcée par le fait que, en tout état de cause, la
Fondation Allende a obtenu la qualité d’investisseur par la cession de la part de
l'investisseur initial, M. Pey Casado, d’une grande partie de son investissement.
A ce propos, les mémes régles que le Tribunal arbitral a énoncées quant a la
notion d’investissement au sens de J’article 25 de la Convention CIRDI
s’appliquent. Compte tenu de la rédaction trés large de |’ API, une interprétation
plus stricte ne se justifierait pas. En particulier, API ne requiert pas que
V'investisseur ait fait l'investissement lui-méme, ce qui laisse ouverte la
possibilité qu’un investissement (et la qualité d’investisseur) puisse résulter
d’une cession de la part de l’investisseur initial.

The

173. The Tribunal did not exceed its powers and the Award will not be annulled on this

ground. The Respondent’s request is accordingly denied.

D.

qd)

Denial of Justice
Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure

(i) Denial of the Right to be Heard

174. Chile contends that, contrary to Article 52(1)(d), the Tribunal denied it the right to be

heard on the Claimants’ alleged denial of justice which ultimately gave rise to

responsibility under the Award. Thus, as a threshold matter, Chile’s challenge in this

regard raises the issue of whether the Claimants asserted the denial of justice claim for

which the Tribunal found Chile responsible. It is recalled that the Tribunal found that

Chile “a violé son obligation de faire bénéficier les demanderesses d’un traitement juste

et équitable, en ce compris celle de s’abstenir de tout déni de justice”. The Tribunal’s

conclusion in this regard is further set forth at paragraph 674 of the Award:

674. Dans le cas d’espéce, en résumé, en accordant des compensations — pour des
raisons qui lui sont propres et sont restées inexpliquées — 4 des personnages qui,
de l’avis du Tribunal arbitral, n’ étaient pas propriétaires des biens confisqués, en
méme temps qu’elle paralysait ou rejetait les revendications de M. Pey Casado
concernant les biens confisqués, la République du Chili a manifestement commis
un déni de justice et refusé de traiter les demanderesses de fagon juste et
équitable.

86

Parties’ Positions
Chile’s Position

175. Chile argues that Claimants never alleged post-entry into force BIT violations related to
denial of justice (Article 4 of the BIT). Consequently, the Republic was not afforded the

opportunity to present defenses, evidence, or witnesses in respect of these claims!”

176. Chile contends as follows: ''?

64. Claimants do not dispute that in the May 2008 Award, the Tribunal
concluded that the BIT’s substantive provisions could not apply to the
confiscation of El Clarin because the relevant expropriatory actions had predated
the BIT’s entry into force in 1994. However, the Tribunal also concluded that the
BIT could in fact be applied to certain alleged BIT violations by Chile that
occurred after the Chile-Spain BIT entered into force.

65. The Tribunal found Chile liable to Mr. Pey under the fair and equitable
treatment provision of the Chile-Spain BIT (Article 4) as a result of two such
alleged post-entry-into-force violations. The first was an alleged procedural
denial of justice due to an “undue delay” by the First Civil Court of Santiago in
deciding Mr. Pey’s claim for the 1973 confiscation of a Goss printing press that
belonged to El Clarin. The second related to an administrative decision— known
as “Decision 43”—that was rendered in Chile by the Ministry of National Assets
following an administrative proceeding pursuant to a law enacted to compensate
victims of Pinochet-era expropriations. In the particular proceeding that resulted
in Decision 43—which was distinct and unrelated to the judicial proceeding
concerning the Goss machine—the successors of the four registered shareholders
of El Clarin had sought compensation from the State for the confiscation of El
Clarin. It is important to recall in this regard that Chilean authorities had
specifically invited Mr. Pey—in writing—to take part in this proceeding.
However, Mr. Pey had voluntarily and expressly declined to participate (so as to
not run afoul of the fork-in-the-road provision of the Chile-Spain BIT and
thereby prejudice his ICSID claim).

"2 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 88. Footnote omitted.
"3 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 64-68. Footnotes omitted.

87

66. At the conclusion of the relevant administrative process, the Chilean Ministry
of National Assets issued “Decision 43,” in which it authorized compensation to
the successors of the registered shareholders of El Clarin (a determination that
the Republic continues to consider was correct, because the relevant beneficiaries
were able to prove ownership of the CPP shares under Chilean law). Shortly after
the issuance of Decision 43, Mr. Pey asked the ICSID Tribunal for provisional
measures enjoining its execution. However, the Tribunal rejected this request,
explaining that “la Décision Ministérielle n° 43 et son exécution au Chili n’ont
pas des conséquences telles qu’elles puissent affecter ou la compétence du
Tribunal Arbitral CIRDI, ou les droits allégués par les Parties demanderesses . .
. .” Later, however, and wholly inconsistently with its Provisional Measures
decision, the Tribunal was to hold in the Award that the execution of Decision
43—that is, the compensation of persons other than Mr. Pey for the confiscation
of El Clarin—had discriminated against Mr. Pey on the basis of his nationality,
in violation of the fair and equitable treatment provision of the Chile-Spain BIT.

67. Claimants in their Counter-Memorial seek to sow confusion by blurring the
lines between the alleged claims relating to the Goss printer and Decision 43 (i.e.,
the “denial of justice” claim and the “discrimination” claim, respectively). The
truth is that these two issues are—and were found by the Tribunal to be—
completely distinct. While Claimants complained in the arbitration that Decision
43 was unfair by calling it a “denial of justice,” the basis for the Tribunal’s
finding of “denial of justice” in the Award (as opposed to its finding of
“discrimination”) was wholly unrelated to Decision 43. Rather, such finding
related solely to the length of the Goss machine proceeding. Accordingly, it is
important that the Committee members examine carefully—and in context—the
passages that Claimants cite as evidence that they in fact asserted the alleged
denial of justice claim for which the Tribunal found Chile liable. The Committee
needs to determine what exactly it is that Claimants were referring to in those
instances in which they used the term “denial of justice” at various times in the
arbitration, and then to determine whether the intended meaning in such instances
matches the alleged claim upon which the Award actually was based.

68. As Chile explained in its Request for Annulment and in its Memorial, it was
not afforded an opportunity to be heard regarding either of the two alleged claims
on which the Tribunal based its Award. It was precluded from responding to the
denial of justice “claim” because: (1) Claimants at no point asserted any denial of
justice claim specifically relating to the delay in the Goss machine proceeding
(which was the sole basis of the Tribunal’s finding of responsibility due to
“denial of justice”); and (2) Claimants purported to assert a vague “denial of
justice” claim concerning the Goss Machine proceedings only on the final day of
the final hearing. Moreover, the vague denial of justice “claim” was purportedly
raised at a hearing that Claimants concede had been convened to address
“questions portant exclusivement sur la compétence,” and which therefore was
an inappropriate context for raising any new merit claim. [...] [Emphasis in
original]

88

177.

178.

179.

According to Chile, the denial of justice claim was introduced as a free-standing claim
for the first time upon prompting from the Tribunal at the hearing held in January
2007.''* However, the parties were never afforded the opportunity to submit their

arguments in respect of this claim.

Examining the earlier pleadings, Chile notes that the term denial of justice was used in
the Claimants’ Supplemental Memorial on the Merits dated 11 September 2002, but it
was then used in reference to Decision No. 43 rather than in reference to the Goss
machine. '!° Although the Claimants’ Ancillary Request of 4 November 2002 related to
the Goss machine, Chile argues that the claim asserted was solely for restitution or
compensation of the machine’s confiscation.''® At the May 2003 Hearing, the Claimants
expressly confirmed that the entirety of the claims in their Request for Arbitration and
Ancillary Request were confiscation claims.''” At the Hearing on Annulment, counsel
for Chile summarized the argument as follows: “it [Claimants’ Ancillary Request] does
refer to the denial of justice, it does refer to the Goss machine, but it does not refer to the
basis on which the Tribunal ruled against Chile, which was the delay [...]. [T]hey never
articulated any denial of justice claim under international law as a free-standing

claim.”!'

In sum, according to Chile, when the Claimants referred to a denial of justice claim for
the Goss machine in subsequent submissions, it always was in the context of the

confiscation claims.

"4 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 218. Footnote omitted.
"5 Thid. at para. 133. Footnote omitted.
"6 Thid. at para. 146. Footnote omitted.

47 Tid. at para. 194, footnote omitted; Tr. Annulment [1] [114:21-115:15] (Eng.); [46:21-33] (Fr.); [121:6-
22] (Spa.); Tr. Arb. [1][159:23-160:6] (Fr.) submitted as RA-24.

48 See Tr. Annulment [2] [329:9-330:1] (Eng.); [137:30-138:1] (Fr.); [357:13-358:12] (Spa.).

89

Claimants’ Position

180. It is the Claimants’ position that they presented their claims in a proper and timely
manner in the arbitral proceeding, including their denial of justice claim. "9 They argue
that: (1) “les Demanderesses ont toujours soutenu que les actes du gouvernement chilien
a l’encontre de Monsieur Pey étaient constitutifs d’un déni de justice” 7°, and (2) they
specifically asserted a denial of justice claim in the 4 November 2002 Ancillary Request
and 23 February 2003 Reply on Jurisdiction and Merits. In this regard, the Claimants

point out the various instances in their pleadings in which they used the term “denial of

justice” and conclude as follows: it

509. Il résulte des développements précédents que les Demanderesses ont bien,
contrairement aux allégations du Chili, formulé une demande sur le fondement
du déni de justice commis par la République du Chili dans le cadre de procédures
engagées par les Demanderesses devant les juridictions locales en vue d’ obtenir
réparation pour la confiscation des presses GOSS. La position des
Demanderesses n’a pas évoluée depuis leur demande complémentaire du 4
novembre 2002.

510. La encore, les prétentions de la Défenderesse sont dénuées de fondement. Il
suffit pour s’en convaincre de relire les écritures des Demanderesses. Afin de
faciliter la tache du Comité ad hoc, les Demanderesses ont extrait de leurs
écritures et des transcriptions des audiences les passages pertinents.

LJ

514. En substance, les Demanderesses soutenaient que les actes pris par la
République du Chili pour tenter de s’opposer 4 la compétence du Tribunal
arbitral — en particulier la demande du Chili au Secrétaire Général du CIRDI
d’annuler sa décision d’enregistrer la requéte d’arbitrage déposée par les
Demanderesses, les démarches de la République du Chili auprés du
gouvernement espagnol pour parvenir a une interprétation commune des termes
de l’API permettant au Chili de soutenir l’incompétence du Tribunal — ainsi que
les mesures d’intimidation 4 1’égard de Monsieur Pey afin qu’ il retire sa demande

"9 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 490-527 and 541-547.
120 Thid. at para. 511.
"2 Thid. at paras. 509-510, 514 and 527.

90

auprés du CIRDI, étaient constitutifs d’un déni de justice au sens du droit
international public, constituant une violation supplémentaire de la République
du Chili au titre de l’ API.

LJ

527. Il résulte des développements précédents que les Demanderesses ont bien
présenté des demandes pour déni de justice et pour violation du traitement juste
et équitable et cela, en ce qui concerne la Décision n°43, depuis 2002, date des
premiers échanges qui ont suivi l’invocation par le Chili de cette Décision
Ministérielle au cours de l’audience de mai 2000. Pourtant, la République du
Chili n’a pas hésité 4 consacrer presque 150 pages de son Mémoire en
annulation 4 cette question. Par la longueur de ses développements la
Défenderesse a vraisemblablement voulu conférer 4 sa demande, une apparence
de sérieux, qui ne saurait tromper le Comité ad hoc.

181. More specifically, the Claimants say that they introduced the Goss machine in their

Ancillary Request of 4 November 2002:'”

Monsieur Pey Casado est donc actuellement confronté au Chili 4 un déni de
justice en ce qui concerne les presses GOSS.

D’une part, la _possibilité de faire valoir_ ses droits devant les juridictions de
Vordre judiciaire lui_a_été_refusée in limine litis. Ainsi ses recours ont été
systématiquement rejetés in limine litis alors qu’ils étaient légalement et
constitutionnellement recevables. M. Pey Casado et la Fondation espagnole ont
donc été privés du droit fondamental d’accéder a la justice. En outre, la décision
du Contralor du 14 octobre 2002 constitue un déni de justice par mauvaise
application de la loi, détournement et abus de pouvoir.

D’autre part, sur un plan purement pratique, Monsieur Pey Casado et la
Fondation espagnole ne pourront plus obtenir une indemnisation au Chili pour la
valeur de remplacement des presses GOSS. [...]

La demande aujourd’hui portée devant le Tribunal arbitral met en cause d’une
part la violation par la République du Chili de son obligation de protection envers
les Demanderesses (article 3.1 de 1’ API Espagne-Chili), et de son obligation de
traitement juste et équitable (article 4.1), et d’autre part la violation de I’ article 5
de I’ API. [Emphasis in original]

'2 Thid. at para. 494 quoting Cl. Anc. Req. pp. 6, 13; see also Tr. Annulment [1] [203:13-204:18] (Eng.); [84:25-
85:10] (Pr.); [221:1-222:3] (Spa.).

91

182. The Claimants also refer to their Reply on Jurisdiction and the Merits dated 23 February
2003 in which they claimed that the denial of justice related to the Goss machine
triggered the international responsibility of Chile. The Reply contains a section entitled
“Le déni de justice dans Il’affaire GOSS entraine la responsabilité internationale de I’Etat

chilien.” It reads as follows:

Les faits additionnels exposés le 4 novembre 2002 consistent dans :

1. Le retard exorbitant de la 1°* Chambre Civile de Santiago a statuer sur le fond:
dans la procédure commencée en octobre 1995, il n’y a pas eu de sentence ;

2. Le rejet in limine litis par la 1°° Chambre Civile de Santiago, le 2 octobre
2001, de la demande de mesures conservatoires a l’égard de la « Décision
N°43 », pour ce qui concerne les presses GOSS, rejet assorti d’un renvoi a la
compétence de la Cour Supréme, s’agissant en l’occurrence de résoudre un
éventuel conflit de compétences entre cette 1 Chambre et le Ministére des Biens
Nationaux ;

3. Le rejet in limine litis par la Cour Supréme du Chili, le 2 juillet 2002, du
conflit de compétence entre ladite autorité administrative et la 1° Chambre
Civile de Santiago, formé le 5 juin 2002 par les investisseurs espagnols [...]

Notons que tous ces rejets sont ostensiblement dépourvus du plus élémentaire
souci de justifier leurs positions, et vont méme jusqu’A se montrer en
contradiction directe avec les données en jeu, ou 4 alléguer une absence de

alors que la di corresp s’appuie méti sur
les faits et les dispositions pertinentes.

Ces faits ont mis en place une situation de déni de justice a l’égard des droits de
la Fondation espagnole et de M. Pey sur les presses GOSS.

Le déni de justice est en lui-méme susceptible de recours a l’arbitrage
(indépendamment du sort de la procédure interne ouverte en 1995), car le
différend entre les investisseurs espagnols et |’Etat du Chili porte sur la
restitution des presses GOSS, ou sa valeur de remplacement. Pour |’ API Chili-
Espagne, le fait d’avoir porté le différend devant la juridiction nationale n’est pas
incompatible avec le recours a l’arbitrage du CIRDI lorsqu’on se trouve face 4
une situation de déni de justice.

En d'autres termes, dans les circonstances de déni de justice consommé le 14
octobre 2002 (décision du Contralor Général, Piéce C216), le recours a
l’arbitrage du CIRDI peut trouver son fondement dans le seul API Espagne-Chili.
L’expert de la défenderesse, M. Dolzer, ne semble pas s’étre rendu compte de ce
fait ni, par conséquent, de ses conséquences. [Emphasis in original]

92

183.

184.

185.

186.

In their Reply of 2003, the Claimants point out that they referred specifically to cases
where denial of justice claims were analyzed such as Azinian v. United Mexican States!”
and Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America.'** They also recall that

denial of justice was specifically addressed during the January 2007 Hearing.

Committee’s Analysis

The Committee agrees with Chile that there is a departure from the right to be heard,
which is a fundamental rule of procedure, when a party is not given a full, fair, or
comparatively equal opportunity to state its case, present its defense, or produce evidence

"5 Chile adds

regarding every claim and issue at every stage of the arbitral proceeding.
that, for a defending party, the right to be heard is essentially the right to rebut; however,
a meaningful opportunity to rebut a claim requires knowledge of that claim in the first

place.

While the Claimants also agree that parties should have ample opportunity to consider
and present written and oral submissions on all the issues raised, they add that the
Tribunal does not have an obligation to draw the parties’ attention to an aspect of a legal

question that they may have failed to address. 126

In the Award,'?’ the Tribunal summarizes fairly the parties’ positions. For the
Claimants, it refers to their written submissions of 11 September 2002, 4 November

2002, 23 February 2003, and oral submissions at the January 2007 Hearing. As for the

"3 Robert Azinian and others v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2, Award dated 1
November 1999.

8 Mondev Award.

"25 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 226.

6 See Cl. Rej. Annulment at para. 192 quoting Schreuer Commentary Art. 52 at para. 317.
27 See Award at paras. 637-649.

93

18

18:

189.

190.

191.

7.

8.

o

S

Respondent, the Tribunal notes that Chile has not developed a complete analysis of the
concepts of denial of justice or fair and equitable treatment but assumes that it was a
deliberate choice.'”* The Tribunal mentions only a few remarks made by the Republic’s

counsel at the 2003 and 2007 Hearings. 129

Having reviewed the parties’ submissions and the relevant paragraphs of the Award, the
Committee finds that the Claimants did present to the Tribunal a claim for denial of

justice in relation to the Goss machine. '*?

The Committee recognizes that the claim was not particularly well developed and
substantiated at any great length by the Claimants but it was definitely raised and it was

raised as a claim distinct from the confiscation claims.

Since the denial of justice claim was raised for the first time in the Claimants’ Ancillary
Claim of 4 November 2002, the Respondent had the opportunity to reply in its written
submissions of 3 February 2003 (Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and the Merits) and
4 April 2003 (Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and the Merits), as well as during the May 2003

Hearing and, to a certain extent, the January 2007 Hearing.

If Chile did not present any defense, it can only be, in the view of the Committee,
because it did not realize that it was a specific claim distinct from the confiscation
claims. However, its failure to address the Claimants’ denial of justice claim is not

because it was not raised by the Claimants.

The issue is not whether the Tribunal granted both parties an equal opportunity to present

their arguments but rather a situation where the Respondent, for whatever reason, did not

2°8 Thid. at para. 646.
"29 Thid. at paras. 603-604 (emphasis on n. 570 and n. 571).

‘8° The Committee is only addressing liability in this section of its Decision and not damages which it will
address later.

94

192.

193.

194.

avail itself of its right to reply and attempt to refute the Claimants’ submissions. In these
circumstances, the Respondent cannot blame the Tribunal and argue, as it does, that it

never had an opportunity to present its defense.

Maybe the Tribunal could have asked the parties to develop further their arguments on
the denial of justice claim but it had no obligation to do so. This is not a situation where
the Tribunal stepped out of the legal framework established by the Claimants."*! The
Tribunal found liability of Chile on the basis of arguments that had been presented, albeit

briefly, by one party.

The Committee notes that the Claimants argued that Chile had waived its right to invoke
the right to be heard as a defense with respect to the denial of justice claim.'?
Obviously, Chile disagrees with Claimants as it states that it was not until the Award was
rendered that it realized that the denial of justice had become one of the two bases for
Chile’s liability.'*? As just explained, the Committee concluded that the Claimants had
advanced the denial of justice claim during the arbitral proceeding. Therefore, it is not a
question of a party being deprived of its right or of a right being waived; it is a situation

where one party failed to exercise its right.

For these reasons, the Committee finds no departure at all from the fundamental rule of
procedure regarding the right to be heard on this merits issue, let alone a serious

departure, and the Respondent’s request is denied.

'S! See Kléckner I Decision at para. 91.
'32 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras 501-504.

'S3 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 106-109.

95

(ii) Burden of Proof

195. The main issue raised by Chile in connection with this aspect of Article 52(1)(d), on the
assumption that the Claimants in fact asserted the relevant denial of justice claim, as the
Committee has found, is whether the Claimants actually discharged their burden of proof
in respect of this claim since Chile says the Claimants presented no evidence about the

duration or handling of the Goss printer proceedings.
Parties’ Positions
Chile’s Position

196. Chile submits that, in the circumstances, the Tribunal improperly allocated the burden of

proof on the denial of justice claim (as well as the discrimination claim): 14

234. [...] [T]he mere unsubstantiated invocation by Claimants of either cause of
action could not—without more—have satisfied their burden of proof. Claimants
never presented—and therefore now cannot identify—any documentary
evidence, legal support, witness testimony, or damages evaluation associated
with the purported denial of justice and discrimination “claims.” The Committee
should not ignore this important corollary of Claimants’ failure to assert the
claims that were the basis of the Award.

197. Chile’s argument is that: 185

Chile’s argument is that since Claimants did not even attempt to present any
evidence on this issue, the only way the Tribunal could have found liability was
essentially by relieving Claimants of their burden of proof. Even under the
standard articulated by the Tribunal itself, judicial delay does not in and of itself,
without more, give rise to a denial of justice under customary international law.
Rather, a claimant must prove that the relevant delay was unreasonable. In the
present case, the Tribunal simply presumed that the seven-year period of duration
of the Goss printer proceedings was ipso facto unreasonable, without ever
analyzing what accounted for the seven year duration, and whether the delay was

'S4 Thid. at para. 234. Footnotes omitted.
'S5 See Resp. Pre-H Skel. at p. 8.

96

in fact attributable to improper handling by the Chilean court. In essence then,
the Tribunal relieved Claimants of their burden of proof, thereby improperly
placing it on the Respondent.

Claimants’ Position

198.

199.

200.

Claimants reply that they have made a proper denial of justice claim and that, as
underlined by the Tribunal in the Award, the Respondent decided not to present any
arguments on this issue.'*° As a result, the Claimants argue that there can be no improper

allocation of the burden of proof. 7

Committee’s Analysis

The Committee has reviewed carefully the Tribunal’s reasoning leading to its conclusion
that the seven-year duration of the Goss printer proceeding was an undue delay and

unreasonable '**

giving rise to a denial of justice claim. Again, the Respondent may
disagree with the Tribunal’s conclusion but, by no stretch of the imagination, can it be
said that there was an improper allocation of the burden of proof which could be
characterized as a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. It is very
clear from the Award that the Tribunal was satisfied with the evidence which the
Claimants adduced. The Respondent’s request for annulment on this ground is

dismissed.

(2) Manifest Excess of Powers

The main issue raised by Chile in terms of “manifest excess of powers” in respect of

Article 52(1)(b) is whether the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by asserting

'86 See Award at para. 646.
'57 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 529.
188 See Award at paras. 659-663.

97

jurisdiction over a purported denial of justice claim for undue delay by the First Civil
Court of Santiago (the Goss machine proceedings) that had allegedly not been asserted

by the Claimants.
Parties’ Positions

Chile’s Position

201. Chile’s position in this regard is summarized as follows: a

428. As discussed above and also in the Memorial, a cause of action for “denial
of justice” must include arguments and evidence relating to the factors that
establish a denial of justice under customary international law and/or the BIT. In
order to state such a claim, Claimants would have been required in their
Ancillary Request to present evidence and to examine the relevant law and facts
supporting allegations that Chilean authorities had unreasonably delayed an
outcome in the Goss printer claim, by acts that were so unjust as to violate
international law. They would have had to establish the requisite elements to
prove a “denial of justice” under international law. However, they did not do so
in the 2002 Ancillary Request, nor at any other stage of the proceeding.
Importantly, Claimants do not challenge in their Counter-Memorial the
Republic’s assertion that Claimants failed to plead—and much less to prove—the
elements of a denial of justice. It follows from this that a denial of justice claim
was never asserted, and that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by
issuing a merits ruling that was predicated on a claim that was never presented to
it by one of the parties.

Claimants’ Position

202. The Claimants reject this request essentially for the same reasons that they invoked above
in their response to Chile’s allegation of departure from a fundamental rule of procedure,
ie. that that: (1) “les Demanderesses ont toujours soutenu que les actes du gouvernement

chilien a l’encontre de Monsieur Pey étaient constitutifs d’un déni de justice;”'” and (2)

'8° See Resp. Rep. Annulment at para. 428. Footnotes omitted.
149 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 511.

98

they specifically asserted a denial of justice claim in the 4 November 2002 Ancillary
Request and 23 February 2003 Reply on Jurisdiction and Merits. The Claimants thus

submit: '

527. Il résulte des développements précédents que les Demanderesses ont bien
présenté des demandes pour déni de justice et pour violation du traitement juste
et équitable et cela, en ce qui concerne la Décision n°43, depuis 2002, date des
premiers échanges qui ont suivi l’invocation par le Chili de cette Décision
Ministérielle au cours de |’audience de mai 2000. Pourtant, la République du
Chili n’a pas hésité 4 consacrer presque 150 pages de son Mémoire en annulation
a cette question. Par la longueur de ses développements la Défenderesse a
vraisemblablement voulu conférer 4 sa demande, une apparence de sérieux, qui
ne saurait tromper le Comité ad hoc.

 

528. Cette démonstration permet de rejeter intégralement la demande
d’annulation de la Sentence fondée sur la prétendue violation grave par le
Tribunal d’une régle fondamentale de procédure et sur l’excés de pouvoir
manifeste du Tribunal.

529. En effet, il n’y a eu de la part du Tribunal aucune violation du droit d’étre
entendue, la République du Chili ayant choisi d’ignorer les arguments des
Demanderesses concernant les violations de |’ API. Il ne peut non plus y avoir un
renversement de la charge de la preuve.

530. Ces éléments s’opposent également 4 la demande de nullité de la Sentence
sur le fondement de l’article 52(1)(b) de la Convention CIRDI. En effet, dans son
Mémoire en annulation, la République du Chili prétend fonder l’annulation de la
Sentence pour excés de pouvoir manifeste du Tribunal sur le seul motif que les
Demanderesses n’ont pas présenté de demandes relatives au déni de justice ou 4
un traitement discriminatoire.

LJ

533. Dés lors, la démonstration que ces demandes ont été présentées par les
Demanderesses au cours de la procédure d’ arbitrage permet au Comité ad hoc de
rejeter la demande de nullité du Chili sur ce fondement. [...]

1 Ibid. at paras. 527-530; 533. Footnote omitted.

99

Committee’s Analysis

203. Essentially for the same reasons which it set out earlier when it concluded that the
Tribunal had not violated any fundamental rule of procedure regarding the right to be
heard on this issue,'*” the Committee rejects the Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal
exceeded its powers in finding that the Claimants had indeed asserted their denial of

justice claim. This application is denied.

(3) Failure to State Reasons
204. The main issues raised by Chile in connection with Article 52(1)(e) and the “denial of

justice” claim are whether the Tribunal failed to state reasons:

- for its conclusion that the Claimants had asserted the particular “denial of
justice” claim for which the Tribunal held Chile responsible (i.e., one based
on delay in the progress of the Goss printer proceedings in the First Civil

Court of Santiago); and

- for basing its finding of the existence of a “denial of justice” solely on the
length of the local judicial proceeding, without inquiring into any of the
other factors or elements that the Tribunal itself had alluded to in the Award

as essential for a finding of denial of justice.
Parties’ Positions
Chile’s Position

205. Chile submits inter alia in support of this ground for annulment: M8

' See supra at paras. 184-194.
‘43 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 494-495. Footnote omitted.

100

494. In the end, and Claimants’ protestations notwithstanding, the only real
“reason” the Tribunal offered in its Award for its finding of a “denial of justice”
was that seven years was too long to wait for a final merits decision. However,
having itself recognized in the Award that a finding of “denial of justice”
requires an “unreasonable or undue delay,” the Tribunal was required to explain
not only the existence of a delay, but also how or why that delay (in the context
and circumstances of the relevant proceeding) was unreasonable or undue, to
such an extent as to constitute a violation of international law. The Award stops
at the first step (the delay of seven years), but then leaps to the conclusion that
the second step is ipso facto satisfied, without exploring the factors that are
relevant to that assessment under the applicable jurisprudence and doctrine.

495. Given the foregoing, on this point the Award again sets forth a stated
“reason” that in fact does not amount to a reason at all within the meaning of
Article 52(1)(e); insofar as it fails to articulate the totality of the premises that are
necessary to lead to its conclusion. Due to the absence of reasons for its finding
of denial of justice, the Award should be annulled. [Emphasis in original]

Claimants’ Position

206. The Claimants reject Chile’s contention and submit: M4

540. En l’espéce, le Tribunal a respecté les exigences de l'article 52(1)(e) de la
Convention en ce que ses développements sur la violation de l’API pour déni de
justice permett[e]nt au lecteur de suivre son raisonnement.

541. En outre, contrairement 4 l’affirmation de la République du Chili, le
Tribunal ne s’est pas contenté de dire qu’une procédure de sept années était
extraordinairement longue et équivalait ipso facto a un déni de justice.

542. Tout d’abord, le Tribunal, dans son rappel des faits sur la violation pour
déni de justice concernant la restitution de la rotative Goss, renvoie 4 ses
développements précédents sur la procédure devant la Premiére Chambre Civile
de Santiago. Méme si le Tribunal arbitral n’indique pas expressément 4 quels
paragraphes il fait référence, il n’est pas difficile de comprendre qu’il renvoie
aux paragraphes 459 et suivants de la Sentence, c’est-a-dire 4 ses conclusions 4
propos de la controverse de 2002 relative au « différend résultant du déni de
justice allégué par les demanderesses ».

44 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 540-548.

101

543. Or, dans cette partie de la Sentence, le Tribunal fait une analyse précise du
déroulement de la procédure devant la Premiére Chambre civile de Santiago et
des décisions rendues par celle-ci dans l’affaire Pey Casado contrairement 4
l’affirmation de la Défenderesse selon laquelle le Tribunal « fail[ed] to analyze in
any way the nature of the local proceedings or what happened during the time
period that such proceedings were pending ».

544. Le Tribunal constate également que les Demanderesses ont « tenté en vain
de faire reconnaitre l’incompatibilité de la Décision n°43 avec cette procédure
judiciaire ». Il décrit alors les différents recours initiés par les Demanderesses
devant les juridictions locales 4 cet égard. Le Tribunal conclut alors :

545. Le Tribunal estime que le dernier différend entre les [p]arties, s’est
cristallisé au cours de la période de 2002-2003. Avec I’introduction de
leur de de ipléi ire le 4 bre 2002, les de deresses
ont pour la premiere fois dans cette procédure, reproché a l’Etat chilien
un déni de justice et ainsi formulé une réclamation. C’est en demandant
au Tribunal arbitral dans son mémoire du 3 février 2003 de rejeter la
demande complémentaire des demanderesses que la défenderesse a
confirmé l’existence d’un différend sur la question du déni de justice.

546. Si dans ses conclusions des paragraphes 659 et suivants de la Sentence, le
Tribunal ne reprend pas expressément les rejets systématiques par les juridictions
chiliennes des recours des Demanderesses sur |’incompatibilité de la Décision
n°43 et la procédure devant la Premiére Chambre Civile de Santiago, il y fait
référence en indiquant :

Sur la premiére question [déni de justice], la réponse ne peut étre que
positive, aux regards des faits établis et déja retenus par le Tribunal
arbitral, l’absence de toute décision par les tribunaux civils chiliens sur
les prétentions de M. Pey Casado s’analysant en un déni de justice
(soulignement ajouté).

547. Le Tribunal justifie alors sa conclusion en analysant les précédents et la
doctrine confirmant que des délais procéduraux particuligrement importants
constituent une forme classique de déni de justice.

548. Il en résulte que contrairement a l’allégation de la République du Chili, le
Tribunal a respecté sa mission au titre de l’article 48(3) de la Convention. En
conséquence, la demande d’annulation des conclusions du Tribunal concernant la
condamnation de |’Etat chilien en raison d’un déni de justice dans I’affaire des
presses Goss, sur le fondement de l’article 52(1)(e) de la Convention, doit étre
rejetée. [Emphasis in original]

102

Committee’s Analysis

207. The Committee agrees with the Claimants. The Tribunal gave extensive reasons to
support its conclusion for grounding a denial of justice claim, which it traversed at length
in its Award. The Respondent’s request for annulment on this ground is accordingly

dismissed.

E. Discrimination
(1) Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure
(i) Right to be Heard
208. As with the alleged “denial of justice” claim, the main issue raised by Chile for purposes
of this facet of Article 52(1)(d) is whether the Claimants in fact asserted the particular

discrimination claim for which the Tribunal found Chile responsible — in this case, under

Article 4 of the Chile-Spain BIT — due to Chile’s execution of Decision 43.
Parties’ Positions
Chile’s Position

209. With respect to the discrimination claim, Chile maintains that since it was never
specifically pleaded by the Claimants it was never afforded the right to defend itself.
Chile maintains as follows: '°

110. Although Claimants had asserted a claim for discrimination due to Decision
43 under Article 3 (the specific “discrimination” provision) and Article 5 (the
expropriation provision) of the Chile-Spain BIT—all as part of Claimants’ theory
of a “continuing” expropriation—the Tribunal in the Award explicitly rejected all

of Claimants’ discrimination claims pursuant to Articles 3 and 5. However—and
in direct contrast to the Tribunal’s finding in the Decision on Provisional

'45 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 110-112. Footnotes omitted.

103

Measures that the execution of Decision 43 could have no effect on Claimants’
rights under the BIT—the Tribunal found Chile liable under Article 4 (the fair
and equitable treatment provision) for discrimination in connection with Decision
43.

111. This finding of discrimination, which the Tribunal stated was based “aux
termes de son appréciation des preuves et de son analyse juridique,” rested on the
fact that Chilean authorities had compensated as the owners of El Clarin the
successors of the four registered shareholders of CPP pursuant to an
administrative proceeding in which Mr. Pey had knowingly and voluntarily
waived his right to participate.

112. As Chile explained in its Memorial, the Tribunal’s “understanding of the
evidence” and “legal analysis” was not, as required by the ICSID Convention and
Arbitration Rules, based on any claim for discrimination actually asserted by
Claimants under the fair and equitable treatment clause of the BIT. Claimants
never asserted—either orally or in writing—any Decision 43-related, Article 4-
based discrimination claim of the sort that formed the basis for the Award.
[Emphasis in original]

210. Therefore, Chile acknowledges that the Claimants submitted to the Tribunal a
Supplemental Memorial on the Merits in which they claimed post-entry in force BIT
violations of Articles 3, 4, and 5 due to Decision No. 43. However, Chile argues that the
Claimants did not state a claim alleging that the Republic had discriminated against Mr.
Pey Casado in violation of Article 4 of the BIT by actually paying the parties found to be
owners of El Clarin in Decision No. 43, although the Tribunal ruled that it had.
According to Chile, this is distinct from what the Claimants argued i.e., that Decision No.
43 constituted an unfair and inequitable treatment because Chile had excluded the
Claimants from the recovery scheme. '46 Chile added at the Hearing on Annulment that
the only time the Claimants articulated a discrimination claim under Article 4 of the BIT

was in their Supplemental Memorial on the Merits dated 11 September 2002, “[b]ut it is

'46 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 129.

104

not even articulated as a discrimination claim, it is articulated as a national treatment
9147

claim [...]
211. In brief, Chile avers that whenever the Claimants referred to Decision No. 43 in

subsequent submissions, it was always in the context of the confiscation claims.

Claimants’ Position

212. The Claimants, for their part, submit that they did develop their discrimination claim in

their written submissions.

213. The Claimants explain that it was introduced at the very outset of the case and was
further developed after Decision No. 43 was issued on 28 April 2000. In particular, they
refer to their Supplemental Memorial on the Merits dated 11 September 2002 at pp. 1 and
2, pp. 125-127.'48

L’Etat chilien a enfreint l’obligation de garantir un traitement juste et équitable
aux _investisseurs espagnols, sous des conditions non moins favorables que pour
ses investisseurs nationaux. Alors que |’Etat chilien avait reconnu, dans ladite
Loi N° 19.518 de 1998, le droit 4 une indemnisation des personnes visées par les
mesures confiscatoires adoptées en vertu des Décrets-Lois N° | et 77 de 1973, il
a exclu de ce méme traitement les investisseurs espagnols par le truchement de la
« Décision N° 43 ». [Emphasis in original]

214. At the Hearing on Annulment, '“?

the Claimants also referred to the description of their
claim in the Reply on Jurisdiction and the Merits dated 23 February 2003. Finally, they

say, that the claim was reiterated at the May 2003 and January 2007 Hearings.

‘7 See Tr. Annulment [2] [334:16] (Eng.); [139:28] (Fr.), [364:8] (Spa.).
148 See Cl. C-Mem. at paras. 520-523; Tr. Arb. [1] [pp. 87-88] (Fr.).
“9 See Tr. Annulment [1] [212:11-213:13] (Eng.), [88:30-89:10] (Fr.); [229:22-231:3] (Spa.).

105

215.

216.

217.

Committee’s Analysis

The Committee notes that the Tribunal refers in its Award to the parties’ positions on the
discrimination claim.'™’ In the case of the Claimants, the Tribunal refers to their written
submissions of 11 September 2002, 23 February 2003, and to oral submissions at the
January 2007 Hearing. As for the Respondent, the Tribunal mentions only a few remarks
made by the Republic’s counsel at the 2003 and 2007 Hearings and a page in both the
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction of 20 July 1999 and the Respondent’s Counter-

Memorial on Jurisdiction and the Merits of 3 February 2003 concerning Decision No. 43.

As explained above in the context of the denial of justice claim, the Committee considers
that the Claimants presented a discrimination claim based on Decision No. 43. Even
though it is not extensively developed by the Claimants, it cannot be said that no such
claim was made. Considering that the discrimination claim was raised in the Claimants’
Supplemental Memorial on the Merits dated 11 September 2002, the Respondent had the
opportunity to reply in its written submissions of 3 February 2003 (Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction and the Merits) and 4 April 2003 (Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and the Merits)

as well as during the May 2003 Hearing and at the January 2007 Hearing.

For whatever reason, the Respondent elected not to address this claim. As for the claim
for denial of justice, Chile cannot blame the Tribunal for not having given it an
opportunity to present its arguments. Additionally, as with the denial of justice claim,
Chile rejects the Claimants’ contention that it waived the right to be heard in defense of
the discrimination claim since the Award was the first time Chile became aware of the
discrimination claim related to Decision No. 43.'°! As concluded, Chile’s contention that

the Tribunal denied it the right to be heard on this claim is rejected because Chile had the

150 See Award at paras. 637-638; 647-648.
5! See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at 524-529; Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 132-133.

106

opportunity to respond. Therefore, the issue does not relate to a right being waived but to

a right not being exercised.

218. The Committee finds that, in these circumstances, there was no denial of the right to be
heard and thus no departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. The Respondent’s

request for annulment on this ground is accordingly denied.

(ii) Burden of Proof
219. The main issue raised by Chile in this regard is whether, on the assumption that the
Claimants in fact asserted their discrimination claim which the Committee has just found

was the case, the Claimants discharged their burden of proof.
Parties’ Positions
Chile’s Position

220. Chile explains that discrimination in violation of the standard of fair and equitable

: 152
treatment exists where:

[...] (1) the conduct is attributable to the State; (2) the conduct is harmful to the
claimant or his property; (3) the conduct is discriminatory, which involves a
comparison of the treatment of the claimant to the treatment of others who are
similarly situated; (4) the conduct is “arbitrary, grossly unfair, unjust or
idiosyncratic;” and (5) the conduct “exposes the claimant to sectional or racial
prejudice.” The burden of proof for each of these five elements should have
rested squarely on the Claimants, particularly since this purported claim, like the
one for denial of justice, was a merits claim.

221. Chile argues that the Claimants did not establish the existence of any of the elements of a
discrimination claim, and therefore failed to discharge their burden of proof. Chile

submits that since the Tribunal ruled against Chile, it shows that a fortiori the Tribunal

'S2 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 362. Footnotes omitted.

107

placed the burden of proof on Chile. In addition, Chile contends that this allocation of
the burden of proof affected the outcome of the case, particularly because discrimination,

in the end, was the only basis on which damages were awarded. 153

Claimants’ Position

222.

223.

As for the denial of justice claim, Claimants reply that they have made a proper
discrimination claim and that, as underlined by the Tribunal in the Award, it was
Respondent’s decision not to develop its arguments on this question. '** As a result, the

Claimants argue that there can be no improper allocation of the burden of proof. 155

Committee’s Analysis

The Committee has reviewed carefully the Tribunal’s reasoning leading to its conclusion
that the Chilean authorities’ compensation of four persons, whom the Tribunal did not
consider the owners of E/ Clarin, under Decision No. 43, gave rise to a discrimination
claim.'*° Again, the Respondent may disagree with the Tribunal’s conclusion but, by no
stretch of the imagination, can it be said that there was an improper allocation of the
burden of proof which could be characterized as a serious departure from a fundamental
tule of procedure. It is very clear from the Award that the Tribunal was satisfied with the
evidence which the Claimants adduced. The Respondent’s request for annulment on this

ground is dismissed.

153

Ibid. at paras. 363-364.

'S4 See Award at para. 646.

'S5 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 529.
186 See Award at paras. 665-674.

108

(2) Manifest Excess of Powers

224. The main issue raised by Chile in connection with Article 52(1)(b) is whether the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by improperly asserting jurisdiction over a
purported Decision No. 43 related discrimination claim under Article 4 which, the

Respondent says, was not asserted by the Claimants.
Parties’ Positions
Chile’s Position
225. Chile’s position in this regard is summarized as follows: 187

430. As extensively explained above, Claimants never actually asserted a
discrimination claim with respect to Decision 43. In the 2002 Supplemental
Memorial, Claimants emphasized their claim for a “continuing expropriation,” a
theory (rejected by the Tribunal) designed to address the requirement for an act
of expropriation that occurred after the BIT entered into force. For this purpose,
Claimants seized on Decision 43 as an alleged post-treaty culmination of a
composite act of confiscation executed by the Chilean government. In other
words, they had invoked Decision 43 merely as a new act of expropriation under
Article 5 of the BIT.

431. In this context, Claimants touched upon “discrimination” as one of the
constituent elements of expropriation. But they never asserted that absent an
agreement by the Tribunal with their “continuing acts” theory of expropriation,
they were also asserting a different, stand-alone claim for discrimination under
Article 4 based on the execution of Decision 43. Claimants never asserted, in
particular, that Decision 43 constituted an act of discrimination against Mr. Pey
in violation of Article 4 of the BIT. As explained above, at no point did
Claimants define the legal standards of discrimination, apply those standards to
the facts, substantiate those facts, or state a particularized claim for relief for
discrimination. In sum, they never asserted a separate cause of action for
discrimination under Article 4 of the BIT, based on allegedly differential
treatment due to Mr. Pey’s nationality in connection with Decision 43.

'S7 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 430-432. Footnotes omitted.

109

432. And yet, it was precisely under that theory that the Tribunal declared Chile
liable. Not only that, but the Tribunal’s finding of discrimination became the sole
basis for the Tribunal’s award of damages to Mr. Pey. By reaching out to decide
a claim that Claimants themselves had never presented, the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers. The Award therefore must be annulled under Article
52(1)(b).

Claimants’ Position

226.

227.

228.

As noted above, the Claimants contend that they did assert their discrimination claim.
Their submissions in this regard mirror those advanced in connection with the denial of

justice claim. 158

Committee’s Analysis

Again, essentially for the same reasons which it set out above, °°

the Committee rejects
the Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal exceeded its powers in finding that the

Claimants had asserted their discrimination claim.

(3) Failure to State Reasons

In respect of Article 52(1)(e) and the Article 4 discrimination claim, Chile argues that the
Tribunal failed to state reasons leading to its finding of discrimination based on Decision

No. 43 in three instances:

- its conclusion that the Claimants had actually asserted a discrimination

claim under Article 4 related to Decision No. 43;

- its determination that the execution of Decision No. 43 had been

discriminatory against Mr. Pey Casado considering that Mr. Pey Casado

188 See supra at para. 202.
'S° See supra at paras. 215-218.

110

had received an explicit written invitation from the Chilean government to
participate in the administrative proceeding that led to Decision No. 43,

but that he had voluntarily (and in writing) declined; and

- the contradiction between the earlier Decision of the Tribunal on
Provisional Measures of 25 September 2001 — which had concluded that
execution of Decision No. 43 could not affect the ICSID proceedings or
Mr. Pey Casado’s rights therein — and its finding in the Award that Chile’s

execution of Decision No. 43 in fact constituted a violation of the BIT.
Parties’ Positions

Chile’s Position

 

229. Chile’s position is clearly stated in its Reply: 160

505. Claimants therefore do not address the Republic’s main argument, which is
that the Tribunal provided no explanation whatsoever as to how Mr. Pey possibly
could have been compensated through Decision 43, given that he voluntarily
excluded himself from the relevant administrative proceedings that were a
prerequisite to any such compensation. The references to the possibility of
alternate procedures is simply not pertinent here. The Tribunal ruled against
Chile not by reference to any alternate procedures, but on the basis that by
compensating alleged third parties rather than Mr. Pey through Decision 43,
Chile discriminated against Mr. Pey. The necessary implication of this is that the
discriminatory act committed by Chile was not declaring Mr. Pey to be the
rightful beneficiary. But the Tribunal entirely glossed over the logical and
necessary component of that conclusion, which is the (incorrect) presumption
that Chile could somehow have declared Mr. Pey the beneficiary of Decision 43,
notwithstanding his explicit decision, in writing, not to seek reparations under
that administrative process, and the fact that compensation of non-applicants in
fact would have been illegal under Chilean law.

506. As a result, the Award simply provides no information that would enable
Chile to apprehend the source of its responsibility for any BIT violation

1 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 505-506. Footnotes omitted.

111

predicated on discrimination, which is a quintessential failure to state reasons.
The Tribunal’s failure even to attempt to set forth reasons for its finding of
discrimination was a clear violation of its obligation to state reasons, which
warrants annulment under Article 52(1)(e). Moreover, annulment on this ground
is especially compelled by the fact that, in the end, the finding that Decision 43
discriminated against Mr. Pey was the exclusive basis for the Tribunal’s award of
monetary damages to Claimants. [Emphasis in original]

230. Chile also refers to what it characterizes as a “contradiction”: '°!

508. [...] [T]he contradiction that is not explained in the Award is how the
Tribunal could both decline to request suspension of the execution of Decision 43
on the grounds that such execution could not possibly affect the ICSID
proceeding, and yet later determine in the ICSID proceeding that the very same
act that it had declined to enjoin was the sole basis for its finding of
discrimination under the BIT, and the sole basis for its award of any damages.
[Emphasis in original.]

231. In its Reply, Chile asserts other “failures” in the Award: 162

514. The Tribunal failed to explain in its Award why it disregarded this critical
fact. Instead, it simply announced that although it could not consider any claim
for discrimination under Articles 3 or 5, it could do so under Article 4. It did not
explain why it was not relevant that Claimants had never raised a discrimination
claim under Article 4 and had never alleged discrimination in connection with
Decision 43. Indeed, the Award does not explain what Claimant’s discrimination
claim consisted of, in what pleading it had been asserted, what supporting
evidence had been submitted, or what the relevant request for relief had been.
The reason for these failures is, of course, that the claim was never asserted by
Claimants at all. This fact further supports the conclusion that the Tribunal failed
to provide reasons for its determination on the issue of discrimination due to
Decision 43, and that the Tribunal’s Award is therefore annullable under Article
52(1)(e).

16! Thid. at para. 508.
1© Thid. at para. 514. Footnote omitted.

112

Claimants’ Position

232. The Claimants reject Chile’s contention that the Tribunal failed to state reasons. '®? With
respect to Chile’s argument that their discrimination claim was never actually
formulated, the Claimants reiterate their submissions made in connection with their

denial of justice claim.’ As to the two other prongs of Chile’s submission, the

Claimants answer: !©

163

564. S’agissant du caractére discriminatoire de la Décision n°43, le raisonnement
du Tribunal peut étre résumé comme suit :

565. Premiérement, le Tribunal indique dans la partie de la Sentence intitulée
« Décision n°43 - Indemnisation de personnes non propriétaires » « le 28 avril
2000, le Ministre des biens nationaux adopte la Décision n°43 selon laquelle les
dispositions de la loi n°19.568 sont applicables aux biens confisqués aux
Sociétés CPP S.A. et EPC Ltda. Cependant, comme le Tribunal l’a expliqué ci-
dessus, la Décision n°43 indemnise des requérants autres que les demanderesses
pour la confiscation des biens en question et le Ministre des biens nationaux
maintiendra cette décision que les demanderesses contesteront en vain ».

566. Deuxigmement, le Tribunal rappelle la propriété de Monsieur Pey des
actions de CPP S.A. et EPC Ltée en indiquant : «M. Pey Casado a bien
démontré avoir procédé a des investissements et étre propriétaire des biens
meubles ou immeubles qui ont été confisqués par l’autorité militaire chilienne ».
Sur le droit de propriété de Monsieur Pey, le Tribunal rappelle également qu’il
avait été reconnu par un jugement chilien et que les autorités chiliennes,
exécutives et administratives (comme judiciaires) étaient également informées
des demandes de Monsieur Pey devant le CIRDI et de sa revendication du droit
de propriété.

567. Troisismement, le Tribunal constate que la Défenderesse n’a jamais remis
en cause le fait que les confiscations intervenues 4 partir de 1973 étaient illicites
et qu’a ce titre, l’Etat du Chili reconnaissait qu'il avait un devoir
d’indemnisation. Néanmoins, le Tribunal constate que les Demanderesses n’ ont
pas bénéficié de ce traitement. II indique « Malheureusement, cette politique ne
s'est pas traduite dans les faits en ce qui concerne les Demanderesses, pour des

See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 449 et seq.

164 Thid. at paras. 554-555.
165 Thid. at paras. 564-572; 579.

113

raisons diverses qui, au moins pour partie, n’ont pas été révélées ou clairement
expliquées par les témoignages ou autres preuves fournies au Tribunal
arbitral ». Ce faisant, le Tribunal constatait que la République du Chili avait fait
subir un traitement différent aux Parties Demanderesses par rapport aux autres
investisseurs notamment nationaux.

568. Finalement, aprés avoir rappelé qu’un traitement discriminatoire est une
violation du traitement juste et équitable au sens du droit international de
protection des investissements, le Tribunal conclut :

Dans le cas d’espéce, en résumé, en accordant des
compensations - pour des raisons qui lui sont propres et sont
restées inexpliquées - a des personnages qui, de l’avis du
Tribunal arbitral, n’étaient pas propriétaires des biens
confisqués, en méme temps qu’il paralysait ou rejetait les
revendications de M. Pey Casado concernant les biens
confisqués, la République du Chili a manifestement commis un
déni de justice et refusé de traiter les demanderesses de fagon
juste et Equitable.

569. L’un des éléments important de cette conclusion et passé sous silence par la
Défenderesse dans son Mémoire en annulation, est que le Tribunal a conclu 4 un
traitement discriminatoire des Demanderesses sous la double condition d’une
compensation 4 des tiers pour la confiscation des biens objet de la procédure
d’arbitrage, et le refus de la République du Chili d’indemniser de quelque
maniére que ce soit Monsieur Pey et la Fondation espagnole, en s’opposant par
tout moyen 4 leurs revendications et en paralysant, autant que faire se peut, la
procédure arbitrale engagée.

570. Dés lors, contrairement a la prétention de la République du Chili, Monsieur
Pey et la Fondation espagnole n’avai[en]t pas nécessairement besoin de porter
leur réclamation sur le fondement de la loi 19.568 pour recevoir un traitement
discriminatoire. Soulignons 4 cet égard que contrairement 4 ce que laisse
supposer la République du Chili, la loi 19.568 n’est pas le seul fondement pour
obtenir réparation des confiscations intervenues au Chili sous le régime militaire
de Pinochet. En effet, comme |’ avait fait Monsieur Pey pour les presses Goss en
octobre 1995, mais aussi comme |’ont fait nombre d’autres victimes du Décret
n°77 de 1973, il est possible d’obtenir réparation devant les cours judiciaires
chiliennes sur le fondement du mandat impératif de la Constitution (article 4 de
la Constitution de 1925 aux termes duquel les décrets de confiscation édictés en
application dudit Décret n°77 sont nuls de nullité ab initio, imprescriptibles et ex
officio). La reconnaissance de cette nullité ab initio constitue une jurisprudence
constante de la Cour Supréme chilienne permettant d’obtenir réparation non
seulement pour la perte subie (damnum emergens) mais également pour la perte
de profit (lucrum cessans).

 

114

233.

234.

571. Ainsi, les motifs contenus dans la Sentence permettent sans nul doute de
suivre le raisonnement du Tribunal sur ce chef de condamnation. Dés lors, la
Sentence répond aux exigences de I’ article 52(1)(e) de la Convention quand bien
méme le tribunal ne répondrait pas de maniére exhaustive aux questions
soulevées par la Défenderesse dans son Mémoire en annulation.

572. Finalement, concernant la troisitme série d’arguments, relative 4 une
contradiction de motifs entre d’une part la condamnation au titre de la violation
d’un traitement juste et équitable et, d’autre part, la décision du 25 septembre
2001, celle-ci est contredite par les termes mémes de la décision du 25 septembre
2001 et plus particuligrement de ses paragraphes 59 4 63.

LJ

579. Dés lors, loin de reconnaitre l’impossibilité pour la Décision n°43 de causer
un préjudice aux Demanderesses, le Tribunal s’appuyait surtout sur le fait que
Vexécution de la Décision n°43 ne rendrait pas impossible la réparation du
préjudice subi par les Demanderesses. II n’y a done dans cette décision de rejet
des mesures conservatoires sollicitées par les Demanderesses aucune
contradiction avec la Sentence condamnant la République du Chili sur le
fondement d’un traitement discriminatoire 4 raison notamment de la Décision
n°43. [Emphasis in original]

Committee’s Analysis

The Claimants, in the lengthy citation from their Counter-Memorial reproduced above,
have demonstrated, to the entire satisfaction of the Committee, that the Tribunal has
stated ample reasons leading to its conclusion that Chile’s Decision No. 43 discriminated
against the Claimants and was thus in breach of Article 4 of the BIT. The Respondent’s

request for annulment based on this ground therefore fails.

F. TheT

 

nal Measures

Chile refers to its invitation to Mr. Pey Casado to participate in the Chilean
administrative proceeding that led to Decision No. 43, as well as to Mr. Pey Casado’s
written waiver to participate in this proceeding. The Claimants, thereafter, requested
injunctive relief from the Tribunal alleging that Decision No. 43 required payment to the

successors of the registered shareholders of E/ Clarin for the expropriation of the

115

235.

newspaper and that such payment would, in effect, constitute a new expropriatory act by

Chile.

The Committee notes that the Tribunal rejected the Claimants’ request for provisional
measures. It concluded that neither Decision No. 43 itself nor its execution could affect
the Claimants’ rights in the ICSID arbitration, since Decision No. 43 involved

individuals other than Mr. Pey Casado.

Parties’ Positions

Chile’s Position

236.

237.

Chile contends that the Tribunal’s Decision on Provisional Measures amounted to a
signal to Chile that it could proceed with the execution of Decision No. 43, confident in
the knowledge that doing so would not conflict with the ICSID arbitration or affect it in
any way. In the Award, however, submits Chile, the Tribunal held Chile liable for
discrimination in violation of Article 4 of the BIT for the act that had been the subject of
the Claimants’ Request for Provisional Measures that had been rejected by the Tribunal:
the execution of Decision No. 43. Chile argues that, in doing so, the Tribunal failed to
abide by one of the rules it had set for the proceeding, which was most unfair to it. This,
submits Chile, was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure in violation

of Article 52(1)(d).

Chile recalls that, in paragraph 65 of its Decision on Provisional Measures, the Tribunal
stated that “la Décision Ministérielle n° 43 et son exécution au Chili n’ont pas des
conséquences telles qu’elles puissent affecter ou la compétence du Tribunal Arbitral

CIRDI, ou les droits allégués par les Parties demanderesses ...” Chile then concludes: 166

16 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at para. 204. Footnote omitted.

116

204. [...] In effect, therefore, by this Decision the Tribunal was signalling to Chile
that it could go forward with execution of Decision 43, as doing so would not affect
the ICSID arbitration. It is for this reason that it is especially unfair that the Award
held Chile responsible under the BIT precisely for proceeding with execution of
Decision 43. In essence, the Tribunal took away with one hand what it had already
given with the other. And this incongruency is rendered even more perverse by the
fact that the alleged discrimination relating to Decision 43 was in the end the sole
basis for the Tribunal’s grant of damages to Claimants.

238. Chile also contends that the Tribunal failed to state reasons because of the inconsistency
between the Tribunal’s condemnation of Chile under the BIT for issuing Decision No. 43
and the Tribunal’s Decision on Provisional Measures. Chile summarizes its position as

follows: !©7

510. Thus, the Tribunal reasoned in its Provisional Measures decision that there
was no need to stay execution of Decision 43, for such decision could have no
direct effect on the rights invoked by Claimants. Entirely inconsistently,
however, in the Award the Tribunal concluded that Decision 43 did have a direct
effect on Claimants’ rights, and that indeed such effect was so grave as to violate
the Spain-Chile BIT’s fair and equitable treatment clause. The Award thus left
Chile at a loss “to understand the tribunal’s motives,” for as Professor Schreuer
has explained, inconsistent reasons “are as useful as no reasons at all.” [Emphasis
in Original]

Claimants’ Position

239. The Claimants reject Chile’s interpretation of the Tribunal’s Decision on Provisional

Measures. They write: 168

572. Finalement, concernant la troisitme série d’arguments, relative 4 une
contradiction de motifs entre d’une part la condamnation au titre de la violation
d’un traitement juste et équitable et, d’autre part, la décision du 25 septembre
2001, celle-ci est contredite par les termes mémes de la décision du 25 septembre
2001 et plus particuligrement de ses paragraphes 59 4 63.

LJ

167 Thid. at para. 510. Footnotes omitted.
18 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 572-581. Footnotes omitted.

117

240.

241.

242.

579. Dés lors, loin de reconnaitre l’impossibilité pour la Décision n°43 de causer
un préjudice aux Demanderesses, le Tribunal s’appuyait surtout sur le fait que
Vexécution de la Décision n°43 ne rendrait pas impossible la réparation du
préjudice subi par les Demanderesses. II n’y a done dans cette décision de rejet
des mesures conservatoires sollicitées par les Demanderesses aucune
contradiction avec la Sentence condamnant la République du Chili sur le
fondement d’un traitement discriminatoire 4 raison notamment de la Décision
n°43.

 

Committee’s Analysis

The Committee finds the Claimants’ arguments persuasive; there is no contradiction

between the Decision of 25 September 2001 on Provisional Measures and the Award.

It is important to consider the Decision on Provisional Measures in context. The
Decision on Provisional Measures was issued after a request by the Claimants on 23
April 2001 for the suspension of the execution of Decision No. 43 by the Ministry of
National Assets of Chile.'® The Claimants alleged that Chile would oppose Decision
No. 43 to any ruling by the Tribunal granting damages for the expropriation. The
Claimants also argued that Decision No. 43 threatened the jurisdiction of the Arbitral
Tribunal. On this question, the Tribunal decided that Decision No. 43 would not affect

the Tribunal’s ability to rule on the question of the share ownership.

While the Tribunal rejected the Claimants’ request, it did not rule that Decision No. 43
could never prejudice the Claimants. The Tribunal declared that any reparations granted
under Decision No. 43 did not directly prejudice the Claimants. The Committee notes
paragraph 63 of the Tribunal’s Decision on Provisional Measures:
63. S’agissant d’une décision visant des indemnisations, elle n’est de toute fagon,
comme indiqué plus haut, pas opposable aux Parties Demanderesses et, par

conséquent, ne cause pas (au moins directement) de dommage a ces derniéres. En
serait-il autrement, ce dommage ne saurait étre considéré par le Tribunal Arbitral

'® See CN-121.

118

comme irréparable dés lors que, ainsi que l’a observé avec raison la Partie
Défenderesse, dans I’hypothése « oi le Chili serait condamné » sur le fond (par
un Tribunal Arbitral CIRDI s’étant reconnu compétent), la conséquence pratique
évidente pour le Chili, principale ou exclusive, ne pourrait étre que, soit
lobligation de restituer les actions revendiquées a leurs propriétaires légitimes
(c’est-a-dire une restitution en nature), soit, en cas d’impossibilité d’une
« restitutio in integrum », V obligation d’indemniser.

243. In the opinion of the Committee, this must be read as meaning that it did not create a
prejudice that would justify the granting of provisional measures. Clearly, the Tribunal
was not ruling on the merits of the case. As it said in paragraph 45 of its Decision on

Provisional Measures:

45. L’objection parait procéder d’un certain malentendu sur la nature méme du
systéme des mesures conservatoires établi par la Convention de Washington et
sur l’objet et le sens des mesures qu’un Tribunal Arbitral du CIRDI peut étre
appelé 4 recommander. II n’est évidemment pas question pour le Tribunal
Arbitral de préjuger en aucune maniére de ce que pourrait étre (s’il se
reconnaissait compétent sur le fond) sa décision quant a la substance du
différend. Mais le mécanisme de I’article 47 de la Convention et de l’article 39
du Réglement n’appelle nullement le Tribunal Arbitral a « préjuger des droits
entiérement éventuels », ou a « passer a l’analyse de matiéres hors de sa
compétence » ou encore a « préjuger sur les résultats éventuels d’un procés qui
n’a méme pas encore commencé en ce qui concerne le fond » comme le pense la
Partie Défenderesse.

244. As submitted by the Claimants: 170

579. Dés lors, loin de reconnaitre l’impossibilité pour la Décision n°43 de causer
un préjudice aux Demanderesses, le Tribunal s’appuyait surtout sur le fait que
Vexécution de la Décision n°43 ne rendrait pas impossible la réparation du
préjudice subi par les Demanderesses. II n’y a done dans cette décision de rejet
des mesures conservatoires sollicitées par les Demanderesses aucune
contradiction avec la Sentence condamnant la République du Chili sur le

d'un trai discriminatoire raison r de la Décision

 

 

n°43,

1 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 579.

119

245. The Committee agrees with the Claimants. The Tribunal did not contradict itself.
Therefore, it did not treat Chile unfairly and it did not fail to state reasons. The Tribunal
respected the rules that it had established for the arbitral proceedings with respect to
Decision No. 43 and its reasons are not contradictory. The Respondent’s requests on
these grounds under Article 52(1)(d) and (e) therefore fail.

G. Damages
(1) Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule of Procedure
(i) Right to be Heard
246. The main issues raised by Chile in connection with this aspect of Article 52(1)(d) are:

- whether the Claimants at any point prior to the Award asserted their

damages claim and the methodology used by the Tribunal; and

- if they did not, whether the Tribunal’s introduction of a damage calculation
in the Award, without providing an opportunity for Chile to be heard in

response, would be consistent with Article 52(1)(d).
Parties’ Positions
Chile’s Position

247. It is Chile’s contention that the Tribunal never afforded it the opportunity to be heard
regarding the calculation of damages, which appeared for the first time in the Award.'7!

The Claimants, repeats Chile, never alleged breaches of Article 4 of the BIT, and never

'"! See Resp. Rep. Annulment at para. 137.

120

248.

249.

submitted any separate damage analysis or calculation of damages resulting from the

denial of justice and discrimination claims: !”

246. The request for damages was framed exclusively in terms of indemnification
for rights related to the ownership of the expropriated property — lost profits,
value of assets, and intellectual property rights. However, at no point in the
proceedings did the parties address the issue of damages for any alleged “denial
of justice” or discrimination. Since the Claimants never actually asserted “denial
of justice” or discrimination claims with respect to the particular alleged State
acts upon which the Tribunal ultimately — and exclusively — predicated its
determination of responsibility by Chile under the BIT, it is not surprising that
the Claimants also never purported to set forth a valuation or claim for damages
for the relevant BIT violations. With no analysis of damages offered, the
Respondent[] had nothing to which to reply. The Tribunal for its part had no
basis on which to review any theories or proof of damages.

The only discussion of damages by the parties in the entire proceeding, pleads Chile,
related solely to damages resulting from the expropriation claim.'? With respect to the
denial of justice claim, while the Claimants requested the costs associated with the
addition of a new claim they never articulated a specific request for damages resulting
from any “denial of justice” claim.'™ As a result, the Respondent never had anything to

teply to.

Chile notes that the Tribunal itself acknowledged that the submissions on damages made
by the parties were limited to the expropriation claim and that there was no debate in

respect of damages for denial of justice and discrimination.'”°

248. Furthermore, the Tribunal expressly conceded in the Award that the
Claimants had not presented any evidence of damages on the denial of justice-
related or discrimination-related BIT violations (as distinguished from the
alleged expropriation-related violations):

' See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 246.
3 Thid. at para. 245.

"4 Thid. at paras. 164; 184-185.

"5 Thid. at paras. 248-250.

121

Dans ’exercice de son droit et pouvoir d’appréciation des preuves, le
Tribunal arbitral ne peut que constater que les demanderesses n’ont
pas apporté de preuve, ou de preuve convaincante, ni par piéces, ni
par témoignage, ni par expertise, des importants dommages allégués
et causés par les faits relevant de la compétence ratione temporis du
Tribunal arbitral... .

249. Finally, the Tribunal also conceded that, in light of the bases for its
conclusion on responsibility, the expropriation-based damages analysis that had
been conducted by the parties was irrelevant:

Il y a lieu de relever d’abord que |’argumentation des demanderesses
concernant |’évaluation du dommage (ainsi du reste, par voie de
conséquence, que la réfutation esquissée par la défenderesse par exemple
avec le rapport de l’expert Kaczmarek) se référe a |’expropriation
intervenue au Chili dans la période 1973-1977, notamment en 1975, et
confirmée par la suite.

L’expropriation survenue avant l’entrée en vigueur du traité ayant été
écartée de l’examen du Tribunal arbitral, il en résulte que, pour cette
raison déja, les allégations, discussions et preuves relatives au dommage
subi par les demanderesses du fait de expropriation, manquent de
pertinence et _ne peuvent pas étre retenues s’agissant d’établir_un
préjudice, résultant lui d’une autre cause, de fait et de droit, celle du
déni de justice et du refus d’un ‘traitement juste et équitable.”

250. Thus, even the Tribunal itself acknowledged that the damages submissions
made by the parties were limited solely to the expropriation context, and there
was no relevant argumentation on the issue of damages for denial of justice and
discrimination. [Emphasis in original]

250. Chile concludes that the Tribunal never consulted the parties and then produced in the

251.

Award its own methodology and calculation. 176

Chile recalls that the Tribunal in its Procedural Orders No. 13 and 14 denied it the
opportunity of presenting further written submissions including a post-hearing brief

following the January 2007 Hearing. At that hearing, the President of the Tribunal asked

"6 Thid. at para. 252.

122

252.

253.

one question on the damages related to a possible breach of the fair and equitable
treatment in relation to Decision No. 43:'7”

Il a été dit par Me Malinvaud, me semble-t-il, 4 propos de la Décision n° 43,

sinon ce matin en tout cas hier, que cette Décision 43 constituait une nouvelle

violation de la Régle du traitement juste équitable ou, si vous voulez, un nouvel

acte illicite. En admettant cette thése, par hypothése ou pour les besoins de la

discussion, c’est-a-dire si l’on admet qu’il s’agit d’une nouvelle violation, le

préjudice ou le dommage serait-il le méme ?
In the words of the Respondent, the invitation of the Tribunal to answer that question
cannot “possibly be deemed a fair opportunity to understand the claim and certainly not a
fair opportunity to respond to it. One does not respond to a Bilateral Investment Treaty
claim that attaches serious potential responsibility to a sovereign state orally by thinking
about it for one minute in the context of a hypothetical question.” Chile acknowledges
that, after the January 2007 Hearing, the Tribunal asked the parties for information on the

amount of compensation that had been granted to the beneficiaries of Decision No. 43,

including inflation and interest rate calculations. Chile notes, however, that;!”

[i]t is important to clarify that the Tribunal had not indicated for what purpose it
was requesting this information, and did not provide the parties with any
opportunity to provide any comments, or anything other than the raw data it had
asked for. Accordingly, such communications cannot be understood as having
granted Chile an opportunity to be heard on the issue of damages relating to the
purported Article 4 claims.

Chile maintains that a tribunal lacks authority to adopt a calculation of damages that
exceeds the boundaries of the parties’ arguments, without first affording the parties an

opportunity to be heard on that issue.'®° Chile argues that even if a tribunal has broad

"7 See RA-26c referring to Tr. Jur. [p. 49] (Fr.).

"8 See Tr. Annulment [2] [313:22-321:22] in particular [321:8-321:16] (Eng.); [131:24-134:33] in
particular [134:23-134:28] (Fr.); [339:21-348:22] in particular [348:7-15] (Spa.).

See Resp. Rep. Annulment at para. 145.

180 Thid. at para. 136.

123

discretion to use a damages calculation not presented by either party, it must nevertheless
afford the parties the right to address this calculation before adopting it, especially if the
question has not been addressed by the parties during the Hearing.'*! Chile notes that the

Tribunal did not proceed as such: 182

251. To compound the Tribunal’s denial of opportunity to be heard, it also
decided to forgo the hearing of any independent expert on damages (whose report
the parties would have had the right to review and respond to). It did so on the
basis that it would have been inexpedient. Specifically, the Tribunal stated in the
Award that it was disinclined to name an independent expert to render an
assessment on damages, because “que tout recours 4 une expertise ... est en soi
généralement de nature 4 augmenter, parfois fortement, la durée et les cofits d’un
arbitrage” and “que tout recours 4 une expertise ... est en soi généralement de
nature 4 augmenter, parfois fortement, la durée et les cofits d’un arbitrage . . . .”

 

252. Thus, concerned about the already unprecedented delay in issuing its
Award, the Tribunal essentially decided to dispense with rigor in the damages
assessment phase of the case, so as to be able to issue its Award as soon as
possible (even so, it did not issue the award until some 16 months after this final
hearing). Faced with the practical problem, however, that the Claimants had not
presented any claim for damages and that an independent expert would take too
long, the Tribunal resorted to devising a damages methodology and calculations
of its own, on which it never once consulted with the parties, and of which the
parties became aware for the first time in the Award itself:

 

En l’absence de preuves convaincantes apportées par les demanderesses
et le recours 4 une ou plusieurs expertises devant étre exclu, le Tribunal
arbitral est cependant en mesure de procéder 4 une évaluation du
dommage 4 l’aide d’éléments objectifs dés lors que, selon les données
incontestées résultant du dossier, les autorités chiliennes elles-mémes, &
la suite de la Décision n° 43, ont fixé le montant de la réparation due aux
personnes ayant, selon elles, droit 4 une indemnisation.

253. In other words, without hearing arguments from either of the parties
regarding the issue of damages, the Tribunal decided simply to substitute the
confiscation valuation of “El Clarin” (as determined in the confiscation-specific
context of Decision 43) for a valuation of the damages specifically attributable to

'8! Thid. at para. 139.
'82 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 251-253. Footnotes omitted.

124

the “denial of justice” and “fair and equitable treatment” violations that the
Tribunal alleged Chile had committed. [Emphasis in original]

254. Chile then concludes that this denial by the Tribunal of its right to be heard ultimately

affected the outcome of the case and must therefore be characterized as a serious

departure from a fundamental rule of procedure: '*3

The Pey Casado Award contained three principal broad conclusions: (1) the
Tribunal had jurisdiction; (2) the Republic committed a denial of justice and a
discriminatory violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard; and (3) the
Republic was responsible to the Claimants for US$10 million worth of damages
resulting from such violations. [Emphasis in original]

255. Finally, the Respondent argues that it never waived its right to be heard on the issue of

damages concerning the discrimination claim relating to Decision No. 43 because it

never had actual or constructive knowledge that a response was required. 1s4

149. [...] The mere fact that parties may have a certain degree of latitude to express
views on almost anything in an arbitration, does not mean they are required to opine on
every conceivable issue that could come up, lest they risk waiver. In particular, they are
not required to address issues that cannot reasonably be discerned to be at play in the
arbitration. Here, as demonstrated above, Chile did not become aware of the
discrimination claim or of the damages methodology employed by the Tribunal in
connection with such claim until the Award was published. Because the right to defend
can only be waived if the respondent has actual or constructive notice that a response is
required, and because Chile had no such knowledge, it is apparent that Chile did not
waive its right to be heard on the issue of damages concerning the alleged
discrimination relating to Decision 43.

Claimants’ Position

256. The Claimants take the position that there was no departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure in the circumstances because the Tribunal’s introduction of the damages

calculation in the Award was justified. In the words of the Claimants, “le quantum du

'83 Thid. at para. 255.
'S4 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at para. 149.

125

dommage réparable au titre du déni de justice et traitement discriminatoire était le méme
que celui résultant de la confiscation, les violations du Chili n’ayant eu pour conséquence

que de priver les Demanderesses d’obtenir réparation pour les confiscations subies
Le}

 

257. The Claimants maintain that they did not make requests for specific damages for the
breaches of Article 4 since they were included in the compensation claim for the
expropriation. '86 As for the denial of justice claim, they refer to their Ancillary Request

of 4 November 2002, p. 13:

Enfin cette demande n’a pas d’incidence sur le montant total des dommages et
intéréts sollicités dans la procédure principale. En effet, le rapport des experts
« Alejandro Arraez et Associés » sur |’évaluation du groupe d’entreprises du
journal Clarin (piéce D18) avait conclu que |’indemnisation correspondant aux
presses GOSS établie par la 1°“ Chambre Civile de Santiago devait étre déduite
de l’évaluation qu’ils avaient faite du montant global des dommages et intéréts.
Cette position est confirmée par le rapport complémentaire du 28 octobre 2002
ci-joint (piéce C225).

258. With respect to the discrimination claim, they maintain that the damages were included

in their expert report of 19 February 2003.'%” They also refer to the January 2007

Hearing: 188

L’interprétation des Demanderesses est que si cette Décision 43 constituait une
nouvelle violation du traitement équitable, il conviendrait, notamment dans le
calcul du dommage, de tenir compte des actes passés du gouvernement et de la
République du Chili, qu’il s’agisse des actes de 1995 ou des décrets de 1977 et
1975 et, dés lors, le calcul de l’indemnité ne serait pas différent si ce n’est qu’il
serait peut étre augmenté, en ce qui concerne le préjudice moral, qui est I’un des
chefs de préjudice demandé, puisque le dommage moral qu’ il s’agisse de celui de

'85 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 613; see also Cl. Rej. Annulment at paras. 208 et seq.
186 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 592.

'87 See Cl. Rej. Annulment at para. 210.

188 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 593 quoting Tr. Jur. [2] [p. 50] (Fr.).

126

M. Pey ou de celui de la Fondation a été augmenté par cette nouvelle violation de
la République du Chili.

259. The Claimants maintain that the Tribunal granted Chile the opportunity to be heard

before, during, and after the January 2007 Hearing.'®

596. [...] [L]es Parties Demanderesses ayant présenté des demandes au cours de
la procédure d’ arbitrage sur les fondements de déni de justice et de traitement
injuste et inéquitable, la République du Chili avait l’opportunité de présenter

dans ses écritures les arguments pertinents pour s’opposer non seulement 4
Vexistence d’une telle violation mais également 4 |’évaluation du préjudice
présentée par les Demanderesses.'””

260. They conclude that tribunals have broad discretion to determine damages, as recognized
by ad hoc committees, and that even if there was a breach of a fundamental rule of
procedure, it would not be a serious one. In this respect, Claimants argue that the
Tribunal would not have been in a position to grant a lesser amount of damages, as it
awarded the strict minimum equivalent to the amount granted by Chile under Decision
No. 43, which was the foundation of the discrimination. Therefore, the Tribunal did not
reach a result substantially different from what it would have awarded had the rule been

observed. 7!

Committee’s Analysis

261. The Committee notes that the Tribunal acknowledged in the Award that:

189 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 591-604.
' Thid. at 596.
1°! Thid. at paras. 608-615.

127

Claimants’ damages arguments were strictly limited to their expropriation

: 2
claims; 192

686. Il y a lieu de relever d’abord que l’argumentation des
demanderesses concernant |’évaluation du dommage (ainsi du reste, par
voie de conséquence, que la réfutation esquissée par la défenderesse par
exemple avec le rapport de Il’expert Kaczmarek) se référe a
Vexpropriation intervenue au Chili dans la période 1973-1977,
notamment en 1975, et confirmée par la suite.

The expropriation-based calculation of damages was not relevant to the BIT
violations in terms of denial of justice and discrimination forming the basis

of the Award; 198

688. L’expropriation survenue avant l’entrée en vigueur du traité ayant
été écartée de l’examen du Tribunal arbitral, il en résulte que, pour
cette raison déja, les allégations, discussions et preuves relatives au
dommage subi par les demanderesses du fait de 1’expropriation,
manquent de pertinence et ne peuvent pas étre retenues s’agissant
d’établir un préjudice, résultant lui d’une autre cause, de fait et de droit,
celle du déni de justice et du refus d’un « traitement juste et équitable ».
[Emphasis in original]

 

Claimants presented no convincing evidence of damages on the denial of

justice or discrimination claims; 194 and

The Tribunal would be able to proceed to the evaluation of the damages
based on objective elements, the Chilean authorities having themselves
fixed the amount of compensation due to persons entitled to be indemnified

under Decision No. 43.'°°

' See Award at para. 686.
"3 Thid. at 688.

'4 Thid. at para. 689.

'°5 Thid. at para. 692.

128

262. The Committee is of the view that even if, arguendo, the Tribunal had such power, it
should have allowed each party the right to present its arguments and to contradict those
of the other party. Having reviewed the entire record, including the parties’ submissions,
the Committee can only conclude that the parties never pleaded the damages claims
arising from the breaches of Article 4 of the BIT. The Claimants did mention briefly the
damages related to the Goss machine and Decision No. 43 but solely in the context of the
expropriation claim. It is significant that the relief requested by the Claimants is limited

to damages resulting from the expropriation: 196

QU IL DECLARE illégitime, contraire au Droit interne chilien et international,
nulle et de nul effet ab initio la saisie par un acte de force et la confiscation des
biens, droits et crédits de CPP S.A. et de EPC Ltée., la dissolution de CPP S.A. et
EPC Ltée., ainsi que la nouvelle dépossession intervenue le 28 avril 2000 ;

-QU’IL CONDAMNE !’Etat défendeur 4 indemniser en conséquence les parties
demanderesses eu égard a la totalité de leurs dommages et préjudices ainsi
causés, y compris le Jucrum cessans a partir de la date de I’acte de force - le 11
septembre 1973- jusqu’a la date de la Sentence -et ce pour un montant minimum
estimé provisoirement a la date du 11 septembre 2002, sauf erreur ou omission, 4
US$ 397.347.287, auquel s’ajoutent les dommages moraux et non patrimoniaux
infligés 4 M. Victor Pey Casado selon |’estimation que le Tribunal jugera
opportune ; [Emphasis added]

En définitive,
Qu’il CONDAMNE l’Etat demandeur & indemniser les demanderesses A hauteur
de 515.193.400 US$ (cing cent quinze millions cent quatre-vingt-treize mille

quatre cent dollars des Etats-Unis d’ Amérique) comme sollicité dans le Mémoire
présenté le 17 mars 1999. [Emphasis in original]

263. The only time the question of damages for breach of Article 4 of the BIT was raised was
at the January 2007 Hearing when the President of the Tribunal asked the parties whether
the injury or damages resulting from the hypothetical breach of the fair and equitable

treatment provision were the same as or different from those resulting from the

16 See RA-20a, Cl. Rep. Jur. and Merits at p. 254 (referring to Supplemental Memorial on the Merits at p.
152, RA-13a).

129

264.

265.

expropriation claim.'”” However, as the record discloses, the January 2007 Hearing was
convened to deal with questions of jurisdiction. It is obvious to the Committee that the
Respondent (and the Claimants) had very little time at the hearing to answer the question
posed by the President. The Committee agrees with Chile that a party cannot respond to
such a question and present its arguments on the consequences of a potential breach of a

substantive provision of a Bilateral Investment Treaty “in one minute”. 198

The parties did not have an opportunity to file post-hearing briefs after the January 2007
Hearing as the Tribunal had made it clear in its decision of 13 September 2006 and in its
Procedural Order No. 13 of 24 October 2006 that there would not be any reopening of the

written phase of the proceedings.

The Committee notes that, after the January 2007 Hearing, the Tribunal asked for
information from the parties in respect of Decision No. 43. However, it is clear to the
Committee that none of these requests related to the principles of compensation for the

breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard:

- on 18 July 2007, the Tribunal asked the parties for “les documents qui lui
permettraient de prendre connaissance des montants précis concernés” with
respect to Decision No. 43.' The Claimants replied by letter of 19 July 2007
specifying the amounts awarded under Decision No. 43 but without any
discussion on legal arguments related to compensation. Respondent replied by
letter of 20 July 2007 and indicated that it was reserving its right to comment on

- - 2
the amount of compensation;"°

197 See supra at para. 251.
18 See supra at para. 252.
See CN-215.
2 See CN-217.

130

266.

267.

- on 3 October 2007, the Tribunal granted 2 weeks to the Respondent to comment
on the Claimants’ letter of 19 July 2007 and also allowed for a further exchange

of observations;

- Respondent replied on 18 October 2007 and attached the documents requested
concerning the amount of Decision No. 43 and relevant inflation and interest rate
calculations. The letter commented on the amount paid under Decision No. 43

and explained the contents of the documents;

- Claimants replied on 29 October 2007 and commented on the data produced by
Chile; and

- Chile replied on 9 November 2007 (letter incorrectly dated 18 October 2007)

commenting on the issuance of promissory notes as the mode of payment.

In the Committee’s view, these post-hearing exchanges do not constitute a fair
opportunity to discuss the remedy for breach of Article 4 of the BIT. Even though the
Tribunal did use objective elements for the valuation of damages (the data provided and
discussed by the parties), at no time did it refer to arguments pleaded by either party. As

explained in their Counter-Memorial on Annulment,”

the Claimants, at the January
2007 Hearing, argued that the compensation due was equivalent to the one resulting from
the confiscation as Chile’s breach of the BIT had the consequence of preventing the
Claimants from obtaining compensation for the confiscation. The Tribunal, however,
adopted another standard. It placed the Claimants in the situation in which they would

have been but-for the BIT violations and awarded the amount fixed by Decision No. 43.

The Committee notes that the Tribunal considered and rejected the option of naming an

independent expert to assess the damages because of the additional delay and the further

201 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 613.

131

268.

269.

costs that such a process could entail.7° However, in the Committee’s view, the
Tribunal could not consider the evidence and reach such a conclusion without having
afforded both parties an opportunity to make submissions on the applicable standard of
compensation and evaluation of damages for the breach of Article 4 of the BIT. The
committee agrees with the ad hoc committee in Kléckner I that reopening the proceeding
before reaching a decision and allowing the parties to put forward their views on the
arbitrators’ new thesis was not just a question of expedience but a requirement as the
Tribunal was going beyond the legal framework that the parties had established.?

Finally, the Committee is satisfied that Chile never waived its right to be heard on this
issue of damages. The Committee recalls that the Tribunal had expressly stated before
the January 2007 Hearing that it would not reopen the written phase of the proceeding.
In the circumstances, Chile cannot be considered to have forfeited its right to object to
the Tribunal’s failure to observe the “principe du contradictoire” when it was prevented
by the Tribunal from filing further submissions. In addition, a party can only waive an
objection if it has actual or constructive knowledge of a procedural violation. As

Professor Schreuer observes,”

some violations of procedural principles may become
visible only after the award has become available. Based on the only question posed to
the parties at the January 2007 Hearing and the Tribunal’s requests of July and October
2007, Chile could not know until it read the Award that the Tribunal would use Decision
No. 43 to evaluate the damages resulting from a breach of the fair and equitable

treatment.

The Committee considers that this departure from the right to be heard which it has found

is serious as the issue on which Chile was denied an opportunity to be heard was

2 See Award at para. 691.
2 See Kléckner I Decision at para. 91.

2 See Schreuer Commentary Art. 52 at para. 334.

132

270.

271.

substantial and outcome-determinative. Chile was deprived of the right to present its
arguments on the standard applicable to the calculation of damages for the breach by
Chile of the fair and equitable treatment provision of the BIT. In view of the Tribunal’s
conclusions, which are part of the dispositif, it is evident that this issue was a critical
component of the Award and that it materially prejudiced Chile. Therefore, the
Committee concludes that it has no discretion not to annul paragraph 4 of the dispositif of
the Award. Additionally, had Chile been granted the opportunity to be heard on the
damages methodology and calculations used by the Tribunal, the Award might have been

substantially different. Although, as the Committee decided earlier,”

the applicant is
not required to prove that the end result would have been different had the rule been
observed, the Committee agrees with Chile that the Tribunal went beyond the standard it
established, i.e., placing the Claimants in the position they would have been but for the
breaches of the BIT, because in fact it left them far better off “by granting them over
US$ 10 million rather than the US$ 2 million they were asking for in Chile.”?°° Without
entering into an analysis of the applicable standard and the damages calculation, there is
no doubt that Chile has demonstrated the impact this significant breach may have had on

the Award.

In sum, the Committee concludes that section 4 only of the dispositif of the Award must

be annulled.

The Committee will observe before concluding this part of its Decision that its finding

does not contradict the conclusions of other ad hoc committees that have ruled that

25 See supra at paras. 78 and 80.
206 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at para. 522, “Thus, even if Mr. Pey had been granted everything he was
asking for in all of the relevant Chilean courts and administrative proceedings, the most he [] would have
obtained would have been a suspension of the Decision 43 proceeding, and compensation for the Goss
machine. Accordingly, it could be said that ICSID Tribunal did far more than merely ‘place Claimants in
the position they would have been...’ In fact, it left them far better off, by granting them over US$10
million, rather than the US$2 million they were asking for in Chile.”

133

tribunals have a wide discretion in determining quantum of damages.” The Committee
notes that decisions in the Rumeli and Azurix cases analyzed the question of quantum in
the light of Article 52(1)(e), i.e., failure to state reasons. The issue in those cases was not
whether the parties had had an opportunity to present and argue damages calculations for
the breaches invoked. The applicants were challenging the reasoning in the tribunals’
quantification of damages. The Committee in the present section of its Decision has
found an annullable error in the process which the Tribunal followed in reaching its

conclusion not in the way it calculated the amount of damages.

(ii) Burden of Proof

272. The ground raised by Chile in connection with this aspect of Article 52(1)(d) is whether

the Claimants satisfied their burden of proving their damages.
Parties’ Positions
Chile’s Position

273. Chile lays emphasis on the Tribunal’s acknowledgment that the Claimants had the
burden of proving their damages and they had not presented any evidence concerning the
valuation of damages for the denial of justice and discrimination claims.
Notwithstanding this premise, the Tribunal awarded Claimants damages for violation of

the fair and equitable treatment.?°*

274. Chile submits the following:””

2°” See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 606; Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 139-142, referring to Rumeli
Decision and Azurix v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/1/12, Decision on Annulment dated 1
September 2009 (hereinafter “Azurix Decision”).

208 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 365-370.
2 Thid. at para. 368.

134

275.

Because the Tribunal rendered such determination on damages against the
Respondent despite the fact that it admitted both that the Claimants bore the
burden of proof regarding damages, and that the Claimants had in fact provided
no arguments or evidence at all in that regard with respect to the two claims that
constituted the ultimate bases of responsibility, it is evident that the Tribunal
disregarded even its own standards on the issue, and improperly reversed the
burden of proof.

The Respondent adds that if the burden of proof, had in fact, been placed upon the
Claimants, the Award might have been very different. Therefore, concludes Chile, the

Tribunal departed from a fundamental rule of procedure. 210

Claimants’ Position

276.

277.

The Claimants repeat their arguments with respect to the denial of the right to be heard,
i.e., that that the Tribunal had discretion with respect to damages and therefore could not

21! that the Claimants satisfied their

have departed from a fundamental rule of procedure,
burden by discussing damages in letters submitted after the January 2007 hearing,”" and
that, even if the Tribunal did depart from a fundamental rule of procedure, such departure

was not “serious” within the meaning of Article 52(1)(d).73

Committee’s Analysis

In light of the Committee’s finding in the previous section of its Decision that the
Tribunal denied Chile the right to be heard on the question of the calculation of damages
which amounted to a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure in breach of
Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, the Committee considers that this ground for

annulment is in fact subsumed in the denial of the right to be heard or has become moot.

210 Thid. at para. 369.

211 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 606-607.
212 See Ibid at paras. 597-605.

213 See Ibid at paras. 607-617.

135

However, in order to dispel any doubt regarding Chile’s Application the Committee

decides to deny it.

(2) Failure to State Reasons

278. Chile submits that in awarding damages to the Claimants, the Tribunal failed to state

reasons with respect to:

Chile’s Position

the methodology and calculations that it used in assessing damages
relating specifically to the two Article 4 violations for which it found

Chile responsible (denial of justice and discrimination); and

its determination that it was appropriate, for the purpose of assessing
damages, to use the expropriation value of E/ Clarin (as quantified in
Decision 43), despite the Tribunal’s earlier conclusion in the Award that
the expropriatory acts relating to El Clarin were outside the BIT’s

temporal scope and therefore outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

Parties’ Positions

279. Chile’s annulment challenge in relation to the damages and based on Article 52(1)(e) of

the ICSID Convention is summarized as follows:

214

521. The Tribunal failed to state reasons on several aspects of this conclusion.
First, it did not explain why it considered that “placing the Claimants in the
situation in which they would have been” but-for the BIT violations was the
proper standard for determining the amount of damages suffered by Claimants as
aresult of the alleged “denial of justice” and failure to provide “fair and equitable
treatment.” Nor did it explain why, in order to meet that standard, it was
appropriate for it to award Claimants an amount that was based on the

214 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 521-527.

136

expropriation-based compensation determined by Decision 43. This is
contradictory with the Tribunal’s previous conclusion that Claimants had to be
compensated for the alleged BIT claims and not for the expropriation. It is also
contradictory with the Tribunal’s overall conclusion that Claimants’
expropriation claim was inadmissible; this is so because the Tribunal ended up
compensating Claimants—through the back door—for the very expropriation that
it had said was outside the ratione temporis scope of the BIT.

522. It is important in this context to recall that the only thing that Claimants
were demanding before the Chilean courts, in terms of compensation, was
compensation for the value of the Goss machine (which they claimed to be
approximately US$2 million). All of the other judicial and administrative
decisions that formed the basis of the Tribunal’s “fair and equitable”
determination concerned denial of Claimant’s requests that the various Chilean
proceedings be suspended pending resolution of the ongoing ICSID arbitration.
Thus, even if Mr. Pey had been granted everything he was asking for in all of the
relevant Chilean courts and administrative proceedings, the most he [] would
have obtained would have been a suspension of the Decision 43 proceeding, and
compensation for the Goss machine. Accordingly, it could be said that the ICSID
Tribunal did far more than merely “place Claimants in the position they would
have been . . . .” In fact, it left them far better off, by granting them over US$10
million, rather than the US$2 million they were asking for in Chile.

 

523. Furthermore, in the end Claimants suffered no harm at all from the Chilean
authorities’ failure to suspend the execution of Decision 43. Claimants’ efforts to
stop the execution of Decision 43 were intended to prevent a payment for the
confiscation of El Clarin to third parties, out of concern that such a payment
would render more difficult any later effort by Claimants to collect from Chile on
an award by the ICSID Tribunal for the very same confiscation. If such
suspension had been granted by the Chilean authorities, it would have allowed
the ICSID Tribunal to rule first. But the practical import of this would have been
negligible, given the Tribunal’s eventual conclusion that Claimants’
expropriation-based claim was outside the scope of the BIT. It could therefore be
said that, had the execution of Decision 43 in fact been suspended, Mr. Pey
would have been no better or worse off than he was without the suspension.
Thus, the Tribunal failed to explain how Mr. Pey would have received US$10
million but for the alleged BIT violations.

524. In sum, the restitution standard used by the Tribunal made no sense in the
context of the particular BIT violations that it found. The Tribunal’s failure to
explain why it chose that standard, and its failure to explain why, having chosen
that standard, it deemed that the expropriation amount calculated in connection
with Decision 43 was the appropriate figure to use to meet the restitution
standard, render the Award annullable under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention.

137

525. In the end, it could reasonably be speculated that the real motivation for the
Tribunal’s decision was its legal inability—due to the ratione temporis
constraints mentioned above—to compensate Claimants under the BIT for the
expropriation of E/ Clarin. Hence the Tribunal’s strained effort to find some sort
of BIT violation by Chile in connection with Decision 43, and the implausibility
of its conclusion on that point, particularly given that it would have in fact been
illegal for the Chilean authorities to compensate Mr. Pey given his status as a
nonparticipant in the relevant administrative proceeding. (On this point it bears
noting that even if Mr. Pey had in fact applied for compensation under this
administrative process for the confiscation of El Clarin, the result would have
been no different, as Chile concluded that the registered shareholders of El
Clarin—whose heirs ended up being the beneficiaries of Decision 43—were in
fact the genuine owners of El Clarin).

526. The ICSID annulment jurisprudence would support a finding of annulment
for the reasons articulated above. As discussed in Chile’s Memorial, the ad hoc
committees in Amco J and MINE annulled awards for “failure to state reasons”
precisely because of the existence of inconsistent or contradictory reasons.
Particularly relevant is MINE, where the committee annulled precisely on the
basis of a failure by the tribunal to state reasons for its damages determination,
noting in that regard that “to the extent that the Tribunal purported to state the
reasons for its decisions” on damages, such reasons were “inconsistent and in
contradiction with its analysis of damages theories” that had been presented by
the parties in the case. The MINE committee further stated:

Having concluded that [the analysis of damages] theories “Y” and “Z”
were unusable because of their speculative character, the Tribunal could
not, without contradicting itself, adopt a “damages theory” which
disregarded the real situation and relied on hypotheses which the
Tribunal itself had rejected as a basis for the calculation of damages. As

the Committee stated . . . , the requirement that the Award must state the
reasons on which it is based is in particular not satisfied by contradictory
reasons.

527. The foregoing analysis by the MINE committee is directly applicable in the
present case. For that and all of the other reasons articulated above, the Pey
Casado Tribunal’s failure to state reasons for its handling of the damages aspects
of its decision warrant annulment of the Award. [Emphasis in original]

138

Claimants’ Position

280.

281.

282.

283.

The Claimants do not expressly address this ground in their written submissions. They
describe the reasoning of the Tribunal with respect to the assessment of damages”!* and
conclude generally that Chile cannot request the annulment of the Award on the grounds

it invoked with respect to the Tribunal’s decision on the amount of damages.”'®

Committee’s Analysis

As is well established by decisions of numerous ICSID ad hoc committees, the “failure to
state reasons” may consist of contradictory reasons.”'7 The purpose of this ground for
annulment — put differently, the purpose of the requirement to state reasons - is to permit

the parties to understand the decisions of ICSID tribunals.

The Committee agrees with Chile that the Tribunal’s adoption of the expropriation-
based calculation of damages under Decision No. 43 contradicts its determination that
this basis of calculation was irrelevant since the Claimants’ claim for expropriation was

outside the temporal scope of the BIT.

In paragraph 688 of the Award, the Tribunal expressly stated that an evaluation of the
damages allegedly suffered by the Claimants as a result of the expropriation was
irrelevant and that all the allegations, discussion and evidence related to such damages
could not be considered by the Tribunal (“ne peuvent pas étre retenues”) because the
expropriation in 1975 had occurred prior to the entry into force of the BIT and was thus

outside the temporal scope of the BIT. In the words of the Tribunal:

215 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 610-615.
216 Thid. at para. 616; Cl. Rej. Annulment at para. 217.
2"7 See supra at para. 85.

139

284.

285.

286.

L’expropriation survenue avant |’entrée en vigueur du traité ayant été écartée de
Yexamen du Tribunal arbitral, il en résulte que, pour cette raison déja, les
allégations, discussions et preuves relatives au dommage subi par les
demanderesses du fait de l’expropriation, manquent de pertinence et ne peuvent
pas 6tre retenues s’agissant d’établir un préjudice, résultant lui d’une autre cause,
de fait et de droit, celle du déni de justice et du refus d’un « traitement juste et
équitable ».

However, the Tribunal then proceeded to determine the calculation of the Claimants’
damages on the basis of the evaluation made by the Chilean Ministry of Assets in
accordance with Decision No. 43 for the purpose of compensating the persons it
considered to be the owners of El Clarin for the expropriation of the newspaper.”
Again, in the words of the Tribunal:
En l’absence de preuves convaincantes apportées par les demanderesses et le
recours 4 une ou plusieurs expertises devant étre exclu, le Tribunal arbitral est
cependant en mesure de procéder 4 une évaluation du dommage 4a l'aide
d’éléments objectifs dés lors que, selon les données incontestées résultant du
dossier, les autorités chiliennes elles-mémes, a la suite de la Décision n° 43, ont

fixé le montant de la réparation due aux personnes ayant, selon elles, droit 4 une
indemnisation.

The Tribunal’s use of the expropriation-based damage calculation is manifestly
inconsistent with its decision a few paragraphs earlier that such an expropriation-based
damage calculation is irrelevant and that all evidence and submissions relevant to such a

calculation could not be considered.

While the Committee recognizes that arbitral tribunals are generally allowed a
considerable measure of discretion in determining quantum of damages,”"” the issue in
the present case is not per se the quantum of damages determined by the Tribunal. Nor
does the problem lie per se in the Tribunal’s chosen method of calculating the damages

suffered by the Claimants. The issue lies precisely in the reasoning followed by the

218 See Award at para.692.
219 See Wena Decision at para. 91; Rumeli Decision at para. 146; Azurix Decision at para. 351.

140

287.

Tribunal to determine the appropriate method of calculation, which, as demonstrated

above, is plainly contradictory.

On this basis, the Committee finds that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for its
determination of damages which is a ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the
ICSID Convention. The Committee therefore grants the Respondent’s request in this
regard and annuls section 4 of the dispositif of the Award.
H. The May 2003 Hearing
(Right to Be Heard

Parties’ Positions

Chile’s Position

288.

289.

Chile contends that the Tribunal denied it a “full and fair” opportunity to be heard within
the meaning of Article 52(1)(d) by: (a) denying Chile the opportunity to present its
witnesses and experts; (b) but nevertheless permitting Mr. Pey Casado to address factual
issues in oral testimony during the May 2003 Hearing; (c) at the same time denying Chile
the right to cross-examine Mr. Pey Casado in that same hearing; and (d) after having
expressly assured Chile at the hearing that it would not treat Mr. Pey Casado’s statements
as factual evidence, referring in its Award to Mr. Pey Casado’s testimony at that hearing
as if it were factual evidence, and invoking such testimony in the Award as the only
evidence on certain key factual findings related to the existence of an “investment” and

to the issue of whether Mr. Pey Casado was the owner of that investment.”

The main issue raised by Chile in connection with the right to be heard is therefore

whether, notwithstanding the Tribunal’s assurances and the absence of any opportunity

220 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at paras. 256-268.

141

290.

291.

by Chile to cross-examine Mr. Pey Casado at the May 2003 Hearing, the Tribunal in the
Award ultimately assigned probative value to such testimony. This issue also raised the
question of the Claimants’ waiver argument in light of the Tribunal’s assurances that Mr.

Pey Casado would not be treated as a fact witness.

Chile submits that, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 32(1), the parties have an absolute
right to present witnesses and experts at a hearing where the parties present their
arguments. While Chile acknowledges that a tribunal may have some discretion in this

regard, the exercise of this discretion, it says, is limited by the requirement that a tribunal

221

treat the parties equally. It further argues that pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule

35(1), a party has a right to cross-examine adverse witnesses.”

Chile’s contention that the Tribunal denied it the right to be heard by not allowing its
counsel to cross-examine Mr. Pey Casado at the May 2003 Hearing is set forth as

follows:”

264. Pursuant to the test articulated in Wena Hotels, a departure is serious where
a petitioning party demonstrates “the impact that the issue may have had on the
award.” Here, the Tribunal’s actions may have had a dramatic impact on the
Award. The Tribunal permitted Mr. Pey to testify, without being examined by the
opposing party, accepted his statements as true, and cited to them as facts in the
Award. Indeed, one of the key underpinnings of the Tribunal’s conclusion that
there was an “investment” under the BIT was its determination that no formal,
written contract or transfer was necessary under Chilean law for the transfer of
the CPP shares because of the close relationship between Mr. Pey and Dario
Sainte Marie and that Mr. Pey was thus the sole owner of the CPP shares;
information that comes directly and uniquely from Mr. Pey’s May 2003
testimony. According to the Award,

Il est allégué que M. Sainte-Marie, en 1972, pour «des raisons
strictement personnelles » et semble-t-il d’ordre familial a décidé de

21 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 160-162.
2? See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 258.
23 Thid. at paras. 264-266. Footnotes omitted.

142

vendre la société CPP S.A. 4 son ami M. Pey Casado, lequel, depuis bien
des années, 1957-58" [avait assisté en tant que collaborateur et
conseiller technique, notamment pour le développement et I’ orientation
de l’entreprise et était devenu « son collaborateur le plus étroit, » le
vendeur souhaitait en effet « quitter le pays pour toujours et de fagon
totale.» C’est la raison pour laquelle, selon _M. Pey Casado, le
« mécanisme de transfert de l’entreprise » se serait déroulé de fagon
rapide et moins formelle qu’il est d’usage sur le plan commercial.

265. The footnotes from this paragraph cite directly to Mr. Pey’s testimony from
the May 2003 hearing, in which he stated:

Les raisons pour lesquelles M. Sainte-Marie a eu cette idée étaient des
raisons strictement personnelles et, 4 mon avis, ce sont des raisons qui
doivent faire l'objet du respect quant aux commentaires qu’on pourrait
faire.

A ce moment-la j’étais son collaborateur le_plus étroit. Je n’ai pas
pergu pas un sous pendant tous mes travaux de nombreuses années de
collaboration en dépit de son instance pour que je sois payé, que je
Vaccepte en tant que professionnel, mais j’ai toujours travaillé en tant
qu’ami avec lui. Il est devenu évident, naturel par conséquent que, étant
la personne qui connaissait le mieux |’entreprise et en méme temps qui
connaissait le mieux de la situation particuligre, de la situation
personnelle de M. Sainte-Marie, c’était naturellement moi auquel s’est
adressé en plus que j’étais entrepreneur.

Donc il s’est adressé 4 moi, disais-je, pour que je lui achéte le journal
étant donné qu’il avait la_ proposition définitive de quitter le_pays
pour toujours.

 

Mon activité était tout 4 fait différente et j’ai di prendre une décision
assez rapidement, en quelques jours. C’est ainsi que le mécanisme du
transfert de ’entreprise s’est déroulé. Nous ne sommes pas passés par
les processus minutieux qui sont utilisés sur le plan commercial. En fait,
ce qui a compté c’était la bonne foi et la relation d’amitié que nous
avions entre nous approfondie tout au long des derniéres années.

266. Had the Tribunal barred Mr. Pey from offering oral testimony over and
above his prior written testimony, or had it given Chile the opportunity to cross-
examine him on both his written and oral testimony, it might have reached a
different conclusion on the issue of whether Mr. Pey was the owner of the CPP
and EPC shares. Thus, the Tribunal’s departure from the rule caused it to render
an award that might have been “substantially different from what it would have
awarded had such a rule been observed.” As stated above, an applicant for
annulment need only demonstrate that it was denied the right to be heard on an
issue that was part of the Tribunal’s decision. Because Mr. Pey’s ownership of

143

292.

293.

the CPP and EPC shares was an element of the Tribunal’s decision upholding
jurisdiction, the denial of the right to be heard may have caused the Tribunal to
render an award “substantially different from what it would have awarded had
such a rule been observed.” Thus, the Tribunal’s actions would constitute a
serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure under the Wena Hotels
test. [Emphasis in original]

Chile adds that, regardless of the Tribunal’s statements about Mr. Pey Casado’s status as
a party prior to allowing him to speak at the May 2003 Hearing, in its Award it treated
his statements at that hearing as factual evidence on certain key issues. In the
circumstances Chile submits, the Tribunal’s denial of any opportunity for Chile to cross-
examine Mr. Pey Casado on those statements amounts to a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure. Chile further contends that, regardless of whether there
was other evidence in the record, the fact that the Tribunal only cited as a source Mr. Pey
Casado’s statements demonstrates that the Tribunal gave them a lot of weight. Chile
concludes that it is obvious that the statements had significant, if not determinative,
influence on the Tribunal’s reasoning on key issues and that fact in itself creates a
prejudice to the Respondent under circumstances in which it was assured that Mr. Pey

Casado’s testimony would not be given any probative value.”*4

Finally, Chile denies the Claimants’ contention that it waived any claim for annulment on
these grounds since it only discovered the departure from this fundamental rule of

procedure after the Award was issued.”

Claimants’ Position

294.

The Claimants argue that not all the rules of procedure are fundamental rules. There is

no fundamental rule requiring the Tribunal to hear all the witnesses and experts who have

24 See Tr. Annulment [2] [341:23-342:12] (Eng.); [142:33-40] (Fr.); [373:17-374:10] (Spa.).
25 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 164; 176.

144

295.

296.

297.

submitted statements and reports. Similarly, there is no fundamental rule of procedure
guaranteeing a right to cross-examine witnesses at a hearing.””° In the words of the
Claimants:”””
101. Il résulte de ce qui précéde que l’impossibilité de contre-interroger un
témoin, comme le refus du Tribunal arbitral d’entendre les témoins et/ou experts

au cours d’une audience orale, ne sauraient étre considérés comme une violation
d’une régle fondamentale de procédure.

102. En tout état de cause, il ne saurait s’agir d’une violation grave dés lors que
le tribunal avait 4 sa disposition les attestations écrites et les rapports d’experts
lui permettant de se forger une opinion. Dés lors, l’absence de témoignages oraux
n’a pu manifestement conduire le Tribunal 4 rendre une décision
substantiellement différente.

In addition, the Claimants maintain that Mr. Pey Casado was not a fact witness and that
Chile in any event waived its right to claim for annulment based on this issue.?* The
Claimants further deny Chile’s contention that the presentation (in French, “l’exposé”)

made by Mr. Pey Casado was treated as evidence by the Tribunal.”

Committee’s Analysis

The Committee considers that the parties’ arguments in respect of this ground raise three
questions: (i) is there an obligation for tribunals to hear witnesses and experts; (ii) should
there have been an opportunity for Chile to cross-examine Mr. Pey Casado; and (iii) how

did the Tribunal treat Mr. Pey Casado’s statements in the Award?

On the first question, the Committee notes that the ICSID Arbitration Rules foresee the

possibility to examine and cross-examine witnesses and experts, but do not require a

26 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 85-99.
227 Thid. at paras. 101-102.

8 Thid. at paras. 105 et seq.

2° Thid. at paras. 132 et seq.

145

298.

tribunal to hear all of the parties’ witnesses and experts. Arbitration Rule 34(2)(a)
provides that the Tribunal may call upon the parties to produce witnesses and experts.
Arbitration Rule 35 describes how witnesses and experts are examined once they have
been called to testify. The verb shall in Arbitration Rule 35(1) (“Witnesses and experts
shall be examined before the Tribunal by the parties under the control of its President
[...]”) cannot be interpreted as requiring all the witnesses and experts having submitted a
written statement or report to be examined. Often, at the first procedural meeting, the
parties agree on the process which will be adopted if witnesses and experts are asked to
testify (e.g., whether each party can call its own witnesses or whether it can only call the
other side’s witnesses). In the absence of any agreement, the Tribunal is free to decide
that it does not need to hear any or all the witnesses or experts and may rely exclusively

on their written statements and reports.

In the present case, it does not seem that the parties had agreed on a specific process.

The Claimants first indicated that they would not present any of their witnesses or

0

experts at the May 2003 Hearing.”* The Respondent made suggestions as to the

231

possibility of examining witnesses or experts.” Then, the Claimants indicated that Mr.

Pey Casado, as one of the claimants, would be present as well as Mr. Alejandro Arrdez,
their damages expert.” By letter of 16 April 2003, the Respondent asked that Mr. Pey
Casado be present also as a fact witness in order to be cross-examined and stated that it

3

would ask its own damages expert, Mr. Kaczmarek, to be present.”* The Claimants

replied by letter of 18 April 2003 proposing 6 witnesses.” As pointed out by the

Claimants in that letter, the contents of the parties’ correspondence on the organization of

250 See RA-68c, Claimants’ letter of 13 December 2002 mentioned in Respondent's letter of 8 April 2003.
5! See RA-68c, Respondent's letter of 8 April 2003.

28 See RA-69c, Claimants’ letter of 11 April 2003.

253 See RA-70c.

4 See RA-Tla.

146

the hearing were mere proposals that did not constitute an agreement between the parties

that the Tribunal would be required to follow:?°

Les parties demanderesses tiennent a rendre parfaitement explicite le fait qu’elles
n’ont pas donné et ne donnent pas, leur accord 4 quelque proposition que ce soit
venant de la part de I’Etat du Chili susceptible d’étre interprétée, directement ou
indirectement, comme un accord entre les parties qui limiterait sous aucune
forme la liberté, ou l’initiative ex officio du Tribunal arbitral.

299. Finally, the Tribunal indicated by letter of 23 April 2003 that “a ce stade et avant
d’entendre les arguments oraux des parties, [le Tribunal arbitral] ne voit pas le besoin

d’entendre des témoins ou des experts.” Therefore, the Tribunal made it clear that no

witness or expert would be heard, as it was entitled to do.

300. The second question relates to the nature of Mr. Pey Casado’s intervention at the May
2003 Hearing. Prior to his first intervention, Chile sought clarification from the Tribunal
as to the capacity in which he would be speaking. At the May 2003 Hearing, the
President of the Tribunal confirmed its understanding that Mr. Pey Casado would not be

speaking as a fact witness but as a party representative:”*°

Javais interprété personnellement, mais je réserve, évidemment, de consulter
mes collégues s’il y avait un probléme, mais j’avais cru dire en introduction que
nous n’entendions pas de témoins.

Par conséquent, le probléme de la valeur d’un témoignage ne me parait pas se
poser 4 ce stade. Nous entendons d’un cété comme de |’ autre. D’ailleurs toute
personne qui fait partie de la délégation va exposer 4 sa maniére le point de vue
de cette délégation.

Par conséquent, je crois qu’il n’y a pas... mais je comprends votre souci, qui a
dailleurs déja été exprimé dans la correspondance, ¢a ne nous a pas échappé. En
tout cas, le cas de M. Pey est simple. La question pourrait étre différente si
quelqu’un d’autre que nous n’avons pas entendu prétendait ici témoigner. Pour
l’instant nous n’entendons pas de témoins.

° Ibid.
236 See RA-24; Tr. Jur. [1] [96:5-23] (Fr.).

147

301.

302.

303.

In the Committee’s view, it is clear that the Tribunal wanted to hear Mr. Pey Casado as a
party representative only. The Committee notes that, in the course of the proceeding, Mr.
Pey Casado never submitted any written statement. However the question arises as to
whether it would not have been opportune for the Tribunal to treat Mr. Pey Casado as a
key fact witness and party representative at the same time. By doing so, the other party

would have had a chance to ask him questions.

This question posed by the Committee relates to the probative weight that the Tribunal
eventually accorded to Mr. Pey Casado’s statements. The Committee has found in eight
parts of the Award references to Mr. Pey Casado’s evidence proffered at the May 2003
Hearing. The quotations are, for the most part, in the sections describing the facts related

to either the friendship between Messrs. Pey Casado and Sainte Marie?*’

or Mr. Pey
Casado’s nationality.?** All these facts are supported by exhibits as demonstrated by the
Claimants. Certain other references relate to the description of the Claimants’ arguments

. 3
on the investment.”

Only two extracts of Mr. Pey Casado’s statements are included in the Tribunal’s
conclusions on the investment: para. 186 (footnote 133) and para. 233 (footnote 190).
The first citation relates to the circumstances leading to the Geneva Document and the
Estoril Protocol, and whether the latter should be considered as a sale contract (as
asserted by the Claimants) or as a contract concluded by Mr. Pey Casado as agent for Mr.
Sainte Marie (as asserted by the Respondent). In paragraph 186, the Tribunal notes that
the Estoril Protocol sets forth complementary obligations. The reference to Mr. Pey
Casado’s statement is used by the Tribunal to illustrate how the Protocol was drafted. As

for paragraph 233 of the Award, it relates to the Tribunal’s conclusions on whether or not

57 See Award at paras. 61; 63; n. 31 and n. 34.
238 Thid. at paras. 88; 101.
2% Thid. at paras. 157; 194; n. 109 and n.146.

148

304.

305.

there was an investment but the quotation refers to the wide distribution of the

newspaper. Clearly, neither reference is determinative of the Tribunal’s conclusion.

Chile also argues that Mr. Pey Casado’s statements were taken into account by the
Tribunal in order to reach its conclusion in paragraphs 228-229 that Mr. Pey Casado was
the sole owner of the shares of CPP. Chile contends that the Tribunal concluded that
there was an investment under the BIT because it determined that no formal, written
contract or transfer was necessary under Chilean law for the transfer of the CPP shares
due to the close relationship between Mr. Pey Casado and Mr. Dario Sainte Marie. This

240

information came directly and uniquely from Mr. Pey Casado’s statement. However,

the Claimants stressed that the friendship between these two men was established in

4! The Committee does not

various testimonies and letters which are part of the file.
consider that the Tribunal relied exclusively on Mr. Pey Casado’s statements to make
that particular determination. His testimony was just one of several factual and legal
elements in the record considered by the Tribunal leading to its decisions regarding Mr.

Pey Casado’s ownership of CCP’s share capital.

Rather, as in the case of the other conclusions reached by the Tribunal, the Committee is
convinced that the Tribunal based its determination on a number of documents and

factual elements in the file and not only on Mr. Pey Casado’s testimony at the May 2003

Hearing. As explained by the Tribunal itself:°?

L’époque 4 laquelle se sont déroulés les faits de la présente affaire est a la fois
lointaine et marquée par une situation politique et économique trés particuliére.
Aussi ’établissement des faits s’est-il avéré une tache difficile et chaque partie
s’est employée 4 défendre une version des faits au moyen de la documentation
dont elle pouvait disposer. Aprés un examen attentif des arguments et des piéces

40 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 295.
41 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 138.
>” See Award at para. 180.

149

soumises par les parties, le Tribunal, dans l’exercice de son pouvoir
d’appréciation des preuves, est parvenu a la conclusion que M. Pey Casado a
acheté l’intégralité des actions de la société CPP S.A. au cours de l’année 1972.
Cette conclusion repose sur trois éléments principaux que sont la conclusion de
ce que les parties appellent les « Protocoles d’Estoril », complétés par ce qu’elles
appellent le « Document de Geneve », les versements effectués au profit de M.
Dario Sainte Marie pour un montant total de 1,28 million USD et la remise 4 M.
Pey Casado, en plusieurs paquets, des titres de la société accompagnés de leurs
formulaires de transfert signés en blanc.

306. As summarized by the Claimants:

141. En réalité, chaque référence par le Tribunal a la déclaration de Monsieur
Pey, visait soit 4 replacer les faits dans leur contexte, soit 4 confirmer sa
compréhension des faits, déja acquise de I’ analyse des piéces du dossier. [...]

307. In the Committee’s opinion, Mr. Pey Casado’s statements were not determinative of the
Tribunal’s conclusion. Therefore, even if it could be considered that Chile was entitled
to cross-examine Mr. Pey Casado, the departure from that rule of procedure is not serious
as the failure to allow his cross-examination does not lead the Committee to conclude
that if Chile had been allowed to cross-examine him, the Tribunal’s decision may have

been different.

308. For these reasons, the Committee finds no serious departure from the fundamental rule of
procedure regarding the right to hear witnesses and experts and to cross-examine Mr. Pey

Casado at the May 2003 Hearing and Chile’s challenge is dismissed.

43 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 141.

150

(2) Unfair / Unequal Treatment of the Parties

Parties’ Positions

Chile’s Position

309.

310.

311.

Chile contends that there is unequal treatment when a tribunal grants an opportunity or
advantage to one party that is not also afforded to the opposite party and unfair treatment

when a tribunal fails to respect the rules that it itself establishes for the proceedings.”*

Chile argues the Tribunal treated the parties unfairly and unequally with respect to Mr.
Pey Casado’s testimony at the May 2003 Hearing. The main issue raised by Chile in this
regard is whether the appearance by Mr. Pey Casado at the hearing as the sole fact
witness for either party, combined with the Tribunal’s refusal to allow his cross-
examination and the reliance in the Award on his testimony — was inherently prejudicial
and unfair to Chile, and thus constituted an unequal treatment of the parties that warrants

annulment under Article 52(1)(d).

More specifically, Chile contends that the Tribunal was unfair as it stated that it would
not hear any witnesses or experts at the May 2003 Hearing, but then, ultimately and
without notice to the parties, allowed the Claimants’ main witness to speak at length at
that hearing. Chile also argues that it is unfair because of the Tribunal’s extensive
reliance in the Award on Mr. Pey Casado’s statements, which the Tribunal accepted as

true. Chile submits that this constituted an egregious procedural inequality.”

*4 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at paras. 277-278; Resp. Rep. Annulment at para. 182.
45 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at paras. 281; 291; 292.

151

Claimants’ Position

312.

313.

The Claimants respond that the Tribunal did not act unfairly because (i) Mr. Pey Casado
did not speak as a fact witness, (ii) the Tribunal permitted Dr. Cea, the President of the
Chilean Constitutional Court, to speak at the January 2007 Hearing without allowing
Claimants to cross-examine him; (iii) the Tribunal’s actions do not rise to the requisite
level of “seriousness” to allow annulment; and (iv) Chile waived its right to annulment

by failing to object to the alleged irregularities of the May 2003 Hearing.“

Committee’s Analysis

The Committee shares Chile’s analysis of what could constitute an unfair and unequal
treatment of the parties. However, as explained above in relation to the right to be heard
with respect to Mr. Pey Casado’s testimony, the Committee considers that the reliance of
the Tribunal on Mr. Pey Casado’s statements was not outcome-determinative. Therefore,
even if it can be considered that the Tribunal treated Chile unfairly and unequally by not
allowing Chile to cross-examine Mr. Pey Casado at the May 2003 Hearing, the departure
from this fundamental rule of procedure cannot be characterized as serious. Chile’s

challenge is accordingly dismissed.

I. The January 2007 Hearing

Parties’ Positions

Chile’s Position

314.

Chile argues the Tribunal treated the parties unfairly and unequally when it allowed the

introduction of a new merits claim at the 2007 Hearing. The main issue raised by Chile

46 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at paras. 106-111, 114-124, 129-141, and 146-149.

152

315.

in this regard is whether the Tribunal acted unfairly in violation of Article 52(1)(d) when,
having limited the scope of the January 2007 Hearing to purely jurisdictional issues, it
then disregarded that rule of procedure by permitting the Claimants to address merits
issues at that hearing, and then relying explicitly on that submission for its merits-related

determinations in its Award.

Chile contends that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure
by permitting the Claimants not only to discuss merits issues but also to introduce a new
merits claim in a purely jurisdictional hearing. This contention is based on Chile’s
earlier-described argument that the Claimants’ denial of justice claim was first introduced
at the January 2007 Hearing, i.e., that it was not asserted as a substantive treaty claim for
a violation of Article 4 until the last day of the January 2007 Hearing. Chile emphasizes
that this claim was introduced only in response to a question from Mr. Gaillard that
expressly asked: (1) if Claimants were asserting a substantive claim based on a “denial of

justice;” and (2) if so, whether it would fall “notamment sur I’article 4”.

Claimants’ Position

316.

317.

As noted earlier, the Claimants disagree that the denial of justice claim was first

introduced at the January 2007 Hearing.” The Claimants concede, however, that the

January 2007 Hearing was meant to be dedicated to jurisdictional issues only."

Committee’s Analysis

The Committee finds that by allowing the Claimants to bolster this denial of justice claim

and by posing questions on that very subject at the January 2007 Hearing, the Tribunal

47 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 506.
248 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 58.

153

318.

319.

did not treat the parties unfairly or unequally. The Committee notes that, as recognized

by the Tribunal itself, both parties exceeded the limited scope of that hearing:

Jobserverai simplement que les deux parties, 4 l’occasion, ont toutes deux
quelque peu débordé le cadre strict de la question. Mais bien évidemment, on
peut toujours dire que tout est lié.

LJ

Je crois que nous pouvons dire que le Tribunal était 14 pour veiller au respect du
cadre stricte qu’il avait fixé et il l’a fait avec une certaine flexibilité, dont les
deux parties ont bénéficié. Il y a eu, plus ou moins inévitablement, certains
dépassements du cadre stricte qui non seulement n’ont pas eu de conséquences
dommageables, mais qui se sont avérés plutét utiles. A cet égard, ce qui vient de
se passer me parait le démontrer, au méme titre que ce qui s’est passé hier.

If Claimants exceeded the boundaries of the Hearing by addressing their denial of justice
claims, the Claimants noted that Chile also went beyond the scope of the questions raised
by the Tribunal when its representatives developed the subject of the burden of proof.”

This flexibility allowed by the Tribunal does not constitute in itself an unfair or unequal
treatment of the parties. In any event, the fact that the Claimants addressed the denial of
justice claim was not prejudicial to Chile. The Committee has already found that the
denial of justice claim was not introduced for the first time at the January 2007

2
Hearing.”° '

Claimants had presented a claim for denial of justice in relation to the Goss
machine and a discrimination claim based on Decision No. 43 in their written pleadings,
before that hearing. In its Award, the Tribunal relies principally on the Claimants’
pleadings”? and adds references to the January 2007 Hearing to confirm its

understanding of the Claimants’ arguments. Thus, Chile has failed to show the impact

* See RA-26c, referring to Mr. Lalive’s comments Tr. Jur. [2] [pp. 46, 65] (Fr.).

250 See Tr. Annulment [1] [198:21] (Eng.); [82:24] (Fr.); [215:16] (Spa.) referring to Tr. Jur., CN-213 at pp.
36-44.

25! See supra at para. 187.
252 See Award at paras. 637 - 645; 650-674.

154

that this treatment by the Tribunal had on the Award. The Respondent’s challenge on

this ground is dismissed.

J. Document Requests

Parties’ Positions
Chile’s Position

320. Chile argues the Tribunal treated the parties unfairly and unequally when it denied all of
the discovery requests made by Chile. The main issue raised by Chile in this regard is
whether the Tribunal’s allegedly different treatment of the parties in the discovery
process could be justified by reference to an arbitral tribunal’s general “evidentiary
discretion,” or whether, to the contrary, such treatment was so extreme — and ultimately

prejudicial to one of the parties — as to constitute an abuse of any such discretion.

321. Chile contends that the Tribunal seriously departed from a fundamental rule of procedure
by denying the totality of its discovery requests and later using the lack of evidence on
those very issues as a basis for findings against Chile. The Republic’s position is

explained as follows:?°

305. The Pey Casado Tribunal treated the parties unfairly and unequally by: (1)
requiring the Respondent to go to great lengths to obtain obscure documents
while imposing no document production burden whatsoever upon the Claimants;
and (2) denying the Republic’s requests and then using the lack of evidence
against it. Specifically, the Tribunal imposed an unequal burden on the parties
by requiring the Respondent to produce what ultimately amounted to 2630
documents, while the Claimants were not required to produce any. The Republic
was given only a short period of time — three weeks — to produce all of the
documents. Furthermore, it was required to produce documents from several
decades before, during a tumultuous period in Chilean political history, and in
response to overbroad requests, when much of the requested information was part

253 See Resp. Mem. at paras. 305, 311. Footnotes omitted.

155

of the public record and could have been obtained by other means. Although the
Tribunal acknowledged in the Award that “I’établissement des faits s’est-il avéré
une tache difficile et chaque partie s’est employée 4 défendre une version des
faits au moyen de la documentation dont elle pouvait disposer,” because the
Claimants had no duty to produce documents, only the Respondent, in fact, was
charged with this “difficult task.”

LJ

311. [...] The Tribunal’s actions with respect to the Republic’s evidentiary
requests create a substantial departure from the principle of fairness because the
departure clearly deprived Chile of the benefit that the rule was intended to
provide, which in the context of a discovery request, is to give a party the
opportunity to substantiate its claim or its defense with relevant documentation in
the possession of the other party. Had the Republic succeeded in obtaining
evidence that the funds in question did not belong to Mr. Pey Casado, this
evidence could have served to prove that Mr. Pey was a mere intermediary rather
than the owner of the CPP and EPC shares. As an intermediary rather than
owner, Mr. Pey would not have been permitted to recover under the BIT, and the
claims would have been dismissed. Therefore, the Tribunal seriously departed
from a fundamental rule of procedure by first denying the entirety of the
Respondent’s evidentiary requests and later faulting the Republic for the lack of
the very evidence the Republic had sought through discovery.

Claimants’ Position

322. In response, the Claimants submit that, “[s]’agissant de la production de documents, 1a

encore, le Tribunal arbitral jouit d’une grande discrétion pour les ordonner ou les

o> 254

tejeter”. The Claimants consider that the Tribunal treated the parties fairly and

equally: 5

103. De la méme maniére, |’obligation de traitement juste et équitable d’une
partie pendant la procédure, requiert du Tribunal qu’il traite les Parties de
maniére impartiale et égalitaire. En d’autres termes, selon ce principe, un
Tribunal arbitral ne doit pas favoriser une partie au détriment d’une autre dans
ses décisions procédurales ou lui accorder un avantage procédural. Cela ne

254 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 153.
255 Thid. at paras. 103-104.

156

signifie pas pour autant que le Tribunal doive rendre des décisions a tout point de
vue égal concernant les différentes demandes des Parties. En particulier, le
Tribunal n’est pas tenu d’ordonner la production de documents sollicités par une
partie dés lors qu’il aurait accédé a la demande de I’autre partie. En |’ espéce, tel
n’a pas été le cas.

104. En tout état de cause, ainsi qu’il le sera démontré ci-dessous, le Tribunal a
permis aux deux Parties de présenter leurs arguments sur |’ensemble du dossier et
a toujours accordé une grande attention au respect du principe d’égalité entre les
Parties.

323. The Claimants also contend that they were entitled to greater access to documents than
Chile because all the relevant documents were in Chile’s possession.”°° In the words of

the Claimants:?°”

169. Il résulte de ce qui précéde que, contrairement aux allégations du Chili, le
Tribunal n’a pas agi de maniére inéquitable 4 |’égard de la République du Chili.
Ses décisions concernant la communication de documents ont été guidées
instamment par l’attitude de la Défenderesse qui, tout au long de la procédure,
n’a eu de cesse d’empécher les Demanderesses d’accéder aux preuves qu’elle
détenait 4 la suite de leur confiscation illicite par les autorités chiliennes.

Committee’s Analysis

324. The Committee finds the ad hoc Committee’s decision in Azurix Corp v. Argentine

Republic apposite in the present case and adopts it:

210. Because the power is discretionary, a decision by a tribunal not to accede to
a party’s request to exercise that power can never, in and of itself, be a departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure. A decision by a tribunal whether or not to
exercise a discretionary power that it has under a rule of procedure is an exercise
of that rule of procedure, and not a departure from that rule of procedure. It is
only where the exercise of that discretion, in all of the circumstances of the case,
amounts to a serious departure from another rule of procedure of a fundamental
nature that there will be grounds for annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the
ICSID Convention.

256 Thid. at paras. 162-168.
257 Tid. at para. 169.

157

325.

326.

327.

233. [...] the Committee observes that the fact that a request by one party is
allowed while a request by another party is denied does not mean that there has
been an inequality in the treatment of the parties. Each request by each party
must be considered and determined by the tribunal on its own individual merits.
It is only where it can be shown that a tribunal has applied inconsistent standards
in the way that it has treated the requests of the different parties that there can be
said to be inequality of treatment. [Emphasis in original]

While it is true that the Respondent had to produce a large number of documents”** as
opposed to the Claimants who were not asked to produce any, this inequality in numbers
does not imply an unequal treatment by the Tribunal. In order to make a determination,

one has to look at the way the Tribunal treated the requests.

° the Tribunal issued a

Further to the 20 May 2002 request from the Claimants,”
Procedural Order on 22 July 2002 ordering the Republic of Chile to produce the
documents requested.? The Tribunal based its decision on “la nécessité manifeste pour
le Tribunal Arbitral de disposer du maximum d’informations relatives au litige”. The
documents to be produced also included the ones which had been seized by the Chilean

Authorities after 11 September 1973.

Chile filed its first document production request on 3 October 2002.76 The request was

2
2262

supplemented on 30 October 200: further to the Claimants’ observations of 11

October 2002.7 Chile’s request contained a list of 17 items corresponding to 21

documents to be produced. The requested documents notably concerned the questions of

258 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 305 (2630 documents).
2? See RA-62a.

269 See RA-63a.

7! See RA-65a.

2 See RA-66a.

263 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 164.

158

328.

329.

330.

the nationality of Mr. Pey Casado as well as his standing as an investor.?™ By letter of
11 November 2002, the Tribunal rejected Chile’s request:7°>
[Le Président du Tribunal] m’a également demandé de vous indiquer que la
requéte concernant la production de documents n’est pas approuvée. Une

décision motivée concernant ces deux questions vous sera notifiée dans la
semaine du 18 novembre 2002.

The decision of the Tribunal on this evidentiary request was issued in the form of
Procedural Order No. 10 dated 3 December 2002. The Tribunal indicated that it could
not at that stage of the procedure decide on the arguments between the parties regarding
document production:
Constatant qu’il n’appartient pas au Tribunal arbitral, en tous les cas en I’état
actuel de la procédure, de statuer sur le bien-fondé de ces requétes, sur la

pertinence de tel document particulier, les conditions de sa production ou les
conséquences de I’absence de cette derniére [...]

The Tribunal then reminded the parties of the general principles applicable in the context
of document production requests:
[...] tout document [...] qui est prima facie en relation avec I’ objet du litige peut

et doit étre produit, sur requéte de |’autre Partie ou du Tribunal, s’il est en la
possession de la Partie sollicitée ou accessible par elle ; [...]

 

Il appartient dans chaque cas au Tribunal Arbitral d’apprécier, 4 la lumiére des
explications fournies par les Parties, les circonstances d’un éventuel défaut de
production, et d’en tirer le cas échéant les conséquences qui en découlent [...]

The Committee is of the view that in those cases where the property of the requesting
party has been seized and there is limited or no access to the documents that can support

the request, it is reasonable for a tribunal to request more efforts and more documents

264 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at para. 301; Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 194, 196.
265 See RA-67a.
2° See CN-149.

159

331.

from the Respondent State. Notwithstanding this approach, a tribunal should adopt
similar standards vis-d-vis each party when making its determinations. In this case, the
Committee notes that the Tribunal gave some justifications as to why it was granting all
of the Claimants’ discovery requests. However, Respondent’s request was denied
without any explanation or mention of the relevance or materiality of the requested
documents. Procedural Order No. 10 contains in fact language which contradicts the
outright denial of Chile’s request (by letter of 11 November 2002) as the Tribunal

indicated that it could not decide on the merits of parties’ requests.

However, the Committee considers that even if there may be some justification for
finding that there might have been an inequality in the treatment of the parties in this
instance, the Committee is not convinced that had the Tribunal proceeded differently it
could have reached a result substantially different. First, even if the Tribunal had
motivated its decision to deny Chile’s request, there is no reason to conclude that it
would have granted it. Second, the Committee does not find that the Tribunal used the
absence of evidence on the issues dealt with in Chile’s denied evidentiary requests to
conclude that Mr. Pey Casado was the owner of the CPP shares. As stated by the

Claimants in their Rejoinder:”°”

52. La décision du Tribunal était motivée par d’autres éléments, a savoir : la
preuve de la signature d’un accord (les Protocoles d’Estoril et l’Accord
complémentaire de Genéve), et le paiement du prix, mais aussi par la détention
des titres par Monsieur Pey ainsi qu’en raison de la reconnaissance par les
autorités chiliennes de la qualité de propriétaire 4 Monsieur Pey.

332. In the circumstances, the Respondent’s request based on this ground is denied.

267 See Cl. Rej. Annulment at para. 52. Footnotes omitted.

160

333.

K. Bias by Arbitrator Bedjaoui

The main issue is this regard is whether any bias by Mr. Bedjaoui against Chile
ultimately affected the outcome of the case and thus amounted to a serious departure

from a fundamental rule of procedure in violation of Article 52(1)(d).

Parties’ Positions

Chile’s Position

334.

335.

In advancing its bias contention, Chile refers to the resignation of Mr. Rezek as President
of the Tribunal and, in particular, Mr. Rezek’s resignation letter dated 13 March 2001788

which states in part as follows:

Je regrette profondément que ce manque de confiance de la partie demanderesse
dans l’arbitre président ne soit exprimé qu’ ce stade de la procédure, a savoir
quelques jours aprés la derniére réunion réalisée 4 huis clos entre les arbitres pour
discuter de leurs opinions finales.

In this regard, Chile surmises:?

388. This statement strongly suggests: (1) that a decision had already been taken
by the Tribunal; (2) that the Claimants had been apprised of this decision, likely
by means of a breach of confidentiality by the Claimants’ party-appointed
arbitrator; and (3) that the Claimants’ request for Mr. Rezek’s resignation was an
attempt to thwart a decision in favor of the Republic.

389. The likelihood that the Claimants were acting based on confidential
information concerning the inner workings of the Tribunal is heightened by the
following revelation by Arbitrator Leoro Franco, made during the
disqualification proceedings in 2005:

 

[O]n peut déduire de ses notes [de M. Garcés],
méticuleusement ce qui se passe 4 Vintérieur du Tribunal,
ce_que le Tribunal doit faire ou_non 4 une_prochaine

268 See RA-S4a.
26 See Resp. Mem. Annulment at paras. 388-391.

161

session, ce que le Secrétariat général du CIRDI doit faire,
démontrant_ainsi_autant_de connaissances que celles que
peut avoir un arbitre participant de la procédure.

390. The only conclusion that can be drawn from this is that the Claimants’
chosen arbitrator, Mr. Bedjaoui, had systematically been breaching his duty of
confidentiality, including by informing the Claimants of the result of the 2001
deliberations, and of an imminent decision adverse to the Claimants, which
immediately prompted their implausible and unfounded challenge.

391. The Wena Hotels test requires that an alleged departure from a fundamental
tule of procedure must have potentially “caused the tribunal to render an award
‘substantially different from what it would have awarded had the rule been
observed,” and provides that “the petitioning party must show the impact that
the issue may have had on the award.” Mr. Bedjaoui’s bias in favor of the
Claimants and his evident breach of confidentiality led to the Claimants’
challenge to resignation of Mr. Rezek, which in turn evidently derailed a
jurisdictional ruling in favor of Chile. Mr. Bedjaoui’s bias thus clearly affected
the outcome of the case in a very concrete and discernible way. [Emphasis in
original]

Claimants’ Position

336. It is the Claimants’ position that the Committee cannot declare “la nullité d’une sentence

19270

sur une simple apparence de partialite’ and that, furthermore, “I’accusation de

partialité du Tribunal ou d’un de ses membres ne doit pas étre fondée sur de simples

spéculations.” 27! The Claimants add:?”

181. De plus, en l’espéce, la récusation de I’arbitre sur lequel porte toutes les
accusations de |’Etat chilien, Monsieur le Juge Bedjaoui, a été acceptée par le
Centre. Or, l’annulation sur le fondement de défaut d’impartialité du Tribunal ne
peut tre une sanction appropriée que si la cause de récusation est apparue aprés
le prononcé de la Sentence ou lorsque la récusation pour prétendue partialité a été
refusée par le Centre d’ arbitrage.

270 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 175.
21! Thid. at para. 180.
2? Thid. at paras. 181-183.

162

337.

338.

182. En l’espéce, seule la demande de récusation de Monsieur le juge Bedjaoui
était fondée sur une prétendue partialité. Dés lors, le rejet de la récusation du
Professeur Lalive ne peut fonder l’annulation de la Sentence. Or, aprés février
2006, c’est-a-dire aprés l’acceptation de la récusation de Monsieur Bedjaoui, la
République du Chili n’a pas émis de réserve sur le fait que le Tribunal
nouvellement constitué allait continuer sa mission. Elle n’a jamais indiqué que la
prétendue partialité de Monsieur Bedjaoui avait conduit le Tribunal arbitral 4
rouvrir les débats en 2001, aprés la démission du Président Rezek. Pourtant, au
vu de l’argument aujourd’hui soutenu, rien ne l’empéchait de formuler une telle
objection, ou en tout état de cause, de formuler des réserves quant a |’intégrité de
la procédure, si elle pouvait les fonder. La République du Chili ne peut
légitimement attendre de constater que la Sentence lui est défavorable pour
soulever cet argument pour la premiére fois devant un Comité ad hoc.

183. Pour cette raison, la demande de la République du Chili doit étre rejetée.

Committee’s Analysis

The Committee agrees with the Claimants. The Committee will not annul an Award on
the basis of arguments based on pure speculation. In any event, the Committee has been
presented with no evidence at all that Mr. Bedjaoui’s behaviour affected in any way the

outcome of this case. The Respondent’s request is accordingly dismissed.

L. The Tribunal’s Ex Aequo et Bono Decision

The main issue in this regard is whether the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in
violation of Article 52(1)(b), by issuing a ruling that, in the submission of Chile, is in
effect an ex aequo et bono decision, thereby failing to abide by (and therefore apply)
ICSID Convention Article 42(3), which forbids tribunals from ruling ex aequo et bono

without the parties’ consent.

163

Parties’ Positions

Chile’s Position

339. Chile’s position in this regard is stated as follows:?”

433. Claimants mischaracterize the Republic’s request for annulment based on
the Tribunal’s adoption of a decision ex aequo et bono. Contrary to what
Claimants contend, this request is not predicated on the fact that the Republic did
not have the opportunity to be heard on the denial of justice and discrimination
issues (although the latter procedural flaw is in fact invoked—separately—as a
ground for annulment under article 52(1)(d), as explained above). Rather, as
explained in the Memorial, the Republic’s ex aequo et bono argument is based on
the fact that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by reaching a decision
that is so illogical, and so strained, that it can only plausibly be explained by a
desire by the Tribunal to achieve a Solomonic solution designed to satisfy both
parties.

434. The unlikely and often wholly unsupported determinations that the Tribunal
was required to make, on so many different issues, to reach its final decision,
combined with its contorted justifications for many of its conclusions, powerfully
suggest an effort by the Tribunal to reverse-engineer its ruling, using a
preordained result as its starting point. However, it was not open to the Tribunal
to make an equity-based decision without the parties’ approval. In the present
case, the record strongly indicates that this is precisely what the Tribunal did.
This constitutes a manifest excess of powers that renders the Award annullable
under Article 52(1)(b).

Claimants’ Position

340. The Claimants refer to Chile’s ex aequo et bono contention as follows:?”*

273

485. Partant du principe que les Parties n’ont jamais débattu de l’existence d’un
déni de justice ou d’un traitement discriminatoire de la part du Chili, la
Défenderesse allégue que le Tribunal arbitral a rendu une décision ex aequo et
bono, sans |’accord préalable des Parties, ce qui constitue un excés manifeste de
pouvoir de la part du Tribunal rendant la Sentence annulable en application de

See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 433-434.

274 See Cl. C-Mem. Annulment at para. 485.

164

341.

342.

Varticle 52(1)(b) de la Convention CIRDI. La République du Chili tente
d’expliquer une violation aussi flagrante des régles du CIRDI par un Tribunal
arbitral aussi expérimenté que celui qui a rendu la Sentence par le fait que celui-
ci ne pouvait sérieusement rejeter les demandes des Demanderesses aprés dix
années de procédure.

Committee’s Analysis

This ground for annulment must fail. There is not a scintilla of evidence that allows
Chile, confronted with an Award of 233 pages (in the French version) and a detailed
analysis by the Tribunal of the many complex factual and legal issues of which it was
seized by the parties, to argue that the Tribunal issued an ex aequo et bono decision. The

Award is not an ex aequo et bono decision and the Respondent’s request is dismissed.

M. The Claimants’ Annulment Challenge

With respect to the Claimants’ annulment challenge, the Committee must first determine
whether the Claimants’ request for annulment is time-barred, having been raised for the
first time in their Counter-Memorial on Annulment. If the Committee finds that the
request is not time-barred, it would then be required to determine, first, whether the claim
is not an impermissible attempt to appeal on the merits a twice-rejected substantive
argument; and only then, whether the Tribunal in fact failed to apply the proper law on

the nullity ab initio issue.

165

Parties’ Positions
Claimants’ Position

343. The Committee recalls that the Claimants request that point 8 only of the dispositif of the

Award be annulled on the following grounds: 275

28. En l’espéce :

i. le Chili soutient que la Sentence doit étre annulée dans son intégralité, en ce
inclus le 8° point du Dispositif. Les Demanderesses sollicitent du Comité ad
hoc qu’ il rejette la demande d’annulation de la Sentence sauf sur le 8°" point
du Dispositif.

. La demande d’annulation du Chili se fonde notamment sur excés de
pouvoir manifeste, pour défaut d’ application de la norme applicable. C’est
sur ce fond que les Di deresses considé que le 8°"

point du Dispositif doit partiellement étre annulé.

iii. La République du Chili soutient que le Tribunal arbitral a manifestement
excédé son pouvoir en se reconnaissant compétent alors que l’investissement
avait prétendument disparu sur la base de la prémisse suivante : « that such

had been completely and definitively extinguished long before the
BIT’s entry into force ». Le Chili fonde son affirmation sur le fait que le
Tribunal arbitral a indiqué que le Décret n°165 était toujours en vigueur dans
Vordre juridique chilien et que, dés lors, l’expropriation était un acte
instantané. Les Demanderesses considérent que cette contradiction existe
réellement dans la Sentence.

 

iv. Mais la raison d’étre de cette contradiction ne se trouve pas 1a ot le Chili la
situe mais ailleurs, dans Vignorance_absolue de la norme interne
impérativement et directement applicable, ex officio, au différend né en 1995,
a savoir l’article 7 de la Constitution du Chili. Les demanderesses considérent
que le Tribunal arbitral a effectivement commis un excés de pouvoir manifeste
en ignorant l'article 7 de la Constitution.

v. Cette contradiction n’affecte en aucune maniére, en conséquence, les points
1 47 du Dispositif de la Sentence -portant sur les différends nés en 2000 et

275 See Cl. Pre-H Skel. at paras. 28-29.

166

2002- mais le seul différend né en 1995 et la partie corrélative du seul 8°"
point du Dispositif.

29. Au-dela de l’irrecevabilité et du mal fondé de l’argument du Chili tendant 4
affirmer que l'investissement a disparu, les demanderesses admettent que le
Tribunal a commis un excés de pouvoir manifeste en ayant omis d’appliquer de
maniére absolue I’article 7 de la Constitution au différend né en 1995. [Emphasis
in original]

Chile’s Position

344. Chile summarizes its response as follows:?”°

534. By submitting their annulment claim more than two years after publication
of the 8 May 2008 Award, Claimants have utterly failed to comply with the 120-
day time limit set forth in Article 52(2). (It bears noting in this regard that
Claimants also did not attempt to file any annulment request within 120 days of
the 18 November 2009 Decision on Revision). For these reasons, Claimants have
waived any and all rights to present an annulment claim in this arbitration, and
the Committee must therefore summarily reject their purported counterclaim for
annulment.

LJ

543. In sum, in its Decision on Revision, the Tribunal rejected for the second
time Claimants’ arguments about the nullity ab initio of the 1975 decree, and in
particular the relevance of that issue for the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Notably, and
likely due to the disingenuousness of the Revision petition and the rather
transparent intent by Claimants to reargue the merits of the nullity ab initio issue,
the Tribunal imposed on Claimants responsibility for covering the totality of the
costs of the Revision proceeding.

544. Given this background, it is nothing short of remarkable—and indeed, rather
abusive— that Claimants now seek yet another bite at the apple, this time
disguising their appeal as an annulment claim. The Committee should not permit
Claimants to do this yet again.

[el

27 See Resp. Rep. Annulment at paras. 534; 543-545.

167

345.

346.

347.

545. Even if Claimants’ counterclaim for annulment were not time-barred, and
even if it did not constitute merely a brazen attempt to appeal an already twice-
rejected substantive argument, it still would fail, because it does not even
remotely raise a valid ground for annulment. In particular, the Tribunal did not
fail to apply Chilean law to the relevant issue.

Committee’s Analysis
Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention is very clear. It provides that:

The application shall be made within 120 days after the date on which the award
was rendered... [Emphasis added]

Arbitration Rule 50(3)(b)(i) is to the same effect. The Award was rendered on 8 May
2008. The Claimants had to file their claim for annulment by 5 September 2008.
However, the Claimants asserted for the first time their request for partial annulment of
paragraph 8 of the dispositif of the Award in their Counter-Memorial on Annulment
which was filed with ICSID on 15 October 2010. The Committee has no hesitation in

ruling that it cannot entertain the Claimants’ application which is time-barred.

The Committee also notes that the Claimants argue that their request, in fact, concerns
one of the grounds for annulment pleaded by Chile, i.e., manifest excess of powers under
Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention in relation to a section of the Award that is
included in Chile’s Application since Chile requested the annulment of the Award as a
whole. The Claimants rely on the decision in Vivendi I where the committee stated that
the respondent in the annulment may present “its own arguments on questions of
annulment, provided that those arguments concern specific matters pleaded by the party

requesting annulment” and “where a ground for annulment is established, it is for the ad

168

348.

349.

350.

hoc committee, and not the requesting party, to determine the extent of the
99277

annulment.
The Committee, in the present case, is of the view that the situation is different. While
the Claimants base their request on a ground raised by Chile, they invoke a matter that
was not debated by Chile, namely the effect of Article 7 of the 1980 Chilean
Constitution. As stated by the Vivendi I committee as well as by Professor Schreuer “if
one party has requested annulment, the other party should not be allowed to ask for
annulment for different reasons outside the time limits of Art. 52(2)”.278

Finally, the Committee does not agree with the Claimants’ interpretation of Professor
Schreuer’s Commentary as presented during the hearing on annulment.?” The Claimants

relied on the following sentences in paragraphs 536 and 537 of the Commentary:*°

536. [...] If additional grounds for annulment come to light during annulment
proceedings, they may be relied upon by the parties and used as a basis for
annulment by the ad hoc committee provided that it is clear that there was no
waiver in relation to them through failure to rely on them in a timely
fashion. [...]

537. This solution is not contradicted by the time limits contained in Art. 52(2).
These time limits relate to an application by a party directed at the institution of
annulment proceedings. They do not preclude the ad hoc committee from taking
cognizance of additional facts once the proceedings are under way. [...]

The Committee understands that the additional grounds for annulment can only be raised
if new facts, which were not known to the parties, come to light during the annulment
proceeding as mentioned specifically by Professor Schreuer at the beginning of

paragraph 536. The Committee notes that this is not the case here.

271 See Vivendi I Decision at paras. 68-69.

278 See Schreuer Commentary Art. 52 at para. 535.

2” See Tr. Annulment [1] [278:16-281:1] (Eng.); [115:25-116:17] (Fr.); [299:4-301:6] (Spa.).
280 See Schreuer Commentary Art. 52 at paras 536-537.

169

351.

VI.

352.

353.

354.

The Committee finds that the Claimants’ request is based on totally different premises
than that of the Applicant in the annulment (the Republic of Chile) and is therefore

inadmissible because time-barred. The Claimants’ application is therefore dismissed.

COSTS

It remains for the Committee to deal with the question of the costs of these annulment
proceedings, as to which the Committee has a discretion. In most of the decisions of

: 2
annulment committees,”*!

the committees have decided that each party should bear its
own litigation costs and that the costs of the proceeding should be borne equally by the

parties.

In the present case, the Committee notes that the Tribunal, both on the basis of its

conclusions in favour of the Claimants and what it characterized as “... la politique
adoptée par la défenderesse consistant, au-dela des exceptions usuelles ou ‘normales’ a
la competence, a multiplier objections et incidents parfois incompatibles avec les usages
de l’arbitrage international” 7°” condemned the Respondent to contribute US$ 2,000,000

to the costs of representation of the Claimants and to bear %4 of the ICSID costs.

The Committee, in the present case, has only annulled that part of the Award dealing
with damages. Thus, the pertinent paragraphs of the dispositif which deal with costs and
which are not annulled by the Decision of the Committee remain in effect. They read as
follows:

5. met 4 la charge de la défenderesse une contribution aux frais et dépens exposés
par les demanderesses, d’un montant de USD 2.000.000, - (deux millions);

 

°8' In 21 of the 35 published Decisions on i and Disconti Orders ining decisions on
costs published as of August 10, 2012. See Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative
Council of ICSID, dated August 10, 2012, and available at http://www.worldbank.org/icsid.

282 See Award at para. 729.

170

355.

356.

357.

358.

6. décide que les frais de procédure seront supportés par les parties dans la
proportion de : 34 du montant total (soit USD 3.136.893,34) pour la défenderesse
et % du montant total (soit 1.045.631,11) pour les demanderesses ; ordonne en
conséquence a la défenderesse de payer aux demanderesses la somme de
USD 1.045.579,35.
With respect to the annulment proceedings, the Committee notes that Chile has raised
different grounds for annulment set out in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention in
respect of eleven specific areas which it has identified. In the view of the Committee,

283

with two exceptions,” Chile’s claims were, prima facie, serious. At the end of the day,

the Committee has found only two of the claims to be meritorious, the ones relating to

damages.

On the other hand, the Claimants raised one claim for annulment in their Counter-
Memorial on Annulment which the Committee dismissed “without any hesitation”

because it was clearly time-barred.
In the circumstances, the Committee will not depart from the prevailing practice.

Accordingly, the Committee decides that each party will bear its own litigation costs and

the costs of the proceeding will be shared equally by each party.

283 Bias by Arbitrator Bedjaoui and the Tribunal’s ex aequo et bono Decision.

171

VII. DECISION

359. For the reasons set forth above, the Committee renders the following decisions:

1.

Pursuant to Article 52(1)(d) and (e), decides to annul paragraph 4 of the
dispositif of the Award of 8 May 2008 and the corresponding paragraphs in the
body of the Award related to damages (Section VIII);

Rejects the other grounds of the Republic’s Application for annulment;

Rejects the Claimants’ request for the partial annulment of paragraph 8 of the

dispositif of the Award;

Finds that paragraphs | to 3 and 5 to 8 of the dispositif as well as the body of

the Award but for Section VIII are res judicata;

Decides that there is no need to order the temporary stay of enforcement of the

un-annulled portion of the Award.

Decides that each party shall bear one half of the ICSID costs incurred in

connection with this annulment proceeding; and

Decides that each party shall bear its own litigation costs and expenses incurred

with respect to this annulment proceeding.

172

Done in English, French and Spanish, all versions being equally authoritative.

 

Nw &

Maitre L} Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C.
President\of the ad hoc Committee

Date: \ 4 Septonbes ore

 

bie dec \, ' A. 6. xz [é-< 4c
Pr6fessor Piero Bernardini Professor Ahmed El-Kosheri

Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee

Date) Y Ochre, Qai2 Date: 27 Syt- 2oj2

173

