INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the resubmission proceeding between
VICTOR PEY CASADO AnD FOUNDATION “PRESIDENTE ALLENDE”

Claimants

THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2

 

DECISION ON RECTIFICATION OF THE AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Sir Frank Berman KCMG QC, President of the Tribunal
Mr V. V. Veeder QC, Arbitrator
Mr Alexis Mourre, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr Benjamin Garel

Assistant to the President of the Tribunal
Dr Gleider I. Hernandez

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 6 October 2017

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Claimants:

Mr Juan E. Garcés

Garcés y Prada, Abogados

Calle Zorrilla no.11, primero derecha
28014 Madrid, Spain

Tel. + 34 91 360 05 36
100407.1303@compuserve.com

In cooperation with :

Ms Carole Malinvaud

Ms Alexandra Mujfioz

Gide, Loyrette, Nouel,

22 cours Albert ler

75008 Paris, France

Tel. +33 1 40 75 36 66
malinvaud@gide.com
alexandra.munoz@gide.com

Representing the Respondent:

Ms Paulina Nazal Aranda

Mr Federico Gajardo Vergara
Ms Liliana Macchiavello
Direccién General de Relaciones
Econoémicas Internacionales
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores
Santiago de Chile, Chile

Tel. +56 2 2827 5100

Tel. +56 2 2827 5282

Tel. +56 2 2827 5261
pnazal@direcon.gob.cl
fgajardo@direcon.gob.cl
Imacchiavello@direcon.gob.cl

Mr Paolo Di Rosa

Ms Gaela Gehring Flores

Ms Mallory Silberman

Amold & Porter Kaye Scholer LLP
601 Massachusetts Ave. NW
Washington, D.C. 20001, USA
Tel. +1 202 942 5060

Tel. +1 202 942 6505

Tel. +1 202 942 6809
Paolo.DiRosa@apks.com
Gaela.GehringFlores@apks.com
Mallory.Silberman@apks.com
xPeyResubmission@apks.com

Mr Jorge Carey

Mr Gonzalo Fernandez

Mr Juan Carlos Riesco

Carey

Isidora Goyenechea 2800 Piso 43
Las Condes, Santiago, Chile

Tel. +56 2 2928 2200
jcarey@carey.cl
gfernandez@carey.cl
jeriesco@carey.cl

J. INTRODUCTION AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

II. THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUESTS FOR RECTIFICATION AND THE RESPONDENT’S

 

 

 

 

 

 

OBSERVATIONS THEREUPON 7
A. Reference to “Decision No. 43” in paragraph 198 of the Resubmission Award ........... 8
B. Rectification of the term “before” in paragraph 61 of the Resubmission Award .......... 8
C. Rectification of the preposition “by” in paragraph 66 of the Resubmission Award...... 9
D. Reference in paragraph 2 of the dispositif of the Resubmission Award to findings of
the Original Tribunal 10
Il]. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS 10
A. Reference to “Decision No. 43” in paragraph 198 of the Award... ll
B. Use of the word “before” in paragraph 61 of the Award ..........cccseeseessessesneeeeeseeeee 12
C. Use of the word “by” in paragraph 66 of the Award
D. Reference in paragraph 2 of the dispositif of the Resubmission Award to the findings
of the First Tribunal 12
IV. COSTS B
V. DECISION 15

 

I. INTRODUCTION AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. On8 May 2008, an arbitral Tribunal composed of Professor Pierre Lalive, Mr. Mohammed
Chemloul and Professor Emmanuel Gaillard (“the First Tribunal”) rendered an award in
Victor Pey Casado and Foundation “Presidente Allende” v. The Republic of Chile (ICSID
Case No. ARB/198/2) (“the First Award”).

2. On 18 December 2012, an ad hoc committee composed of Professor Piero Bernardini,
Mr. L. Yves Fortier QC and Professor Ahmed El-Kosheri partially annulled the First Award,
subsequent to which the Claimants resubmitted the dispute to a new tribunal (“the

Resubmission Proceedings”).

3. On 13 September 2016, the present Tribunal, as Arbitral Tribunal in the Resubmission

Proceedings, (“the Tribunal”) rendered an Award (“the Resubmission Award”).

4. By letter dated 27 October 2016, the Claimants submitted a Request for Rectification of the
Resubmission Award pursuant to Article 49 of the ICSID Convention (“the Request for
Rectification”). In that same letter, the Claimants made certain requests for inquiry and
disclosure by Sir Franklin Berman and Mr Veeder, and further requested that the rectification
proceeding be suspended until the tribunal called upon to interpret the First Award of 8 May

2008 had issued its decision on interpretation.!

5. By email dated 4 November 2016, the Respondent asked the Secretary-General of ICSID for
four weeks to file its response regarding the proper procedure to be followed in the

circumstances presented by the Claimants’ submissions.

6. By email dated 5 November 2016, the Claimants opposed the Respondent's request for a

four-week time limit.

' By letter of 7 October 2016, the Claimants submitted an application for interpretation of the First Award, which was
registered by the Secretary-General of ICSID on 21 October 2016. On 12 May 2017, the Secretary-General of ICSID
issued an order taking note of the discontinuance of the interpretation proceeding pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule
44,

On 8 November 2016, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for
Rectification. By letter dated the same day, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID invited
the Parties to submit to the Tribunal their proposals regarding the procedure, conduct and

timetable of the rectification proceedings (“the Rectification Proceedings”).

By letter dated 10 November 2016, the Claimants submitted a request for suspension of the
Rectification Proceedings, pending disclosure of certain information by Sir Franklin Berman

and Mr Veeder.

By letter dated 16 November 2016, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to indicate by

30 November 2016 whether it consented to the requested rectifications.

By letter dated 17 November 2016, the Respondent asked the Tribunal to order the Claimants
to submit a Spanish version of the Request for Rectification, and requested a period of at
least three weeks following receipt of the Spanish version of the Request for Rectification to

consider and submit to the Tribunal its position on the proposed rectifications.

By letter dated 18 November 2016, the Claimants reiterated to the Tribunal their requests for
disclosure dated 27 October 2016 and 10 November 2016.

By letter dated 21 November 2016, the Tribunal took note of the references in the Request
for Rectification to further declarations touching the independence and impartiality of Sir
Franklin Berman and Mr Veeder, and communicated to the Parties the fact that the two
arbitrators had already responded to the Secretary-General of ICSID on these questions, and

had nothing further to add.

By a second letter dated 21 November 2016, the Tribunal rejected the request filed by the
Claimants for the suspension of the Rectification Proceedings. In the same letter, the
Tribunal requested the Claimants to provide a Spanish translation of the Request by

2 December 2016, and set the procedural timetable for the Rectification Proceedings.

By letter of 22 November 2016, the Claimants proposed the disqualification of Sir Franklin
Berman and Mr Veeder (“the Challenged Arbitrators”) under Article 57 of the ICSID
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9 (“the First Disqualification Proposal”).

20.

21.

By letter dated 29 November 2016, the Centre informed the Parties that, pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 9(6), the Rectification Proceedings were suspended until the First

Disqualification Proposal had been decided.

On 21 February 2017, the Centre transmitted to the Parties the Decision of the Chairman of
the ICSID Administrative Council to dismiss the First Disqualification Proposal. By letter
of the same date, the Tribunal notified the Parties that, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration

Rule 9(6), the Rectification Proceedings were resumed on that date.

On 23 February and 4 March 2017, the Claimants submitted further proposals for the
disqualification of Mr. Veeder and subsequently for the disqualification of Sir Franklin
Berman under Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9. By letter
of 23 February 2017, the Tribunal notified the Parties that, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration

Rule 9(6), the Rectification Proceedings were once again suspended.

By letter dated 6 March 2017, the Centre informed the Parties that it was treating the
Claimants’ further proposals for disqualification as a proposal to disqualify a majority of the
Tribunal, to be decided simultaneously by the Chairman of the Administrative Council of
ICSID in accordance with Article 58 of the ICSID Convention (“the Second Disqualification
Proposal’).

On 13 April 2017, the Centre informed the Parties of the Decision of the Chairman of the
Administrative Council to dismiss the Second Disqualification Proposal. By letter dated the
same day, the Tribunal notified the Parties that the Rectification Proceedings had resumed

with immediate effect.

By letter dated 18 April 2017, the Tribunal notified the Parties that the procedural
arrangements as set out in the letter dated 21 November 2016 would stand, subject to a
prolongation of the procedural timetable by twenty (20) weeks to take account of the

suspensions of the Rectification Proceedings as set out above.

By letter dated 21 April 2017, the Claimants communicated a request to the Tribunal for the

discontinuance of the Rectification Proceedings under ICSID Arbitration Rule 44.

22.

23.

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

In an Order dated 24 April 2017, the Tribunal set 1 May 2017 as the date for the Respondent
to state its position under ICSID Arbitration Rule 44 with respect to the Claimants’ request

for discontinuance of the Rectification Proceedings.

By letter of 1 May 2017, the Respondent communicated to the Tribunal its opposition to the
request for the discontinuance of the Rectification Proceedings, and requested that these

Proceedings remain active until the Tribunal had made a determination on the issue of costs.

By letter of 3 May 2017, the Tribunal communicated to the Claimants the position of the
Respondent in respect of the discontinuance of the Rectification Proceedings, and its
determination that the Rectification Proceedings would continue as provided in Arbitration
Rule 44. In the same letter, the Tribunal requested submission of a Spanish translation of the

Request for Rectification by 5 May 2017.

By email dated 5 May 2017, the Tribunal transmitted to the Parties an amended copy of the
Decision of 13 April 2017 of the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council dismissing

the Second Disqualification Proposal.

By email dated 5 May 2017, the Claimants submitted the Spanish version of the Request for

Rectification.

By letter dated 10 May 2017, the Respondent requested that its deadline to respond to the

Request for Rectification be extended to 9 June 2017.

By letter dated 15 May 2017, the Tribunal accepted the Respondent’s request and adjusted

the time limits for the Parties’ submissions accordingly.

By letter dated 9 June 2017, the Claimants requested that the Tribunal order the Respondent
to disclose any information not publicly available relating to payments made by the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Chile to Essex Court Chambers, that the Tribunal and the Centre
investigate this issue and disclose the results of the investigation to all Parties, and that the
Tribunal and the Centre take the necessary measures to maintain the possible confidentiality

of the information requested.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

Il.

37.

On 9 June 2017, the Respondent submitted its observations in response to the Request for

Rectification.

By letter dated 15 June 2017, the Tribunal noted that the Claimants’ requests of 9 June 2017
(paragraph 29 above) were placed in a context that had already been considered in the First
and Second Disqualification Proposals and their dismissal by the Chairman of the ICSID
Administrative Council, and informed the Parties of its conclusion that the requests lacked
any connection with the rectifications requested, and therefore lay outside its powers and

functions in the Rectification Proceedings.

On 24 June 2017, the Respondent submitted to the Tribunal the Spanish version of its

observations on the Request for Rectification.

By letter dated 24 July 2017, the Claimants notified the Tribunal that they did not intend to

file a reply to the Respondent’s response.

By email dated 1 August 2017, the Tribunal informed the Parties that the written procedure

on the Rectification Proceedings was now closed.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 49(3), the members of the Tribunal have
determined that it would not be necessary for them to meet in order to consider the Request
for Rectification. The present Decision has been deliberated through several exchanges of

written communications among the members of the Tribunal.

In accordance with Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention, the present Decision constitutes

an integral part of the Resubmission Award.

THE CLAIMANTS’ REQUESTS FOR RECTIFICATION

The Claimants raise four requests for rectification: (1) correction of an erroneous reference to
“Decision No. 43” in paragraph 198 of the Resubmission Award; (2) replacement of the term
“before” by the term “by” in paragraph 61 of the Resubmission Award; (3) replacement of the

term “by” by the term “since” in paragraph 66 of the Resubmission Award; and (4) the removal

from point 2 of the dispositif of the Resubmission Award of any reference to portions of the

First Award that had been annulled, including footnote 387.7

A. Reference to “Decision No. 43” in paragraph 198 of the Resubmission Award

38. The Claimants submit that the reference to “the nullity of Decision No. 43” in the final sentence
of paragraph 198 of the Resubmission Award is in error, as the correct reference should be to
Chilean Decree No. 165. The Claimants thus request that the relevant paragraph? of the
Resubmission Award should either be corrected to read “Decree No. 165” or alternatively
deleted in full.4 The Claimants assert in support that the First Award had accepted that they
had established their title to the disputed assets.°

39. The Respondent agrees that the reference to Decision No. 43 is in error, and that the correct
reference should have been “Decree No. 165”, but neither accepts the Claimants’ arguments
as to why the proposed rectification would be necessary, nor the alternative of deleting
paragraph 198 in its entirety. The Respondent contends that the Tribunal must respect the
nature and limited scope of a rectification proceeding and can only rectify a “clerical or
similar” error, without engaging in an interpretation of the First Award. It contends further that
paragraph 198 is one of the core paragraphs of the First Award, so that to delete it would

exceed the scope of the Tribunal’s competence in a rectification proceeding.®

B. Rectification of the term “before” in paragraph 61 of the Resubmission Award

40. The Claimants assert that paragraph 61 of the Resubmission Award incorrectly states that their

position in the Resubmission Proceedings was that the validity of Decree No. 165 had never

2 The Tribunal notes that the Request for Rectification also included various matters touching upon the disqualification
of the Challenged Arbitrators. As these matters were included in the First and Second Disqualification Proposals and
settled by the Chairman’s decisions dismissing these proposals, and are in any event outside the competence of the
Tribunal in these proceedings, they will not be further considered in the present Decision except in relation to the
allocation of cos
3 In the Claimants’ Request, para. 11, paragraph 199 is mentioned, but in the context of the claim, the Tribunal has
interpreted this to be a clerical error, and in fact a reference to paragraph 198.

 

  
 

4 Claimants’ Request, para. 11.
5 Claimants’ Request, paras. 5-7.
© Respondent's Observations, paras. 3-6.

41.

42.

43.

been put into question “before” the Chilean courts, and point to paragraph 207 of their Reply
of 9 January 2015, which does not use “devant” (“before”), but rather “par” (“by”).’ Given
that they had in fact made submissions regarding the nullity of Decree No. 165 before the
1 Civil Chamber of Santiago in 1994, the Claimants say that the error might lead to the
misleading conclusion that the First Award was reproaching the Claimants for not having

raised the question of the nullity of Decree No. 165, when that was not in fact the case.®

The Respondent agrees with the Claimants’ proposed rectification, as it reflects the original
terminology used in the Claimants’ Reply. It contends, however, that the other justifications
raised by the Claimants are unfounded, pointing in particular to the conclusion in paragraph
198 of the Resubmission Award that the arguments relating to the status of Decree No. 165
were not relevant to the Resubmission Proceedings, as well as to its earlier submission that the
Claimants had never asked for the annulment of Decree No. 165, once they asserted their

claims before an international tribunal rather than a Chilean domestic court.’

C. Rectification of the preposition “by” in paragraph 66 of the Resubmission Award

The Claimants say that the use of the preposition “par” (“by”) in paragraph 66 of the
Resubmission Award is in error, and point in this connection to paragraph 159 of their Reply,
which uses the preposition “depuis” (“since”) in reference to the denial of justice and its
consummation. The Claimants say that the use of the preposition “by” would mischaracterize
their view that it is not the First Award that consummates the denial of justice, but that the

denial of justice has been brought about through the actions of the Respondent.!?

The Respondent does not oppose the rectification requested, on the basis that the passage in
question resumes the Claimants’ Reply, and the Claimants’ Reply did make use of the word

“depuis” (“since”), but rejects the wider reasons put forward by the Claimants.!!

7 Claimants’ Request, para. 13.

8 Claimants’ Request, paras. 14-16.

° Respondent’s Observations, paras. 10-14.

© Claimants’ Request, paras 20-21.

'! Respondent’s Observations, paras. 16-17.

D. Reference in paragraph 2 of the dispositif of the Resubmission Award to findings of
the First Tribunal
44. The Claimants contend that the reference, in paragraph 2 of the dispositif of the Resubmission
Award, to paragraph 704 of the First Award is in error, as the paragraph is part of the portion
of the First Award that had been annulled; the reference should accordingly be deleted, with a

consequential replacement of the possessive “sa” (“its”) by “the”.!?

45. The Respondent acknowledges that paragraph 704 of the First Award was in the portion
specified in the Annulment Decision, but submits that the Claimants’ proposed rectification
could create confusion, and proposes instead the elimination of the words “as has already been

indicated by” the First Tribunal and the footnote, but not the use of the possessive “its”.!°

iI. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS
46. Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention provides, in relevant part, as follows:

The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45 days after the date on
which the award was rendered ... shall rectify any clerical, arithmetical or
similar error in the award.'*

47. Arbitration Rule 49 outlines the procedure to be followed, but speaks, in its paragraph (1),

more generally, of “any error in the award which the requesting party seeks to have rectified.”

48. The wording of the two provisions has in common the reference to an ‘error’ and that the
purpose of the procedure is the ‘rectification’ of any such error. Where the texts diverge, the
wording of the Convention naturally governs. In order to fall within the rectification
procedure, an error must therefore be “in the award,” and it must be clerical, or arithmetical,
“or similar.” The Tribunal notes the differences between the three language versions of
Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention (see fn 14), which have, however, no significance for

the Tribunal’s analysis in the circumstances of this case.

2 Claimants’ Request, paras. 25-26.
'3 Respondent’s Observations, paras. 18-19.

\4 Whereas the French version refers generally to “erreur matérielle,” the English and Spanish versions are similar to
one another in referring more specifically to “clerical, arithmetical or similar error” and “errores materiales,
aritméticos o similares del mismo”, respectively.

49, It follows that, as is already implicit in the notion of ‘rectification,’ the procedure does not
encompass any alleged mistake of law by the tribunal or any factual determination or
discretionary assessment by it. The procedure is not an appeal, and this in turn illuminates
why Article 49 of the Convention makes the rectification of any duly established “clerical,

arithmetical or similar error” into a duty of the tribunal. '

50. Practice has established that there are two, and only two, conditions that must be met for a
rectification. First, a clerical, arithmetical or similar error must be found to exist; and secondly,
the requested rectification must concern an aspect of the award that is purely accessory to the

underlying dispute settled by the award.'®

51. Following the (in the event somewhat attenuated) procedure laid down by the Tribunal, it
appears that there is no disagreement between the Parties as to the existence of the four errors
identified in the Claimants’ Request, although they differ as to the appropriate means of
correcting them within the scope of the rectification procedure. However that may be, it
remains the duty of the Tribunal itself both to ascertain the existence of one or more errors
falling within the scope of Article 49 and, if so, to decide how to rectify them. In so doing, it
is only the Tribunal itself which can be the authentic judge of its intentions in framing the
relevant passages in the Resubmission Award. The Tribunal will therefore examine one by
one the four issues raised by the Claimants, in the light of the written comments of the

Respondent.

A. Reference to “Decision No. 43” in paragraph 198 of the Resubmission Award

52. The Tribunal agrees that the reference in the last sentence of paragraph 198 to Decision No. 43

was a mistake and that it had intended to refer to Decree No. 165. The error is manifestly a

'S Cf Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, Decision of the ad hoc
Committee on Supplementation and Rectification of 28 May 2003, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, para. 11, citing to CH
Schreuer, The ICSID C :AC AC on the C on the of

Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (2 edn, Cambridge University Press, 2009), Commentary to
Article 49, para. 47.

'6 Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, Decision of the ad hoc

Committee on Supplementation and Rectification of 28 May 2003, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, para. 25; citing to the
earlier AMCO v. Indonesia, Decision on Supplemental Decisions and Rectification, | ICSID Reports 569, at 638;
Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, Rectification of the Award of 31 January 2001, 16 ICSID Rev (2001),
at 279; CDSE v. Republic of Costa Rica, Decision of 8 June 2000, 15 ICSID Rev. (2000), at 169.

 

ll

53.

54.

55.

purely clerical one, and will therefore be rectified by replacing the words “Decision No. 43”

by “Decree No. 165.”

B. Use of the word “before” in paragraph 61 of the Resubmission Award

The Tribunal agrees that the paragraph in question was intended to do no more than reflect the
Claimants’ submissions in their Reply Memorial, and ought therefore to have employed the
Claimants’ own wording, namely “by” rather than “before.” As the error is one of a purely
clerical nature, without impact on the substance of the Resubmission Award, the paragraph

will be rectified accordingly, by substitution of the word “by” in the final sentence.

C. Use of the word “by” in paragraph 66 of the Resubmission Award

The Tribunal agrees that, once again, the paragraph in question was intended to do no more
than reflect the Claimants’ submissions in their Reply Memorial, and ought therefore to have
employed the Claimants’ own wording, namely “since” rather than “by.” As the error is one
of a purely clerical nature, without impact on the substance of the Resubmission Award, the
paragraph will be rectified accordingly, by substitution of the word “since” in the first

sentence.

D. Reference in paragraph 2 of the dispositif of the Resubmission Award to the findii
of the First Tribunal
The Tribunal observes that it is a matter for debate whether the effect of the Annulment
Decision was to annul all of the content of Part VIII of the First Award or only that “related to
damages.”'” The question is however immaterial to the present matter, as the sole point at
issue is the present Tribunal’s decision in the Resubmission Award that a finding to the effect
that the Claimants had been the victims of a denial of justice constituted in itself a form of
satisfaction under international law for the Respondent’s breach of Article 4 of the BIT. This
constituted an independent finding by the present Tribunal, which is not in itself affected,
negatively or positively, by the fact that the First Tribunal had reached a similar conclusion in

its own Award, and that it did so on the basis of findings earlier in the First Award which the

‘7 See Annulment Decision of 18 December 2012, para. 359.

12

IV.

56.

57.

58.

Annulment Decision had expressly declared to be res judicata. The Tribunal therefore sees
no imperative need for rectification of the dispositif. In the light, however, of the measure of
agreement between the Parties that reference ought not to be made to paragraph 704 of the
First Award, paragraph 2 of the dispositif of the Resubmission Award is rectified to read as
follows: “That the formal recognition by the First Tribunal of the Claimants’ rights and its
finding that they were the victims of a denial of justice constitutes in itself'a form of satisfaction
under international law for the Respondent’s breach of Article 4 of the BIT;”. With this

modification, fn. 387 falls away.

COSTS

The Tribunal refers to its observations in the Resubmission Award on the allocation of costs,
notably in paragraphs 249 and 251. As, pursuant to Article 49 of the ICSID Convention, a
decision on an application for rectification is to become part of the award, the Tribunal can see
no good reason why the same principles should not apply to these Rectification Proceedings
as well. It appears from Arbitration Rule 49(4) that a tribunal’s powers in respect of costs are

the same in both cases.

For the application of those principles in present circumstances, the proceedings have to be
divided into two; one part relates to the request for rectification itself, the other to the two
successive proposals for the disqualification of a majority of the Tribunal, both of which fell
to the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council to decide. As to the latter, factors of
relevance to the allocation of costs include the Chairman’s findings that the first challenge was
out of time, and that the second was without merit. As to the former, although it has, as
indicated above, proceeded to make four rectifications to the text of its Resubmission Award
pursuant to the obligation laid upon it by Article 49 of the Convention, the Tribunal has
nevertheless come to the conclusion that three of the four rectifications concern matters of
purely formal import, and that none of the four rectifications has any perceptible impact on the

meaning or effect of the Resubmission Award as such.

Taking these factors into account, the Tribunal decides, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 47(1)(j)
read together with Rule 49(4), that the costs incurred by the Centre in respect of these

rectification proceedings, including the costs resulting from the associated challenges to

13

Sir Franklin Berman and Mr Veeder, shall be borne by the Claimants, but makes no further

order as to costs.

59. These costs amount to (in US$):

60.

61.

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses

Sir Franklin Berman QC 0

Mr V. V. Veeder 0

Mr Alexis Mourre 1,875
President of the Tribunal’s 6.370
Assistant’s fees and expenses >
Other direct expenses (estimated) 5,681.72
ICSID’s administrative fees 32,000
Total 45,926.72

The above costs have been paid out of the advances made to ICSID by the Parties in equal
parts. Once the case account balance is final, the ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties
with a detailed financial statement; any remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Parties in

equal shares.

In consequence of paragraphs 56 to 60 above, the costs to be borne by the Claimants amount
to US$ 45,926.72, and the Claimants are accordingly under an obligation to reimburse to the
Respondent the amount of US$ 22,963.36, in addition to the amount specified in paragraph
255 of the Resubmission Award.

Vv. DECISION

62. The Tribunal accordingly decides:

(a) Paragraphs 61, 66, and 198, and paragraph 2 of the dispositif, of the Resubmission
Award are rectified as set out in paragraphs 52, 53, 54, and 55 above.

(b) The costs incurred by the Centre in respect of these Rectification Proceedings,
including the costs resulting from the associated challenges to Sir Franklin
Berman and Mr Veeder, shall be borne by the Claimants and the Claimants shall
therefore reimburse to the Respondent the sum of US$ 22,963.36, in addition to
the amount specified in paragraph 255 of the Resubmission Award. The Tribunal

makes no further order as to costs.

   

iklin Berman KCMG QC
President of the Tribunal

dae 12 Aa tewer 2017
Foe Veer rr / =

V.V. Veeder QC "Alexis Mourre
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: 2S Gy ty Xw it Date: VU! Wyman dy

