 

 

NAFTA/UNCITRAL

Decision on the Challenge to Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, QC

in the Arbitration

VITO G. GALLO

— Claimant —

GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

— Respondent —

Nassib G. Ziadé
Deputy Secretary-General, ICSID

 

 

1. The present challenge of Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, QC arose in the case of Vito G.
Gallo y. Government of Canada, which is being heard under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
and Section B of Chapter 11 of the North American Free Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”) by a
three-member tribunal. The Tribunal consists of Mr. Juan Fernéndez-Armesto (presiding
arbitrator), Mr. Jean-Gabriel Castel OC, QC, and Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, QC. The arbitral

proceedings in this case are being administered by the Permanent Court of Arbitration (“PCA”).

2. NAFTA Article 1124(1) provides that the ICSID Secretary-General shall serve as
appointing authority for arbitration under Section B of NAFTA Chapter 11. NAFTA Article
1120(2) indicates that the applicable arbitration rules, ie., in this case the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, shall govern the arbitration. Article 12(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration

Rules provides that the decision on a challenge shall be made by the appointing authority.

3. Article 10(3) of the ICSID Convention provides that “[dJuring the Secretary-General’s
absence or inability to act ... the Deputy Secretary-General shall act as Secretary-General” as,
indeed, during any vacancy of the office of Secretary-General. In the present case, the Secretary-
General of ICSID is unable to act within the meaning of Article 10(3) of the ICSID Convention.
In such circumstances, the Deputy Secretary-General is automatically required by the ICSID
Convention to act as Secretary-General in the specific matter, and to perform all of the Secretary-
General’s functions, including those of an appointing authority, without having any reporting

relationship to the Secretary-General. It is in this context that I am deciding this challenge.

Factual Background and Procedural History

4. On June 4, 2007, the Respondent appointed Mr. Thomas as an arbitrator and forwarded to
the Claimant Mr. Thomas’ curriculum vitae (“CV”). The CV disclosed a significant amount of
past and present work for the Government of Mexico. In his CV, Mr. Thomas stated that he was
“presently managing partner of Thomas & Partners, Barristers & Solicitors (due to retire from
counsel work and to withdraw from the firm on or about 31 December 2007).” The Tribunal was
constituted on December 4, 2007 following the presiding arbitrator’s acceptance of his own

appointment.

5. On March 7, 2008, the Tribunal held its first procedural hearing. Procedural Order No. 1
of June 4, 2008 incorporated, among other things, the procedural rules governing the arbitration
which had been discussed on March 7 between the parties and the Tribunal. Procedural Order
No. | stated that “[t]he disputing parties agree and confirm that the Arbitral Tribunal has been
duly constituted in accordance with Article 1123 of the NAFTA.” It further stated that “[t]he
disputing parties confirm that they waive any possible objection to the constitution of the
Arbitral Tribunal and to the appointment of the Arbitrators on the grounds of conflict of interest
and/or lack of independence or impartiality in respect of matters known to them at the date of

signature of this Procedural Order.”

6. On June 25, 2008, Mr. Thomas informed the parties of his new address and contact
details as of June 15, 2008. In the same communication, Mr. Thomas referred to his Thomas &
Partners address as his “former office premises,” albeit without referencing it by name. During
the same period, the national press in Canada as well as some arbitration and trade publications

reported that Mr. Thomas’ former colleagues in Thomas & Partners had joined Borden Ladner

Gervais, LLP (hereinafter “BLG”) as partners, while Mr. Thomas joined the firm as an

independent counsel.

7. On March 5, 2009, Mr. Thomas sent to the parties through the PCA a letter updating

them as to changes in his professional situation. He indicated to them that “[e]ffective 15 June

2008, [he] became a sole practitioner practicing through [his] personal law corporation.” He

further indicated:

My files are administered and maintained autonomously from BLG. My law
corporation has separate computer, financial records, and telecommunications
system. As a part of my consultancy agreement, I can assist BLG in a particular
matter if both firms have cleared their conflicts checks. Neither firm has access to
the other’s computer systems, internal communications and file openings, efc.

8. In the same letter of March 5, 2009, Mr. Thomas brought what he described as a
development” to the parties’ attention:

I have recently been advised by BLG that the Government of Mexico has decided
to retain it to provide legal services to it for the period 1 March to 31 December
2009. The government sought agreement that I could (through BLG) advise on
specific legal matters as they arose and | agreed to that request.

“recent

9. The letter of March 5 was never received by the parties, due to Mr. Thomas’ incorrectly

typing the e-mail address of the Legal Secretary at the PCA. On June 3, 2009, he discovered the

error and sent the March 5 letter again to the parties through the PCA.

10. On June 15, 2009, counsel for the Claimant wrote a letter to Mr. Thomas inquiring about

the following:

We would appreciate receiving confirmation from you as to whether you have
already commenced the work contemplated in the retainer agreement mentioned
in your letter. Could you also please confirm whether the retainer agreement
contemplates the provision of legal research, advice or representation with respect
to the interpretation or application of the provisions of NAFTA Chapter 11, or
similar provisions in Mexico’s Bilateral Investment Treaties?

11. On June 22, 2009, Mr. Thomas replied to the Claimant’s letter of June 15. He stated:

Since BLG’s retainer entered into force, | have done a small amount of work for
BLG on Mexico-related matters, consisting principally of reviewing its advice in
respect of matters that fall within the rubric of international trade and investment
law. I have not provided representation to Mexico in respect of the interpretation
or application of the provisions of NAFTA Chapter 11 or similar provisions in
Mexico’s Bilateral Investment Treaties. I estimate that my time spent in this
regard amounts to less than 5% of my time spent on professional matters.

12. On July 7, 2009, the Claimant requested that Mr. Thomas withdraw from his position as
arbitrator. It expressed the belief that “circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as
to [Mr. Thomas’] impartiality and independence to continue serving as arbitrator appointed by
the Government of Canada.” The Claimant stressed, however, that it did “not allege the
existence of actual bias” on the part of Mr. Thomas. Rather, the Claimant stated that its
challenge was “based upon the objective standards prescribed under Articles 9 and 10 of the

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and the applicable rules of international law.”

13. On July 10, 2009, the Respondent stated that it did not “believe that there exist
circumstances sufficient to create justifiable doubts as to [Mr. Thomas’] impartiality and

independence” as an arbitrator.

14. On July 15, 2009, Mr. Thomas, in response to the Claimant’s allegations, decided not to

tender his resignation.

15. On July 20, 2009, the Claimant wrote to me in my capacity as Deputy Secretary-General
seeking my “determination of the challenge [it had] submitted to Mr. Thomas’ continued service
as arbitrator.” The Claimant made it clear that this request was entered without prejudice to its
standing position that the “Deputy Secretary-General should not exercise the authority granted to

the Secretary-General under NAFTA Article 1124(1).” Canada had for its part, on July 14,

2009, expressed the view that the Deputy Secretary-General of ICSID was the “appointing

authority with respect to this matter.”

16. On July 20 and 21, 2009, the parties proposed different schedules for the filing of further
submissions on the challenge to Mr. Thomas. On July 22, 2009, I wrote to the parties on this
point, informing them that I had decided:

(1) to invite the Claimant to file any further observations that it may have on the
challenge by July 27, 2009;

(2) to invite the Respondent to file any further observations that it may have by
August 10, 2009;

(3) to invite Mr. Thomas to file any additional comments that he may have within
ten days of his receipt of the Respondent’s submission;

(4) to invite the parties to file simultaneously any further comments that they may
have within ten days of their receipt of Mr. Thomas’ comments; and

(5) to reserve the possibility of inviting further submissions if deemed necessary.

17. The Claimant and the Respondent filed their submissions as scheduled on July 27, 2009
and August 10, 2009, respectively. Mr. Thomas submitted his comments on the parties’
submissions on August 17, 2009. On August 28, 2009, the Claimant filed a Reply on the
Challenge, and the Respondent submitted a letter with respect to the challenge. On September 1,

2009, the Respondent stated its intention not to file an additional submission.

18. Both of the parties and Mr. Thomas have conducted themselves with the utmost civility
in the course of this challenge. The Claimant emphasized at the outset that it was pursuing the
challenge with regret, and that it was not alleging the “existence of actual bias” on Mr. Thomas’
part. Mr. Thomas in turn expressed his appreciation for the Claimant’s pursuing the challenge
with regret, and affirmed that he took no offense by the challenge. Both the Claimant and Mr.

Thomas stressed the importance of preserving the legitimacy of, and confidence in, the investor-

5

State dispute settlement process. Both of the parties and Mr. Thomas are to be commended for
the professionalism of their submissions and the spirit in which the challenge procedure has been

conducted.
Considerations

19. The applicable standard for deciding whether to sustain a challenge to an arbitrator in the
present case is set out in Article 10(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, which provides that

in “arbitrator may be challenged if circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to
the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence.” This is an objective standard in that it requires
not only a showing of doubt, but doubt that is justifiable. (“[U]nder the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules doubts are justifiable ... if they give rise to an apprehension of bias that is, to the objective
observer, reasonable.” See the Challenge Decision of 11 January 1995, XXII Yearbook
Commercial Arbitration 227, 234 (1997).) Furthermore, as the standard requires an exercise of
judgment, it is only logical to conclude that all relevant facts and circumstances must be
considered in reaching that judgment. The first question to be addressed is, however, the

timeliness of the challenge.
Timeliness of the Challenge

20. Pursuant to Article 11(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, a challenge to an
arbitrator must be made within fifteen days after the appointment of the challenged arbitrator has
been notified to the challenging party, or within fifteen days after circumstances giving rise to
justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence have become known to the
challenging party. The parties dispute at length the issue of when the Claimant became aware or

should have become aware that Mr. Thomas was continuing to act as a counsel after December

31, 2007. The burden of proof here lies with the Respondent. While the Claimant as the party
raising the challenge must show that justifiable doubts exist as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or
independence, the burden of proving that the Claimant knew of relevant circumstances more than

fifteen days prior to bringing the challenge falls upon the Respondent.

21. | The Respondent first observes that the Claimant sent submissions to Mr. Thomas at
Thomas & Partners on multiple occasions between February 29 and May 12, 2008. The
Respondent next observes that Procedural Order No. 1 of June 4, 2008 listed Mr. Thomas’ office
at Thomas & Partners as his contact information and place of service for documents. The
Respondent contends that the Claimant was thus on notice that Mr. Thomas remained a counsel.
The Respondent further notes that Mr. Thomas on June 25, 2008 informed the parties and the
other members of the Tribunal of his new address, referring to the Thomas & Partners address as
his “former office premises.” The Respondent observes that the Claimant had no more than
fifteen days from this last date to challenge Mr. Thomas’ statement that he would retire from
counsel work prior to the arbitration getting underway. The Claimant takes issue with the

Respondent’s assertions concerning Mr. Thomas’ address.

22. Even taking the Respondent’s view of the facts, the Respondent’s arguments here are of
no moment. Merely maintaining an address at a law firm for some months after a declared date

of departure does not by itself indicate continuing work as a counsel.

23. The Respondent next invokes in support of its position press coverage of the “merger”
between Thomas & Partners and BLG in June 2008, and of Mr. Thomas’ relationship with BLG
as an independent counsel. (Mr. Thomas contests the use of the term “merger” as being merely

colloquial.) The Respondent further notes the small size of the Canadian trade and investment

bar as evidence of constructive knowledge of Mr. Thomas’ continuing status as a counsel. The
Claimant denies any actual knowledge of Mr. Thomas’ remaining as counsel prior to Mr.

Thomas’ disclosure in June 2009.

24. Allowing the Respondent to invoke evidence of constructive knowledge (even if
reasonably proved) would relieve the arbitrator of the continuing duty to disclose. This would
unfairly place the burden on the Claimant to seek elsewhere the notice it should have received
from the arbitrator. Of interest in this respect is the Respondent’s statement that counsel for the
Claimant were “almost certainly aware” of the “merger” shortly after it occurred in June 2008.

Such speculative statements cannot replace proof of actual knowledge.

25. Easily dismissed is the Respondent’s observation that one of the Claimant’s counsel
spoke on May 13, 2009 ona panel with Mr. Thomas, and that the conference materials contained
a CV of Mr. Thomas noting at page 2 his continuing advice to clients on a case-by-case basis.
The Claimant’s counsel denies having obtained such materials. This denial need not be assessed,
however. The burden of proof here lies with the Respondent. It would in any event be
unreasonable to burden a party with the expectation that its counsel will have read every line of

every page of every CV provided at a conference.

26. The Respondent has not established that the challenge was untimely. Even if the
Respondent proved that the Claimant knew that Mr. Thomas remained a counsel, this fact would
not in itself be determinative. The proper matter to be considered is whom Mr. Thomas has

counseled, and on what topics. These questions will be considered further below.

27. The appropriate date from which time shall be deemed to have started running is June 22,

2009, the date on which Mr. Thomas disclosed to the parties the extent of his advisory work to

Mexico. The challenge has therefore been made within the fifteen-day time limit set out in

Article 11(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

Merits of the Challenge

28. Turning then to the merits of the challenge, the Claimant first complains that Mr. Thomas

has remained a counsel despite his indication to the contrary in his CV of 2007.

29. It would have been preferable for Mr. Thomas not to have stated in a CV provided to the
parties that he intended to retire as counsel if his intentions were not entirely certain. As things
stand today, and irrespective of the advisability of such a situation, one may as a general matter
be simultaneously an arbitrator in one case and a counsel in another. There is no need to
disavow the possibility of assuming either role. The fact that one makes such a statement and
then changes one’s mind is therefore hardly sufficient to sustain a challenge absent other
evidence of a conflict. Thus, the Claimant’s assertion that it relied on Mr. Thomas’ statement in
his CV in evaluating his acceptability as an arbitrator does not by itself sustain the challenge

raised against Mr. Thomas.

30. The real issue is that Mr. Thomas is presently advising Mexico, a State Party to the
NAFTA and a potential participant in this case pursuant to NAFTA Article 1128. In his letter of
June 22, 2009, Mr. Thomas stated that he had not since March 2009 represented Mexico “in
respect of the interpretation or application of the provisions of NAFTA Chapter 11 or similar
provisions in Mexico’s Bilateral Investment Treaties,” but has done “a small amount of work for
BLG on Mexico-related matters, consisting principally of reviewing its advice in respect of

matters that fall within the rubric of international trade and investment law.”

31. In the particular context of NAFTA Article 1128, this is too fine a distinction to dispel
doubt. By serving on a tribunal in a NAFTA arbitration involving a NAFTA State Party, while
simultaneously acting as an advisor to another NAFTA State Party which has a legal right to
participate in the proceedings, an arbitrator inevitably risks creating justifiable doubts as to his

impartiality and independence.

32. The Respondent opines that there can be no conflict of interest since the amount of legal
advice provided by Mr. Thomas to Mexico is de minimis. The Respondent misses the point,
however. Where arbitral functions are concerned, any paid or gratis service provided to a third
party with a right to intervene can create a perception of a lack of impartiality. The amount of

work done makes no difference. What matters is the mere fact that work is being performed.

33. Mr. Thomas’ personal integrity is unquestioned, and he is to be commended for
disclosing his advisory services to Mexico in a forthright manner. Nevertheless, in an
arrangement like the one presently at issue, the arbitrator could be perceived as attentive to the
interests of the advised State Party. His judgment may appear to be impaired by the potential
interest of the advised State Party in the proceedings. Moreover, if the advised State Party were
formally to intervene under Article 1128, this would necessarily lead to the reconstitution of the

tribunal. In any event, the arbitrator’s involvement is problematic.

34. The Claimant demands Mr. Thomas’ disqualification on the basis that “there is no way to
‘un-ring’ the bell.” But the bell has not yet actually been rung. Mexico has not stated an interest
in this case by participating under Article 1128, or otherwise. Had Mexico intervened, this
would have required Mr. Thomas’ immediate disqualification. The fact is, however, that Mexico

has not yet done so. The Claimant’s request must therefore be rejected.

35. Nevertheless, because Mexico has the immanent right under Article 1128 formally to
state its interest by participating in the case, an apparent conflict of interest is perceptible. Even
if Mexico were not in the end to intervene, the arbitration would have had to proceed under the
shadow of this possibility. The parties would inevitably be in a distracting and unsettled
situation. It would be next to impossible for Mr. Thomas to avoid altogether, in his work as an
arbitrator, the appearance of an inability to distance himself fully from the interests of Mexico,

the advised NAFTA State Party and a potential participant in the present case.

36. In the instant case, from the point of view of a “reasonable and informed third party”
(General Standard 2(c) of the IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International
Arbitration), i.e., a “fair minded, rational, objective observer” (Challenge Decision of 11 January
1995, op. cit. at 236), there would be justifiable doubts about Mr. Thomas’ impartiality and
independence as an arbitrator if he were not to discontinue his advisory services to Mexico for
the remainder of this arbitration. Mr. Thomas must therefore now choose whether he will
continue to advise Mexico, or continue to serve as an arbitrator in this case. Mr. Thomas shall
inform me of his choice (with copies being sent to the parties, the two other arbitrators and the

PCA) within seven (7) days of his receipt of the present decision.
Costs

37. The Respondent requests that the Claimant be ordered to bear all of the costs of this
challenge. It is reasonable, unless the Tribunal determines otherwise, that the authority ruling on
the challenge should also decide the subsidiary question of whether to award costs in respect of

the challenge. Both sides asserted their positions cogently and constructively. In view of the

importance of the legal issues raised by both parties, and the usefulness of both parties’ pleadings

in deciding the present challenge, each party will bear its own costs.
Decision
For the reasons discussed above, I have decided:
(1) the Claimant’s challenge to Mr. Thomas is timely;
(2) the Claimant’s challenge is rejected;

(3) Mr. Thomas is requested to inform me within seven (7) days of his choice

between continuing to advise Mexico and serving as an arbitrator in this case;

and

(4) each party will bear its own costs in respect of this challenge.

Nassib G. Ziadé
Deputy Secretary-General, ICSID

Date: Ockote /%, 2005

