INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between

VLADISLAV KIM, PAVEL BoRISSOV, AIBAR BURKITBAYEV, ALMAS CHUKIN,
LYAZZAT DAURENBEKOVA, ADAL ISSABEKOV, DAMIR KARASSAYEV, AIDAN
KARIBZHANOV, AIGUL NURMAKHANOVA, KAIRAT OMAROV, NIKOLAY VARENKO
AND GULZHAMASH ZAITBEKOVA

Claimants

and

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN
Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/13/6

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Professor David D. Caron, President
The Honorable L. Yves Fortier, PC, CC, OQ, QC, Arbitrator
Mr. Toby Landau, QC, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Geraldine R. Fischer

Assistant to the Tribunal
Ms. Natalia Mikolajcyk (2015 — 2016) / Dr. Cian C. Murphy (2016 — Present)

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 8 March 2017

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
 
 

 

 

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS .......c:cccescesesessessssssesneeseeneesees v
REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES
I. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF DECISION ........:c:c:seesessessessessseenseeeeeneeseesee 1
A. The Dispute 1
B. Summary of the Decision 1
(1) The First Jurisdictional Objection — Nationality 1
(2) The Second Jurisdictional Objection — That Claimants are not “Investors” who
made an “Investment” 2
(3) The Third Jurisdictional Objection — Legality of the Investment...............0cc0 3
(4) The Fourth Jurisdictional Objection — Corruption... eeeeeeeeseeeseeeeeeees 4
(5) Cost: 5
II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 6
A. Registration of the Request for Arbitration ......0....0.cccccceseesestesestesesteseseseeeseeeseeeeeeee 6
B. Establishment of the Tribunal 6
C. First Session 7
D. Written and Oral Procedure 7
E. Post-Hearing Procedure 17
Procedural History as to Anonymous Experts .........:.:.:cccesseseeeseseeeeesteeeeeeeeeeeneeaeeeee 18
Il. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 27
A. Claimants’ Representation of the Factual Background .......0.0.ccccceeee teense 27
B. Respondent’s Representation of the Factual Background..........cccceceeee eee 30
C. Tribunal’s Preliminary Comment on the Factual Background ..........0.cccceseeeeeeeneee 31
IV. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS AND REQUEST FOR RELIEF . 32
V. THE JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBUNAL.
A. Claimant’s Assertion as to Jurisdiction
B. Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections ...........c.cccsccscssesseseeseseeeseeseseesesteseseesesneneaneneas 34
VI. THE APPLICABLE LAW 36
VII. THE FIRST JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION - NATIONALITY ........0 cece 37
A. Introduction 37
B. The Nationality Requirement in International and National Law..........0..0c eee 37

Cc.

D.

 

Application of the Nationality Requirement ..

 

 

 

(1) Mr. Chukin 42
(2) Mr. Varenko 43
(3) All Other Claimants 44
The Tribunal’s Conclusion 46

 

VIII. THE SECOND JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION — THAT CLAIMANTS ARE NOT

“INVESTORS” WHO MADE AN “INVESTMENT”...
A.
B.
Cc.

E.

 

Introduction 46

The Law Applicable to the Objection .......... cece ceeeeeee eee ceeeeeteeeneneeeeeeeenenenees 47

 

Objections that Claimants are not “Investors”

(1) Claimants Have Not Proven their Ownership of Shares in BC and KC............... 48
(2) The Investors are Passive Rather than Active......cccceceeeseseeeseeeseeeseeeeeenees 60
(3) The Investors are too Remote from BC and KC........:ceccecsecseeeeseesteeteeteeeeseeseenes 62
Objections that Claimants did not make an “Investment?” ........0.0. cece 65
(1) The Investment Did Not Involve a Capital Contribution... cence 66
(2) The Investment was Short Term......c.ccccccscssessesseseeeeseeseeseeseeseesneeeeneeneeneeseeneenses 67

(3) The Investment was Made without the Awareness of the Uzbek Government... 68

The Tribunal’s Conclusion on the Second Objection ...........c ccc eee 71

IX. THE THIRD JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION — LEGALITY OF THE INVESTMENT71

A.
B.

Cc.

 

 

 

Introduction 71
The Scope of the Legality Requirement... ceceseseeeseeeeesteeeteeeeeeeeeeeneees 72
(1) Article 12 of the BIT: The Source of the Legality Requirement ................0000 72
(2) “Made”: The Temporal Scope and Causative Dimension of the Legality

Requirement. 75
(3) “Legislation”: The Formal Scope of the Legality Requirement. .......0.0ccee 77
(4) “In Compliance with Legislation”: The Substantive Content and Scope of the

Legality Requirement. 78
(5) The Tribunal’s Conclusions as to the Legality Requirement...........c eee 87
The Acts of Noncompliance with Uzbek Law Alleged by Respondent..........0....00 87
(1) Fraud in Violation of Uzbek Securities Law ...........cececsecseeees ees testeeteeeeeeneeneenes 89
(2) Failure to Register the English SPAs..........

 

(3) False Disclosure and Concealment in Registering the Tashkent SPA................... 90

(4) Fraud Causing Significant Harm to the State, BC and KC Minority Shareholders,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

the TSE and the Brokers 92
D. Alleged Violation Relating to Fraud in Violation of Uzbek Securities Law ............... 94
E. Alleged Violations Relating to the Conclusion of the English SPAS........0.0cccee 9o7
(1) Law No. 218-I, Article 22 97
(2) Cabinet of Minister’s Resolution No. 285, Appendix 2 Article 5... 99
(3) Order No. 2003-08 100
F, Alleged Violations Relating to False Disclosure and Concealment in the Registration
of the Tashkent SPAs 103
(1) Civil Code, Article 116 103
(2) Civil Code, Article 124 105
(3) Law No. 260-II (Law on Exchange Activity), Articles 7, 15 and 27 .........eeee 108
(4) Law No. 218-I (Law on Functioning Mechanism of Securities Market), Articles 6,
25 and 31 110
(5) Order No. 04-103 (Order on the Prevention of Stock Market Manipulation),
Article 2.3.2 112
(6) Order No. 2002-06 (Securities Disclosure Order), Articles 25 and 28............. 113
(7) TSE Rules, Rule 2 115
G. Alleged Violations Relating to Fraud Causing Significant Harm to the State, the BC
and KC Minority Shareholders, the TSE, and the Brokers .............ccceeeeeeeeeee 115
(1) Criminal Code, Article 168 ........ccccccscsessestestesteeseeseeseeseeseessessesseneenseneenseneensens 116
(2) Criminal Code, Article 184.00... ccccseeeeeeseseeeeeeesesnensestensensneeneesnneeneneeneee 117
(3) Civil Code, Article 123 119
H. Claimants’ Argument that Respondent is Estopped from Raising Illegality ............. 121
I. Conclusion on Third Objection...
THE FOURTH JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION - CORRUPTION ..........:c0:cccseseees 122
A. The Burden of Proof and the Significance to be Afforded Red Flags .............
A. Respondent’s Assertion That an Excess Payment to Ms. Karimova was a Violation of
Article 211 of the Uzbekistan Criminal Code
B. Respondent’s Assertion That an Excess Payment to Ms. Karimova was Contrary to
International Public Policy Prohibiting Corruption.
C. Respondent’s Assertion that a Payment by Claimants to Mr. Bizakov Constitutes

Corruption in Violation of International Public Policy ........... ccc eee 136

iii

 

D. Tribunal Conclusions as to the Fourth Objection..
XI. COSTS 141
A. The Inadequate Safeguarding of Information Regarding the Anonymous Experts... 141

B. Additional Matter of Concern — Conduct of Specific Claimant.......0.00 ce 144
C. The Tribunal’s Conclusion on Costs ........c:ceccecessesseeseessesesseeeeseesessessnsanesseneeseeneesee 145
XII. DECISION 145

 

FREQUENTLY USED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Anonymous Expert I First Author of Anonymous Experts’ Report I or Exchange Report I
Anonymous Expert IT Second Author of Anonymous Experts’ Report I or Exchange Report I
Arbitration Rules ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

BC JSC Bekabadcement

BIT or Treaty Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan and

the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan on Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments, signed in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on
2 June 1997 and entered into force on 8 September 1997

Black Expert Report of Professor Bernard Black dated 2 March 2015

Born Expert Report Expert Report of Mr. Gary Born dated 25 February 2015

Butler I Expert Report of Professor William Butler dated 17 April 2014

Butler II Second Expert Report of Professor William Butler dated 9 May 2015
Citizenship Law Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan on Citizenship of the Republic of

Kazakhstan dated 20 December 1991 (RL-0119)

Civil Code Civil Code of the Republic of Uzbekistan (CL-0370)

Criminal Code Criminal Code of the Republic of Uzbekistan (R-0027)

English SPAs English Share Purchase Agreements

Hart I Expert Report of Mr. Timothy Hart dated 31 July 2014

Hearing (Part I) Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Washington, D.C., 28 July to 1
August 2015

Hearing (Part II) Second Hearing on Preliminary Objections, The Hague, 10 to 12
November 2015

ICSID Convention Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and

Nationals of Other States, which entered into force on 14 October 1966
Kaden Kaden Invest Ltd.

Kazakh Constitution Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan (CL-0013)

KC

KimI

Kim II

Kim III
Knyazev
Mamatov I
Mamatov IT
McGlinchey
Nabolena
Navigant II
Nurmakhanova
NDA

Pak I

Pak II

Ray Companies
Raybird
Rayblock
Raycross
Request or RFA

required dates

Resolution No. 12

Sauer

Tashkent SPAs

JSC Kuvasaycement

Witness Statement of Mr. Vladislav Kim dated 24 April 2014

Second Witness Statement of Mr. Vladislav Kim dated 8 December 2014
Third Witness Statement of Mr. Vladislav Kim dated 13 May 2015
Expert Report of Mr. Valery Knyazev dated 18 May 2015

Expert Report of Mr. Shavkat Mamatov dated 31 July 2014

Second Expert Report of Mr. Shavkat Mamatov dated 17 February 2015
Expert Report of Professor Eric McGlinchey dated 7 April 2014
Nabolena Ltd.

Second Expert Report of Navigant Consulting dated 13 May 2015
Witness Statement of Ms. Aigul Nurmakhanova dated 15 May 2015
Non-Disclosure Agreement

First Witness Statement of Mr. Dmitry Pak dated 29 July 2014

Second Witness Statement of Mr. Dmitry Pak dated 26 February 2015
Raycross Limited, Raybird Limited, and Rayblock Limited

Raybird Limited

Rayblock Limited

Raycross Limited

Request for Arbitration by Claimants dated 22 March 2013

Dates upon which Claimants’ must hold Kazakh nationality for the
Tribunal to have jurisdiction ratione personae

Resolution of the Constitution Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan No.
12 dated 12 January 2003 (CL-0401)

Witness Statement of Mr. Michael Sauer dated 15 May 2015

Tashkent Share Purchase Agreements

vi

TSE
UCG

Working Group

Zaitbekova

Tashkent Stock Exchange
United Cement Group Plc.

Claimants’ informal sub-committee to oversee the potential acquisition of
BC and KC, established Spring 2005

Witness Statement of Ms. Gulzhamash Zaitbekova dated 15 May 2015

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Counsel for the Claimants:

Jones Day

Mr. Baiju S. Vasani
21 Tudor Street
London EC4Y ODJ
United Kingdom

and

Jones Day

Ms. Melissa S. Gorsline

51 Louisiana Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20001-2113
United States of America

and

Visor Holding

Mr. Michael McNicholas
Esentai Tower

14th Floor

77/7 Al Farabi Avenue
Almaty 050060
Republic of Kazakhstan

Counsel for the Respondent:

White & Case LLP

Ms. Carolyn B. Lamm

Ms. Andrea J. Menaker

Mr. Brody K. Greenwald

Ms. Larissa Eltsefon

Ms. Jennifer A. Ivers

701 Thirteenth Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20005-3807
United States of America

and

Republic of Uzbekistan
Minister Muzraf Ikramov
Mr. Davronbek Akhmedov
Ms. Khurliman Aytniyazov
Ministry of Justice

5 Sayilgoh Street

Tashkent 100047

Republic of Uzbekistan

INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF DECISION
A. — The Dispute

This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the Agreement between
the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan and the Government of the Republic of
Uzbekistan on Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments (the “BIT” or
“Treaty”), which was signed on 2 June 1997 and entered into force on 8 September 1997,
and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals
of Other States, which entered into force on 14 October 1966 (the “ICSID Convention”).

Claimants in this arbitration are 12 of 13 partners in Visor, a private equity investment
group established in 2001 and headquartered in Kazakhstan. The twelve partners and
claimants are Vladislav Kim, Pavel Borissov, Aibar Burkitbayev, Almas Chukin, Lyazzat
Daurenbekova, Adal Issabekov, Damir Karassayev, Aidan Karibzhanov, Aigul
Nurmakhanova, Kairat Omarov, Nikolay Varenko and Gulzhamash Zaitbekova
(“Claimants”). The Respondent is the Republic of Uzbekistan (“Uzbekistan” or
“Respondent’”). The Claimants and the Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to
as the “Parties”.

The dispute relates to Claimants’ interest in two cement plants located in Uzbekistan, JSC
Bekabadcement (“BC”) and JSC Kuvasaycement (“KC”), that are held through a Cypriot
holding company, United Cement Group Plc. (“UCG”).

B. Summary of the Decision

Claimants seek arbitration before ICSID on the basis of the BIT and the ICSID Convention.
In this Decision, the Tribunal addresses and denies four preliminary objections, each
multifaceted, to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and to the admissibility of Claimants’ case. This
section provides a summary of the Tribunal’s Decision, with references to the full
reasoning within. This summary is to be understood in terms of the exposition in the
Decision.

(1) | The First Jurisdictional Objection - Nationality

Respondent's first objection is that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because of the nationality
of Claimants. Under the terms of the BIT, Claimants must be Khazakh nationals to make
their claim. Respondent argues that two of Claimants, Messrs. Almas Chukin and Nikolay

Varenko, failed to establish their Kazakh nationality, and that Claimants’ evidence as
regards the ten other Claimants is insufficient to establish their Kazakh nationality.

6. The Tribunal finds that Mr. Chukin’s passport and citizenship certificate constitute
evidence on their face establishing his possession of Kazakh citizenship on the required
dates and that evidence as regards Mr. Chukin’s previous possession of Kyrgyz citizenship
does not call into question the probity of this evidence. The Tribunal considers that the
termination of Mr. Varenko’s Kazakh citizenship on 11 July 2014 demonstrates that, on
that date, circumstances existed under Kazakh law to merit such termination. However,
given the absence of any evidence of a prior termination of Kazakh citizenship, and given
the evidence that Mr. Varenko did possess Kazakh citizenship on the required dates, the
Tribunal concludes that the fact of the later termination of Mr. Varenko’s citizenship does
not call into question his possession of citizenship on the required dates. The Tribunal finds
that the passports submitted with the Request for Arbitration are sufficient to satisfy the
Tribunal of the Kazakh citizenship of the ten Claimants other than Messrs. Varenko and
Chukin on the required dates.

(2) The Second Jurisdictional Objection — That Claimants are not
“Investors” who made an “Investment”

7. By its second objection, Respondent asserts that Claimants are neither “investors” nor
persons who made an “investment” as those terms are defined in the BIT and therefore
their claim is beyond the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.”

8. Respondent argues that Claimants fail to establish their status as “investors” under the BIT.
In particular Respondent argues that (1) Claimants have not established the necessary link
between themselves and the alleged investment, that is their ownership of shares in BC and
KC prior to the alleged breach; (2) Claimants’ role in relation to BC and KC is “passive”
rather than “active” and therefore Claimants are not “investors”; and (3) Claimants are too
remote from the “investment” and therefore Claimants are not “investors”.

9. The Tribunal concludes that Claimants have proven their ownership of shares in BC and
KC through the ownership holding structure set out in the Request for Arbitration at the
required times.

10. The Tribunal holds that the BIT in this case does not contain a distinction between active
and passive investors so as to require investors are “active”. Furthermore, even if there
were such a requirement, Claimants had an active role in the management of the BC and
KC plants.

 
 

et forth at paragraphs 181 to 236 of this Decision.

2 The Tribunal’s analysis is set forth at paragraphs 237 to 357 of this Decision.

11. The Tribunal concludes that there is no basis — in the BIT or in the authorities to which the
Parties make reference — to read a “remoteness” test into the definition of “investor”. The
Tribunal does not accept that Claimants were unaware of their investment. The Tribunal
also does not consider Claimants’ complex corporate structure to be sufficient, of itself, to
render the BIT inapplicable. Furthermore, the Tribunal does not consider the fact that
certain aspects of the ownership holding structure entail a beneficial, rather than a legal,
ownership, to be material to the jurisdictional issue.

12. The second aspect that Respondent raises relates to whether Claimants can be said to have
made an “investment” under the terms of the BIT. In particular, (1) that the investment did
not involve a capital contribution; (2) that the investment was short term in nature; and (3)
that the investment was made without the awareness of the Uzbek Government.

13. The Tribunal holds that there is nothing in the BIT, nor in the ICSID Convention, to provide
any foundation for Respondent’s argument that investment arrangements dependent on
credit facilities for their financing are not “investments”.

14. The Tribunal holds that there is nothing in the BIT, nor in the ICSID Convention, to provide
a foundation for Respondent’s argument that investments made with some measure of
intent to dispose, or possibly to dispose, of them in the short, rather than long, term do not
gain the protection of the BIT as “investments”.

15. The Tribunal does not find any support in the BIT or in the ICSID Convention for the
argument that there exists an “awareness requirement” for an investment to benefit from
the protection of the BIT. Rather, the BIT constitutes consent to arbitration for “investors”
who make “investments” in accordance with the general terms of the BIT. Specific co-
operation with, or awareness of, investors’ activity by the Host State government is not
necessary.

(3) The Third Jurisdictional Objection — Legality of the Investment

16. Respondent’s third objection is that Claimants’ investment was not made in compliance
with Uzbek legislation and that therefore such investment does not attract protection under
the BIT.

17. The language of Article 12 limits the “application” of the BIT to investments made in

compliance with the legislation of Uzbekistan. This legality requirement is limited to the
time at which the investment is made.

18. The term “legislation” in Article 12 of the BIT encompasses those actions regarded as
“law” by the Host State’s legal system which, on the basis of the record in this case, is

 

3 The Tribunal’s analysis is set forth at paragraphs 358 to 540 of this Decision.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

* The Tribunal’s analysis is

defined by the normative-legal acts set out in Article 5 of the Uzbekistan Law on
Normative-Legal Acts.

In the Tribunal’s view, there has been little satisfactory analysis as to the types of acts of
noncompliance that are encompassed within the legality requirement. The ordinary
meaning of the phrase “made in compliance with legislation” is inclusive and without
explicit substantive limitations. However, it is striking that no authority appears to argue
that the “legality requirement” is entirely without limits. The limitations on the substantive
scope of the terms in Article 12 become apparent when the ordinary meaning of the terms
is considered in their context and in light of the object and purpose of the Treaty.

In the Tribunal’s view, the interpretive task is guided by the principle of proportionality.
The Tribunal must balance the object of promoting economic relations by providing a
stable investment framework with the harsh consequence of entirely denying the
application of the BIT when the investment is not made in compliance with legislation.
The denial of the protections of the BIT is a harsh consequence that is a proportional
response only when its application is triggered by noncompliance with a law that results
in a compromise of a correspondingly significant interest of the Host State.

The Tribunal, by majority, finds that Respondent either has failed to establish that
Claimants were not in compliance with various laws or that such acts of noncompliance do
not result in a compromise of an interest that justifies, as a proportionate response, the
harshness of denying application of the BIT. The Tribunal also finds one alleged act of
noncompliance does not involve noncompliance with “legislation” as that term is defined
in Article 12.

(4) | The Fourth Jurisdictional Objection - Corruption

Respondent’s fourth objection is that Claimants procured their investment through
corruption and that the claim arising from an investment so procured is not, as a
consequence, admissible.*

Respondent first argues that an overpayment to Ms. Karimova of approximately US$8
million by Claimants disguised within the price for their acquisition of shares in KC and
BC constituted a bribe in violation of Article 211 of the Criminal Code.

The Tribunal concludes that it is difficult to assess whether or not any overpayment was
made because there is uncertainty in valuing the shares themselves. Moreover, even if there
were some overpayment, the mere fact of such an overpayment would not in and of itself
establish that the overpayment should be regarded as a bribe. Given the failure of

 

set forth at paragraphs 543 to 617 of this Decision.

25.

26.

27.

Respondent to establish the other elements of bribe-giving, the Tribunal need not decide
whether an overpayment was made or whether any such overpayment constitutes a bribe.
In particular, the Tribunal holds (1) Respondent has not substantiated its assertion that Ms.
Karimova was a government official during the relevant period so as to satisfy the
requirements of the Article 211 and (2) Respondent has not identified what, if any, action
that Ms. Karimova took or could have taken as a result of any Government position she
may have held, so as to advantage Claimants and thereby establish that the terms of Article
211 of the Criminal Code have been met.

Respondent, second, argues that the factual case put forward as regards Article 211 of the
Criminal Code is also such as to violate international public policy and thereby render the
claim inadmissible. The Tribunal concludes, on the basis of the record, that international
public policy, as applicable to this dispute, is in concordance with Article 211 of the Uzbek
Criminal Code and takes the bribery and corruption of government officials as its focus.
As noted above, Respondent did not establish that Ms. Karimova is a government official
and that, even if Ms. Karimova were a government official, Respondent failed to establish
that there was any advantage improperly sought by, or provided to, Claimants. Given these
findings, the Tribunal denies Respondent’s objection that a payment by Claimants to Ms.
Karimova was contrary to international public policy.

Respondent’s third allegation of corruption rests upon a payment of US$3 million to Mr.
Bizakov as a part of the complex and convoluted purchase transactions. Respondent argues
that this alleged bribe renders the claim inadmissible by virtue of the international public
policy against corruption. Respondent offers no evidence that Mr. Bizakov had or has any
relationship to the Government of Uzbekistan, or indeed had any contact with the
Government of Uzbekistan. Respondent solely points to Mr. Bizakov’s role as a conduit
between Claimants and Ms. Karimova (or her representative). Respondent likewise has
offered no evidence of any attempt by Mr. Bizakov to secure any advantage from the
Government of Uzbekistan by way of a bribe. The Tribunal does not find, on the basis of
its examination, any evidence of corruption so as to merit a conclusion that the transaction
was illegal or contrary to public policy.

(5) Costs

As to allocation of the costs of proceedings thus far, and in particular with respect to the
Anonymous Experts, it is the Tribunal’s view that Respondent’s Counsel failed to adopt
adequate procedures to ensure the integrity of the confidential information entrusted to it.
The Tribunal holds that Respondent is to bear the costs associated with the Anonymous
Experts in these proceedings. As to the conduct of Mr. Kim, a Claimant, during the July

28.

29.

30.

31.

5 The Tribunal’s analy:

2015 Hearing, the Tribunal is deeply troubled. This unacceptable conduct will be a factor
in the Tribunal’s final allocation of costs at a later stage in this proceeding.°

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
A. _ Registration of the Request for Arbitration

On 25 March 2013, ICSID received a hard copy of the Request for Arbitration dated 22
March 2013 submitted by Vladislav Kim, Pavel Borissov, Aibar Burkitbayev, Almas
Chukin, Lyazzat Daurenbekova, Adal Issabekov, Damir Karassayev, Aidan Karibzhanov,
Aigul Nurmakhanova, Kairat Omarov, Nikolay Varenko and Gulzhamash Zaitbekova
against the Republic of Uzbekistan with Factual Exhibits C-0001 to C-0022 and Legal
Authorities CL-0001 to CL-0002 (the “Request” or “RFA”).

On 24 April 2013, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request, as supplemented
by Claimants’ letter of 10 April 2013, in accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID
Convention and notified the Parties of the registration. In the Notice of Registration, the
Secretary-General invited the Parties to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon
as possible in accordance with Rule 7(d) of the Centre’s Rules of Procedure for the
Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings.

B. _ Establishment of the Tribunal

The Parties agreed to constitute the Tribunal in accordance with Article 37(2)(a) of the
ICSID Convention and that the Tribunal would consist of three arbitrators: one to be
appointed by each Party, and the third arbitrator and President of the Tribunal to be
appointed by agreement of the Parties.

On 17 October 2013, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”), notified the
Parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and the Tribunal was
constituted on that date. The Tribunal is composed of: Professor David D. Caron, a U.S.
national, President, appointed by agreement of the Parties; The Honourable L. Yves Fortier
PC, CC, OQ, QC, a Canadian, appointed by Claimant; and Mr. Toby Landau QC, a British
national, appointed by Respondent. That same day, Ms. Geraldine R. Fischer, ICSID Legal
Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal. On 13 April 2015, the Parties
agreed to the appointment of Ms. Natalia Mikolajcyk as the Assistant to the Tribunal. On
8 July 2016, the Parties agreed to the appointment of Dr. Cian C. Murphy to replace Ms.
Mikolajcyk as the Assistant to the Tribunal.

 

s set forth at paragraphs 618 to 639 of this Decision.

32.

33.

34.

35.

C. _ First Session

On 18 December 2013, the Tribunal held a first session with the Parties by video
conference. The Parties confirmed that the Members of the Tribunal had been validly
appointed. It was agreed, inter alia, that the applicable Arbitration Rules are those in effect
from 10 April 2006 and the procedural language is English. The Parties’ agreement on
procedural matters was memorialized in Procedural Order No. 1, which was issued on 6
January 2014.

D. Written and Oral Procedure

On 25 April 2014, Claimants filed a Memorial on the Merits, in accordance with the
approved modified procedural schedule, with the following supporting documents:

e Witness Statement of Mr. Poul Bech dated 24 April 2014;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Sergei Deneschuk dated 24 April 2014;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Vladislav Kim dated 24 April 2014 (“Kim I’);

e Witness Statement of Mr. Alexander Korobeinikov dated 24 April 2014;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Andrei Yorsh dated 24 April 2014;

e Expert Report of Professor Eric McGlinchey dated 7 April 2014 (“McGlinchey”);
e Expert Report of Professor William Butler dated 17 April 2014 (“Butler I’’);

e Expert Report of Navigant Consulting dated 25 April 2014;

e Factual Exhibits C-0023 to C-0363; and

e Legal Authorities CL-0003 to CL-0338.

On 22 May 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2 adopting the Parties’
amended procedural timetable.

On 1 August 2014, Respondent filed a Memorial on Preliminary Objections and
Request for Bifurcation with the following supporting documents:

e Witness Statement of Mr. Mukhtasarkhon Matkarimova dated 29 July 2014;

¢ Witness Statement of Mr. Dmitry Pak dated 29 July 2014 (“Pak I’);

36.

37.

38.

39.

e Witness Statement of Mr. Mukhtar Mukhamedov dated 31 July 2014;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Usmonali Ortikov dated 31 July 2014;

e Expert Report of Mr. Shavkat Mamatov dated 31 July 2014 (“Mamatoy I’);
e Expert Report of Mr. Timothy Hart dated 31 July 2014 (“Hart I’);

e Factual Exhibits R-0001 to R-0124; and

e Legal Authorities RL-0001 to RL-0062.

On 22 August 2014, Claimants filed their observations on Respondent’s Request for
Bifurcation with four enclosures. The Parties subsequently exchanged further
correspondence on whether the Tribunal should grant Claimants’ request that the Tribunal
defer its decision on bifurcation until after Claimants submitted their Counter-Memorial.

On 21 September 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 granting
Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation in respect of its first four (of five) objections to
jurisdiction, namely whether (1) Claimants are nationals of Kazakhstan, (2) whether
Claimants made an investment under the ICSID Convention and Article 1.2 of the BIT and (3)
whether the acquisition of BC and KC involved acts of corruption, and (4) whether the
acquisition of BC and KC involved fraud or other violations of Uzbekistan law. The fifth
objection raised by Respondent, that senior managers of BC have consistently bribed
Uzbek Government officials, was joined to the merits.

On 11 December 2014, Claimants filed a Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections
with the following supporting documents:

e Second Witness Statement of Mr. Sergei Deneschuk dated 5 December 2014;

e Second Witness Statement of Mr. Vladislav Kim dated 8 December 2014 (“Kim
II”);

e Unnamed Expert Report dated 9 December 2014;
e Factual Exhibits C-0364 to C-0521; and
e Legal Authorities CL-0339 to CL-0369.

On 30 December 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 concerning
Respondent’s 15 December 2014 motion to: “(1) exclude from the record the anonymous
expert report of Claimants’ ‘unnamed’ alleged expert; and (2) direct Claimants to resubmit

40.

their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction without any reference to that report”. The Tribunal
denied the Respondent’s request, finding that “several reports submitted [by Claimants]
pointing to political conditions within Uzbekistan as well as the citations to the alleged
treatment of other interested parties in this dispute prima facie [...] support Claimants’
assertion of a substantial risk to the expert assuming the identity of the expert is disclosed”.
The Tribunal confirmed that it would revisit the admissibility and probative value of the
Anonymous Expert Report as part of its deliberations on preliminary objections and invited
the Parties to make further submissions on these issues as part of their subsequent
scheduled pleadings.

On 2 March 2015, Respondent filed a Reply on Preliminary Objections with the
following supporting documents:

e Witness Statement of Mr. Akmaljon Valijonov dated 16 February 2015;

e Second Witness Statement of Mr. Usmonali Ortikov dated 25 February 2015;
e Witness Statement of Mr. Murat Khudayberganov dated 26 February 2015;

e Witness Statement of Mukhtasarkhon Matkarimova dated 26 February 2015;
e Second Witness Statement of Mr. Dmitry Pak dated 26 February 2015 (“Pak IT’);
e Witness Statement of Mr. Abdunabi Matkholikov dated 27 February 2015;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Pazlillo Tishabev dated 27 February 2015;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Shavkat Egamberdiev dated 28 February 2015;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Nodir Foziljonov dated 28 February 2015;

e Witness Statement of Ms. Gulchekhra Mamurova dated 28 February 2015;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Aliya Tshmatova dated 28 February 2015;

e Witness Statement of Mr. Rustam Yuldashev dated 28 February 2015;

e Second Expert Report of Mr. Shavkat Mamatov dated 17 February 2015
(“Mamatov IT’);

e Expert Report of Mr. Gary Born dated 25 February 2015 (“Born Expert
Report”);

e Expert Report of Professor Bernard Black dated 2 March 2015 (“Black”);

e Second Expert Report of Mr. Timothy Hart dated 2 March 2015;
e Expert Report of Mr. Daniel Nardello dated 2 March 2015;

e Factual Exhibits R-0125 to R-0263; and

e Legal Authorities RL-0063 to RL-0136.

Al. On 18 May 2015, Claimants filed a Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections with the
following supporting documents:

e Third Witness Statement of Mr. Sergei Deneschuk dated 13 May 2015;
e Third Witness Statement of Mr. Vladislav Kim dated 13 May 2015 (“Kim III’);

e Witness Statement of Ms. Aigul Nurmakhanova dated 15 May 2015
(“Nurmakhanova’”);

e Witness Statement of Mr. Michael Sauer dated 15 May 2015 (“Sauer”);

e Witness Statement of Ms. Gulzhamash Zaitbekova dated 15 May 2015
(“Zaitbekova”);

e Expert Report of Professor Craig Lewis dated 8 May 2015;

e Second Expert Report of Professor William Butler dated 9 May 2015 (“Butler
Ir);

e Second Expert Report of Professor Eric McGlinchey dated 10 May 2015;

e Second Expert Report of Navigant Consulting dated 13 May 2015 (“Navigant
Ir);

e Second Anonymous Expert Report dated 18 May 2015;

e Expert Report of Valery Knyazev dated 18 May 2015 (“Knyazev’);
e Expert Report of Mr. Robert Strahota dated 18 May 2015;

e Factual Exhibits C-0522 to C-0740; and

e Legal Authorities CL-0370 to CL-0447.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

47.

48.

49.

On 11 June 2015, Respondent submitted a letter requesting that Claimants’ Exhibit C-0719
be excluded from the record, as it is an expert opinion and not contemporaneous factual
evidence. Alternatively, Respondent asked to be given an opportunity to submit rebuttal
evidence and to cross-examine Mr. Demetriades.

During the pre-Hearing conference call on 30 June 2015, the Tribunal allowed Respondent
to file a rebuttal submission limited to the specific point raised in Exhibit C-0719 by 14
July 2015.

On 14 July 2015, Respondent submitted its rebuttal submission, including the Opinion of
Menelaos Kyprianou, Managing Partner of Michael Kyprianou & Co. LLC in Nicosia,
Cyprus, and relevant Cypriot and English law.

On 15 July 2015, Claimants, in a letter to the Tribunal, observed that Respondent’s rebuttal
submission went beyond the Tribunal's directions and raised points not addressed in
Exhibit C-0719, namely the validity of the unwritten trust arrangements between
Claimants. Claimants asked the Tribunal to strike Respondent’s rebuttal submission from
the record. Alternatively, Claimants asked the Tribunal that any rebuttal submission by
Respondent be entered into the record as an exhibit.

On 16 July 2015, the Tribunal requested Respondent’s comments by 17 July 2015. On 17
July 2015, Respondent, in a letter to the Tribunal, asked for the rebuttal submission to be
entered into the record as an expert opinion arguing that points raised in the rebuttal
submission, i.e. the validity of an oral trust agreement under Cyprus law, would have been
raised in the cross-examination of Mr. Demetriades.

After due consideration, the Tribunal concluded that Respondent’s rebuttal submission
goes beyond the Tribunal’s directions expressed during the pre-Hearing conference call.
Consequently, the Tribunal, in Procedural Order No. 8 (see paragraph 52 below) ordered
Respondent to file a rebuttal submission strictly limited to the one issue raised in the
Claimants’ exhibit and excluded Respondent’s rebuttal submission of 14 July 2015 from
the record.

On 21 June 2015, following several exchanges between the Parties, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 5 concerning various procedural matters regarding the Hearing and
document production matters. Therein, the Tribunal also decided that it would issue a
separate Order regarding Respondent’s renewed request to exclude the Anonymous Expert
Reports.

On 30 June 2015, the Tribunal held a pre-Hearing organizational meeting with the Parties
and the Secretary of the Tribunal by telephone conference.

50.

51.

52.

53.

On 1 July 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6, concerning Respondent’s
renewed request to exclude from the record Claimants’ Anonymous Expert Reports. The
Tribunal decided to pursue a phased approached for the examination of the Anonymous
Experts during the oral proceedings. In the initial phase, the two Anonymous Experts
would be permitted to testify in an “attorney’s eyes only” manner to allow the Tribunal to
assess fully the risks and consequences of revealing the Anonymous Experts’ identities.
During this initial phase, the identities of the Anonymous Experts would be disclosed only
to certain counsel upon signing a Non-Disclosure Agreement (“NDA”), and the
Anonymous Experts would be permitted to testify via video-link with representatives from
both Parties and the ICSID Secretariat present in the room.

On 15 July 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 7 ordering the sequestration
and separate examination of the Anonymous Experts at the upcoming oral proceeding,
deciding on the time allocation as well as permitting the submission of certain documents
while remaining seized of all other document production and submission requests to be
considered as necessary during the upcoming Hearing.

On 20 July 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 8, related to the evidence
provided by Mr. Demetriades and marked as Claimants’ Exhibit C-0719.

A Hearing on Preliminary Objections took place in Washington, D.C. from 28 July to 1
August 2015 ( “Hearing (Part I)”). In addition to the Members of the Tribunal, the
Secretary of the Tribunal and the Assistant to the Tribunal, present at the Hearing were:

For Claimants:

Counsel

- Mr. Michael Swainston, QC Brick Court Chambers
- Mr. Baiju S. Vasani Jones Day

- Ms. Melissa S. Gorsline Jones Day

- Ms. Tatiana Minaeva Jones Day

- Mr. Charles T. Kotuby Jr. Jones Day

- Ms. Sylvia Tonova Jones Day

- Mr. James Egerton-Vernon Jones Day

- Mr. Denis Olarou Jones Day

- Ms. Anastasiya Ugale Jones Day

- Ms. Lindsay Reimschussel Jones Day
- Ms. Maria I. Pradilla Picas Jones Day

- Ms. Allison Prevatt Jones Day
- Mr. Janai Orina Jones Day
- Mr. Tendai Mukau Jones Day
- Ms. Angela Dunay Jones Day

- Mr. Matthew Brewer

Claimants’ Representatives

- Ms. Aigul Nurmakhanova
- Mr. Almas Chukin

- Mr. Michael McNicholas

Fact Witnesses

- Mr. Vladislav Kim

- Ms. Gulzhamash Zaitbekova
- Mr. Michael Sauer

- Mr. Poul Bech

Experts

- Mr. Valery Knyazev

- Ms. Anastasia Mikhalitsyna
- Mr. Robert D. Strahota

- Mr. Brent C. Kaczmarek

- Mr. Kiran P. Sequeira

For Respondent:

Counsel

- Ms. Carolyn Lamm

- Ms. Andrea Menaker
- Mr. William Currier

- Mr. Adams Lee

- Mr. Frank Schweitzer
- Mr. Brody Greenwald
- Mr. Jared Hubbard

- Mr. Chauncey Bratt

- Ms. Larissa Eltsefon

- Ms. Jennifer Ivers

- Mr. Anthony Bestafka-Cruz
- Mr. Jeffrey Stellhorn

- Mr. Darien Salehy

- Ms. Erin Vaccaro

- Ms. Luca Winer

s. Kate Stillman

s. Stephanie Isaia

. Hannelore Sklar

. Galina Duckworth

ES

- M
- M

ez

Jones Day

Claimant
Claimant
Claimants’ Agent

Claimant

Claimant

Visor Holding
Chimpharm OJS, CFO

Haberman Ilett LLP
Haberman Ilett LLP
Strahota Capital Markets
Navigant Consulting, Inc.
Navigant Consulting, Inc.

White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP

54.

- Mr. Dmitry Savransky
- Mr. Alex Tararin

Respondent’s Representatives

- Minister Muzraf Ikramov

- Mr. Davronbek Akhmedov
- Mr. Sanjar Kasimov

- Mr. Jurabek Akhmedov

- Mr. Yunusali Shakirov

- Mr. Mukhtor Mukhamedov
- Mr. Usmonali Ortikov

- Mr. Kamol Muhtarov

Fact Witnesses
- Mr. Dmitry Pak

Experts
- Professor Bernard Black

- Mr. Timothy Hart
- Mr. Shavkat Mamatov

- Mr. David Meilstrup

White & Case LLP
White & Case LLP

Ministry of Justice of Uzbekistan

Ministry of Justice of Uzbekistan

Law Department of Cabinet of Ministers
State Committee for Privatization,
Demonopolization, and the Development of
Competition

Ferghana Securities Department

Tashkent Regional Prosecutor’s Office
Kuvasaycement OJSC

Embassy of the Republic of Uzbekistan to the
United States

Full Stock Group LLC

Northwestern University Law School and Kellogg
School of Management

Credibility International

Management Board of the Republican Stock
Exchange Tashkent

Credibility International

The following Fact Witnesses and Experts testified at the Hearing (Part I):

For Claimants

- Mr. Vladislav Kim (Claimants’ Fact Witness)

- Mr. Michael Sauer (Claimants’ Fact Witness)

- Ms. Gulzhamash Zaitbekova (Claimants’ Fact Witness)
- Mr. Poul Bech (Claimants’ Fact Witness)

- Mr. Valery Knyazek (Claimants’ Expert)

- Mr. Brent Kaczmarek (Claimants’ Expert)

For Respondent

- Mr. Dmitry Pak (Respondent’s Fact Witness)
- Mr. Timothy Hart (Respondent’s Expert)

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

During the Hearing (Part I), special arrangements were made for the Anonymous Experts
to testify via video-conference from an unidentified location with counsel from both sides
and a representative of the ICSID Secretariat present. Due to multiple disclosures by
Respondent’s counsel, the Anonymous Experts feared they would be identified and
declined to testify. As a result, the Tribunal decided that the Anonymous Experts would
testify at a later time.

In the course of the Hearing (Part I), counsel for Respondent became aware of a discussion
on social media in which one of Claimants had published on the same platform a
photograph surreptitiously taken of the Hearing and negative remarks about Respondent’s
Counsel.

The Claimant in question sent an apology for his behaviour. The Tribunal made clear to
participants that the Hearing was to continue in both strict confidentiality and with courtesy
towards all participants. The participants undertook to maintain appropriate professional
behavior thereafter.

Audio and video recordings were prepared of the Hearing (Part I) and the proceedings in
English and Russian were transcribed verbatim. The recordings and transcripts were later
distributed by the Centre to the Parties and the Members of the Tribunal.

On 7 August 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 9 concerning Respondent’s
request to introduce additional documents into the record and request Claimants to produce
additional documents.

On 5 October 2015, the President of the Tribunal, the Parties and the Secretary of the
Tribunal held a second pre-Hearing organizational meeting with the Parties by telephone
conference.

On 13 October 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 10 concerning
Respondent’s request to introduce new evidence into the record and require Claimants to
produce documents, as well as whether Claimants’ rebuttal evidence should be allowed
into the record.

On 19 October 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 11, which was subject to
the confidential “attorney’s eyes only” designation, concerning matters related to the
examination of the Anonymous Experts.

On 7 November 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 12, which was subject
to the confidential “attorney’s eyes only” designation, regarding the Anonymous Experts’
examination.

64. A second Hearing on Preliminary Objections took place in The Hague from 10 to 12
November 2015 (“Hearing (Part II)”). In addition to the Members of the Tribunal, the
Secretary of the Tribunal and the Assistant to the Tribunal, present at the hearing were:

For Claimants:

Counsel

- Mr. Michael Swainston QC Brick Court Chambers
- Mr. Baiju S. Vasani Jones Day

- Ms. Melissa S. Gorsline Jones Day

- Ms. Tatiana Minaeva Jones Day

- Mr. Denis Olarou Jones Day

- Ms. Lindsay Reimschussel Jones Day

- Ms. Maria I. Pradilla Picas Jones Day

- Mr. Firoz Ehsan Jones Day

Claimants’ Representatives

- Ms. Aigul Nurmakhanova Claimant

- Mr. Almas Chukin Claimant

- Mr. Michael McNicholas Claimants’ Agent

- Mr. Michael Sauer Visor Holding

Experts

- Mr. Robert D. Strahota Strahota Capital Markets

For Respondent:

Counsel

- Ms. Carolyn Lamm White & Case LLP
- Ms. Andrea Menaker White & Case LLP
- Mr. William Currier White & Case LLP
- Mr. Brody Greenwald White & Case LLP
- Mr. Jared Hubbard White & Case LLP
- Mr. Chauncey Bratt White & Case LLP
- Ms. Larissa Eltsefon White & Case LLP
- Ms. Jennifer Ivers White & Case LLP
- Mr. Anthony Bestafka-Cruz White & Case LLP
- Mr. Jeffrey Stellhorn White & Case LLP
- Ms. Erin Vaccaro White & Case LLP

Respondent’s Representatives

- Minister Muzraf Ikramov Ministry of Justice of Uzbekistan

- Mr. Davronbek Akhmedov Ministry of Justice of Uzbekistan

- Mr. Jurabek Akhmedov State Committee for Privatization,
Demonopolization, and the Development of
Competition

- Ms. Malika Pulatova Respondent’s Interpreter

- Mr. Alisher Khoshimov Respondent’s Interpreter

Experts

- Professor Bernard Black Northwestern University Law School and Kellogg
School of Management

- Mr. Shavkat Mamatov Management Board of the Republican Stock
Exchange Tashkent

65. The following Experts testified at the Hearing (Part II):

For Claimants
- Mr. Robert D. Strahota (Claimants’ Expert)

For Respondent
- Professor Bernard Black (Respondent’s Expert)
- Mr. Shavkat Mamatov (Respondent’s Expert)

66. On 11 November 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 13, which was subject
to the confidential “attorney’s eyes only” designation, regarding the Anonymous Experts’
Reports.

67. Audio and video recordings were prepared of the Hearing (Part II) and the proceedings in
English and Russian were transcribed verbatim. The recordings and transcripts were later
distributed by the Centre to the Parties and the Members of the Tribunal.

68. Although originally scheduled to testify in a phased approach at a separate session from
the Hearings, Claimants’ counsel subsequently notified the Tribunal that the Anonymous
Experts withdrew their Reports after certain confidential information that could
compromise their anonymity was again disclosed.

E. Post-Hearing Procedure
69. On 21 December 2015, the Parties filed simultaneous Post-Hearing Briefs.

70. On 22 December 2015, the Parties submitted their Submissions on Costs.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

F. Procedural History as to Anonymous Experts

A particular and unusual aspect of the procedural history merits separate examination from
the chronology set out in the preceding sections. Together with their Counter-Memorial on
Preliminary Objections dated 11 December 2014, Claimants submitted Exchange Report I
prepared by an anonymous individual (“Anonymous Expert I”).

In this report, the Anonymous Expert I provided reasons for the non-disclosure of his/her
name or other personal details. These reasons, in essence, were that the Anonymous Expert
I, and companies at which he/she is employed, might face greater scrutiny from the Uzbek
state, to the detriment of their business activities.°

On 30 December 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4, dealing with
Respondent’s request, made by letter dated 15 December 2014, to exclude the Exchange
Report I from the record. In this Order, the Tribunal denied Respondent’s request for the
time being, indicating, however, that such decision is strictly without prejudice to a full
consideration of the evidence and the probative value the Tribunal may give to the
statements in the Report.

In principle, the Tribunal agreed with Respondent that an expert opinion must be signed
and dated by the expert where the report contains the full name and address of the expert
as well as a description of the background, qualifications, training and experience of the
expert. The Tribunal also agreed that the burden of proving that the Tribunal should depart
from this principle is on the party proffering the anonymous expert report. However, the
Tribunal concluded that, prima facie, Claimants have submitted sufficient evidence not to
exclude the Anonymous Expert Report at this stage of the proceedings.

Further, in Procedural Order No. 4, the Tribunal invited Claimants to investigate and
suggest other effective ways to secure the Anonymous Expert I’s safety, while making
her/him available for examination during the Hearing. The Tribunal also noted that it would
revisit its decision not to exclude Exchange Report I (its admissibility and its probative
value) as a part of its deliberations on the preliminary objections.

In its Reply on Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction and Admissibility dated 2 March
2015, Respondent again requested for the anonymous expert testimony to be excluded from
the record. Alternatively, if the Tribunal decided to admit Exchange Report I, Respondent
argued that a more proportionate remedy would be to reveal Anonymous Expert I’s
identity, background and qualifications to Respondent’s counsel, with no such disclosure
being made to any of the client representatives.

© Exchange Report I, 4.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

Respondent argued that it must have the opportunity to challenge Anonymous Expert I’s
evidence by attacking her or his credibility through cross-examination. It further contended
that Claimants’ allegations regarding Respondent’s political and legal system are
generalized and Claimants had failed to meet their burden of proving that Anonymous
Expert I would be in danger if the identity were revealed. According to Respondent,
Claimants failed to establish that, the only way in which Claimants could produce
testimony in response to Respondent’s preliminary objection and simultaneously protect
the safety and security of the author of that testimony, was through an anonymous expert
report.

Additionally, together with the Reply on Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, Respondent submitted an Expert Report of Mr. Gary Born dated 25
February 2015 (“Born Expert Report”). In his report, Mr. Born raised the following
principal issues that must be considered with regard to anonymous expert testimony in
investment arbitration: first, procedural fairness; second, party’s right to challenge
evidence; third, challenging expert evidence through cross-examination; and fourth,
generally admitting anonymous expert evidence in the context of procedural fairness.

In sum, the Born Expert Report argues that there are two elements of procedural fairness:
the right to be heard and the right to equal treatment. The right to challenge evidence
submitted by the opposing party forms part of the fundamental right to be heard (rebuttal
evidence or cross-examination). Thus, a tribunal before whom evidence is proffered that
cannot be tested by the opposing party should refuse to take that evidence into account. In
Mr. Born’s view, an award of a tribunal that refuses to allow cross-examination, but
nevertheless takes the contested evidence into account, is subject to annulment.

The Born Expert Report points out that, as a rule, expert evidence must be authenticated in
order for the other party to be able to test it (e.g., IBA Rules Article 5.2(a)). Therefore, if a
tribunal is to receive, consider, and rely upon the statements of an individual, it is essential
to allow the opposing party and the tribunal to know who that person is, to have that
person’s attestation of truth and to understand the basis for a purported expert’s expertise.
In the absence of this information, it is impossible for the opposing party to properly test
the veracity, competence and integrity of the expert’s evidence.

The Born Expert Report thus concludes that the threshold for admitting anonymous expert
evidence in an investment arbitration is very high. In other words, the tribunal should only
interfere with a party’s right to procedural fairness, if the evidence before it demonstrates
a clear and compelling risk of significant negative consequences for the witness (e.g.,
protecting a life of the witness, state security issues involved).

To offer a solution, Mr. Born looks to the principle of proportionality. He argues that, if
specific threats to the witness’s security exist, proportionality and non-discrimination

19

83.

84.

85.

86.

principles require consideration of other/less intrusive means to achieve a party’s goal to
submit the relevant evidence. For instance: (a) Claimants to find an expert from a country
with a similar stock exchange system; (b) expertise from an individual who worked at the
Uzbek stock market in the past, but now lives outside of the country; or (c) a hybrid of
options (a) and (b).

Bearing in mind the above, the Born Expert Report suggests two solutions for the Tribunal
to consider: (1) disclosure only to Respondent’s counsel meaning disclosure of the
unnamed expert’s identity, background and qualifications supported by Respondent’s
undertaking not to disclose the identity of the expert witness (procedure similar to
situations where highly confidential commercial information is revealed); or (2) disclosure
to both Respondent’s counsel and Respondent’s expert (meaning disclosure of the
unnamed expert’s identity, background and qualifications supported by a. strict
confidentiality agreement).

In response to Respondent’s solutions offered in its Reply to Preliminary Objections on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Claimants indicated in their Rejoinder on Preliminary
Objections dated 18 May 2015 that the Anonymous Experts I and II would be willing to
disclose their identities and testify in person, provided that: (1) they present their testimony
in the “‘attorneys’ eyes only”; (2) Respondent’s counsel sign an NDA to keep the experts’
identity and credentials confidential from (i) Respondent; (ii) Respondent’s witnesses who
are Uzbek citizens or reside in Uzbekistan; (iii) any other person who possesses Uzbek
citizenship or currently resides in Uzbekistan; and (iv) any person outside this arbitration
process; (3) Respondent’s counsel indemnify the experts should either of them suffer any
adverse effects as a result of a breach of the NDA; (4) Claimants seek separate agreements
with the court reporters and translators; (5) the Tribunal issues an order confirming the
NDA and the arrangements for the testimony and confirming that the Tribunal will
maintain confidentiality of the information; (6) the experts be allowed to testify either (i)
in person in Moscow or Almaty, or (ii) via Skype from an undisclosed location; and (7)
any confidential information be redacted and not disclosed to Prohibited Persons as defined
under the NDA.

However, with the same Rejoinder, Claimants further submitted Exchange Report II, in
which it was disclosed that Exchange Report I was in fact co-authored by two anonymous
individuals (Anonymous Expert I and Anonymous Expert II, together the “Anonymous
Experts”).”

In reaction to this disclosure, Respondent in its letter of 3 June 2015 argued that Claimants
and their counsel acted in bad faith and with lack of candor. Respondent again asked the

7 Exchange Report II, 2.

20

87.

88.

89.

90.

Tribunal to exclude Exchange Reports I and II or, alternatively, requested to be provided
with the identities and curricula vitae of the Anonymous Experts.

In response, Claimants in their letter dated 11 June 2015 indicated that they were truly
unable to present their arguments without the anonymous testimony and asked the Tribunal
to wait until after the Hearing, or at least until there was no possibility of testimony by the
Anonymous Experts, before the Tribunal determines whether the reports are actually
‘unauthenticated’. Claimants also submitted that the Tribunal should allow for the
“attorney’s eyes only” solution suggested by Mr. Born and outlined in detail in Claimants’
Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections.

After due consideration of the Parties’ arguments and the unique circumstances of the case,
the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6 on 1 July 2015, in which the Tribunal agreed
with the Parties at the outset that procedural fairness and equal treatment of the parties
constitute fundamental principles underlying arbitration proceedings. The Tribunal further
agreed that one party’s right to challenge evidence (either by rebuttal evidence or cross-
examination) submitted by the opposing party is inherent in that party’s right to be heard.
The Tribunal similarly agreed that any departure from these principles is subject to the
highest scrutiny and must be balanced against the ability of both parties to present their
case in full and any danger to the potential witness that may be involved.

Favoring a solution to be mutually agreed by the Parties, the Tribunal decided in its
Procedural Order No. 6 to approach the issue in a phased manner and as an initial matter
to adopt an “attorney’s eyes only” solution as follows:

i. Claimants were to provide Respondent with a draft NDA. The Tribunal also
observed that it did not see the necessity to include in the NDA the indemnity clause
requested by Claimants. The Tribunal was of the view that Respondent’s counsel
undertaking not to disclose the identity of Anonymous Expert I and Anonymous
Expert II should constitute a sufficient measure of protection.

ii. Claimants were to provide Respondent’s counsel with a confidentiality agreement
to be signed by the court reporters and the translators.

iii. The Tribunal directed the Parties to provide it with a signed draft of the NDA at the
earliest convenience.

iv. The Tribunal directed Claimants to provide Respondent and the Tribunal with
complete curricula vitae of Anonymous Expert I and Anonymous Expert II,
including (but not limited to) their identities and qualifications, upon the conclusion
of the NDA.

At this initial stage, the Tribunal confirmed that both Anonymous Expert I and Anonymous

Expert II were to be made available to give testimony at the Preliminary Hearing via a
video link. To ensure procedural fairness, the Tribunal confirmed that Respondent must be

21

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

given the opportunity to have its representative present in the room, from which the two
Anonymous Experts would be testifying.

Finally, the Tribunal underlined that, its initial willingness to allow the Anonymous
Experts to testify in the “‘attorney’s eyes only” approach as described above, did not in any
way impede the Tribunal’s discretion to exclude this evidence from the record, should the
Tribunal decide this was justified under the circumstances.

On 15 July 2015, the Parties signed the NDA, identifying “confidential information” and
setting out the Parties’ obligations with regard to the handling of such confidential
information in the course of the arbitration.

On 15 July 2015, taking into account the Parties’ arguments with respect to the
sequestration of the Anonymous Experts,*® the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 7.
Given the unusual circumstances surrounding the examination of the Anonymous Experts,
the Tribunal ordered that they be presented and examined separately, and be accompanied
by the necessary sequestration arrangements.

However, during the Hearing (Part I), two (both accepted-as-inadvertent) disclosures of
confidential information by Respondent’s Counsel, as proscribed by the Confidentiality
Agreement, occurred. In light of this, and after numerous discussions with both Parties’
counsels, it was decided that the Anonymous Experts would give their testimony at a later
stage.

Subsequently, on 5 October 2015, the President of the Tribunal, the Secretary of the
Tribunal, and the Parties held a conference call, during which counsel for Respondent
indicated that it intended to use publicly available documents, not on the record of this
arbitration, during its cross-examination of the Anonymous Experts in Phase I. Claimants’
Counsel requested to be provided with the documents reasonably in advance and a
discussion ensued. The President of the Tribunal requested the Parties to submit their brief
written commentary on the issue by 9 October 2015.

On 6 October 2015, Respondent submitted its request to use publicly available documents,
not on the record, during its Phase I cross-examination of the Anonymous Experts.
Respondent indicated in its letter that Respondent had located these documents only after
the limited information regarding the Anonymous Experts was revealed to them and that
they concerned “the bona fides of the Anonymous Experts as independent experts and their
alleged reasons for requesting anonymity”.

8 See Parties’ letters regarding the sequestration of the Anonymous Experts dated respectively 10 and 13 July 2015.

22

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

On 9 October 2015, Claimants submitted their objection to Respondent’s request.
Claimants indicated that there were no exceptional circumstances allowing for such a late
introduction of the said documents on the record and that allowing Respondent to
“impeach” Claimants’ experts by surprise would be a violation of Claimants’ due process
rights in these proceedings. Thus, Claimants asked the Tribunal to either (1) deny
Respondent’s request to cross examine the Anonymous Experts with the proposed
impeachment documents or any other materials not in the record; or (2) order Respondent
to immediately produce the proposed impeachment documents, along with any other
documents or evidentiary materials that it planned to use during the upcoming Hearing,
while providing Claimants with an opportunity for rebuttal.

Consequently, on 19 October 2015 the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 11, in which
it granted Respondent’s request to add the impeachment documents to the record and to
order Respondent to produce the said documents at its earliest convenience. The Tribunal
also granted Claimants’ request to submit rebuttal evidence and ordered Claimants to
produce such rebuttal documents at its earliest convenience.

After reviewing the new documents submitted by Respondent, in their letter of 30 October
2015, Claimants raised a number of points in order to argue that there was no good reason
for Respondent to introduce at such a late stage new documents to be used for the cross-
examination of the Anonymous Experts. Claimants further indicated that given the inability
to predict the line of Respondent’s argumentation during their cross, Claimants were unable
to fully respond with their rebuttal evidence. Thus, Claimants asked the Tribunal to be
allowed to produce further rebuttal evidence, if necessary, with their Post-Hearing Briefs.

In response, in a letter of 3 November 2015, Respondent indicated that Claimants’
characterization of the “impeachment evidence” and the manner in which Respondent
introduced this into the record contained a number of misrepresentations. Specifically,
Respondent focused on Claimants’ contentions regarding the documents used for the cross-
examination of Mr. Knyazev. Respondent also objected to Claimants’ request to submit
further rebuttal evidence with Post-Hearing Briefs. Respondent indicated that it would be
impermissible to require it to set out in advance its arguments and that submission of further
rebuttal evidence with Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief would be impractical and not
warranted under the circumstances.

On 2 November 2015, in a letter to the Tribunal, this time Claimants brought to the
Tribunal’s attention that on 23 October 2015 at 8:31 PM, Respondent’s Counsel had sent
an email to the Tribunal — which also copied an Uzbek Government official — attaching
edited transcripts and including confidential information regarding the Anonymous
Experts.

23

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

As a consequence, Claimants informed the Tribunal that the Anonymous Experts had
informed Claimants’ Counsel that they were no longer willing to testify in this arbitration
under any circumstances. As explained by Claimants’ Counsel, the Anonymous Experts
believed that Respondent’s Counsel could not be trusted to preserve their anonymity and
further, they were concerned that if they testified, they would be exposed to extreme danger
—aconcern which Claimants’ Counsel submitted was fully justified.

In response, in its letter of 4 November 2015, Respondent informed the Tribunal that its
client had deleted the email without reading it or opening its attachments. Respondent’s
Counsel also contended that the transcripts at issue did not, in fact, contain any information
that was not previously disclosed or that could be used to identify the Anonymous Experts,
their whereabouts, or the location of the Hearing (Part I).

Therefore, Respondent asked the Tribunal to: (1) order the Anonymous Experts to testify
in person at the scheduled Hearing (Part I); (2) alternatively, order the Anonymous Experts
to testify by video-link, but only in the event that the Tribunal concluded that there were
valid grounds for the Anonymous Experts to refuse to testify in person as scheduled; and
(3) if the Anonymous Experts refused to testify at the Hearing (Part I) as ordered by the
Tribunal, exclude their reports from the record or accord them no weight, and allocate
Hearing time for Respondent to present its impeachment evidence and arguments.

In their letter of 5 November 2015, Claimants’ Counsel firmly denied the various
allegations regarding the alleged underlying reasons for the Anonymous Experts’ refusal
to give testimony at the upcoming hearing. Claimants’ Counsel further confirmed that the
Anonymous Experts were not willing to testify due to their safety concerns and again asked
the Tribunal that, nonetheless, the Anonymous Experts’ written evidence be kept on the
record and given full weight.

On 7 November 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 12 rejecting
Respondent’s first request that the Tribunal order the Anonymous Experts to appear for
cross-examination at the designated Hearing (Part I) location as initially scheduled. At the
same time, the Tribunal invited the Parties, and Claimants’ Counsel in particular, to explore
the possibility of video-link testimony by the Anonymous Experts.

By way of Claimants’ email of 7 November 2015, the Tribunal and Respondent were
informed that the Anonymous Experts were not willing to further testify in this arbitration
under any circumstances. Claimants’ Counsel conveyed two overriding concerns that were
presented by the Anonymous Experts. First, the Anonymous Experts were concerned that
Respondent already knew their identity. Second, even if Respondent was to be taken at its
word that the email containing confidential information had been deleted without review,
the Anonymous Experts no longer had any confidence that the existing arrangements that

24

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

had been put in place to protect their identities would effectively serve their purpose going
forward.

In an email of 7 November 2015, Respondent’s Counsel advised the Tribunal that it did
not acquiesce to the alleged facts underlying the Anonymous Experts’ decision.

The Claimants contacted the Anonymous Experts to ascertain whether they were willing
to appear by video link as an alternative. The Anonymous Experts declined to appear by
video link for the same reasons, as explained above.

During the Hearing (Part II), the Tribunal noted that the Anonymous Experts had not
withdrawn their expert reports from the record, despite their refusal to testify in these
proceedings. The Tribunal thus asked Counsel for Claimants whether the Anonymous
Experts, in declining to appear, appreciated that they could also withdraw their reports.
Counsel for Claimants indicated that the Anonymous Experts appreciated that the Tribunal
might exclude their reports or not give them any weight as a consequence of their
nonappearance.

On 11 November 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 13, which directed
Claimants’ Counsel to contact expeditiously the Anonymous Experts to reiterate that their
expert reports remained a part of the record in this proceeding at the present time and,
putting aside possible contract issues between the experts and Claimants, to ask whether
they wished the expert reports to be withdrawn, assuming that the anonymity they
requested was allowed.

The Tribunal took into account the fact that the Anonymous Experts had expressed a fear
of retaliation as a possible consequence of the expert opinions they had submitted to the
Tribunal, and that thereafter they had not agreed to appear for examination because of the
fear expressed. The Tribunal was also concerned that it had a responsibility to ensure the
good order and fairness of these proceedings.

On 12 November 2015, Claimants’ Counsel informed the Tribunal that the Anonymous
Experts wanted to withdraw their reports, even if the Tribunal would provide them
anonymity, because of the reasons previously stated.” Notwithstanding this request by the
Anonymous Experts, Claimants’ Counsel asked that these reports remain part of the record
in this arbitration.!°

After a break for deliberations, on the same day, the Tribunal informed the Parties of its
decision to withdraw Exchange Report I and Exchange Report II from the record in their

° Second Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 4, p. 302:2-8.
© Second Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 4, p. 303:4-14.

25

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

entirety, including the exhibits that were part of those Expert Reports.'! Upon Claimants’
request, the Tribunal gave permission to Claimants to make a motion to add to the record
certain exhibits relied upon by Anonymous Expert I and Anonymous Expert II as
Claimants’ exhibits. !”

On 17 November 2015, in a letter to the Tribunal, Claimants, inter alia, requested to have
a number of documents, previously cited in Exchange Reports I and II, readmitted into the
record. Claimants argue that the majority of the exhibits cited were also extensively cited
in the Parties’ pleadings and in other expert reports. Further, Claimants contended that the
readmission of the exhibits to the record would not result in any prejudice to Respondent.

In a letter to the Tribunal of 25 November 2015, Respondent confirmed that it did not
object to Claimants’ request that the Tribunal readmit to the record the exhibits referenced
in the Anonymous Experts’ reports.

In its decision regarding the exclusion of the Anonymous Experts’ reports from the record,
the Tribunal took into account the following considerations.

First, the Tribunal considered the Anonymous Experts’ request for the reports to be
withdrawn from the record, even if the Experts’ anonymity was to be preserved. The
Tribunal also noted that the Experts wished Respondent to be informed of the fact that their
reports have been withdrawn.

Second, the Tribunal considered Claimants’ request for the reports to remain on the record,
notwithstanding the Experts’ request described above. Claimants’ position is that they
have obtained the Anonymous Expert evidence in good faith and that it thus should benefit
from the appropriate weight and stay on the record.

The Tribunal also considered Respondent’s position set out earlier during the Hearing
regarding the Experts’ anonymity as well as the overall circumstances leading to the
Experts’ request to have their reports withdrawn.

As noted in Procedural Order No. 13, the Tribunal may not ignore the continuing
representations of fears of professional or personal retaliation held by the Anonymous
Experts. Further, as recalled in that same Order, the Tribunal holds that it has a
responsibility to ensure the good order and fairness of these proceedings.

In light of the above circumstances, the Tribunal finds it difficult to reconcile Claimants’
request that the Anonymous Experts’ reports be retained as part of the record with the
Experts asking to have them withdrawn. The Tribunal also appreciates the difficulty in

'! Second Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 4, pp. 310:21-311:3.
2 Second Hearing on Preliminary Objections, Day 4, pp. 311:5-312:2.

26

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

which the Respondent’s Counsel would find itself towards its client should the reports be
given weight by the Tribunal even though the Anonymous Experts asked for Respondent
to be informed about their decision to withdraw the reports. Consequently, and on balance,
as communicated to the Parties during the Hearing, the Tribunal decides to exclude the
Anonymous Experts’ reports from the record.

In turn, the Tribunal appreciated the duties of candor and professionalism that Claimants’
Counsel owes to its clients. The Tribunal also notes the difficult circumstances that led to
the withdrawal of their reports by the Anonymous Experts. The Tribunal thus grants
Claimants’ request for the exhibits listed in the Annex A to remain as part of the record in
this arbitration. The Tribunal notes in this respect that the said exhibits already are
designated as Claimants’ factual or legal exhibits and were referred to and/or relied upon
by both Parties in the course of these proceedings. Therefore, the Tribunal believes that
should these exhibits remain on the record, they will not cause any prejudice to
Respondent.

The issue of the allocation of costs associated with the Anonymous Experts is addressed
infra in Part XI of this Decision.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The factual background differs in considerable respects as between Claimants’ and
Respondent’s representations. This section provides a summary of those representations
insofar as they relate to Claimant’s acquisition of the BC and KC plants in Uzbekistan and
Respondent’s objections to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction. The different representations of the
factual background pervade the arguments on jurisdiction throughout this award. An
additional exposition of the factual background as it relates to the merits of this claim will
be necessary in the award on the merits.

A. Claimants’ Representation of the Factual Background

Claimants’ position describes a good faith investment in the Uzbek cement industry that
led to a campaign of harassment by the Uzbek Government against Claimants’ business
interests. The campaign involved arrests, the seizure of company documents and assets,
and the bringing of criminal and civil proceedings against Claimants’ companies and
certain of the managers of those companies.

Claimants maintain that they hold a portfolio of cement manufacturing assets, including
BC and KC, cement plants, and related assets, in Kazakhstan, Kyrgystan, and Russia. These
assets are held through a Cypriot holding company, UCG, and, in the case of BC and KC,
its Cypriot subsidiaries — Raycross Limited (“Raycross”), Raybird Limited (“Raybird”),

27

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

133.

and Rayblock Limited (“Rayblock”) (Raycross, Raybird, and Rayblock, together: the
“Ray Companies”).

In 2005, Claimants were in the process of growing the cement sector of their investment
portfolios.!? In Spring of that year, they learned from Mr. Nurlan Bizakov, a prominent
businessman, that there may be an opportunity to complement their growing cement
holding with the BC and KC plants in Uzbekistan. '*

Claimants set up an informal sub-committee to oversee the potential acquisition of BC and
KC (the “Working Group”) and negotiations commenced via the intermediation of Mr.
Bizakov.

The price of US$33.98 million for BC and KC together was deemed a reasonable price by
both Claimants and Sellers. '°

Following from Claimant’s perceived limitations of the Tashkent Stock Exchange
(“TSE”), relating to spread limits and investment protection, Claimants and Sellers entered
into two complementary agreements:

e The Tashkent Share Purchase Agreements executed by the brokers to record title
transfer in the shares on the TSE (“Tashkent SPAs”); and

e The English Share Purchase Agreements negotiated by the parties and containing the
additional protections required by the Claimants (“English SPAs”).'°

Mr. Kim, acting on behalf of the Claimants’ subsidiaries, Kaden Invest Ltd. (“Kaden”)
and Nabolena Ltd. (“Nabolena’’), was introduced to a broker at the TSE, Mr. Pak, whose
only colleague at the brokerage firm Tenet Invest, Mr. Allakverdyan, represented Sellers. !7

On 16 January 2006, Mr. Kim signed the Agency Agreements, whereby brokers were able
to complete the transaction by “matching” buyers’ and sellers’ terms on the stock
exchange. On the basis of that matched transaction, the brokers filled out the transaction
card, executed the Tashkent SPAs, and informed Mr. Kim and Sellers of the completed
deal report.

8 See Saur, { 12.

4 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {| 10; Nurmakhanova, { 17.
'5 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 4 12-13.

‘6 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 14.

"7 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 15.

28

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

 

When the deal was done, Claimants also contracted to pay Mr. Bizakov his commission of
US$3 million for introducing them to the opportunity.'*

Between the spring of 2006 and 2007, Claimants proceeded to increase their majority
stakes in BC and KC by acquiring minority shareholdings.' After further acquisitions of
cement plants in 2006 and 2007, Claimants restructured their cement holdings under the
umbrella of UCG in 2008.”°

Between 2006 and 2010 Claimants invested “over US$127 million in the modernization
and improvement of BC’s and KC’s production facilities”.?! This led to an increase in
production capacity and profitability of the plants. On foot of this increase in production
capacity Claimants secured debt financing “in excess of US$320 million from
Kazkommertsbank (the largest bank in Kazakhstan)”.

Claimants began to prepare for an initial public offering (“IPO”) of UCG. As part of these
preparations Claimants had to produce audited accounts of UCG. At that point, Claimants
had to make a choice between maintaining the complete confidentiality of the BC and KC
acquisitions, as insisted upon by Sellers, and providing auditors with financial information
on the transactions for the purposes of the UCG accounts. Claimants provided UCG’s
auditors with the Tashkent SPAs, rather than the English SPAs, as part of this process.

From early in 2010, Claimants’ business interests were subject to a campaign of harassment
by Respondent. The harassment took place under the guise of official and lawful action by
offices and agencies of the Uzbek Government but was done in violation of national law
and in violation of Respondent’s obligations under the BIT.

Claimants’ BC cement production facilities were subject to criminal and regulatory
investigations. These investigations led to the arrest and detention of employees at
Claimants’ cement production facilities, disruption of business activities, and confiscation
of company property. In June 2011, BC and four of its managers were found guilty of
criminal charges by an Uzbek criminal court. Furthermore, the court held that a 51%
shareholding in BC was to be given over to the Uzbek Government. This expropriation of
Claimants’ investment in BC was done without substantive or procedural due process.
Claimants’ attempts to achieve redress through the Uzbek courts were unsuccessful. As a
result of these actions by the Uzbek Government, Claimants have lost their majority

Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {{ 17.
Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 18.

 

2© €-0332, Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {| 19; see IPA Roadshow Presentation, United Cement
Group, Plc. dated February 2010, slide 4.

2! Claimants’ Request for Arbitration, {[ 5.

2 Claimants’ Request for Arbitration, {| 6.

2 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 20; see Zaitbekova, {| 17-20.

29

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

shareholding in BC and, as a consequence of further Uzbek Government actions, consider
their minority shareholding to have lost all value.

Claimants’ KC cement production facilities were, in the course of the legal proceedings
involving BC, subject to a similar campaign of criminal and regulatory investigations.
Uzbek prosecutors ordered the seizure of currency in KC’s accounts. The Uzbek
Government brought a civil claim to seek the transfer of 12% of Claimants’ shares in KC
to over 1,400 individuals that the Uzbek Government claims were deceived or coerced into
selling their shares. After a final hearing that was conducted without substantive or
procedural due process, a judge found for the Government-supported individuals. As a
result of these actions, Claimants have lost a significant proportion of the shareholding in
KC.

In sum, as a result of Respondent’s actions, Claimants have suffered losses in their interests
in BC and KC. They have also been made liable to debt repayments to Kazkommertsbank
for the debt financing that may be enforced against Claimants’ other interests. Claimants
therefore seek damages that they anticipate to be “no less than US$500 million” from
Respondent.”+

B. _ Respondent’s Representation of the Factual Background

Respondent denies Claimants’ representation of the factual background. Respondent
counters with a narrative of a sham investment involving corruption and fraud by Claimants
in violation of Uzbek law and to the detriment of existing shareholders in BC and KC.

Respondent argues that there is no evidence that Claimants held shares in BC or KC or that
they were in control of the various companies in the complex corporate structure that
Claimants purport to use to manage their investments in the cement industry in Uzbekistan
and other markets.

Insofar as Claimants purport to control the investment vehicles known as Kaden and
Nabolena, Claimants made false disclosure as regards the agreed purchase price of the BC
and KC shares, and therefore violated Uzbek law and committed securities fraud. This was
done by Claimants to evade taxes, fees to the stock exchange, and to improperly improve
the prospects of the IPO that Claimants sought for UCG.7>

The false disclosures to the TSE also enabled Claimants to use UGC to obtain a large bank
loan from Kazkommertsbank and thereby to pay distributions to its shareholders.”°

Claimants’ Request for Arbitration, {| 18.
25 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {{] 88-94.
26 Respondent’ s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {] 95-97.

30

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.

153.

154.

Claimants subsequently coerced minority shareholders of BC and KC stock to sell their
shares at prices far below what Claimants had paid for the majority shares. Mr. Deneschuk,
then General Manager at KC, threatened employees with the loss of their jobs if they
refused to sell to Claimants at the price Claimants had set.””

Claimants also made an off-the-books, offshore payment of US$33.98 million to
Ambassador Gulnara Karimova, in exchange for a relationship of trust and her influence
on her father, the then-President of Uzbekistan.*

Claimants’ alleged subsidiary, Caspian Resources, coordinated BC’s systematic bribing of
numerous Uzbek Government officials. To do so, Caspian Resources organized a secret
“black cash” fund, which BC funded through fraudulent payments to consulting companies
controlled by Caspian Resources.”?

In light of the illegal activities by BC and KC, the Uzbek Government brought criminal
proceedings against the managers of BC and against the Uzbek Government officials who
participated in Claimants’ bribery scheme. *°

Claimants’ Request for Arbitration lacks merit and, furthermore, is an improper invocation
of the BIT for the reasons set out at paragraphs 167-172 of this decision.

C. — Tribunal’s Preliminary Comment on the Factual Background

While much of the factual background to the dispute is contested by the Parties, there is a
degree of congruence between the accounts as regards certain aspects.

First, Claimants and Respondent agree that acquisitions of shares in BC and KC took place
by certain undertakings.

Second, Claimants and Respondent agree that there were two sets of agreements (the
Tashkent SPAs and the English SPAs) used to effect these acquisitions of shares.

Third, Claimants and Respondent also agree that a substantial time after the acquisitions
the Uzbek Government has taken certain actions against BC and KC as a result of
regulatory and criminal investigations.

27 Respondent’ s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {ff 78-87.
28 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {9 98-102.
2 Respondent’ s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, | 103.

8 Respondent’ s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, { 103.

31

155.

156.

157.

158.

159.

Vv.

160.

However, there are significant differences in the representations as regards the motivations
and intentions of both Claimants and Respondent in respect of these and other actions taken
by the Parties.

The differences in the Parties’ accounts go directly to the resolution of Respondent’s
preliminary objections. The Tribunal resolves these disputes as regards the factual
background in its consideration, below, of four of Respondent’s five preliminary
objections. The fifth preliminary objection, that senior managers of BC have consistently
bribed Uzbek Government officials, is joined to the merits.

The Tribunal will return to the factual background in its consideration of the merits.
SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS AND REQUEST FOR RELIEF
In its Memorial on Preliminary Objections, Respondent requests that the Tribunal
[I]ssue a Decision on Jurisdiction on Admissibility dismissing all of
Claimants’ claims, and awarding Respondent its full costs and
expenses associated with defending against Claimants’ claims.*!

In their Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, Claimants ask the Tribunal to:

(a) Dismiss each of Respondent’s four preliminary objections to
jurisdiction;

(b) Award Claimants all of their legal fees and all of their costs and
expenses incurred in the jurisdictional stage of these proceedings;
and

(c) Grant such other relief as the Tribunal considers appropriate.**
THE JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBUNAL

This Tribunal is constituted under the ICSID Convention. Both Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan
are State Parties to the Convention.** The Convention provides, at Article 25(1), as follows:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State
(or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State

3! Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, | 255.

*» Claimants
*3 Kazakhstan signed the ICSID Convention on 23 July 1992, deposited its

Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 285.

 

  

instrument of ratification on 21 September

2000, with the Convention's entry into force falling on 21 October 2000. Uzbekistan signed the ICSID Convention
on 14 March 1994, deposited its instrument of ratification on 26 July 1995, with the Convention’s entry into force
falling on 25 August 1995.

32

161.

162.

163.

164.

designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing
to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their consent,
no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

It is for Claimants to establish the basis of jurisdiction of an ICSID Tribunal. Consent by
the Parties may be found in a variety of written instruments. The offer to arbitrate may be
in one written instrument and the acceptance in another.

Claimants base the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the BIT and the ICSID Convention.**
The two State Parties to the Treaty — Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan — provide their consent
to arbitration in the Treaty. This consent is contained in the form of an offer to arbitrate
claims made by investors of one State Party as regards treaty breaches by the agents of the
other State Party.** Claimants accepted Uzbekistan’s offer to arbitrate by submitting their
Request to ICSID.*°

Article 41(1) of the Arbitration Rules states that objections to a Tribunal’s jurisdiction
“shall be made as early as possible”. Respondent timely filed its Memorial on Preliminary
Objections and Request for Bifurcation on 1 August 2014.

A. — Claimant’s Assertion as to Jurisdiction

Claimants seek arbitration before ICSID on the basis of the BIT and the ICSID Convention.
Article 10 of the BIT states:

Each Contracting Party hereby consents to the referral of any legal
dispute between one Contracting Party and an investor from the
other Contracting Party’ s State in respect of investments made by it
within the territory of the former Contracting Party to one of the
following institutions:

[.]

c) the International Centre for Development [sic: Settlement] of
Investment Disputes, if both Contracting Parties shall be members
of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States, opened for signature
on 18 March 1965 in Washington, Dc.*”

* C-0001, BIT.

55 €-0001, BIT, Art. 10.

Claimants’ Request for Arbitration, | 133.
37. €-0001, BIT, Art. 10.

33

165. Claimants assert that have met the BIT’s jurisdictional requirements as they are qualified
“investors” from Kazakhstan who have made an “investment” in Uzbekistan through their
acquisition and development of the BC and KC cement plants in the Host State. Claimants
therefore contend that arbitration before ICSID is available to them for the resolution of
their dispute with Uzbekistan.**

166. Claimants contend that they have met the jurisdictional requirements established in Article
25 of the ICSID Conventions as:

B.

Uzbekistan is a Contracting State to the ICSID Convention and Claimants are
nationals of Kazakhstan, another Contracting State to the ICSID Convention;*?

Claimants and Respondent have a “legal dispute” regarding Claimants’ legal rights
under the Treaty, relevant Uzbekistan and international laws, and violation of such
rights by Respondent;*°

The dispute arises directly out of Claimants’ investment in BC and KC, because
of actions taken by Respondent. Claimants underscore that although there is not
definition of the term “investment” under the ICSID Convention, the term is
widely accepted to have a broad meaning, which Claimants meet. According to
Claimants, they “have continuously invested in Uzbekistan since 2006 and have
poured over US$139.8 million into BC and KC[, including] invest[ing] heavily in
the improvement of the efficiency and productivity of the cement plants, turning
them into highly profitable enterprises employing hundreds of local Uzbek
workers and supplying cement in the country for construction of important
infrastructure” ;*! and

The Parties have consented to ICSID arbitration in writing when the Claimants
accepted Uzbekistan’s offer of arbitration, contained in Article 10 of the Treaty,
by requesting registration of its Request with ICSID in March 2013.47

Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections

167. As noted at paragraph 35 above, Respondent initially raised five preliminary objections to
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and the admissibility of the claims. In Procedural Order No. 3,
the Tribunal decided to deal with the Respondent’s first four objections to jurisdiction as a
preliminary matter.

38 Claimants
>? Claimants

* Memorial on the Merits, {{{ 691-699.
* Memorial on the Merits, {{{ 703-704.

“© Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, {{ 701.

41 Claimants’
® Claimants’

” Memorial on the Merits, 702.
* Memorial on the Merits, 41 705-707.

34

168.

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

174.

In addition, in its Reply on Preliminary Objections, Respondent raised further objections
with regard to Claimants’ nationality. The essence of all of the objections is summarized
below.

First, Respondent argues that Claimants have failed to meet their burden of proving that
they own — and have owned since the first alleged Treaty breach in March 2010 — the shares
of BC and KC.

Second, Respondent contends that it has consented under the BIT to arbitrating legal
disputes concerning investments that were actively made by investors, but did not consent
to arbitrating legal disputes concerning indirect shareholders that are remotely and
passively held. Thus, Respondent argues that, even assuming arguendo that the Claimants
indirectly have owned shares in BC and KC since the first alleged Treaty breach, they did
not make an investment in Uzbekistan under the BIT or the ICSID Convention.“

Third, Respondent further contends that it has consented under the BIT to arbitrating legal
disputes arising out of investments that were made in compliance with it laws, but did not
consent to arbitrating legal disputes arising out of unlawful investments. In this context,
Respondent argues that Claimants made their investment in violation of Uzbek laws,
through fraud and deceit, and that consequently the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction and/or the
Claimants’ claims are inadmissible under the BIT, the ICSID Convention and principles of
international public policy.*

Fourth, Respondent alleges that Claimants made their investments through an off-the-
books payment of US$33.98 million to bank accounts in Latvia and that these payments
were corrupt payments to a relative of a Government official, namely Ms. Gulnara
Karimova. Consequently, Respondent argues that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction and/or the
claims are inadmissible under the BIT, the ICSID Convention and principles of
international public policy.*®

The Tribunal will first consider the nationality argument and then will discuss each of the
remaining objections in turn, dealing with any factual disputes so far as necessary in order
to dispose of them.

The Tribunal has had the benefit of extensive submissions and evidence from the Parties
in this case. Many issues and sub-issues have been raised in the course of the proceedings.
The Tribunal has carefully considered all submissions, all evidence, and all issues but for

+3 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 4.
+ Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 1 5.
45 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 4 6.
46 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 7.

35

VI.

175.

176.

177.

178.

179.

180.

the sake of procedural economy has only discussed in this Decision those it considers
necessary.

THE APPLICABLE LAW

Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that “The Tribunal shall decide a dispute
in accordance with such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties. In the absence of
such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the
dispute (including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international law as
may be applicable.”

The principal international law applicable to the dispute is the BIT. The Treaty entered into
force between Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan on 8 September 1997.

Insofar as Article 10 of the BIT entails consent to arbitration by an ICSID tribunal,
jurisdiction under the BIT is limited by the jurisdictional provisions of the ICSID
Convention.

The applicable law for interpretation of the BIT is found in the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties (“VCLT”), to which both Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan have acceded.*”

The Tribunal observes that Article 14 of the BIT indicates that the text was drawn up in
Kazakh, Uzbek and Russian languages, with all texts having equal legal force although the
“Russian text is used for the purposes of interpretation of this Agreement”. The Tribunal
has been provided by the Parties with an English text of the BIT. The Parties have not
disputed the accuracy of this translation of the Russian text. The Tribunal therefore in its
analysis refers solely to the language of the English translation as provided.

As regards the burden of proof, it is for Claimants to establish that they have made an
investment in accordance with the BIT and the ICSID Convention. Furthermore, it is for
Respondent to bear the burden of proof for objections that it raises to Claimants’ assertion
that they have made an investment that attracts the protection of the BIT. The Tribunal
addresses specific questions of burden of proof in its examination of the objections in this
Decision.

47 CL-0322, the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, adopted and opened for signature on 23 May 1969, entered
into force 27 January 1980 (1155 United Nations Treaty Series 331) was acceded to by Kazakhstan on 5 January 1994
and by Uzbekistan on 12 July 1995.

36

VII.

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.

THE FIRST JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION - NATIONALITY
A. — Introduction

Respondent’s first objection is that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae.
Respondent argues that two of Claimants, Messrs. Almas Chukin and Nikolay Varenko,
failed to establish their Kazakh nationality, and that Claimants’ evidence as regards the ten
other Claimants is insufficient to establish their Kazakh nationality.**

Claimants counter that all Claimants are Kazakh nationals for the purposes of this
arbitration, including Messrs. Chukin and Varenko, as each Claimant has provided a copy
of their passport and thus satisfied prima facie the nationality requirement.*?
argue that the burden of proof as regards the nationality requirement at that point shifts to
Respondent, who Claimants argue has failed to rebut the presumption raised by the prima
facie evidence.°

Claimants

The Tribunal in the following sections first sets out the nationality requirement in
international and applicable national law and then applies that requirement to Mr. Chukin,
Mr. Varenko, and the ten other Claimants.

B. The Nationality Requirement in International and National Law

The applicable international law on the nationality requirement is found in Article 1(1) and
1(5) of the BIT and Article 25(2) of the ICSID Convention. The applicable international
law in part refers to national law, and the applicable national law is found in the Law of
the Republic of Kazakhstan on Citizenship of the Republic of Kazakhstan (“Citizenship
Law”).°! The Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan (“Kazakh Constitution”) and
Resolution of the Constitution Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 12 of 12 January
2003 (“Resolution No. 12”) are also pertinent to this objection.*”

Article 1(1) of the BIT sets out a definition of “investor”. The term includes “legal entities
of the Contracting Parties’ States’. It also includes “citizens, associations of citizens, and
stateless persons of the Contracting Parties’ States”.**

+8 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 15 et seq. See also Respondent's letter of 2 September 2014,

p.6
En

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {| 42.

5° Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 43.
5! RL-0119, Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan on Citizenship of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 20 December
1991 (“Citizenship Law”).

52 CL-0013, Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan (“Kazakh Constitution”

 

CL-0401, Resolution of the

Constitution Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 12 dated 12 January 2003 (“Resolution No. 12”).
53 C0001, BIT, Art.1(1).

37

186. Article 1(5) of the BIT provides that the term “citizens” refers to “persons holding
citizenship and legal capacity under the laws of one Contracting Party’s State, permanently
residing in its territory or abroad, and making investments within the territory of the other
Contracting Party’s State”.*4

187. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention provides that the Centre’s jurisdiction extends to
claims brought by a “National of another Contracting State”.

188. Article 25(2)(a) of the ICSID Convention states that a “National of another Contracting
State” includes “any natural person who had the nationality of a Contracting State other
than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit such
dispute to conciliation or arbitration as well as on the date on which the request was
registered pursuant to paragraph (3) of Article 28 or paragraph (3) of Article 36, but does
not include any person who on either date also had the nationality of the Contracting State
party to the dispute”.

189. The Article 25 of the ICSID Convention requirement entails a positive nationality
requirement (that Claimants had the nationality of a Contracting State other than the State
party to the dispute) and a negative nationality requirement (that Claimants did not have
the nationality of the Contracting State party in the dispute).°® The negative nationality
requirement is not put in issue by the Parties in this case.

190. It is not in dispute that, under the terms of the BIT and the ICSID Convention, it is

necessary for Claimants to demonstrate that they were Kazakh nationals on three dates

relevant as regards this requirement (“required dates”).*”

191. The required dates are:
(i) the date of the alleged breach: 1 March 2010;>*

(ii) the date the claim was submitted to ICSID: 22 March 2013; and

‘Article 1(6) of the BIT defines the term “stateless persons” as persons without citizenship, permanently residing
within the territory of one Contracting Party’s State, re; red in accordance with the laws of said Contracting Party’s
State to carry out entrepreneurial activity, and making investments within the territory of the other Contracting Party’s
State. The term “stateless” is not put in issue by the Parties in this case. C-0001, BIT, Art. 1(6).

55 ICSID Convention, Art. 25(2)(a).

5 See also RL-0051, Waguih Elie George Siag v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/15, Decision on
Jurisdiction dated 11 April 2007, [ 142.

57 Respondent's Reply on Preliminary Objections, J 22; Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 4 41.

58 On this point see RL-0008, Abaclat and Others. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5, Decision on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility dated 4 August 2011 (“Abaclat”).

    

   

   

  

 

38

192.

193.

194.

195.

196.

197.

198.

(iii) the date the claim was registered by ICSID: 24 April 2013.°°

It is also not in dispute that the attribution of Kazakh nationality is a matter of Kazakh law.
The principal applicable national laws are the Constitution of Kazakhstan, the Citizenship
Law, and Resolution 12.

Although the Parties are in agreement that the Citizenship Law is one of the applicable
national laws, there is significant disagreement about the interpretation of that law, and
about its application to Mr. Chukin, Mr. Varenko, and the other ten Claimants.

The Parties agree that passports and certificates of nationality constitute prima facie
evidence of a claimant’s nationality.°! However, Respondent argues that the Tribunal
should nonetheless look beyond the prima facie evidence and consider “counter-
indications” that, Respondent argues, should rebut the presumption raised by the prima
facie evidence.”

Respondent argues that the Kazakh Constitution strictly prohibits dual citizenship. In
particular, Respondent argues, Article 10(3) of the Constitution establishes the principle
that “a citizen of the Republic shall not be recognized as a citizen of a different state”.°
Therefore, a central contention of Respondent’s submission is that the Citizenship Law can
result in the immediate and automatic loss of Kazakh citizenship under certain
circumstances.™

Respondent draws the Tribunal’s attention to the award in Soufraki which, Respondent
contends, is an analogous case.® The tribunal in Soufraki held that an Italian citizen had
lost his Italian citizenship upon acquisition of Canadian citizenship when he did not take
the necessary steps under Italian law to reacquire Italian citizenship. Respondent relies
upon an analogy with Soufraki to inform its interpretation of the Citizenship Law in this
case.

Article 19 of the Citizenship Law provides that Kazakh citizenship “shall be terminated”
as a result of either renunciation of Kazakh citizenship or as a result of the “loss of

8° ICSID Convention, Art. 25(2)(a); Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections {{ 3; Claimants’ Rejoinder on
Preliminary Objections, | 41.

© CL-0013, Kazakh Constitution; RL-0119, Citizenship Law; CL-0401, Resolution No. 12.

©! Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 42.

© Respondent's Reply on Preliminary Objections, {ff 28-31.

© CL-0401, Resolution No.12, p. 3.

© Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, 16.

65 RL-0127, Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7, Award dated 7 July
2004 (“Soufraki”).

39

199.

200.

201.

202.

203.

204.

° RL-0119, Citizens’

Citizenship”. Article 21 further provides that Kazakh citizenship “shall be lost,” among
other reasons, “as a result of joining the [...] State government bodies and other
administrative bodies of another state”, or “in the event that a person has obtained
Citizenship of a different state”.

Respondent argues, therefore, that in certain circumstances a Kazakh citizen may lose their
citizenship by operation of law if, for example, they acquire the citizenship of a foreign
state or serve in the government of a foreign state.

Claimants dispute Respondent’s analogy with Soufraki because, Claimants argue, under
the Italian law applicable in Soufraki no governmental act was required to terminate the
citizenship. Rather, the Italian citizenship was automatically terminated as soon as the
Italian national acquired another citizenship.®

Claimants furthermore contest Respondent’s interpretation of Articles 19 and 21 of the
Citizenship Law, insofar as Respondent asserts citizenship is automatically and
immediately lost “by operation of law”.© Claimants argue that “[i]f anything, those two
articles read together suggest that losing citizenship is not automatic or immediate because
termination of citizenship (Article 19) and loss of citizenship (Article 21) are evidently two
separate stages”.’°

Claimants submit that there are additional relevant provisions of national law that make
clear that an individual remains a Kazakh citizen until his citizenship is terminated by the
Kazakh government: Resolution No. 12 and Articles 30 and 37 of the Citizenship Law.

Resolution No. 12, according to Claimants, provides that if a citizen of another state who
acquires Kazakh citizenship fails to renounce the other state’s citizenship, that person’s
Kazakh citizenship “shall be deemed invalid”.”! Claimants argue that the term “deemed
invalid” must be interpreted in light of Articles 30 and 37 of the Citizenship Law.

Article 30 of the Citizenship Law provides that the Office of Internal Affairs is the only
authority empowered to determine the “existence of citizenship of the Republic of
Kazakhstan, or lack thereof” of persons permanently residing in Kazakhstan.’ Article 37

 

ip Law, Art. 19.

© RL-0119, Citizenship Law, Art. 21(1), 21(5).
© Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 52.

© Claimants
7 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {| 47-52 (emphas

Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 46; Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, | 27.

n original).

   

 

7 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {[ 49; CL-0401, Resolution No. 12, pp. 3, 5.
7 RL-O119, Citizenship Law, Art. 30.

40

205.

206.

207.

208.

209.

provides that citizenship is only officially terminated the day “of registration of its loss by
» 7B

the Government”.
Consequently, Claimants contend, only the Office of Internal Affairs is empowered to
determine the existence of Kazakh citizenship of persons residing in Kazakhstan.”
Further, Claimants argue that Kazakh citizenship is terminated only on the day of
registration of its loss by the Government.’

The Tribunal finds the citizenship law at issue in Soufraki is sufficiently distinct to that
before the Tribunal in the instant case such that the reasoning in Soufraki is not applicable.
The Soufraki tribunal found that the terms of the Italian law were “clear and leave no room
for interpretation”.”° The Kazakh Citizenship Law, however, is not clear. Moreover, when
the Kazakh Citizenship Law is read in the context of the Kazakh Constitution and
Resolution No. 12, the Tribunal finds strength to Claimants’ argument that there is a
distinction between the invalidity or loss of entitlement to citizenship (under Article 21 of
the Citizenship Law) and the termination of that citizenship (under Article 19 of the
Citizenship Law).

The existence of such a distinction indicates that an individual may be susceptible to the
termination of citizenship but may retain such citizenship until a decision is taken by the
Office of Internal Affairs. In contrast, in the Italian law applicable in Soufraki, an
individual’s Italian citizenship was lost by operation of law unless the individual
themselves took action to reaffirm that citizenship.

The Tribunal finds therefore, that a claim that an individual does not hold Kazakh
citizenship requires evidence not just that they have either made a renunciation of
citizenship or that they meet the criteria for “loss of citizenship” under Article 21 of the
Citizenship Law, but also that they have been subject to “termination of citizenship” under
Article 19 of the Citizenship Law. Such a conclusion is consistent with the presumption
against statelessness that is a general principle of public international law — as an automatic
loss of citizenship increases the risk of an individual being rendered stateless by operation
of law.

C. Application of the Nationality Requirement

The Tribunal is in agreement with the Parties that passports and certificates of nationality
constitute prima facie evidence of citizenship that raise a presumption in favour of such

73 RL-O119, Citizenship Law, Art. 30.

4 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 50.
5 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 451.
% RL-0127, Soufraki, | 52.

41

citizenship.” In the event that Claimants provide such prima facie evidence, it would be
for Respondent to rebut the presumption that such evidence raises.

210. The Tribunal’s finding is in concordance with the conclusions of other arbitral tribunals to
which the Parties have made reference. The Micula tribunal held that “there exists a
presumption in favour of the validity of a State’s conferment of nationality. The threshold
to overcome such presumption is high [...] It is for Respondent to make such a showing.
For this purpose, casting doubt is not sufficient”.”*

211. The award of the Micula tribunal was relied on by the Arif tribunal, which held that it would
only be inclined to disregard the national authority’s decision on citizenship if “there was
convincing and decisive evidence” that the acquisition of nationality “was fraudulent or at
least resulted from a material error”.”? Further, in Tza Yap Sum, the tribunal held that the
burden on respondents to overcome the presumption in this regard is “onerous”.*°

212. All Claimants have provided Kazakh passports as prima facie evidence of their Kazakh
nationality.*' The question before the Tribunal in the determination of Respondents first
objection is therefore whether this prima facie evidence has been subject to rebuttal in
relation to (1) Mr. Chukin, (2) Mr. Varenko, and (3) all other Claimants.

(1) Mr. Chukin

213. Mr. Chukin has provided a copy of his Kazakh passport issued on 25 September 2009 as
prima facie evidence of his citizenship on the required dates: 1 March 2010; 22 March
2013; 24 April 2013.°? Mr. Chukin has also provided a copy of a certificate attesting to his
Kazakh nationality issued on 15 May 2015 as further such evidence. **

214. Respondent notes that Mr. Chukin served as the Head of the Department of Industry for
Kyrgyzstan’s Ministry of Economy and Finance from 1990 until 1992 and as the chargé
d’affaires of Kyrgyzstan’s Embassy to the United States from 1992 until 1996.84 Mr.

7 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections 41, Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 41 28-
31; see also RL-0126, Ambiente Ufficio S.P.A. and others v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/9, Decision
on Jurisdiction and Admissibility dated 8 February 2013 (“Ambiente”), | 312; RL-0008, Abaclat, | 422.

8 CL-0398, Joan Micula, Viorel Micula, S.C. European Food S.A., S.C. Starmill S.R.L., and S.C. Multipack 8.
Romania ICSID Case No. ARB/05/20, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility dated 24 September 2008
(“Micula”), {1 87, 95.

9 RL-0128, Franck Charles Arif v. Republic of Moldova, \CSID Case No. ARB/11/23, Award dated 8 April 2013,
357.

8 CL-0345, Tza Yap Sum v. Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/6, Decision on Jurisdiction and Competence
dated 19 June 2009 (“Tza Yap Sum”).

81 €.0002, Excerpts of Claimants’ Passports.

® €.0002, Excerpts of Claimants’ Passports.

3 €.0663, Certificate of the Office of Internal Affairs of Almaty dated 15 May 2015.

* Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 17.

 

   

 

 

42

215.

216.

217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

Chukin was a Deputy Chairman of the State Property Fund in Kyrgyzstan between 1996
and 1997.

Respondent argues that in accordance with the Citizenship Law, Articles 19 and 21, Mr.
Chukin lost his Kazakh citizenship while he was a government official of the Government
of Kyrgyzstan.*° Respondent further submits that Claimants have failed to provide
additional information to establish Mr. Chukin as a Kazakh citizen on the required dates.*°

Claimants argue that Mr. Chukin surrendered his Kyrgyz citizenship at the same time as
gaining his Kazakh citizenship. Claimants also argue that even if Mr. Chukin did not
surrender his Kyrgyz citizenship, or even if his renunciation was not effective for whatever
reason, Kazakh citizenship is only terminated upon official governmental action.*”
Claimants further submit that they have provided a copy of Mr. Chukin’s Kazakhstan
passport and his citizenship certificate to establish Mr. Chukin as a Kazakh citizen on the
required dates.**

The Tribunal finds that Mr. Chukin’s passport and citizenship certificate constitute prima
facie evidence of his possession of Kazakh citizenship on the required dates. The Tribunal
finds that the evidence as regards Mr. Chukin’s previous possession of Kyrgyz citizenship
does not call into question the probity of this prima facie evidence.

Therefore, on the basis of the evidence in the record, the Tribunal rejects the argument that
it does not have jurisdiction ratione personae over the claim insofar as it relates to Mr.
Chukin.

(2) Mr. Varenko

Mr. Varenko has provided a copy of his Kazakh passport issued on 1 October 2009 as
prima facie evidence of his citizenship on the required dates: 1 March 2010; 22 March
2013; 24 April 2013.°°

On 11 July 2014, as a result of Mr. Varenko’s acquisition of Russian citizenship, the
Government of Kazakhstan registered a decision to terminate Mr. Varenko’s Kazakh
citizenship.

Claimants submit that Mr. Varenko’s citizenship terminated on 11 July 2014, when the
Office of Internal Affairs issued and registered a decision in this regard.°° Claimants

85 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, {{ 16-18.
86 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, 18.

*7 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 55.

88 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {ff 54-55.

® €.0002, Excerpts of Claiman

Passports.

  

° Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {{f 50, 52.

4B

222.

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

228.

°! C.0002, Excerpts of Claimai

contend that the termination does not call into question Mr. Varenko’s citizenship on the
required dates. Respondent, in contrast, contends that the loss of Mr. Varenko’s Kazakh
citizenship at that time does call into question his possession of Kazakh citizenship on the
required dates.

The Tribunal considers that the termination of Mr. Varenko’s Kazakh citizenship on 11
July 2014 demonstrates that, on that date, circumstances existed under Kazakh law to merit
such termination. It is a reasonable inference that, if such circumstances also existed prior
to 11 July 2014, Mr. Varenko may have been susceptible to a termination of citizenship at
an earlier date.

However, given the absence of any evidence of a prior termination of Kazakh citizenship,
and given the prima facie evidence that Mr. Varenko did possess Kazakh citizenship on
the required dates, the Tribunal concludes that the fact of the later termination of Mr.
Varenko’s citizenship does not call into question his possession of citizenship on the
required dates.

The Tribunal considers that the very act of termination of Mr. Varenko’s citizenship on 11
July 2014 strengthens the conclusions as regards the distinction between the “loss” of
Kazakh citizenship and its “termination” by the state of Kazakhstan.

Therefore, on the basis of the evidence in the record, the Tribunal rejects the argument that
it does not have jurisdiction ratione personae over the claim insofar as it relates to Mr.
Varenko.

(3) All Other Claimants

All other Claimants have provided copies of their passports as prima facie evidence of their
Kazakh citizenship on the required dates: 1 March 2010; 22 March 2013; 24 April 2013.°!

Respondent argues that “in light of the issues raised with respect to Messrs Chukin and
Varenko, Claimants passports do not conclusively establish that they were Kazakh
nationals [...] [on the required dates]”.°? Claimants, in contrast, argue that Claimants’
passports constitute prima facie evidence of nationality that Respondent is required to rebut
and that Respondent has failed to rebut.*

Claimants state in the Request for Arbitration that Claimants are all “lifelong citizens of
the Republic of Kazakhstan”. Such statement may be called into question — for example by

 

s’ Passports.

°2 Respondent's Reply on Preliminary Objections, 32.
°3 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 43; RL-0126, Ambiente, W 309, 312, 320-21. See also CL-0398,
Micula, 1 95-96.

44

229.

230.

231.

232.

°* Claimants

95

Respondent’

Respondent’s evidence as regards Mr. Chukin’s service in the Government of
Kyrgyzstan.°* However, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is not dependent on Claimants being
“lifelong citizens” of Kazakhstan, but rather its jurisdiction is only dependent on Claimants
having citizenship of Kazakhstan on the required dates. The Tribunal therefore draws no
inferences from the statement by Claimants as regards “lifelong citizenship” or from
Respondent’s attempts to rebut that statement.

Respondent requested an attestation of citizenship by Claimants that they “have not held
and do not hold any other nationality and were Kazakh nationals on each of the required
dates”.°> No attestation was made by Claimants. The Tribunal also notes Claimants’
argument that, despite Respondent’s calls for such attestation by Claimants, Respondent
did not ask any question on this point during their cross-examination of Mr. Kim or Ms.
Zaitbekova.”° In addition, Respondent did not make any additional arguments on the law
or on the facts in relation to this first objection on jurisdiction in its Post-Hearing Brief.
The Tribunal therefore draws no inferences from the presence or absence of attestations of
citizenship beyond what is in the record.

It is not in dispute that the ten Claimants’ passports serve as prima facie evidence of the
existence of the ten Claimants’ Kazakh citizenship.*” For nine of the ten additional
Claimants those passports were issued between 2007 and 2009 and were valid for a period
of ten years that includes the required dates.”*

For the tenth additional Claimant, Ms. Aigul Nurmakanova, the passport was issued on |
September 2011.°° This falls after the first required date, the date of breach, on 1 March
2010. However, there has been no evidence adduced to suggest that Ms. Nurmakanova did
not hold Kazakh citizenship on the first required date. Indeed, Ms. Nurmakanova was born,
according to her passport, in Kazakhstan, and therefore in accordance with Article 3 of the
Citizenship Law is likely to have been a Kazakh citizen from birth.

The Tribunal recalls the Micula tribunal’s finding that the “casting of doubt” is not
sufficient to rebut a presumption raised by prima facie evidence and the Tza Yap Sum
tribunal’s finding that the burden on Respondent is an “onerous” one. !°

Request for Arbitration, {{[ 1, 121; Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, {[ 696.
s Reply on Preliminary Objections, { 32.

 

 

° Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 8.

°” Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, {{{{ 28-31; Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections,
{ 43; RL-0126, Ambiente, {| 309, 312, 320-21. See also CL-0398, Micula, 1 95-96.

88 €-0002, Excerpts of Claimants’ Passports.

% €-0002, Excerpts of Claimants’ Passports.

10 CL-0398, Micula, Wl 95-96, CL-0345, Tza Yap Sum, { 63.

45

233.

234.

235.

236.

VIL

237.

238.

In the absence of specific evidence to call into question the Kazakh nationality of Ms.
Nurmakanova, or any of the ten Claimants other than Messrs. Chukin and Varenko, the
Tribunal must base its finding on the evidence that is in the record, i.e. on the passports
that Claimants have provided. The Tribunal finds that those passports, submitted with the
Request for Arbitration, are sufficient to satisfy the Tribunal of the Kazakh citizenship of
the ten Claimants other than Messrs. Varenko and Chukin on the required dates. As in
Ambiente Ufficio, “due to the lack of relevant concrete submissions and documentation
from the Respondent's side, no problems as to the jurisdiction of the Centre [...] arise”.!°!
Therefore, on the basis of the evidence in the record, the Tribunal rejects the argument that
it does not have jurisdiction ratione personae over the claim insofar as it relates to the ten
Claimants other than Messrs. Chukin and Varenko.

D. The Tribunal’s Conclusion

In the course of its arguments Respondent conducted a very detailed forensic examination
of the evidence with which it was presented and advanced a range of arguments to
challenge Claimants’ case on this point. In the Tribunal’s view, none of these arguments
have been sufficient to displace the prima facie evidence set out above.

For the reasons set out above, and on the basis of the evidence in the record, the Tribunal
finds that it has jurisdiction ratione personae over the dispute and therefore dismisses
Respondent’s first objection.

THE SECOND JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION - THAT CLAIMANTS ARE
NOT “INVESTORS” WHO MADE AN “INVESTMENT”

A. — Introduction

By its second objection, Respondent asserts that Claimants are neither “investors” nor
persons who made an “investment” as those terms are defined in the BIT.!

To address this jurisdictional objection, the Tribunal first sets out the applicable law from
the ICSID Convention and the BIT. The Tribunal then goes on to group Respondent’s
specific objections under two categories: those relating to Claimants’ status as “investors”;
and those relating to the characterization of Claimants’ business affairs as an “investment”.

‘©! RL-0126, Ambiente, 19 320-21.

102

Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {¥ 164-201.

46

239.

240.

241.

242.

243.

B. The Law Applicable to the Objection

The law applicable to this objection is contained in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention
and Article 1(1) of the BIT. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention provides that the Centre’s
jurisdiction shall “extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment, between
a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State
designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting State, which
the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre”.!°> The ICSID
Convention does not offer a definition of “investment”.

Article 1(1) of the BIT defines “investors” in relevant part as “(a) legal entities of the
Contracting Parties’ States; (b) citizens, associations of citizens, and stateless persons of
the Contracting Parties’ States”. !°

Article 1(2) of the BIT defines “investments” as “any kind of asset and the rights thereto,
as well as intellectual property rights, invested by the investors of one Contracting Party
within the territory of the other Contracting Party’s State for profit (income) and includes,
in particular, but not exclusively: [...]”.!°> Article 1(2)(a)-(e) then sets out a non-exhaustive
list of types of investment. Of particular relevance to this dispute are “movable and
immovable property and related property rights; [...]””!°° and “cash, shares, stocks and
other securities and any forms of participation in enterprises, joint stock companies,
business partnerships, associations and other legal entities registered in accordance with
the laws of each of the Contracting Parties; [...]”.!°7

For jurisdiction to be established, the claim must pass both through the institutional
jurisdictional keyhole set forth in Article 25 as well as the specific jurisdictional keyhole
defined in the BIT. The drafters of Article 25 in constructing that keyhole were cognizant
that the parties to a particular BIT may construct a more specific jurisdictional keyhole in
their instrument. Both Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and Article 1 of the BIT are to
be interpreted in accordance with the VCLT.!°°

Respondent’s various specific objections to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Respondent’ s
second argument fall into two broad categories: one category that disputes Claimants’
status as “investors” under the BIT and the ICSID Convention and another category that

3 1CSID Convention, Art. 25.
‘4 €.0001, BIT, Art. 1(1).

15 €.0001, BIT, Art. 1(2).

106 €.9001, BIT, Art. 1(2)(a).
67 C.0001, BIT, Art. 1(2)(b).
108 CL-0322, VCLT, Art. 31.

47

disputes Claimants’ interests as an “investment” under the BIT and the ICSID Convention.
109

The Tribunal addresses each in turn.

244. Before it turns to these objections, the Tribunal takes note of Claimants’ citation of the
award of the Micula tribunal in which it held that it need not resolve the precise scope of
the investment at the jurisdictional stage, but rather need only establish, as a threshold
matter, that there is an investment.!!° The Tribunal agrees that the precise scope of the
investment may become more clear at the merits stage of these proceedings, and that — to
resolve this objection — it need only establish at this stage that Claimants are “investors”
who made an “investment” in accordance with the BIT and the ICSID Convention.

C. Objections that Claimants are not “Investors”

245. Respondent argues that Claimants fail to establish their status as “investors” under the
BIT.!!! In particular, Respondent argues that (1) Claimants have not established the
necessary link between themselves and the alleged investment, that is their ownership of
shares in BC and KC prior to the alleged breach; (2) Claimants’ role in relation to BC and
KC is “passive” rather than “active” and therefore Claimants are not “investors”; (3)
Claimants are too remote from the “investment” and therefore Claimants are not
“investors”.

(1) Claimants Have Not Proven their Ownership of Shares in BC and KC

246. Both Respondent and Claimants have made extensive representations as to the ownership
of BC and KC and the structure of holding companies and trusts through which Claimants
purport to own BC and KC. This structure is complex. The particulars of Claimants’
ownership of shares in BC and KC became more detailed during the course of the
proceedings, with Claimants making available further information about the holding
structure in the face of challenges from Respondent.

247. Claimants provided an outline of their ownership holding structure of BC and KC as of 30
April 2008 in their Request for Arbitration.'!? This alleged ownership holding structure
was included in graphic format by Respondent in its Memorial on Preliminary Objections
and Request for Bifurcation as follows:!!

 

10° The Tribunal notes that Respondent further refers to Article 1(1) of the BIT, arguing that to qualify as an investor
under the BIT, Claimants must hold citizenship under the laws of the Contracting State (Respondent’s Memorial on
Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, | 175). The Tribunal addresses, and dismisses, this objection at
paragraphs 181-236 above. For the purposes of this arbitration and on the basis of the evidence before it, the Tribunal
holds that Claimants are Kazakh nationals and that the Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione personae over their claims.
110 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, n. 185.

111 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {| 11-12.

'2 Claimants’ Request for Arbitration, Schedule 2.

113 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, { 29.

 

   

    

 

48

248.

249.

 

     
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

  

 

  
 
     

 

 

° 8
3 5
3 g s
e1/2 ella|le|/z
Slls EW ey zis
z\|3 SHE EE
ay] Zo sis
Sie <|izif2lle
3) 8
keratin HR EREE
Ri S| a] sa} S|} Soa] 8
British Virgin
Islands
100%
Inter Investment Consolidation
Group Limited
16.78%
{83.22%
United Cement Group
pprus
Raybird
Limited
Uzbekistan
32%| 34% 17 19% \ 34% | 265%

 

 

 

Bekabadcement OJSC | [ Kuvasaycement OJSC

Claimants agree with this representation and argue that this structure has been unchanged
since 30 April 2008.!!4 Claimants further state that they have held their shares in BC and
KC through this holding structure to be in the best possible position to take advantage of
market opportunities and to restructure their interests after any further acquisitions. !!>

Respondent argues that Claimants “have not substantiated this alleged holding
structure”.''!® In particular, Respondent alleges that Claimants have failed to provide
sufficient evidence that they made investments in Uzbekistan — such as originals or copies
of share certificates of each Claimants’ ownership in the investment’ s holding structure.!!7
Respondent further argues that Claimants do not offer testimony as to their ownership,!'®
and that the available share exchange agreements do not indicate the shareholders of

44 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 30.

45 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 66.

446 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, | 30.

417 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, { 180.

448 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, 44 33, 195.

49

250.

251.

252.

253.

254.

255.

parties to the transactions.'!? Respondent also raises a series of objections, set out below
at paragraph 255, to Claimants’ statement of their ownership holding structure.

The Tribunal must assess claims about the ownership holding structure only insofar as such
claims relate to its jurisdiction over this dispute. The Parties agree that “‘an investor seeking
access to international jurisdiction pursuant to an investment treaty must prove that it was
an investor at the relevant time”.!”° It is for Claimant to substantiate its ownership of shares
in BC and KC to demonstrate that Claimants’ Request for Arbitration falls within the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction, in accordance with the BIT and the ICSID Convention.

Claimants emphasize that such ownership needs to be established at the time of the alleged
breaches of the BIT.!*! The Tribunal agrees that it is well settled law that the relevant time
for Claimants to demonstrate their ownership is the time of the breach.

For Claimants, “the relevant times for the purposes of jurisdiction are: the date this
arbitration was instituted on 22 March 2013, the dates on which Claimants’ investments in
BC and KC were expropriated by the Uzbek state on 5 June 2012 and 10 June 2013
respectively, and, to the extent relevant to other claims, the dates on which the Uzbek state
first took unlawful action against their investments in BC and KC on 2 March 2010 and 16
April 2012 respectively”. !?? Claimants also allege further breaches of the BIT when their
investments in BC and KC were expropriated by the Uzbek state on 5 June 2012 and 10
June 2013 respectively. The Tribunal concludes that Claimants must therefore demonstrate
their ownership of the investment on these dates.

Claimants argue that it is “undisputed” that they have owned the shares in BC and KC “at
the very latest since 20 February 2009 and continuing through the time of the breach”.!73
Claimants therefore argue that it is not necessary for the Tribunal to examine this issue any
further.

Respondent, however, raises five assertions in order to dispute such ownership.

Respondent argues variously that (a) Claimants have not proven their ownership of the
upper levels of their holding structure; (b) Claimants have not proven their ownership of
Kaden and Nabolena, their majority share acquisition vehicles; (c) Claimants have not
proven their ownership of Carsoco, Clipco, Fasinco, Karuteco, Robianco, and Vernico,

419 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, | 27.

29 RL-0016, Cementownia “Nowa Huta” S.A. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/06/2, Award dated
17 September 2009, { 112. See also RL-0028, Libananco Holdings Co. Ltd. v. Republic of Turkey, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/06/8, Award dated 2 September 2011, 4 128; RL-0021, Europe Cement Investment & Trade S.A. v. Republic of
Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/2, Award dated 13 August 2009, if 25, 27-28 ().

2! Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 158.

22 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, n. 16.

23 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {ff 58, 77.

50

256.

257.

258.

 

 

I
126 ge,

their minority share acquisition vehicles; (d) Claimants have not proven their ownership of
the Ray Companies (Raybird, Rayblock, and Raycross); and (e) the oral trusts, based in
Cyprus, through which Claimants hold and have held their business interests, are invalid
under Cypriot Law.

These arguments — if substantiated — would only be sufficient to deny jurisdiction if they
led to a failure by Claimants to demonstrate their ownership at the time of the alleged
breach. Despite the many claims that Respondent makes about Claimants’ ownership
structure, for the purposes of jurisdiction, it is only necessary for Claimants to meet this
test. The Tribunal nevertheless takes each of the claims in turn in the sub-sections that
follow.

a. Ownership of the top levels of Holding Structure: Visor Partners
Limited, Visor Cement Companies Limited, Inter Investment
Consolidation Group Limited, and Telsat Limited

Respondent disputes Claimants’ ownership of the top levels of the holding structure. On
Claimants’ account, they hold shares in BC and KC via a holding structure that has as its
upper tiers Visor Partners Limited, Visor Cement Companies Limited, Inter Investment
Consolidation Group Limited (“IICG”), Telsat Limited, and UCG. The Tribunal deals with
Claimants’ ownership of each of these entities in turn.

(i) Visor Partners Limited

Claimants state that Visor Partners Limited was incorporated on 31 July 2007 and that
since incorporation the company has been owned by various Claimants (and Mr. Michael
Sauer).!74 Claimants also state that Visor Cement Companies Limited was incorporated on
31 July 2007 and that since incorporation the company has been owned by Visor Partners
Limited.'?> Claimants evidence these aspects of its holding structure by means of various
documents including certificates of incumbency, registers of members, resolutions, and
share certificates.!2° Respondent does not offer evidence to call these documents into
question. The Tribunal, on the basis of the evidence before it, concludes that Claimants
(with Mr. Michael Sauer) have been owners of Visor Partners Limited and Visor Cement
Companies Limited since 31 July 2007 and therefore at all times relevant to jurisdiction.

aimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 12.
aimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 13.
¢ C-0435 to C-0451.

  

Sl

259.

260.

261.

262.

263.

(ii) ICG

Claimants state that IICG was incorporated on 31 July 2007 with Visor Cement as its sole
shareholder. !7’ Claimants evidence this ownership with a certificate of incumbency, share
certificate, and company resolution. Respondent does not offer evidence to call these
documents into question. The Tribunal, on the basis of the evidence before it, concludes
that Claimants (with Mr. Michael Sauer) have been owners of IICG since 31 July 2007 and
therefore at all times relevant to jurisdiction. '?*

(iii) Telsat

Claimants state that Telsat was incorporated on 31 July 2007 at which time its sole
shareholder was Veller Investment Group Limited — a company owned by Claimants
(except Claimant Borissov). Since 5 September 2007, Telsat has been owned in its entirety
by Visor Cement Companies Limited.!?° Claimants evidence this ownership with a
Certificate of Incumbency, registers of members, and company resolutions. '*° Respondent
does not offer evidence to call these documents into question. The Tribunal concludes, on
the basis of the evidence before it, that Claimants (with Mr. Michael Sauer) have been
owners of Telsat since 31 July 2007 and therefore at all times relevant to jurisdiction.

(iv) Starwheel Limited (later UCG)

Claimants state that Starwheel Limited was incorporated on 3 April 2007 with Abacus
(Cyprus) Limited as its sole shareholder.'*! Ownership was transferred to “United Cement
Group Ltd.”, a company in the Isle of Man, on 8 October 2007, and thereafter to Telsat and
IICG on 14 November 2007. Claimants evidence this ownership with certificates of
incorporation and name change, registers of members and share ledgers, lists of
shareholders, and declarations of trust.'°? The Tribunal concludes, on the basis of the
evidence before it, that Claimants (with Mr. Michael Sauer) have been owners of UCG
since 31 July 2007 and at all times relevant to jurisdiction.

Thus, having carefully considered all the arguments and evidence available to it, the
Tribunal concludes that Claimants have demonstrated their ownership of Visor Partners
Limited, Visor Cement Companies Limited, IICG, Telsat Limited; and UCG.

The Tribunal turns, in Section VIII.C(1)d below, to the transfer by Claimants of shares in
BC and KC from various share acquisition vehicles to the three companies known as the

27 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 15.
28 See C-0420 to C-0426.
29 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 4 14.

130 See ©

 

; C-0427 to C-0434.

'5! Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 16.
32 See C-0414 to C-0417; C-0475; C-0514 to C-0515.

52

264.

265.

266.

267.

Ray Companies, and thereby into its ownership holding structure. First, however, it is
necessary to examine Respondents’ claims as regards the ownership of the majority share
acquisition vehicles (Kaden and Nabolena) and the minority share acquisition vehicles
(Carsoco, Clipco, Fasinco, Karuteco, Robianco, and Vernico).

b. Ownership of Acquisition Vehicles for Majority Shares in BC and
KC

Claimants state that they acquired their majority share interests in BC and KC in January
2006 through Kaden and Nabolena and then transferred those interests from the share
acquisition vehicles into their holding structure. Respondent argues that Claimants have
not proven their ownership of the acquisition vehicles, namely Kaden and Nabolena, used
to purchase the majority shares in BC and KC.'°

Claimants state that Nabolena was incorporated on 20 April 2005 with Dema Nominees
and Dema Trustees as its sole shareholders. '*+ These companies made trust declarations in
favour of Claimant Kim on 11 May 2005.'*° Claimants further state that Mr. Kim held his
shares in Nabolena in trust for Claimants as a whole (except Claimant Borissov).!*° This
ownership, Claimants state, covers all relevant times — from 27 January 2006 (the date of
KC share acquisition by Nabolena) to 29 April 2008 (the date of transfer of KC shares to
the Ray Companies and therefore into Claimants’ holding structure). '*”

Respondent argues that Claimants have not proven the continuity of ownership of
Nabolena. In particular, Respondent refers to the transfer of shares in Nabolena from Dema
Nominees and Dema Trustees to a variety of other entities in the months prior to the transfer
by Nabolena of its KC shares into Claimants’ holding structure. '** Respondent therefore
disputes Claimants’ ownership of the KC shares in the time between their acquisition by
Nabolena and their transfer to the Ray Companies and therefore into Claimants’ ownership
structure.

The Tribunal notes that Claimants have demonstrated their ownership of Nabolena at the
time of its acquisition of the KC shares. Further noted is that Claimants do not address in
full all points that Respondent raises as regards their ownership of Nabolena, in particular
the transfer of ownership of Nabolena.'* However, the Tribunal does not find the question

33 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, | 14.

84 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, J 28, Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections,
479. See also C-0476, Corporate Register of Nabolena dated 18 June 2012.

85 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 79. See also C-0477, Trust Declarations of Nabolena dated 11
May 2005.

'36 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 80. See also Kim II, {{{ 37-38.

57 Kim IIL, { 38.

'38 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, {ff 263-267.

'89 See Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {{ 81; Nurmakhanova, | 52.

53

268.

269.

270.

271.

272.

of continuity of ownership, assuming there were a break, relevant. Critically, Respondent
does not set out how any breach in continuity of ownership, in particular between the date
of acquisition of KC shares by Nabolena and the date of transfer of those shares into
Claimants’ holding structure, may impact upon jurisdiction.

The burden on Claimants is to demonstrate its ownership at the time of the alleged breach.
It is possible for Claimants to do so without a demonstration of continuity of ownership at
all times from the first acquisition of KC shares by Nabolena. Therefore, subject to
Claimants’ satisfactory demonstration of ownership — i.e. through its holding structure — at
the time of the alleged breach, its failure to demonstrate continuity of ownership at all times
from the date of first acquisition will not impact upon jurisdiction.

Claimants state that Kaden was incorporated on 7 October 2005. On 27 October 2005, its
shareholder was Visor Investment Services Ltd. Visor Investment Services Ltd was owned
by three Claimants from its date of incorporation, 10 January 2005, and was owned by
Weimar Properties Limited from 5 December 2005. Weimar was owned by Berrimor
Associates Ltd. which was, in turn, owned by Claimant Kim. 140

Claimants acknowledge that they cannot locate a document to demonstrate their ownership
on 27 January 2006 — i.e. on the date of acquisition of BC shares by Kaden. Rather, they
provide documents to evidence their ownership on dates both prior to, and after, that date.
There is, Claimants note, “a gap of four months between 5 December 2005 and 20 April
2006 in respect of which there are no documents that directly support Claimants’ case [of
ownership of Kaden]”.'#!

As with Nabolena, Claimants do not entirely substantiate continuity of ownership of
Kaden. In contrast with Nabolena, the gap in evidence as regards Kaden relates to the date
of acquisition of a majority of shares in BC. Claimants argue that they owned Kaden at the
date of acquisition. The Tribunal holds that, if it were necessary to conclude whether
Claimants were owners of Kaden at the date of acquisition, it would find that the
preponderance of evidence indicates that Claimants owned Kaden at the date of acquisition.

However, the Tribunal reiterates that the burden on Claimants is to demonstrate its
ownership at the time of the alleged breach of the BIT. The Tribunal further reiterates that
it is possible for Claimants to do so without a demonstration of continuity of ownership at
all times from the first acquisition of shares. Therefore, subject to Claimants’ satisfactory
demonstration of ownership — i.e. through its holding structure — at the time of the alleged

449 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, | 27. See also C-0463, C-0466, C-0464, C-0474, C-
0516 and C-0517.
41 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 85.

54

breach, its failure to demonstrate continuity of ownership at all times from the date of first
acquisition will not impact upon jurisdiction.

273. On the basis of all materials before it, the Tribunal concludes that Claimants have
demonstrated their ownership of the majority share acquisition vehicles at various times
prior to the transfer by Nabolena and Kaden of shares in KC and BC to the Ray Companies
and therefore into Claimants’ holding structure.

274. The Tribunal next considers Respondent’s claims as regards the ownership of the minority
share acquisition vehicles (Carsoco, Clipco, Fasinco, Karuteco, Robianco, and Vernico).

c. Ownership of Acquisition Vehicles for Minority Shares in BC and
KC

275. The acquisition of further shares in BC and KC by Claimants’ companies is also in dispute.
Respondent argues that Claimants have not proven their ownership of the various share
acquisition vehicles that Claimants purport to have used to acquire further shares in BC
and KC. There are six such share acquisition vehicles in dispute: Carsoco, Clipco, Fasinco,
Karuteco, Robianco, and Vernico. '4?

276. Claimants argue that it is sufficient for this Tribunal to find that Claimants had a majority
shareholding in BC and KC so as to resolve the jurisdictional question. '*? However, they
also state that they have sufficiently demonstrated the ownership of the acquisition
vehicles for the further shares in BC and KC, as follows.

277. Inthe case of the BC share acquisition vehicles, Carsoco, '44 Vernico,'#> and Karuteco,'4°
Claimants state that each share acquisition vehicle was held by a Cypriot trustee in bare
trust for Claimant Varenko who, in turn, held all shares in trust for Claimants generally
(except Claimant Borrisov). Claimants have provided share exchange agreements, sale
and purchase of shares agreements, company registers, and trust deeds to this effect.

278. Ina similar vein, in the case of the KC share acquisition vehicles, Clipco, M7 Fasinco,'4*
and Robianco, '4? Claimants state that each share acquisition vehicle was held by a Cypriot
trustee in bare trust for Claimant Varenko who, in turn, held all shares in trust for

'42 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, { 23; ff 277-279.

43 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 77.

4 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 97. See also C-0490; C-0504; C-0685; C-0686.

45 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 98. See also C-0494; C-0503; C-0698; C-0699.

446 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, J 94. See also C-0493; C-0495; C-0507; C-0692; C-0693.

‘47 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {| 95. See also C-0497; C-0498; C-0505; C-0687; C-0688;
C-0689.

48 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, J 96. See also C-0496; C-0499; C-0506; C-0690; C-0691.

49 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 99. See also C-0500; C-0508; C-0694; C-0695; C-0696;
C-0697.

55

279.

280.

281.

282.

283.

284.

Claimants generally (except Claimant Borrisov). Claimants have provided share exchange
agreements, sale and purchase of shares agreements, company registers, and trust deeds
to this effect.

Claimants evidence their ownership of the share acquisition vehicles using factual exhibits
that include corporate registers, tables of Tashkent Stock Exchange transactions, and trust
deeds. Aside from its objection to the validity of the Cypriot trusts, Respondent does not
offer any evidence to contradiction Claimants’ factual exhibits.

Having carefully considered all arguments and evidence available to it, and subject to the
Tribunal’s consideration of the validity of the oral trusts in Claimants’ holding structure,
the Tribunal concludes that Claimants have demonstrated their ownership of the minority
share acquisition vehicles.

The Tribunal next turns to Respondent’s objection to a series of transactions through which
the various share acquisition vehicles transferred ownership of shares in BC and KC to the
Ray Companies and thereby into the holding structure Claimants set out in the Request for
Arbitration.

d. Transfer of BC and KC Shares to UCG via the Ray Companies

Claimants state that, in 2008, they sought to consolidate and restructure their holding
structure for KC and BC to prepare for an IPO.!°° Central to this consolidation was the
transfer of shares from the KC contributor companies (Nabolena, Clipco, Fasinco, and
Robianco) and from the BC contributor companies (Kaden, Carsoco, Vernico, and
Karuteco) into Claimants’ new holding structure.

Claimants state that between 26 March and 10 April 2008 the KC contributor companies
(Nabolena, Clipco, Fasinco, and Robianco) each transferred their shares in KC to the Ray
Companies in exchange for shares in the Ray Companies. '°! The KC contributor companies
then, on 29 April 2008, transferred their shares in the Ray Companies to Starwheel (later
UCG).'* As a result of these transactions Starwheel (later UCG) came to own a majority
shareholding in KC by 30 April 2008.'**

Claimants also state, in a similar vein, that between 9 April and 10 April 2008 the BC
contributor companies (Kaden, Carsoco, Vernico, and Karuteco) each transferred their
shares in BC to the Ray Companies in exchange for shares in the Ray Companies.'*4 The

'50 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 30.
‘5! Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 31.

*2 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, | 32.

'53 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 32.
'S4 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 31.

56

285.

286.

287.

288.

289.

290.

BC contributor companies then also, on 29 April 2008, transferred their shares in the Ray
Companies to Starwheel (later UCG).'* As a result of these transactions Starwheel (later
UCG) came to own a majority shareholding in BC by 30 April 2008.6

On Claimants’ account, therefore, from 30 April 2008 until the time of the alleged breaches
of the BIT, UCG owned, via its whole ownership of the Ray Companies, a majority holding

in KC and in BC. The structure has been unchanged ever since that date. '°’

Respondent, however, disputes Claimants’ ownership of the Ray Companies (Raybird,
3,158

Rayblock, and Raycross) which received shares as detailed above in 200:
Claimants state that the Ray Companies were incorporated in December 2007 under the
ownership of Abacus (Cyprus) Limited. Claimants evidence these incorporations with
certificates of incorporation. °° On 10 March 2008, Abacus transferred its shares in the Ray
Companies to the majority share acquisition vehicles (Kaden and Nabolena) and the
minority share acquisition vehicles (Carsoco, Clipco, Fasinco, Karuteco, Robianco, and
Vernico).'® Respondent has provided no argument or evidence to call these transactions
into question.

In light of the foregoing, and having carefully considered all materials available to it, the
Tribunal concludes that, subject to the validity of the oral trust, Claimants have proven
their ownership of shares in BC and KC.

e. Claimants’ Ownership Relies on an Invalid Oral Trust

Respondent argues that the oral trusts, based in Cyprus, through which Claimants hold and
have held their business interests, are invalid under Cypriot Law.

Respondent notes that the trust declarations of Dema Trustees and Dema Nominees as
regards their shares in Nabolena are not notarized.'°! Respondent further notes that
Claimants’ trust declarations pre-date the acquisition of shares in BC and KC and argues
that this fact calls into question Claimants’ ownership of the share acquisition vehicles.

'55 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 32.

'86 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 32.

57 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 30.

58 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {¥f 27, 30-31.

59 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 17; See also C-0384, Certificate of Incorporation of
Raycross dated 22 February 2008; C-0394, Certificate of Incorporation of Rayblock dated 22 February 2008; C-0404,
Certificate of Incorporation of Raybird dated 22 February 2008.

60 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 18.

'6! Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, 269.

s7

291.

292.

293.

294.

295.

Respondent argues that Claimant relies upon testimony from Mr. Kim as regards the
ownership of Nabolena which has proven to be changeable during the course of
proceedings. For example, neither the Request for Arbitration nor Mr. Kim’s first witness
statement make reference to the role of Dema Trustees and Dema Nominees and their trust
declarations in the ownership of Nabolena.'©? Respondent also cites a report, by Global
Witness, that states that it is not possible to determine the ultimate beneficiaries of Dema
Nominees and Dema Trustees. !3

Claimants argue that the oral trusts are valid under Cypriot Law and deny that there is
anything suspicious about their use of the oral trusts in their holding structure. '*

Claimants argue that, under the applicable Cypriot Law, it is not necessary for a trust
declaration to be notarized in order for such a declaration to be authentic.'® Claimants
further argue that, contrary to Respondent’s arguments, it is not salient that the Trust
Declarations pre-date the acquisition of shares in BC and KC by several months in each
case.!® Rather, Claimants state that it would be entirely unusual to execute the trusts over
and over in anticipation of future litigation or arbitration.

Claimants do not accept Respondent’s position as regards the evidence of Mr. Kim and
state that they have offered additional details as regards their holding structure in reply to
Respondent’s challenges to the validity of that holding structure. Claimants further argue
that the Global Witness report is unpersuasive, insofar as the Tribunal itself may come to
aconclusion on this matter, as the Tribunal is in possession of more information than were
the authors of the Global Witness report. !°

In this regard, Claimants cite a letter from Mr. Lellos Demetriades, a lawyer in Cyprus.!*
Mr. Demetriades states, after review of the Dema Trustees and Dema Nominees Trust
Declarations, “that under Cypriot law the absence of notarisation or witnesses does not
affect their validity”. Mr. Demetriades then offers the general observation that “under
Cyprus law a trust relating to the abovementioned trust declarations does not have to be in

writing and thus the need for notarisation or witnessing does not arise”.!°

'62 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, { 261

63 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, { 268. See also R-0156, Global Witness, “Funny Business in the
Turkmen-Ukraine Gas Trade” dated April 2006.

'64 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 64.

65 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections,
466 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections,
'67 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections,

I
[ 60.
[ 63.
[ 66.

'68 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 60.
69 €.0719, Letter from Lellos Demetriades to Jones Day dated 12 May 2015.

58

296.

297.

298.

299.

300.

301.

302.

303.

304.

Claimants submit that, in the absence of rebuttal evidence from Respondents, there is prima
facie evidence that the oral trusts were valid under Cypriot law.

The Tribunal must base its decision on the validity of the oral trusts in Cypriot law on the
preponderance of evidence available to it. Thus, the Tribunal considers neither the
testimony of Mr. Kim, nor the Global Witness report, to be determinative of the matter.

The Tribunal further notes that, although Claimants did not, at the outset of these
proceedings, offer all of the information as regards its holding structure that is now
available to the Tribunal, the ongoing clarification of Claimants’ holding structure does
not, of itself, call into question the veracity of the information now available to the
Tribunal.

The Tribunal notes in particular the letter from Mr. Demetriades.'”” Mr. Demetriades has
evident expertise in Cypriot Law and is clear and unequivocal in his statements as regards
the validity of the oral trusts in that legal system. The Tribunal considers that this letter is
strong evidence as regards the applicable Cypriot Law in general and the validity of the
Dema Trustees and Dema Nominees oral trusts in particular.

In the absence of further argument or evidence from Respondent on this point, and on the
basis of all the materials available to it, the Tribunal concludes that the oral trusts were
valid in Cypriot Law. This conclusion applies to the oral trusts as regards Dema Trustees
and Dema Nominees and to oral trusts found elsewhere in Claimants’ holding structure.

f. Conclusions on Ownership

The Tribunal notes once more that the precise scope of the “investment” may be the subject
of further discussion in any award on the merits of the dispute, as necessary.

For the purposes of the resolution of Respondent’s second objection it is necessary, only,
that Claimants prove their ownership at the time of the alleged breach.

The Tribunal concludes, on the basis of the argument and the evidence available to it, that
Claimants have proven their ownership of shares in BC and KC through the ownership
holding structure set out in the Request for Arbitration from 30 April 2008 until the dates
of the alleged breaches.

The Tribunal also concludes, on the basis of the argument and the evidence available to it,
that Claimants have proven their initial ownership of shares in BC and KC on the date of
first acquisition by Kaden and Nabolena respectively, on 27 January 2006. The Tribunal
reaches this conclusion on the basis of the preponderance of the evidence — notwithstanding

170 €.0719, Letter from Lellos Demetriades to Jones Day dated 12 May 2015.

59

Claimants not having produced documentation to prove continuity of ownership from that
date.

305. The Tribunal therefore rejects the objection to its jurisdiction on this ground.
(2) The Investors are Passive Rather than Active

306. Respondent argues that the term “investor” involves an active relationship to the
investment rather than merely a passive one. Respondent notes, for example, that certain
clauses in the BIT use the formulation “investments (made) by investors”.'”! Respondent
argues, on the basis of this language, that each Claimant must establish that he or she took
specific action involving substantial contribution and risk to make his or her
investment.'”* Respondent observes that there is support for such a requirement in the
awards of other ICSID tribunals. !7°

307. Respondent further argues that Claimants do not meet this requirement. Respondent states
that there is no evidence that Claimants were engaged in the management of their
investment. Respondent notes Mr. Kim’s statement in which he said that after the
acquisition of BC and KC he “had no further direct involvement with BC and KC”.!4 As
to a later statement from Mr. Kim, that sets out the involvement of Claimants in the
management of their investment, Respondent argues that Mr. Kim’s “self-serving change
in testimony is not credible”.!”> Respondent also stresses that Claimants have not provided
“any record of any meeting” at which Claimants took strategic decisions as regards BC
and KC,!76

308. Claimants dispute the existence of a distinction between active and passive “investors”.!7”
Claimants argue that it is necessary only to establish that the investing activity of their
intermediary entities is performed at their direction or that the intermediate entities are
subject to the investor’s control.!* Claimants argue that Respondent’s reliance on awards
of other ICSID tribunals is inapposite because of different language in the BITs in those

"71 €.0001, BIT, Art. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12 and 14, Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for
Bifurcation, 176-177; 1 338-344. See e.g., C-0001, BIT, Art, 2(1), 3(1) and 32).
2 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {{ 178.
"3 Respondent Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, 177; See also RL-0047, Standard
Chartered Bank v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/12, Award dated 2 November 2012
(“Standard Chartered Bank”).
"74 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, { 35; Kim I, | 27
175 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, {318
"76 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, { 320.
"77 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, ] 51-53.
"8 Claimants” Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 51. See also RL-0047, Standard Chartered Bank.

 

60

309.

310.

311.

312.

disputes and because the facts of those disputes are distinguishable.'”? Claimants further
cite awards of yet other ICSID tribunals for the proposition that the verb “made” does not
in itself require Claimants to meet a particular standard as “active” investors.'®°
Claimants also submit that, even if such a test is applicable, they were active managers of
their investment in BC and KC.'®! In particular, Claimants refer to the “Investment
Committee”, which they assert was a sub-committee of Claimants that met on a regular
basis to assist the collective decisions of the entire group on the handling of their strategic
investments. '*? Claimants give the example of a meeting of the Investment Committee held
on 3 April 2007, where various investment plans were presented to the group, and then
were subsequently implemented by the BC and KC Supervisory Boards.'*? Claimants
further cite their management of UCG as an example of the active management of their
investments. '** Claimants note that they would be in a position to offer further testimony
as regards their management, were it not the case that certain of their plant managers, such
as Mr. Nikitin, have been imprisoned by Respondent. '*°

The Tribunal takes note of Respondent’s argument as regards the implications of the term
“made” in the BIT. As set out at paragraphs 373-377 below, the term “made” does indicate
that there exists a temporal limitation on the legality requirement. However, the Tribunal
does not agree that the ordinary meaning of the term “made” does not necessarily entails a
requirement that Claimants must have an ongoing “active” role in the investment such that
the term imposes a limitation on the definition of “investor” under the BIT.

Therefore, the Tribunal rejects Respondent’s argument that the definition of “investors” in
the BIT must be read in a more restrictive manner or to require a greater degree of
involvement in the management of the investment by Claimants than would otherwise be
the case.

The Tribunal therefore holds that the BIT in this case does not contain a distinction between
active and passive investors requiring the former. Furthermore, even if there were such a
requirement, Claimants had an active role in the management of the BC and KC plants. In
particular, the Tribunal notes: (i) the role of the Investment Committee, and a sub-group of

179 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 67; see CL-0344, Alapli Elektrik B.V. v. Republic of Turkey,
ICSID Case No. ARB/08/13, Award dated 16 July 2012; RL-0047, Standard Chartered Bank.

'89 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, J 69; RL-0008, Abaclat, {ff 282, 393.

'8! Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, {| 38-40.

'§2 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, §{{ 38-40; Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary
Objections, {| 108-123.

'83 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 44. See also Kim Il, | 14; C-0518, Protocol No. 5 of
the Supervisory Board of KC dated 25 October 2007; Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, [ 112-117.
‘8 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, {| 41-43; Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary
Objections, | 118-123.

'85 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, {| 38-43.

61

313.

314.

315.

Claimants, to take decisions about Claimants’ investment strategy; '** (ii) the appointment
of several Claimants to the Supervisory Boards of BC and KC; '*’ and (iii) the development
of the BC and KC plants in anticipation of the aborted IPO. '**

The Tribunal also does not agree that the decisions of other ICSID tribunals alter this
conclusion. In Standard Chartered Bank, the respondent state argued that the claimants’
investment was limited the holding of loans, securities, and other financial claims. 189 The
tribunal accepted that these were investments ‘of’ the claimants and not investments ‘by’
the claimants.!°° In contrast, in this case, Claimants have undertaken not just to hold a
financial interest in the BC and KC plants but also to manage and develop those plants.
Standard Chartered Bank is therefore not analogous to the present proceedings. In Alapli
Elektrik, the decision of the Tribunal majority to which Respondent in this dispute refers
was that the claimant acquired the investment “for the sole purpose of manufacturing
international jurisdiction, at a time when the project was already in great difficulty and the
facts that are at the root of the dispute with Turkey were already known to the Sponsors of
the Project”.'®! In contrast, in this case, it is not in dispute that Claimants acquired the
shares in BC and KC several years before the plants came into difficulty and sought, in any
case, to develop the BC and KC plants for the purpose of future sale. Therefore, Alapli
Elektrik is also not analogous to the present proceedings.

The Tribunal denies the objection to its jurisdiction on this ground.
(3) | The Investors are too Remote from BC and KC

Respondent argues that an investor may be too remote from an investment for that
investment to attract protection under the BIT applicable to a dispute. Respondent argues
that “[i]n contrast to some other bilateral and multilateral investment treaties [...] the BIT
does not offer specific protection for the indirect ownership of shares or other remote
categories of investments”.!°? Respondent also relies on the awards of other ICSID
tribunals that have made reference to such a requirement.'*? Respondent also contends
further that each Claimant owns, at most, a “small and attenuated interest in BC and
KC”.!*4 Respondent argues that awards from other ICSID tribunals have held that a

'86 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, {| 38-40.
'87 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, J 44; See also Kim Il, | 14; C-0518, Protocol No. 5 of

the Super

 

ry Board of KC dated 25 October 2007; Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {ff 112-117.

'88 Claimants” Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 22.

'8° RL-0047, Standard Chartered Bank, 73.

'% RL-0047, Standard Chartered Bank, " 196-198.

91 Respondent Memorial on Preliminary Objection and Request for Bifurcation, n. 580.
'®2 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, { 176.

193

Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, 4 185-189.

'°4 Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {{ 198.

62

minority shareholding was too remote to attract protection under the terms of the applicable
international investment law.'®° As a final point, Respondent puts in issue the beneficial
nature of Claimants’ ownership of certain of its companies. Claimants’ holding structure,
set out at paragraphs 247-305 above, was such that Claimants are legal owners of certain
aspects of their holding structure and beneficial owners of other aspects. Respondent argues
that, even if Claimants’ oral trusts are valid in Cypriot Law, such trusts give Claimants at
best beneficial ownership of the assets.!°° Respondent notes that Claimants’ citation of
Reza Nemazee v. Iran entails a decision in which the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal
rejected a finding of beneficial ownership owing to the failure of the claimants to evidence
that ownership.”

316. Claimants, in contrast, state that in this case they together own a majority interest in the
investment and therefore that the authorities in question are distinguishable. !°* Claimants
also argue that the corporate structure they used as an investment strategy does not render
them “remote” as investors. Claimants argue that “Respondent’s depiction of Claimants’
corporate structure involving sixteen intermediaries is grossly exaggerated”.'°? The
corporate chain of ownership at the time of majority share acquisition was, according to
Claimants, four intermediary companies in the case of BC and three intermediary
companies in the case of KC. After reorganization BC and KC were owned through a chain
of “no more than eight intermediaries”.?°° Claimants argue that nothing in the BIT or in
the ICSID Convention limits the protection of international investment law to legal rather
than beneficial ownership. Claimants further assert that, in the awards of other ICSID
tribunals, beneficial ownership has been given at least the same extent of protection as legal
ownership. 7°!

317. Although the BIT does not offer specific protection for what Respondent terms “indirect
ownership” nor does it exclude such “indirect ownership” from the definitions of either
“investors” or “investments”. Furthermore, it is clear from the above analysis that the
definitions of those terms in Article 1 of the BIT may be read to include such ownership.

5 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, 186. See also RL-0020, Enron

Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/O1/3, Decision on Jurisdiction
dated 14 January 2004 (“Enron”).

9 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, | 270.

57 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, { 340. See also CL-0343, Reza Nemazee v. Islamic Republic of
Tran, lran-U.S. Claims Tribunal, Award No. 575-4-3 dated 10 December 1996, 155.

8 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, | 53-58.

'°9 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 71.

200 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 71 (emphasis in original).

21 CL-0411, Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul v. Republic of Tajikistan, SCC Case No. V064/2008, Partial Award on
Jurisdiction and Liability dated 2 September 2009, 144-145; RL-O117, James M. Saghi, Michael R. Saghi and
Allan J. Saghi v. Islamic Republic of Iran, Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal, Award No. 544-298-2 dated 22 January 1993.

 

  

63

318.

319.

320.

321.

322.

Moreover, although certain other ICSID tribunals have held that there may be
circumstances under which an investor is too remote from the investment in question, it is
more often the case that such tribunals find that their jurisdiction is not lost on this ground.
Respondent itself notes that several of the awards it cites are ones in which,
notwithstanding their comments about remoteness, the tribunals in question held that there
was a protected investment.2°? Thus, statements of the ICSID tribunals in Enron v.
Argentina, Société Générale v. Dominican Republic, and African Holding Co. v.
Democratic Republic of Congo are of limited application on this point.2%

The Tribunal notes that Respondent also cites Standard Chartered Bank, and Alapli
Elektrik, as regards “remoteness”. However, neither Standard Chartered Bank nor Alapli
Elektrik are analogous to the situation in the current dispute, for the reasons set out at
paragraph 313 above, and therefore the cases are not applicable for the disposition of this
issue.

The Tribunal concludes that there is no basis — in the BIT or in the authorities to which the
Parties make reference — to read a “remoteness” test into the definition of “investor”.
Indeed, Respondent does not offer any specificity as to what such a requirement would
entail. The Tribunal does not accept that Claimants were unaware of their investment. The
Tribunal also does not consider Claimants’ complex corporate structure to be sufficient, of
itself, to render the BIT not applicable. Furthermore, the Tribunal does not consider the
fact that certain aspects of the ownership holding structure entail a beneficial, rather than a
legal, ownership, to be material to the jurisdictional issue.

The Tribunal therefore rejects the objection to its jurisdiction on this ground.

In conclusion on these points, the Tribunal finds that Respondent has not substantiated its
objections that Claimants are not “investors” in accordance with the terms of the BIT and
the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal next turns to Respondent’s objections that Claimants
did not make an “investment”.

22 RL-0020, Enron; RL-0033, Noble Energy Inc. and MachalaPower Cia. Ltda. v. Republic of Ecuador and Consejo
Nacional de Electricidad, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/12, Decision on Jurisdiction dated 5 March 2008; RL-0046,
Société Générale in respect of DR Energy Holdings Lid. and Empresa Distribuidora de Electricidad del Este, S.A. v.

Domii

 

can Republic, LCIA Case No. UN7927, Award on Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction dated 19 September

2008 (“Société Générale”); RL-0010, African Holding Co. of America Inc. and Société Africaine de Construction au
Congo S.A.R.L. v. Democratic Republic of Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/21, Award on Objections and Jurisdiction

and Admiss

ibility dated 29 July 2008 (“African Holding”).

 

23 RL-0020, Enron; RL-0046, Société Générale; RL-0010, African Holding.

64

D. Objections that Claimants did not make an “Investment”

323. The second category of objections that Respondent raises relate to whether Claimants can
be said to have made an “investment” under the terms of the BIT. Respondent argues that
“numerous tribunals have recognized that a protected “investment” under the ICSID
Convention must involve substantial contribution and risk”?

324. Claimants argue in response that Respondent is reading “extra-textual jurisdictional
criteria” into the BIT.?°> Claimants argue that such criteria are “inapplicable” but are,
nevertheless, met by Claimants, and state that they “clearly made a contribution of value
in Uzbekistan and assumed a long-term, significant risk in doing so”.?°

325. At the outset, the Tribunal disagrees with Respondent’s general argument that there is a
restrictive test to be applied to the definition of “investments” in the BIT. In the Tribunal’s
view, this argument is without any basis.

326. First, to the extent that it is argued that obligations on states should be interpreted
restrictively, the VCLT eschews such canons of interpretation in favour of the general rule
of interpretation set forth in Article 31 of the VCLT.

327. Second, the BIT itself contains no such restrictions when read in accordance with the
VCLT. The definition of “investments” is broad, as is not uncommon in such treaties, so
as to encompass a wide range of business and financial activities in Host States.

328. Third, Respondent’s reference to other awards of other ICSID tribunals are inapposite.
Respondent itself notes that “[t]erms that are defined in the BIT must be accorded their
specific meaning under the BIT [in this dispute]”.°” The Tribunal, nevertheless, addresses
the specific awards cited by Respondent in the sections that follow.

329. Notwithstanding its more specific consideration in the sections that follow, as a preliminary
finding, the Tribunal holds that there is no basis in the text of the BIT to read a restrictive
definition of “investments” into the Treaty, nor is it persuaded by the citation of other
awards to do so.

330. In what follows the Tribunal considers each of Respondent’s specific objections to
Claimants’ investments in Uzbekistan to assess whether they cause Claimants to lose the

24 Respondent Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {ff 173, 185. See also fff 193-197 at
which Respondent relies upon KT Asia and Quiborax. RL-0027, KT Asia Investment Group B.V. v. Republic of
Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/8, Award dated 17 October 2013; RL-0042, Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic
Minerals S.A. & Allan Fosk Kapliin v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on
Jurisdiction dated 27 September 2012 (“Quiborax”).

285 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 57.

206 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, | 21; {Mf 34-37.

207 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, | 175.

 

65

protection of the BIT: (1) that the investment did not involve a capital contribution; (2) that
the investment was short term in nature; and (3) that the investment was made without the
awareness of the Uzbek Government.

(1) | The Investment Did Not Involve a Capital Contribution

331. Respondent argues that Claimants did not make a contribution of capital or equity in the
acquisition of BC and KC and therefore that there is no investment per se.”°* In particular,
Respondent argues that Claimants used loans from Kazkommertsbank Joint Stock
Company (“KKB”) — rather than their own capital or equity —- to fund their acquisitions
and that such use deprives those acquisitions of the protection of the BIT.7°

332. Respondent argues that neither Claimants’ majority share acquisition vehicles (Kaden and
Nabolena), nor Claimants themselves, contributed capital or equity to obtain the KKB
loans used to purchase the BC and KC shares.?!° According to Respondent, these loans
were unusual for KKB and were also under-collateralized. Respondent further alleges that
there is no evidence that Claimants were obliged to repay these loans.!!

333. Claimants argue that it is entirely proper to rely upon credit facilities to make an
investment. Claimants submit that they bear the risk for the repayment of the KKB loans.?!?
Claimants highlight that the 2006 KKB loans involved a guarantee by the Claimants-
controlled entity Caspian Cement LLP.?!? Claimants also state that interest continue to
accrue on these loans, interest that Claimants seek in damages in this arbitration.

334. It is undisputed that the investor must make an “investment”. The Tribunal, however,
holds that there is nothing in the BIT, nor in the ICSID Convention, to provide any
foundation for Respondent’s argument that investment arrangements dependent on credit
facilities for their financing are not “investments”.

335. Indeed, this argument is manifestly unsustainable. It is not at all unusual for investments
to entail the use of credit facilities by investors. As the tribunal in Sistem v. Kyrgyz
Republic observed “it is entirely normal for investment projects to be financed by
borrowed funds”.?'* Therefore, the Tribunal holds that Claimants’ reliance on a line of

208 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, 4
2 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objectio1
210 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, {{{ 291-301.

2!1 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, #¥{ 291-301.

22 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, {{{ 34-37; Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary
Objections, ] 101-123.

213 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 104.

214 CL-0196, Sistem Mithendislik Insaat Sanayi ve Ticaret A.§. v. Kyrgyz Republic, CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/06/1,
Award dated 9 September 2009 (“Sistem”), | 35; See also CL-0419, Caratube International Oil Company LLP v.
Republic of Kazakhstan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/12, Award dated 5 June 2012, { 355; CL-0420, Saipem S.p.A. v.

I 291-316.
292.

s, {
s, {

 

 

66

336.

337.

338.

339.

340.

credit from KKB does not vitiate Claimants’ status as “investors” nor does it make the
“investment” one that falls outside the protection of the BIT.

As to Respondent’s allegations with respect to the financing arrangement in this instance,
the Tribunal finds on the basis of the evidence before it that Respondent’s contention that
the loans were under-collateralized is not supported, given the guarantee provided by
Caspian Cement.

Furthermore, on the basis of the available evidence, Respondent’s contention that
Claimants may not be required to repay the loans is not supported. Respondent argues that
Claimants used proceeds from the 2008 KKB loans for the UCG non-dividend
distributions to its shareholders, rather than to repay the 2006 KKB loans.”!> The Tribunal
notes the letter from KKB, dated 8 May 2015, that confirms that the 2006 loans were
repaid in full.?!®

Finally, the Tribunal does not accept Respondent’s contention that the 2006 and 2008
KKB loans were related-party transactions. Respondent argues that the KKB loans were
a related-party transaction designed to profit Claimants while burdening the various
subsidiaries with debt and consequently defrauding the Kazakh Sovereign Wealth
Fund.”!” Claimants deny Respondent’s allegations,?!®
of “relatedness” between KKB and their companies. In particular, Claimants maintain that
they had no relation with KKB at the time the loans were issued in 2006 and 2008.
Claimants state that none of them held any key managerial positions at KKB when they
held managerial positions at Visor International Solutions.!? The Tribunal notes
Claimants’ explanation of the relationship between KKB and Claimants. On the basis of
the arguments and evidence available to it, the Tribunal holds that Respondent has failed
to establish the impropriety that it alleges.

and assert that there is no evidence

The Tribunal therefore denies the objection to its jurisdiction on this ground.
(2) The Investment was Short Term

Respondent argues that, insofar as Claimants had business interests in BC and KC, these
do not constitute a protected investment as the interests were anticipated to be short-

People’s Republic of Bangladesh, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on
Provisional Measures dated 21 March 2007, { 106.

215

Respondent's Reply on Preliminary Objections, {f{ 302-307.

216 C0527, Letter from KKB to UCG dated 8 May 2015. See also Nurmakhanova, {| 79.
2!7 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, {{{ 308-316.

218 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {ff 103-104.

21 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {{ 105-106.

67

341.

342.

343.

344.

345.

346.

term.?”° In particular, Respondent draws the Tribunal’s attention to Claimants’ statement
that their intention was to consolidate and sell their interests in BC and KC, either through
an IPO of the holding company, UGC, or direct to a private investor.?”!

Claimants do not dispute their intention to sell their interests,?”? but argue that such an

intention does not remove their investment from the protection of the BIT.*?* They note
that their intention was to invest in the BC and KC plants and then, at an opportune time in
terms of market conditions, to sell on their interests.

The Tribunal holds that there is nothing in the BIT, nor in the ICSID Convention, to provide
a foundation for Respondent’s argument that investments made with some measure of
intent to dispose, or possibly to dispose, of them in the short, rather than long, term do not
gain the protection of the BIT as “investments”.

The Tribunal agrees that there might be circumstances in which it would be appropriate for

in “investment” to lose the protection of a BIT on the grounds that it was “short term”.
Those circumstances might include, for example, where investors in a stock exchange
briefly hold shares in an undertaking, in the midst of buying and selling.

However, such circumstances do not obtain in this instance. Claimants made their initial
investment through the acquisition of a majority of shares in BC and KC and then made
further investments — for example to develop the facilities at the plant. It is not salient that
Claimants did so with the ultimate intention to either sell their interest through an IPO or
to a private investor. Indeed, this course of action is by no means unusual and not
inconsistent with the objects and purpose of international investment law.

The Tribunal therefore denies the objection to its jurisdiction on this ground.

(3) The Investment was Made without the Awareness of the Uzbek
Government

Respondent objects that the investment that Claimants purport to have made was done, if
it was done at all, without the awareness of the Uzbek Government.?* In particular,
Respondent argues that there is no evidence that the Uzbek Government had any
involvement with Claimants as regards the investment or that the Uzbek Government was

220 Respondent’s Opening Statement, Hearing Tr., Day 1, 26:2-8.

22! Respondent’s Opening Statement, Hearing Tr., Day 1, 26:2-8.

222 Kim IL, 17; Kim III, 6; see also Kim I, { 8.

23 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Submission, { 17.

224 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {| 34. Respondent’s Reply on
Preliminary Objections, {| 329-332.

68

347.

348.

349.

350.

225

aware that Claimants were indirect owners of BC and KC.?% Respondent compares the
situation in this case with that in the awards of other ICSID tribunals to argue that
Claimants’ investment does not attract the protection of the BIT.??°

Claimants respond that there is no requirement of Host State awareness (an “awareness
requirement”) to be found in the BIT or in the ICSID Convention.””’ Claimants state that
in the cases identified by Respondent, the reference to Government knowledge of, or co-
operation with, an investor was not a determinative factor in the tribunals’ decisions.?28
Claimants also argue that, in any event, it is not plausible that Respondent was unaware
of Claimants’ investment given the scale of Claimants’ investment in one of Uzbekistan’s
key industries, and given the fact that foreign investment companies such as KC and BC
must register with the Department of Justice in Tashkent.”

The Tribunal does not find any support in the BIT or in the ICSID Convention for the
argument that there exists an “awareness requirement” for an investment to benefit from
the protection of the BIT. Rather, the BIT constitutes consent to arbitration for “investors”
who make “investments” in accordance with the general terms of the BIT. Specific co-
operation with, or awareness of, investors activity by the Host State government is not
necessary.

As regards Respondents’ reference to the awards of other tribunals, in particular Enron v.
Argentina, Société Générale v. Dominican Republic, and African Holding v. Democratic
Republic of Congo, the Tribunal notes that those awards were made under the terms of
different BITs, and that the factual and legal backgrounds to the disputes were critically
different from those at issue in this dispute.

In Enron, the fact of the claimants’ participation in a scheme run by the host state
government was sufficient to rebut an argument by that host state that the state did not
consent to arbitration with the claimants.”*° In Enron there was a specific requirement for
investors to establish a particular investment vehicle to participate in the government
scheme. In this dispute, in contrast, there is no applicable Host State Government scheme
in which Claimants were expected to participate. Rather, Claimants’ investment was made
through the acquisition of shares from another private party. Therefore, the fact of the
existence of a host state scheme in Enron, and the use of that scheme by the claimants in
that case to demonstrate the host state’s consent, does not, of itself establish a general

Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {{{ 187-189; RL-0020, Enron,

52; RL-0046, Société Générale, 4 52; RL-0010, African Holding, { 100-101; Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary
Objections, ]] 329-332.

226 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {ff 187-188; | 199-201.

227 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, | 59.

28 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objection, {| 73.

29 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 74.

230 RL-0020, Enron.

69

351.

352.

353.

354.

355.

“awareness requirement” in international investment law. The situation in Enron is not
analogous to that in the current proceedings.

In Société Generale, the tribunal refers to the Enron award. However, the tribunal also
notes that in Enron there was a specific requirement for investors to establish a particular
investment vehicle to participate in the government scheme. Thus, the tribunal in Société
Generale, if anything, concurs with the analysis of Enron in paragraph 350 above, insofar
as it establishes only that where there is a requirement to engage with a host state scheme,
such engagement may constitute evidence of consent to arbitration on the part of the
respondent State.?*! The citation of the award in Société Générale is therefore also
unhelpful to Respondent’s case.

In African Holding, the tribunal’s citation of the Host State’s knowledge of the investor
was part of a general discussion on the investor’s relationship with the investment at issue
in the dispute and was not determinative of jurisdiction. The Tribunal finds that it offers
no support for Respondent’s argument that it read an “‘awareness requirement” into the BIT
in this dispute.

The examination of Host State awareness in the specific circumstances under consideration
by these other tribunals does not merit the conclusion that there is a general rule of
international investment law that stipulates an “awareness requirement” to be read into a
particular BIT or the ICSID Convention itself.

Indeed, the Tribunal considers this argument by Respondent to be inconsistent with the
objects and purpose of international investment law. The promotion of international
investment does not require a Host State to be aware of each and every investment made
in its territory. Rather, by its agreement of an investment treaty, the Host State makes the
offer of protection to any international investor whose investment falls within the terms of
the Treaty. In the absence of specific language to require it in a particular BIT, there is no
foundation for the claim that the offer of protection is implicitly restricted by reference to
an “awareness requirement”.

In the absence of such an “awareness requirement” for an investment to attract protection
under the BIT or the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal does not need to conclude on whether
or not the Uzbek state was aware of Claimants’ investment. However, the Tribunal notes
the arguments and evidence that Claimants adduce to indicate that there is a high likelihood
that the Uzbek state was aware of the investment particularly given the importance of the
cement industry to the Uzbek economy.?>

231 RL-0046, Société Générale.
232 RL-0010, African Holding.
233 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 74.

70

356.

357.

358.

359.

360.

The Tribunal therefore rejects the objection to its jurisdiction on this ground.
E. The Tribunal’s Conclusion on the Second Objection

For the reasons set out above, and subject to the resolution of the third and fourth
jurisdictional objections below, the Tribunal finds that Claimants are “investors” that made
an “investment” in accordance with the terms of the ICSID Convention and the BIT and
therefore dismisses Respondent’s second objection.

THE THIRD JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION - LEGALITY OF THE
INVESTMENT

A. — Introduction

Respondent’s third objection is that Claimants’ investment was not made in compliance
with Uzbek legislation and that therefore such investment does not attract protection under
the BIT. Respondent and Claimants have filed extensive pleadings regarding the third
objection. The third objection gained specificity through the course of the arbitration, and
the contentions of the Parties are assembled with that evolution in mind.

Respondent argues that it has consented under the BIT to arbitrate disputes arising out of
investments that were made in compliance with its laws, and conversely that it did not
consent to arbitrate disputes arising out of unlawful investments. Claimants in response
observe that “[b]oth Parties agree that the relevant BIT includes an ‘in accordance with
the law’ or ‘legality’ provision,’ but disagree sharply on the scope [of the legality
requirement] and whether the provision was violated”.

Respondent alleges that Claimants’ investment is not in compliance with numerous
specific code provisions, laws, resolutions, orders or rules. Consequently, Respondent
contends that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction, or that Claimants’ claims are inadmissible
under the BIT, the ICSID Convention and principles of international public policy.?>*
Claimants counter that Respondent’s objection is based on “erroneous factual
assumptions” (including assumptions supported only by what Claimants allege to be
demonstrably false witness statements) and on “a purposeful misreading of Uzbek law
(including the addition of legal requirements that did not even exist during the time of
Claimants’ investment)”.”*° Claimants argue that they “have not violated any Uzbek Law,
let alone a fundamental legal principle of Uzbek Law, in the making of their investments
[...] [nJor have Claimants committed any illegality under international law or international

234 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 185.
235 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, 6.
236 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, {| 5 (emphasis in original).

71

public policy such that this Tribunal would lack jurisdiction over Claimants’ claims for
>» 237

breach of the Treaty”.

361. Claimants further submit that as Respondent almost certainly knew the particular facts
said to be at the root of the illegality argument, namely that the price paid at the TSE was
lower than fair market value, and that Respondent did nothing to “cure this so-called
illegality”, that the Respondent as a consequence should be estopped from pursuing this
objection.?°*

362. Inthe following sections the Tribunal first ascertains the scope of the legality requirement
applicable in this proceeding and second applies that requirement to each of the illegalities
alleged by Respondent. For each section, the views of the Parties are summarized prior to
the Tribunal setting forth its analysis and holdings.

B. The Scope of the Legality Requirement
(1) Article 12 of the BIT: The Source of the Legality Requirement

363. Respondent submits that it has limited its consent to arbitrate through a legality
requirement in Articles 12, 1(3), 2(2) and 11 of the Kazakhstan-Uzbekistan BIT.?*?
According to Respondent, prior ICSID tribunals confronted with similar legality
provisions have held that disputes arising out of unlawful investments impose a
jurisdictional bar and are beyond the scope of the parties’ consent.?4° Even where no such
express legality clause is found in the treaty, Respondent asserts that ICSID tribunals have

found that such a requirement is implicit.24! Respondent highlights that “Claimants agree

that the [BIT] contains an ‘in accordance-with-law’ or ‘legality provision’”.74”

237 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 186.

238 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {| 436-437.

2° Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, {{{ 204-205.

20 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {| 206-207 (citing RL-0012,
Alasdair Ross Anderson et al v. Republic of Costa Rica, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/3, Award dated 19 May 2010
(“Anderson”); RL-0022, Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/20, Award dated 14 July 2010;
RL-0026, Inceysa Vallisoletana, S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26, Award dated 2 August
2006; RL-0030, Metal-Tech Ltd. v. Republic of Uzbekistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/3, Award dated 4 October 2013
(“Metal-Tech”)).

241 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, {{[209-210 (citing RL-0039, Plama Consortium Limited v.
Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Award dated 27 August 2008; RL-0038, Phoenix Action, Ltd. v.
Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award dated 15 April 2009 (“Phoenix Action”); RL-0044, SAUR
International S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/4, Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability dated 6
June 2012; RL-0025, Gustav F W Hamester GmbH & Co KG v. Republic of Ghana, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O7/24,
Award dated 18 June 2010 (“Hamester”).

282 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, 185 (quoting Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary
Objections, { 61 n. 164).

72

364.

365.

366.

367.

368.

243,

Although the Parties agree that the BIT contains a legality requirement, the precise source
and language of that requirement must be identified so that the Tribunal may ascertain its
scope and content. Respondent argues that its objection finds its source in four clauses of
the BIT: Articles 12, 1(3), 2(2), and 11.74? The Tribunal notes that Respondent emphasises
Article 12 as the basis of the requirement with the references in other cited articles to the
laws of the Host State as reinforcing the existence of such a requirement.

Article 12 of the BIT is entitled “Application of the Agreement” and provides:

This Agreement shall apply to investments within the territory of
one Contracting Party’s State, made in compliance with its
legislation by investors from the other Contracting Party’s State,
regardless of whether they were made before or after the entry into
force of this Agreement (emphasis added).

The language of Article 12 limits the “application” of the BIT to investments made in
compliance with the legislation of Uzbekistan. The Tribunal observes that other tribunals
have found similar language to establish a legality requirement when such language is
present in the relevant BIT as a part of the definition of “investment”. The Tribunal’s
conclusion in the present case is all the stronger where the relevant language is found in a
specific clause delineating the scope of application of the BIT. Such language in a BIT is
sometimes referred to as an “explicit legality requirement”.**> The Tribunal will refer to
the requirement simply as the “legality requirement”.

As to the other articles of the BIT referenced by Respondent, the Tribunal does not
consider that the presence of similar language elsewhere in the BIT imports a legality
requirement broader or more demanding than Article 12. Indeed, the other articles relied
upon do not appear to bear on the legality requirement at all.

As regards Articles 2(2) and 11 of the BIT, these do not pertain to the scope of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Article 2(2) provides: “Within the scope of the laws of its State,
each Contracting Party will support various forms of mutual investment and ensure their
protection within the territory of its State and will not infringe upon these investments by
arbitrary control measures, in respect of their operation, use, and placement”. The
reference to the “scope of the laws of its State” in this Article is a limitation on the extent
of the Contracting Parties’ obligations to support and protect investments. It does not
pertain to the definition of such investments or the application of the BIT to such
investments. Article 11 states: “Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, all

Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, {f{ 204-205.

24 See, e.g., RL-0012, Anderson and the interpretation of the BIT between Costa Rica and Canada at ff 51-61. See
further CL-0350, Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines, CSID Case No
ARB/03/25, Award dated 16 August 2007 (“Fraport”).

5 See, e.g., CL-0350, Fraport, | 332.

73

investments made in accordance with this Agreement shall be governed by the laws in
force within the territory of the Contracting Party’s State, wherein said investments were
made”. The reference to “governed by the laws in force...” in this Article relates to the
laws applicable within a territory in which investments are made. It does not pertain to the
definition of such investments or the application of the BIT to such investments.

369. As to Article 1(3), this also does not pertain to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. The definition
of “investment” is found in Article 1(2): an investment is “any kind of asset and the rights
thereto, as well as intellectual property rights, invested by investors of one Contracting
Party within the territory of the other Contracting Party’s State for profit (income) and
includes, in particular, but not exclusively [...]”. In some BITs, the presence of a “made
in accordance with law” requirement is argued to flow from the definition of investment.
However, Article 1(2) of the BIT here does not contain any statement as to the legality of
such investments or any obligation that such investments be made in accordance with law.
Rather, Respondent places reliance on Article 1(3), which states: “Changing the form of
investments, made in accordance with the law of the Contracting Party’s State at the place
of investment, does not change its qualification as an investment”. Article 1(3) can be read
in one of two ways: (i) “Changing the form of investments, [such investments having
been] made in accordance with the law [...]” or (ii) “changing the form of investments,
[such changes having been] made in accordance with the law [...]”. Of these two possible
readings, the second is the better interpretation in the Tribunal’s opinion. Article 1(2)
defines “investment”. Article 1(3) is a special rule applicable to changes to the form of
investment. It would be incorrect to read into the general requirement as to the definition
of “investment” the special rule that relates to the protection of investments that may
change form. Article 1(3) in the Tribunal’s opinion therefore does not support the claim
that investments, in general, must be “in accordance with law”.

370. Respondent also bases its objection on an implicit legality requirement in international
law, citing to the awards of other ICSID tribunals.“© The Tribunal notes that references
as to an “implicit legality requirement” have been made even where there is an explicit
legality requirement in the text of the BIT.74” However, following the general principle of
applying a specific requirement over a general one, the presence of an explicit legality
requirement — such as that in Article 12 — defines the jurisdictional impact of a legality
requirement thereby displacing any implicit legality requirement as regards jurisdictional
questions. Similar reasoning has been adopted by other ICSID tribunals.™“* Moreover,
given the Tribunal’s finding that an explicit legality requirement is present in Article 12,
the Tribunal need not rule on the existence of a parallel legality requirement particularly

26 Respondent Reply on Preliminary Objections, 184-186.
7 See, e.g., CL-0350, Fraport, 1 332; RL-0038, Phoenix Action, n. 231.
8 See, e.g., RL-0025, Hamester, 1 123-128; CL-0350, Fraport, W 344-345.

74

371.

372.

373.

374.

as explicit legality requirement here is not limited by the text in any unusual way and,
indeed, neither Party has so argued.

Before interpreting the scope of the requirement in Article 12, the Tribunal observes that
the Parties in their submissions have utilized various terms when referring to the legality
requirement. Although the English text of Article 12 uses the phrase “made in compliance
with legislation,” both Parties in their submissions at times equate this phrase with “made
in accordance with law”.”4? Moreover, both Parties at various points equate an investment
not “made in accordance with law” with an “illegal investment”. As a matter of
interpretation, the Tribunal adopts the apparent view of the Parties that the phrases “made
in compliance with legislation” and “made in accordance with law” involve equivalent
obligations. Likewise, the Tribunal views an investment that is made not in accordance
with, or not in compliance with, the law to be an investment that is illegal under
Uzbekistan law. Thus, in its analysis in this Award, the Tribunal’s use of the phrases
“legality requirement” or “made in accordance with law” should be read as equivalent to
the “made in compliance with legislation” requirement in Article 12 of the BIT.

As far as the scope of the legality requirement is concerned, the Tribunal finds that there
are three dimensions to be considered: temporal, formal, and substantive.

(2) “Made”: The Temporal Scope and Causative Dimension of the Legality
Requirement.

Claimants assert that “tribunals have found that a violation of law depriving a claimant of
treaty protection must also be directly linked to the claimant’s ability to make the
investment”.?’ Claimants argue that Respondent admits that an “illegality defense to
jurisdiction is concerned only with violations of law [...] occurring ‘at the initiation of the
’”. especially where the treaty (like the BIT) “requires that investments be

‘made’ in accordance with host State law”.?*!

investment

The Tribunal finds that the legality requirement has a temporal dimension. The word
“made”, both in terms of its ordinary meaning and its use in the past tense, indicates that
the test applies at the time the investment is established. It is not a requirement subsequent
to the making of the investment. Indeed, if this were not so, the second use of the word
“made” in Article 12 of the BIT would make no sense:

This Agreement shall apply to investments within the territory of
one Contracting Party’s State, made in compliance with its

~9 Although not argued by the Parties, the Tribunal observes there is support for the equation of legislation with law
in the original Russian text. It appears that the English word “law” in Article 1(3) and the word “legislation” in Article

12 are both
250 Claimants’ Pt

ian word “3aKOHOaTeBCTBO”.

   

251 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, { 39 (citing RL-0025, Hamester).

75

legislation by investors from the other Contracting Party’s State,
regardless of whether they were made before or after the entry into
force of this Agreement (emphasis added).

375. Other tribunals have reached similar conclusions where the word “made” was the
operative term in the particular clause. In Quiborax v. Bolivia, for example, the tribunal
held that the word “made” imposed a temporal restriction on the legality requirement in
the BIT relevant to that proceeding.*>* Similarly, in Hamester v. Ghana, the tribunal held
that the legality requirement in that BIT, in particular the term “made”.
scope of application of the BIT “only by reference to legality at the initiation of the
investment”.?>> The tribunal continued: “the legality of the creation of the investment is a
jurisdictional issue; the legality of the investor’s conduct during the life of the investment
is a merits issue”.2* Likewise, tribunals facing arguably analogous terminology have
found a temporal limitation. In the 2013 award in Metal-Tech v. Uzbekistan, for example,
the tribunal read the word “implemented” as imposing a temporal restriction on the
legality requirement in the BIT relevant to that proceeding.”

conditions the

 

376. Further, the use of the term “made” indicates that an additional consideration in the
examination of a violation of the law is whether the illegal action was related to Claimants’
making of the investment. If a violation of the law is not related to Claimants’ decision to
make the investment, then such violation is not an action within the scope of the legality
requirement.

377. The Tribunal therefore holds that the scope of application of the BIT is limited by a
legality requirement that an investment must be “in compliance with [Host State]
legislation” at the time that the investment is made. This limitation does not discount the
possibility that there may be illegal action by Claimants at a later date or an illegal action
unrelated to the making of the investment, but any such later illegality would be a matter
for the Tribunal to consider at the merits stage of these proceedings.

252 RL-0042, Quiborax, || 266. The Quiborax tribunal held that the BIT’s legality requirement was limited to the time
of the establishment of the investment and it did not extend to the subsequent performance. Indeed, the treaty refers
to the legality requirement in the past tense by using the word investments “made” in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the host state (in Spanish, “haya efectuado”).

253 RL-0025, Hamester, | 127.

254 RL-0025, Hamester, | 127. The tribunal also concluded that this specific language displaced at the jurisdictional
phase the reach of what is described in this award as the implicit legality requirement.

55 RL-0030, Metal-Tech, {| 185-193. In this proceeding, the tribunal’s jurisdiction to arbitrate investment disputes
pursuant to Article 8 of the treaty hinged upon the definition of investment. Article 1(1) of the treaty defined
investments as “[...] any kind of assets, implemented in accordance with the laws and regulations” of the host state.
Uzbekistan had urged arbitrators to read “implemented” in a broad temporal fashion so as to mean established and
operated. However, the tribunal elected to read the term as akin to “established” only, thus consonant with another
term (“invested”) that is commonly seen in other bilateral investment treaties. Indeed, the arbitrators took comfort
from the wider “context”, and in particular the fact that the term “implemented” was used at another juncture in the
treaty — the transfers provision — to denote the particular day that an investment was made.

 

 

76

378.

379.

(3) “Legislation”: The Formal Scope of the Legality Requirement.

The Tribunal finds that the legality requirement has a formal dimension that turns on the
meaning given to the word “legislation”. As noted at paragraph 371 above, the Parties use
the phrases “in accordance with law” and “in compliance with legislation”
interchangeably. The Tribunal agrees that the term “law” and the term “legislation”
indicate largely overlapping descriptions of normative legal acts. It could be argued that
the term “legislation” is a narrower form of “law” pointing only to statutory law but not,
for example, to higher laws such as a constitution. The Tribunal concludes that the better
reading is that the legality requirement found in Article 12 of the BIT requires that the
investment be made in compliance with the legislation of the Host State, where the term
“legislation” encompasses those normative actions regarded as “law” by the Host State’s
legal system.

Professor William Butler, Claimant’ s Expert on Uzbekistan Law and a Senior Jurisconsult
by examination in the Republic of Uzbekistan, in his Second Expert Report provides an
opinion as to the scope of the term “laws” within the Uzbekistan legal system. He opines:

[...] Uzbekistan legislation and legal doctrine recognizes a hierarchy
of sources of law and is among the few countries in the world to
have reduced that hierarchy to codified form. The codification takes
the form of the Law of the Republic Uzbekistan on Normative-Legal
Acts, adopted 14 December 2000, as amended to December 2014
[...] The Law on Normative-Legal Acts determines, inter alia,
precisely what a normative-legal act is in Uzbekistan; namely, an
“official document” adopted in accordance with the Law on
Normative-Legal Acts that establishes, changes, or repeals legal
norms in their capacity as generally-binding State prescriptions. It
also sets forth the requirements for the registration and obligatory
publication of the normative-legal acts. [...] The legal system of
Uzbekistan is also structured on the basis that violations of law,
whether criminal, administrative, labour, civil, or otherwise, may be
sanctioned only by the relevant branch legislation and within the
limits established by it. Non-normative legal acts may not create
general normative consequences contrary to general legislation. [...]
The types of normative-legal acts are set out in hierarchical
sequence from top to bottom in Article 5 of the Law on Normative-
Legal Acts:

e Constitution of the Republic Uzbekistan;

e laws of the Republic Uzbekistan;

e decrees of chambers of the Olii Mazhlis of the Republic
Uzbekistan (as amended by Law of 3 December 2004, No.
714-ID;

77

380.

381.

382.

383.

e edicts, decrees, and regulations of the President of the
Republic Uzbekistan;

e decrees (also called resolutions) of the Cabinet of Ministers
of the Republic Uzbekistan;

e orders and decrees of ministries, State committees, and
departments.?°°

The Tribunal is persuaded that the term “legislation” for the purposes of Article 12 of the
BIT encompasses, and is limited to, the normative-legal acts set out in Article 5 of the
Law on Normative-Legal Acts. Conduct not in compliance with a normative legal act
other than those normative-legal acts set out in Article 5 of the Law on Normative-Legal
Acts does not constitute conduct addressed by the legality requirement.

(4) “In Compliance with Legislation”: The Substantive Content and Scope
of the Legality Requirement

a. The Issue of the Substantive Scope of the Legality Requirement

The third dimension to the scope of the legality requirement is substantive. Both Parties
accept that not all actions not “in compliance with legislation” will render an investment
outside of the protections of the BIT. The Parties disagree, however, as to how the
Tribunal is to identify those acts of noncompliance to which the legality requirement
applies. That is, by what test is the Tribunal to ascertain what is a sufficiently serious act
of noncompliance. Articulation of the substantive limits to the illegality requirement
requires the interpretation of Article 12 in accordance with the rules set forth in the VCLT.

b. Contentions of the Parties

Respondent does not so much define the test that the Tribunal must apply as it asserts that
the Uzbek Law violations by Claimants are not trivial but rather are of a manifestly serious
character. Respondent asserts, for example, that Claimants’ “false disclosures were
deliberate and material”, and they caused significant harm to the State, the TSE, the
clearing house, the brokers and the minority shareholders while providing a significant
benefit to Claimants.**’ Respondent does, however, disagree with several specific
limitations on the legality requirement advanced by Claimants.”*

Claimants contend that prior tribunals dealing with “in accordance with law” provisions
have found that “only fundamental violations of law that are necessary to the making of

256 Butler I, (ff 2-5.

257 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, § 211.

258 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, {185 ef seg. Respondent disagrees, for example, that there is a
good faith exception to the legality requirement (§{f 185-207).

78

384.

385.

an illegal investment will deprive an investor-State tribunal of jurisdiction”.*? According
to Claimants, “[o]nly where the investment is not capable of being made under Uzbek
Law — where it constitutes a violation of a ‘fundamental rule of law’ or ‘fundamental legal
principles’ rendering the transaction void ab initio or illegal per se — would it fall outside
the scope of protected investments”.”® Although “tribunals have differed in their specific
definition of ‘fundamental,’ two factors have been a constant”: (1) “whether [the
violation] renders the investment void ab initio or merely voidable”; and (2) “whether
there is a specified cure for the violation in host State law”. 76!

c. The Tribunal’s Analysis of the Substantive Scope of the Legality
Requirement

The legality requirement reflects a condition of great importance to the Host State, the
international community and to investors contemplating a major undertaking. Numerous
tribunals have addressed the legality requirement present in other BITs and forged, if not
a test of the substantive scope of the legality requirement, a series of statements that have
come to be employed by ICSID tribunals. The dominant tendency within these awards is
(1) to state that the substantive scope of the legality requirement is limited to violations of
fundamental laws of the Host State and (2) to state a variety of rule-like statements
whereby the first proposition may be applied.

The Tribunal does not find the analysis thus far satisfactory. The rule-like statements in
other awards are in several instances constructed without reference either to the text of the
treaty in question or to underlying principles. A characteristic of rules is that they may
include more situations than appropriate (over-inclusive) and simultaneously not include
situations that should be captured (under-inclusive). Previous tribunals through rule-like
statements, as a practical matter, have approximated what this Tribunal regards as the core
of those acts that trigger a legality requirement, but the lack of underlying principles
makes problematic a nuanced articulation of the boundaries of that core. Although all
proceedings are contested, unmoored rule-like statements have accentuated the
contestation in this proceeding. Moreover, such rule-like statements are not necessarily
phrased in ways that can be applied easily to other Host State laws, or adapted to the
variety of legal systems encountered by ICSID tribunals.

28° Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, { 34 (emphasis in original) (citing CL-0198, Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil
Telekomikasyon Hizmetleri A.S. v. Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16, Award dated 29 July 2008;
CL-0351, Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen, 1CSID Case No, ARB/05/17, Award dated 6 February
2008; CL-0435, Hochtief A.G. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No, ARB/07/31, Decision on Liability dated 29
December 2014; RL-0042, Quiborax).

26 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 185.

261 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {{ 35-37 (citing CL-0347, Liman Caspian Oil BV and NCL Dutch Investments BV
v. Republic of Kazakhstan, 1CSID Case No. ARB/07/14, Award dated 22 June 2010 (excerpts) (“Liman”).

79

386.

387.

388.

389.

390.

391.

392.

As already noted, the legality requirement in the instant proceeding is found in Article 12
of the BIT. The proper place to begin therefore is with the interpretation of Article 12 in
accordance with the VCLT.

Article 31 of the VCLT is entitled the “General Rule of Interpretation”. Article 31(1)
provides that “[a] treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object
and purpose”. Article 31(2) proceeds to specify that “context” includes, in addition to the
text, the preamble of the treaty.

Interpretation under Article 31 of the VCLT is a process of progressive encirclement
where the interpreter starts under the general rule with (1) the ordinary meaning of the
terms of the treaty, (2) in their context and (3) in light of the treaty’s object and purpose,
and by cycling through this three-step inquiry iteratively closes in upon the proper
interpretation. In approaching this task, it is important to observe that the VCLT does not
privilege any one of these three aspects of the interpretation method. The meaning of a
word or phrase is not solely a matter of dictionaries and linguistics. Rather, the
interpretation of a word or phrase involves a complex task of considering the ordinary
meaning of a word or phrase in the context in which that word or phrase is found and in
light of the object and purpose of the document.

Apart from the above analysis of the terms “made” and “legislation”, reference to the
ordinary meaning of the terms in Article 12 does not suggest limitations on the substantive
scope of the legality requirement. The ordinary meaning of the phrase “made in
compliance with legislation” is inclusive and without explicit substantive limitations.

The lack of support for substantive limits in the ordinary meaning of the terms used is
striking inasmuch the Tribunal is not aware of any authority that argues that the legality
requirement has no limits. On the contrary, many, if not all, other tribunals exclude minor
or trivial acts not in compliance with legislation as not the type of acts intended to be
captured by a legality requirement.” Further, the Parties do not dispute that the legality
requirement does not include minor or trivial acts of noncompliance.

The limitations on the substantive scope of the terms in Article 12 become apparent when
the ordinary meaning of the terms is considered in their context and in light of the object
and purpose of the treaty.

As to context, Article 12 of the BIT is entitled “Application of the Agreement”. This is
significant in that the consequence of finding a failure to satisfy the legality requirement
is that the BIT does not apply to the investment in question. The legality requirement does

2 See, ¢.g., RL-0042, Quiborax.

80

not only remove access to arbitration but removes the obligations of the Host State vis-a-
vis the investor and the investment in total. This, on any view, is a very significant — and
harsh — consequence.

393. Context also includes the preamble which is a primary textual location for ascertaining
the object and purpose of the treaty. The preamble of the BIT indicates that Kazakhstan
and Uzbekistan entered into the BIT:

[D]esiring to promote greater economic cooperation between them
for the mutual benefit of both states on a long-term basis,

[R]ecognising the need to promote and protect investments in order
to create and maintain favourable conditions for investors of one
Contracting Party’s State within the territory of the other
Contracting Party’s State, and

[B]eing in agreement that a stable investment framework will ensure
maximally efficient utilisation of economic resources and the
development of productive forces.?

394. It is the combination of desiring to “promote greater economic cooperation” and the fact
that an act not in compliance with legislation under Article 12 excludes an investment
from the scope of application of the BIT generally, that indicates the necessary substantive
limits on the legality requirement. Given the aim of encouraging investment through the
provision of some measure of security, it is not plausible that the drafters of the BIT
intended to include minor acts of noncompliance as a basis for denying jurisdiction.

395. The exclusion of acts of noncompliance that are minor or trivial, however, does not
establish that the legality requirement is limited to violations of fundamental laws.

396. In the Tribunal’s view, a more principled approach is to be guided in the interpretive task
by the principle of proportionality. The Tribunal must balance the object of promoting
economic relations by providing a stable investment framework with the harsh
consequence of denying the application of the BIT in total when the investment is not
made in compliance with legislation. The denial of the protections of the BIT is a harsh
consequence that is a proportional response only when its application is triggered by
noncompliance with a law that results in a compromise of a correspondingly significant
interest of the Host State.

263 C0001, BIT.

81

397. Several tribunals have referred to proportionality as a principle informing its decision to
limit the substantive scope of the legality requirement. In its Decision on Jurisdiction in
Metalpar v. Argentina, for example, the tribunal wrote:

As explained above, the Organic Law of the General Inspectorate of
Justice concerning the Law of Commercial Societies, indicated that
sanctions may be imposed for violations of the law, statutes or
regulations, which would include lack of registration of a foreign
company in the Public Registry of Commerce. These sanctions are,
in sum, a notice of warning and fines imposed on the company and
its directors.

In the Tribunal’s view, the lack of adequate registration could be
sanctioned by refusing to register certain documents of the
company, through a notice of warning, or by imposition of a fine on
the company or its directors, but it would be disproportionate to
punish this omission to register by denying the investor an essential
protection such as access to ICSID tribunals.

398. The phrase “noncompliance with a law that results in a compromise of a correspondingly
significant interest of the Host State” is chosen so as to focus more sharply the substantive
scope of the legality requirement not on whether the law is fundamental but rather on the
significance of the violation. The Tribunal believes that the gravity of the law itself is a
central part of the examination but not the sole focal point. It is not only the law, but the
act of noncompliance (or in some wordings, the violation) that is key. The seriousness of
the act is a combination of both the importance of the requirements in the law and the
flagrancy of the investor’s noncompliance. The text or standing of the law — although
central — does not in and of itself determine whether the legality requirement is triggered.
Rather, the law must be considered in concert with the particulars of the investor’s
violation. An investor may violate a law of some import egregiously or it may violate a
law of fundamental importance in only a trivial or accidental way. Seriousness to the Host
State is to be determined by the overall outcome, which will depend on the seriousness of
the law viewed in concert with the seriousness of the violation.

399. Adoption of a legal principle places the application of that principle, as well as a measure
of appreciation, with the tribunal. In this sense, rules are preferable in that they both
provide more clarity to governments and investors and channel more strongly the decision
making of tribunals. This Tribunal would prefer a legality requirement in the BIT that is
textually clear and specific. That is not the case, however. Presented with the bare bones
language of Article 12, the Tribunal finds that the proper interpretation requires the
application of a principle. The use of principle-based reasoning rather than rule-based

24 CL-0437, Metalpar S.A. and Buen Aire S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/5, Decision on
Jurisdiction dated 27 April 2006 (excerpts of English translation) (“Metalpar”), {| 83-84.

82

categorical divides is more appropriate when States themselves in drafting a treaty provide
only objectives. Rule-like statements constructed by tribunals in such instances provide
the comfort of certainty but do so without justification for either their under or over
inclusiveness. The Tribunal in this sense does not so much seek to increase the scope of
acts captured as a practical matter by existing rule-like statements but rather aims to
identify the underlying principle that can provide a more nuanced definition of the limits
of the acts of noncompliance that would trigger the legality requirement.

400. The focus on the principle of proportionality (rather than on rule-like statements) means
that the proper test must be applied on a case-by-case basis taking into account all relevant
factors. Many of those factors are the ones that have been set out by other tribunals in the
form of rule-like statements. But the incorporation of them into reasoning on the basis of
an application of a principle renders them factors rather than categorical divides.
Principles require the tribunal to treat each case on its own facts. Of course, where treaties
add detail to the legality requirement, then rule based categorical divides may become
appropriate.

401. The shift from rule-like statements to the application of the principle of proportionality
transforms many of the rule-like statements articulated by tribunals to date into factors to
be considered. For example, Claimants assert that the legality requirement requires that
the act be taken in bad faith and that there is a good faith exception under international
law for violations of local law particularly where the Host State law is not clear as, it
argues, is the case in this proceeding. Claimants relying on the MTD v. Chile and Anderson
v. Costa Rica cases submit:

Anderson is premised on the existence of a good faith exception, as
it suggests that an investor who performs “the kind of due diligence
that reasonable investors would have undertaken” may retain
protection under the BIT in spite of a potential violation of domestic
law. And MTD stands for the proposition that a host State has a duty
to act coherently in the implementation and application of its laws
and regulations. If the State promulgates a legal regime that is
confusing or internally contradictory, a good faith violation of that
legal regime “is the responsibility [of the Host State], not of the

investor”.?°

 

265 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, { 166.
266 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 167 (citing RL-0012, Anderson, 58, and CL-0245, MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and
MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile, CSID Case No. ARB/O1/7, Award dated 25 May 2004, | 164).

83

Claimants assert that several tribunals have found that a legality provision will not bar
jurisdiction where the alleged violation of law was made in good faith.?67

402. Respondent submits “[a]s the Anderson decision reflects, bad faith or intent is not required
where, as here, the BIT conditions its protection on the investor making its investment in
accordance with host State’s law”.7°* Respondent also contends that “Claimants fail to
establish that there is an exception to the legality requirement in the BIT for investments
that were made in violation of law, where the investor undertook in good faith to comply
with the law”.?

403. For this Tribunal, focusing on the seriousness of non-compliance, both in terms of the
seriousness of the law and the action taken by the investor, makes the good faith of the
investor something that is considered as a factor in the overall assessment of the
proportionality between the violation and the sanction. An action in good faith possibly
may render an act of noncompliance less serious, but — depending on the seriousness of
the law violated — not necessarily. It may be that the law alleged to be violated has as an
element of a violation that bad faith or a specific intent is required. Likewise, it may be
that the law alleged to be violated provides an exception if the act is undertaken in good
faith when, for example, due diligence is exercised.

404. By way of summary, having considered the submissions of the Parties as well as the
commentary of publicists and the awards of other tribunals cited by the Parties, the
Tribunal holds that the legality requirement in the BIT denies the protections of the BIT
to claims when the investment involved was made in noncompliance with a law of
Uzbekistan where together the act of noncompliance and the content of the legal
obligation results in a compromise of a correspondingly significant interest of Uzbekistan.
This test requires a case-by-case analysis examining both the seriousness of the investor’ s
conduct and the significance of the obligation not complied with so as to ensure that the
harshness of the sanction of placing the investment outside of the protections of the BIT
is a proportionate consequence for the violation examined. To hold that the Tribunal is to
examine the applicability of the legality requirement on a case-by-case basis does not
mean that it is done without guidance. The proportionality principle guides the Tribunal’s
consideration and indicates that the combination of the investor’s conduct and the law
involved must result in a compromise of a significant interest of the Host State.

?67 Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 229. Claimants also argue that the present case is
entirely distinguishable from Anderson v. Costa Rica, Plama y. Bulgaria and Inceysa v. El Salvador where “the
claimants had uniformly acted knowingly and in bad faith to commit ‘serious’ violations of the host State’s law in
order to make per se illegal investments”. Whereas in this case, Claimants “acted in good faith to make lawful
legitimate investments”. Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 225; Claimants’ Rejoinder on
Preliminary Objections, { 421.

268 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, {| 187.

269 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, J 196.

 
 

 

84

405. The Tribunal’s case-by-case application of the legality requirement involves three steps.

406. First the Tribunal must assess the significance of the obligation with which the investor
is alleged to not comply. In undertaking this assessment for this objection, the Tribunal
identified the following non-exhaustive list of relevant considerations:

e What does the level of sanction provided in the law suggest as to the significance
of the obligation to the State? A low level fine, for example, suggests an obligation
that is less significant than obligations that involve forfeiture of assets or that are
within the criminal code and provide for possible imprisonment. Similarly, a law
which provides that a transaction is void (ab initio) suggests that the obligation is
significant. A law that provides that the transaction is voidable, suggests — but does
not necessarily indicate — less significance than a provision that declares the
transaction void. Likewise, a law that allows for the State to waive the legal
consequences of the wrong-doing suggests that the obligation — at least in some
cases — is less significant. Finally, the possibility that the law provides that the
illegal act may be cured through specified acts by the noncompliant party suggests
an obligation of lesser significance. ?”°

e What does a general non-enforcement of an obligation by the Host State suggest as
to the significance to the state of that obligation? Consideration of enforcement or
non-enforcement needs to be approached carefully, however, inasmuch as the
investigative and prosecutorial resources of any given host state are limited.

e What does the specific decision of the Host State not to investigate or prosecute the
particular alleged act of noncompliance suggest as to the significance to the state
of the obligation in the specific context? This, again, with the same caveat about
limitations on state resources as identified with the previous factor (although to a
lesser extent).

e What does evidence of widespread noncompliance suggest as to the significance of
the obligation to the State? Again, care needs to be exercised. Widespread
noncompliance in the sense of desuetude of the obligation may suggest a past, but
not present, significance of an obligation. Simultaneously, widespread
noncompliance in terms of a law that reflects an important current objective of the
State — for example, combatting corruption — should not lessen the significance of
the obligation not to take bribes.

270 A violation of the law that is curable may not be sufficient to prevent seizure of jurisdiction by a Tribunal. See to
this effect the awards in CL-0426, Achmea B.V. v. Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2008-13, Final Award
dated 7 December 2012; CL-0347, Liman; CL-0437, Metalpar, CL-0436, Mamidoil Jetoil Greek Petroleum Products
Societe S.A. v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/24, Award dated 30 March 2015.

85

407.

408.

Second, the Tribunal must assess the seriousness of the investor’s conduct. In undertaking
this assessment, the Tribunal identifies the following non-exhaustive list of relevant
considerations:

Does the investor’s conduct violate the obligation as alleged? A threshold inquiry
is whether there was noncompliance where the elements required for a violation are
established in accordance with the applicable standard of proof.

What does the investor’s intent suggest as to the seriousness of the investor’s
conduct? Where a particular state of mind is not required for the violation, does the
intentionality of the investor’s conduct suggest a more egregious act? In contrast,
does an act of noncompliance that is mere accident suggest a less egregious act?
Whether intent as an aggravating factor, or lack of intent as an excuse, is to be
considered may be indicated by the law itself.

What does an unclear, evolving or incoherent law suggest as to the seriousness of
an act of noncompliance? Although the intentional violation of an unclear law
would still be a serious act, the lack of clarity to a law potentially suggests a greater
likelihood of acts that are accidental or in good faith as opposed to egregious
violations.

What does the exercise of due diligence by an investor suggest as to the seriousness
of an act of noncompliance? Although due diligence does not foreclose an
intentional violation of law, it does otherwise suggest an effort to understand and
comply with the requirements of the law.

What does a failure of the State to investigate or prosecute the alleged particular act
of noncompliance suggest as to the seriousness of the investor’s conduct? This
factor requires that the State have knowledge, or be presumed to have had
knowledge, of the alleged act of noncompliance.

What does the subsequent conduct of the investor suggest as to the seriousness of
the alleged act of noncompliance? For example, continued investment in the asset
may indicate that the investor pursued the investment in good faith.

Third, the Tribunal must evaluate whether the combination of the investor’s conduct and
the law involved results in a compromise of a significant interest of the Host State to such
an extent that the harshness of the sanction of placing the investment outside of the
protections of the BIT is a proportionate consequence for the violation examined. The
primary indication of such a compromised significant interest is whether the legal
consequence of the violation under the Host State’s law manifests a gravity to the act of

86

409.

410.

411.

412.

413.

414.

noncompliance that is proportional to the harshness of denying access to the protections
of the BIT.

The Tribunal notes that in carrying out its evaluation it will not necessarily consider all
factors in relation to all alleged breaches. The factors set out above are non-exhaustive
and are likely to be of varying applicability in different circumstances. In its consideration
of Respondent’s allegations of acts of noncompliance with Uzbek law by Claimants, the
Tribunal examines those factors that are relevant to a particular allegation, such factors
being different for the different allegations.

(5) | The Tribunal’s Conclusions as to the Legality Requirement

The language of Article 12 limits the “application” of the BIT to investments made in
compliance with the legislation of Uzbekistan. The legality requirement is limited to the
time that the investment is made.

The term “legislation” in Article 12 encompasses those normative actions regarded as
“law” by the Host State’s legal system which on the basis of the record in this case is
defined by the normative-legal acts set out in Article 5 of the Uzbekistan Law on

Normative-Legal Acts.

In the Tribunal’s view, there has been little satisfactory analysis as to the types of acts of
noncompliance that are encompassed within the legality requirement. The ordinary
meaning of the phrase “made in compliance with legislation” is inclusive and without
explicit substantive limitations. However, it is striking that no authority appears to argue
that there has are no limits to the “legality requirement”. The limitations on the substantive
scope of the terms in Article 12 become apparent when the ordinary meaning of the terms
is considered in their context and in light of the object and purpose of the treaty.

In the Tribunal’s view, the interpretive task is guided by the principle of proportionality.
The Tribunal must balance the object of promoting economic relations by providing a
stable investment framework with the harsh consequence of denying the application of
the BIT in total when the investment is not made in compliance with legislation. The
denial of the protections of the BIT is a harsh consequence that is a proportional response
only when its application is triggered by noncompliance with a law that results in a
compromise of a correspondingly significant interest of the Host State.

C. The Acts of Noncompliance with Uzbek Law Alleged by Respondent.

Respondent alleges acts of noncompliance by Claimants with different provisions of Uzbek
law. Respondent submits that the actions by Claimants that place their alleged investments
in serious violation of Uzbek laws begin with Claimants purchasing the majority of the BC

87

Als.

416.

417.

418.

and KC shares using two sets of agreements that Respondent argues to be unlawful in
several respects. The two sets of agreements are:

(1) “English SPAs”: Respondent contends that Kaden and Nabolena, Claimants’
alleged investment vehicles, through Mr. Kim acting allegedly on behalf of
Claimants, concluded the English law share and purchase agreements to buy the
majority shares in BC and KC for US$33.98 million (and US$4.37 million in
alleged related expenses), which they then concealed from the TSE in violation of
Uzbek laws and regulations that require all share sale and purchase agreements be
registered in Uzbekistan.?”!

(2) “Tashkent SPAs”: Kaden and Nabolena also registered agreements on the
Tashkent Stock Exchange disclosing a false purchase price of only US$2.2 million,
in violation of Uzbek laws and regulations that require complete and accurate
disclosures and strictly prohibit false disclosures and fraud.?””

According to Respondent, Claimants’ “other alleged acquisition vehicles purchased
significant volumes of shares from minority shareholders, many of whom were employees
of BC and KC, at far below the fair market price of those shares, without revealing the
earlier concealed price in the Secret Agreements” in further violation of “Uzbek securities
laws and regulations and the general antifraud provisions of the Uzbek Civil and Criminal

Codes”.23

To aid in the presentation of the Parties’ contentions as well as the Tribunal’s analysis,
the violations alleged to arise out of these facts are grouped by the Tribunal in the
following sections into four categories. The specific laws identified in each of the
categories are listed in order of the normative-legal hierarchy set out in Article 5 of the
Uzbekistan Law on Normative-Legal Act summarised in paragraph 379 above.

Before the Tribunal begins its application of the legality test to the violations alleged in
this objection, the Tribunal observes that Respondent has the burden of proof to establish
that the investment was not made in compliance with a law of Uzbekistan.

The Tribunal notes that, on the application of the legality test to certain of the violations
alleged in this objection, it possesses both a majority view and a minority view. In some
instances, the reasoning of the minority view arrives at a different result, whereas in other

271 Respondent's Reply on Preliminary Objections, {[ 4; see also Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections,
49 202, 217, 218, with citation of Mamatov I, {9 13-14. See also Mamatov I, 31.

272 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, {[ 4; see also Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections,
49 202, 217, 219, 220, with citation of Mamatov I, {ff 17-22, 29.

273 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, {[ 5.

88

instances the reasoning of the minority view arrives at the same result. These differences
are made clear in what follows.

)

Fraud in Violation of Uzbek Securities Law

419. First, Respondent submits that Claimants “caused fraudulent transactions to occur on the

TSE” in violation of the following Uzbek Securities Laws and Regulation:?”*

420.

Claimants’ Alleged Action(s)

“Mr. Kim caused the TSE to
publicly report that the BC and KC
majority shareholdings were
purchased for US$2.2 million, and
not the prices paid of US$34
million, and thus misleading the
market participants”.

2)

Alleged Violation of Uzbek Law Provision

Order No. 04-103 on “Regulations on the Prevention of
Manipulation of the Stock Market” dated 25 June 1999
“Prohibits any market participants from ‘[pJerform[ing] any act
aimed at artificially inflating/underpricing of securities, the product
of a false or misleading impression of active trading in order to
induce third parties to buy/sell securities at a bargain price for the
manipulators”.

“A member (group members) of the securities market and/or their
customers do not have the right to conclude a transaction of sale and

purchase of a particular type of security on the basis of mutual

 

agreement, with the intent to mislead other market participants”.

Failure to Register the English SPAs

Second, Respondent alleges that the English SPAs are void, because they were required
to be registered on the TSE but were not, and that the failure to do so resulted in three
violations of Uzbek law, as follows:27>

Claimants’ Alleged Action

“Claimants contracted for the sale
and purchase of the majority
shareholdings of BC and KC in the
English SPAs, which were never
registered on the Tashkent Stock

Exchange”. 276

Uzbek Law Provision Allegedly Violated

Law No. 218-I, Art. 22 (Basic Principles of Uzbek Securities
Market)2””

“[E]ach operation at the securities market associated with changes
in prices [and] the owner [...] shall be registered in accordance with
legislation” and that “transaction[s] with registered securities [...]
carried out between the legal entities are subject to registration”.

274 Respondent’s Closing Presentation, p. 72.

275 Respondent’s Closing Presentation, slide 125. See also Respondent’s Reply, {34 (citing Mamatov II, {| 5, 17-18;
Mamatov I, {if 12-13, 26, 28; Pak I, ]8; Black, 9{f 15-16 (explaining that Uzbekistan has, and had at the time of the
transactions, Consolidating Reporting Rules which require the registration of all transactions of shares in public
companies).

276 Respondent’s Closing Presentation, slide 125.

277 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, {| 44. See also R-0075, Law No. 218-I dated 25 April 1996 and
Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {| 220 (citing R-0070, Order No. 2003-08, Art. 5; Butler II, {{{] 44-
45, n. 74).

 

 

 

 

89

Cabinet of Minister’s Resolution No. 285, App. 2 Art. 5
(Transactions in Securities on TSE)?”* “Transactions on the
secondary market for purchase and sale of shares of open joint stock
companies are concluded exclusively on stock exchanges and
organized out of exchange securities market”.

Order No. 2003-08 (Prohibiting Off-Exchange Transactions)?”
“Purchase and sales transactions of shares of open joint stock
companies concluded on a secondary market outside of organizers
shall be
deemed [null and void]/[invalid]” (the final term is dependent on
whether Claimants’ or Respondent's translation is accepted —see
discussion at paragraphs 457 - 464 below).

 

of exchanges and over-the-counter sales and securiti

(3) False Disclosure and Concealment in Registering the Tashkent SPA.

421. Third, Respondent alleges that the Tashkent SPAs are invalid as they were registered on
the basis of false disclosures and concealment and that such actions give rise to a further
nine violations of Uzbek law. Respondent contends that the Tashkent SPAs also violated
Uzbek law as these were “sham contracts that described fictitious transactions” as the sale
price reflected was significantly lower than the actual purchase price.”*° Respondent
asserts that Claimants’ non-disclosure of the English SPA price on the TSE, amounted to
“false and misleading disclosures” violating the following Uzbek Securities Laws and
Regulations and such transactions are void under the Uzbek Civil Code:?*!

Claimants’ Alleged Action(s Alleged Violation of Uzbek Law Provision

Claimants deliberately concealed Uzbekistan Civil Code Art. 116: “A transaction whose content
the price paid for the BC and KC does not correspond to the requirements of legislation, and also
shares from the Uzbek securities concluded for a purpose knowingly contrary to the foundations of
market by registering the the legal order or morality shall be null”.

transactions on the TSE at a false

price. 787 Uzbekistan Civil Code Art. 124:?4 “A transaction concluded
only for form, without the intention to create legal consequences,
shall be null (fictitious transaction).

278 R-0005, Cabinet of Ministers Resolution No. 285 dated 8 June 1994.

279 R-0070, Order No. 2003-08 dated 26 May 2003.

280 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, § 219 with citation of Mamatov I, 29.

28! Respondent's Memorial on Preliminary Objections, {{ 220; Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, { 51;
Respondent's Closing Presentation, pp. 79-81; Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, | 62.

282 Respondent’s Closing Presentation, p. 79.

283 CL-0370, Civil Code, Art. 116.

284 CL-0370, Civil Code, Art. 124.

 

 

90

Tf a transaction is concluded for the purpose of concealing another
transaction (sham transaction), then the rules relating to such
transaction which the parties actually had in view shall apply”.

Mr. Kim instructed his broker Mr. Law No. 260-I1 (Law on Exchange Activity), Art. 15:°°° “The

Pak to register transaction following are not allowed on the Exchange...spread of false

documents showing that Kaden information that may be the reason for artificial change in the

and Nabolena purchased shares on —_ market structure”.

the TSE Exchange for a price that

he knew was not the actual Law 218-I “on the Mechanism of Securities Market

price.285 Performance”, Art. 31:27 “Securities market participants for
violation of securities legislation shall be liable in accordance with
established procedure [for...] misleading investors and
supervising authorities by release (provision) of deliberately false
information”.

 

  

Claimants disclosed false purchase Law 218-I “on the Mechanism of Securities Market

price for the BC and KC shares to Performance”, Arts. 6 and 25:°° Article 6 provides that the

TSE. 285 “[mlain principles of trading in the securities market” include
“pricing based on actual current demand and supply; strict
compliance with the legislation on the securities market by all
participants: ...providing full discl
their issuers[;] transparency and accessibility of that information;
protection of the interests of investors and issuers; [and]
prohibition and prosecution of fraud and other illegal activities on
the market”. Article 25 prohibits “manipulation at the securities
market through bogus transactions”.

ure about the securities and

    

Law No, 260-II (Law on Exchange Activity), Arts. 7, 15 and
27:

“The main principles of the exchange activity are: openness and
publicity of exchange trades; freedom of formation of prices
during exchange trades; voluntariness of concluding
transactions; equality of conditions of
trades for all exchange members. [...] The following are not
allowed in the exchange: [...] spread of false information that may
be the reason for artificial change in the market structure. [...]
Persons responsible for violating legislation on exchanges and

      
 

 

?85 Respondent’s Closing Presentation, p. 79.

286 R-0008, Law No. 260-II dated 29 August 2001, Art. 3, 7 and 15.

287 R-0075, Law No. 218-I dated 25 April 1996. Respondent also argues Claimants violated Art. 6 and 25 of Law No.
218-I. Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, 51; Mamatov I, {{ 18; Pak II, { 13.

288 Respondent’s Closing Presentation, p. 79.

289 R-0075, Law No. 218-I dated 25 April 1996. Respondent's Reply on Preliminary Objections, 51 (citing Art. 6, 25
of Law No. 218-1); Mamatov I, 18; Pak II, (13.

299 R-0008, Law No. 260-II dated 29 August 2001.

91

exchange activity shall bear responsibility in the established
procedure.”

Order No. 04-103 (Order on the Prevention of Stock Market
Manipulation), Art. 2.3.2:2°' “All market participants are
prohibited from ‘distribut[ing] / transmit[ting] information to
other participants or to make any statement, which, in terms of
time and/or the circumstances under which they were made, is
false or misleading [to] any other market participants, and in
respect of which the declarant was aware that it is false and
misleading”.

Order No. 2002-06 (Securities Disclosure Order), Art. 28:77
“Participants of the securities market shall bear responsibili

established by the legislation for the improper disclos'
information at the securities market or discl

 

  

information, which is misleading”.

TSE Rules, Rule 2:2 This rule provides the “basic principles of
exchange activities” were “strict compliance with the legislation
legal acts of the securities market and other internal regulations-
orders and contractual relations between all participants in the
securities market; [...] transparency and publicity of the exchange
trade; equality of conditions for participation in exchange trading
for all members of the exchange; voluntariness of settlement of
stock transactions on purchase and sale of securiti
pricing on the stock exchange trading; timeliness and publication
of reliable and complete data on securities admitted to stock
exchange trading and informing participants of trading on prices
of stock exchange transactions; openness and accessibility of
information on settled transactions to the participants of trading;

 

freedom of

  

r and of fraudul price
[and] knowingly proving unreliable information [to the

Exchange]”.

(4) | Fraud Causing Significant Harm to the State, BC and KC Minority
Shareholders, the TSE and the Brokers

422. Fourth, Respondent alleges that false disclosures and concealment by the Claimants
caused significant harm to the State, the BC and KC minority shareholders, the TSE and
the brokers, resulting in illicit benefits to Claimants and giving rise to a further four
violations of Uzbek law. In particular, Respondent asserts that Claimants defrauded the

281 R-0013, Order No. 04-103 dated 25 June 1999.
2 R-0003, Order No. 2002-06 dated 27 March 2002, Art. 28 and 29.
283 R-0002, Rules of Exchange Trade of Services in the Republican Stock Exchange, “Tashkent”.

92

423.

State, the TSE, their broker, and the minority shareholders of BC and KC in violation of

the following Uzbek laws:7**

Claimants’ Alleged Action(s)

“Claimants paid commissions to
their broker Mr. Pak and fees to
the TSE that were calculated
based on the knowingly false and
significantly lower price
registered on the TSE”.

“Claimants defrauded minority
shareholders by purchasing shares
from them at artificially low
prices and without disclosing the
real value of the shares”.
“Claimants assisted sellers to
evade paying profit taxes on KC
and BC transactions”.

 

Alleged Violation of Uzbek Law Provision

Uzbekistan Criminal Code Article 168:° Fraud is the “acquisition
of someone’s property or the right thereto by deception or abuse of
confidence”.

Uzbekistan Criminal Code Articles 30 and 184:°° “[...]
helpmates shall be subject to liability under the same Article of the
Special Part of this Code,
concealment or understatement of profit (income) or other taxable
objects aswell
payments, established by the State, in large amount [
by fine, correctional labor, arrest, or imprisonment].”

as committers [...] Intentional

as other evasion from taxes, duties, or other

   

punishable

Uzbekistan Civil Code Article 123:2” “A transaction concluded
under the influence of fraud, coercion, threat, or ill-intentioned
agreement of a representative of one party with the other party [...]
may be deemed by a court to be invalid upon the suit of the victim”.

The Tribunal notes that Respondent, in its first submission on this objection, put forward
what might be termed a residual violation category, in its contention that, “[i]n addition to
violating numerous provisions of Uzbek law, Claimants’ fraud on the market violated
transnational public policy” as “the securities laws and regulations of other countries are
for the most part universal in requiring truthful and accurate disclosures and prohibiting
concealment, fraud of manipulation”.?°* As indicated at paragraphs 378-380 above, the
legality requirement must allege a violation of a law of Uzbekistan. Given that a residual
category is not specified and is not related to the laws of Uzbekistan, the Tribunal holds
that the residual category does not provide a basis for application of the legality

requirement.

24 Respondent’s Closing Presentation, p. 148.

295 R-0027, Criminal Code, Art. 168.

296 R-0027, Criminal Code, Art. 30 and 184.

257 CL-0370, Civil Code, Art. 123.

298 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections, {221 (citing Hart I, 40).

93

424.

425.

426.

427.

428.

429.

The Tribunal in the following sections assesses by category whether the alleged violations
trigger application of the legality requirement.

D. Alleged Violation Relating to Fraud in Violation of Uzbek Securities Law

The Tribunal begins its consideration with the allegation that Claimants are culpable of
fraud in violation of Uzbek Securities Law — in particular Order No. 04-103.

Respondent argues that Claimants manipulated the stock market in violation of
Order No. 04-103 which “[p]rohibits any market participants from ‘[p]erform[ing] any act
aimed at artificially inflating/underpricing of securities, the product of a false or misleading
impression of active trading in order to induce third parties to buy/sell securities at a
bargain price for the manipulators” and also provides that “[a] member (group members)
of the securities market and/or their customers do not have the right to conclude a
transaction of sale and purchase of a particular type of security on the basis of mutual
agreement, with the intent to mislead other market participants”.

As to the significance of the prohibition on fraud, the Tribunal finds this obligation very
significant. An act of fraud of the kind alleged results under the statute in the transaction
being void, a consequence that reflects the great significance of the interest to the State. As
is often the case with such a harsh consequence, a specified intent by the person accused is
required. In this instance, the accused must act “in order to induce third parties to buy/sell”
and “with the intent to mislead other market participants”. As will be seen below, the
Tribunal by majority holds that the Respondent has not established the requisite intent to
support its allegation that Claimants violated Order No. 04-103.

As to the significance of the conduct of the Claimants, given its eventual conclusion that
Respondent has not established a violation of Order No. 04-103, the Tribunal need not go
any further in its legality requirement analysis. However, the Tribunal’s assessment of the
conduct of Claimants is relevant to several of the other alleged violations and it is thus
appropriate to set out those considerations here. Three of these considerations indicate that
Claimants’ conduct was not as egregious as Respondent alleges.

First, the transactions in question took place in the context of a highly uncertain legal
environment, in which the applicable legal regime was unclear, difficult for any reasonable
investor to ascertain, subject to change and still evolving. At the time the transactions took
place the TSE was still under development — as was the regulatory framework that
governed transactions both on and off the exchange. This uncertainty made compliance
with the regulatory framework much more difficult for Claimants than it would have been
in a more mature, and more stable, legal environment.

94

430. Second, Claimants were heavily reliant on the advice of their broker, Mr. Pak, and Sellers,
on the matter of compliance with Uzbek law. Indeed, the steps they took which are now
the subject of criticism by Respondent were those advised by Mr. Pak and Sellers. In this
regard, the Tribunal — given the apparent inconsistencies in his testimony — finds
unconvincing the evidence of Mr. Pak. First, Mr Pak implies, in Pak I, that Mr. Kim’s
arrival at Tenet Investment was as a walk-in client.” In oral testimony, however, Mr. Pak
admitted that his introduction to Mr. Kim was made by his sole business partner, Mr.
Allakverdyan, who was Sellers’ agent. Second, Mr. Pak claims that he did not know
Sellers.*°! However, on cross-examination, Mr Pak acknowledged that Tenet Investment
had, on 30 August 2005, engaged in the sale of shares in the BC plant in which Mr.
Allakverdyan was the agent of Velner Group (the sellers) and in which he, Mr. Pak, was
the agent of the purchaser, Sonora Tex UK Ltd.*? These shares were then sold back to
Velner Group on 24 October 2005 for the same price.* Third, Mr. Pak claims in Pak I
that the share price of US$37.50 was given to him by Mr. Kim.*° However, in oral
testimony Mr. Pak stated that Mr. Allakverdyan had “an excerpt from the depository
record, and the number of stock was mentioned there, and their price’”.°5 Furthermore,
under cross-examination Mr. Pak admitted that the share price for the August and October
2005 transactions was US$37.00 per share.*”° Mr, Pak nevertheless denied that the amount
of US$37.00 per share had come from him or from Mr. Allakverdyan.*””

431. The inconsistencies between Mr. Pak’s written statements and his oral evidence cast doubt
on the probity of that evidence as a whole. The Tribunal concludes that it is likely that
when Mr. Allakverdyan acted for the Velner Group in such transactions he introduced the
transaction’s other party to Mr. Pak, who then acted as the latter’s agent. Thus, it is likely
that Mr. Pak was aware of the whole scheme of the transactions and, despite his claims to
the contrary, aware of the price to be paid in advance of Mr. Kim’s involvement in the
transaction.

432. Third, the Tribunal is satisfied that Claimants were purchasers that sought to acquire the
majority share in BC and KC plants in good faith and in accordance with an investment

2 Pak I, J 10: “I met Mr. Kim in January 2006. My office at Tenet Invest was located directly next to the main
entrance to the building of the Tashkent Stock Exchange. I recall that Mr. Kim entered my office and stated that he
represented the interests of foreign investors and needed a broker who could help provide brokerage services for the
purchase of securities on the Stock Exchange.” No reference is made in this entire statement to Mr. Allakverdyan.

300 Mr. Pak, Hearing Tr., Day 1, 235:10-14. “The first time I met Mr. Kim approximately in January of 2006 [...]. We
met when he came to my office. He was introduced to me by Allakverdyan, who was a second broker in the brokerage.
He was introduced to me as a foreign investor. We met in our office”.

301 Mr. Pak, Hearing Tr., Day 1, 236:13-14.

302 Mr. Pak, Hearing Tr., Day 1, 277:2-20.

303 Mr. Pak, Hearing Tr., Day 1, 277:2-20. See further R-0006, entries 36, 37, 38 and 39.

304 Pak I, J 15.

305 Mr. Pak, Hearing Tr., Day 1, 237:13-15.

306 Mr. Pak, Hearing Tr., Day 1, 277:2-20.

307 Mr. Pak, Hearing Tr., Day 1, 285:15-288:14.

95

433.

434.

435.

436.

437.

strategy. Their principal goals at all times were to develop the BC and KC cement plants,
and to consolidate their investment in this sector, so as to later sell the investment through
an IPO or to a private purchaser. Indeed, Claimants made further substantial investments
in the development of the cement plants in the years following the acquisition of them.

Against these three considerations, the Tribunal finds equivocal Claimants’ assertion that
the involvement of Ms. Karimova and the contractual limitations she or her representatives
placed on further due diligence itself explains or justifies Claimants’ conduct. On the one
hand, the Tribunal accepts that the involvement of Ms. Karimova in a transfer of shares in
the strategically important cement industry meant that the Uzbek Government likely was
aware of the transaction. On the other hand, the Tribunal is persuaded that a private
contractual commitment does not excuse one’s conduct.

The Tribunal likewise recalls that Claimants maintain that it was their belief both that it
was not possible to record the correct price on the Tashkent SPAs for a transaction of the
size involved and that the practice they followed was not unusual in this market. The
Tribunal finds these assertions also equivocal, although it must be said that the evidence
given as to the possibility of registering this transaction on the TSE made clear to the
Tribunal the difficulty of ascertaining the requirements of the Rules of the TSE. Moreover,
the indications that the TSE was not a very active exchange at the time as well as the lack
of evidence given as to governmental investigations under or prosecutions of the various
relatively recent securities laws of Uzbekistan left unclear questions of practice on the
Exchange.

The Tribunal emphasizes that these considerations would not, of themselves, be
exculpatory for a Claimant whose noncompliance with a Host State law inherently was of
sufficient seriousness to render proportionate the loss of treaty protection. In particular, a
proven allegation of fraud, with its requirement of intention, would likely be sufficient to
cause an investment to fall outside the scope of the legality requirement in Article 12 of
the BIT and therefore to cause the investment to lose the protection of the BIT and thereby
vitiate the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. In this sense, the Tribunal returns to Respondent’s
allegation that Claimants violated Order No. 04-103.

An allegation of fraud under Order No. 04-103 requires a specific intention by the
fraudulent party. In this instance, the accused must act “in order to induce third parties to
buy/sell” and “with the intent to mislead other market participants”. The Tribunal
concludes that Respondent has not met its burden of proof in this regard.

In attempting to establish fraud, Respondent points to the intentional decision of Claimants
to enter a price on the Tashkent Stock Exchange other than that provided for in the English
SPAs. Respondent is correct that the price recorded on the Tashkent SPAs is not the price

96

438.

439.

440.

441.

442.

paid by Claimants in the English SPAs. Indeed, the Tribunal considers the fact that
different figures were entered to be agreed by the Parties.

The Tribunal accepts to an extent Claimants’ argument that the English SPAs do more than
the Tashkent SPAs in terms of gaining a “control Premium” and granting various rights
such as a choice of law and choice of courts agreement. But those additions in the
Tribunal’s opinion cannot explain fully the difference between the price paid by Claimants
in the English SPAs and the price recorded on the Tashkent SPAs.

However, the Tribunal, by a majority, does not consider the entry of an incorrect price
sufficient to establish fraud in violation of Order No. 04-103. The deliberate act of entering
a false price on the exchange is not equivalent to the intent to defraud. On the basis of the
record before it, there is not a sufficient foundation on which the Tribunal majority can
find that Claimants had an intention to mislead other market participants or to manipulate
the market. Respondent alleges that Claimants sought to defraud minority shareholders,
and has explained how this could have happened. However, a majority of the Tribunal does
not find this allegation established by the actual record before it. It may be the case that the
Claimants did not comply with some other law, but the majority does not find the intent to
defraud necessary for noncompliance with Order No. 04-103 to have been established.

On the view of a minority of the Tribunal, there is a sufficient basis to find the requisite
“intent”. On this view, the recording of an incorrect price was required by Sellers, and
Sellers insisted that the true price be kept strictly confidential. Indeed, if Claimants had not
agreed to this stipulation, the evidence was that the sale likely would not have gone ahead.
The primary purpose of giving price information to the TSE is to inform all participants in
the market as to the details of the sale and in particular the price, for the purposes of other
purchases and sales. This being the case the necessary conclusion is that Claimants
intended the market to be given misleading information. Claimants may have preferred not
to do this, but given Sellers’ insistence, on their own evidence they agreed to do so, to
secure the deal. For the minority, such conduct readily falls within “fraud” as understood
in Uzbek law, and was a very serious violation, given the existence of a public reporting
requirement integral to the operation of an exchange.

E. Alleged Violations Relating to the Conclusion of the English SPAs

The Tribunal next considers Respondent’s allegations relating to the conclusion of the
English SPAs.

(1) Law No. 218-I, Article 22

Respondent notes that Article 22 of Law No. 218-I provides that “each operation at the
securities market associated with changes in prices [and] the owner [...] shall be registered

97

443.

444,

445.

446.

447.

448.

in accordance with legislation” and that “transaction[s] with registered securities [...]
carried out between the legal entities are subject to registration”. Respondent submits that
the English SPAs violated Article 22 by not being registered on the TSE.*°°

Claimants contest Respondent’s reading of Law No. 218-I. They assert that Article 22
requires registration for trades at the stock exchange and organized over-the-counter
exchange but not for private contracts related to securities.*°? Therefore, Claimants assert
they complied with the Article 22 requirement by registering the Tashkent SPAs, and the
English SPAs were not subject to this registration obligation.?!°

The Tribunal observes that although Respondent alleges several violations of Law
No. 218-I in its Post-Hearing Brief that discussion did not focus on Article 22 as argued
in Respondent’s earlier pleadings. The Tribunal assumes, however, that this argument is
maintained by Respondent.

As to the alleged violation of Article 22, the Tribunal recalls that it is not contested that
the price in the English SPAs was not registered on the TSE. A majority of the Tribunal
doubts that the language of Article 22 applies to private contacts related to the purchase
of shares.

By majority, the Tribunal, assuming that the registration requirement of Article 22 applies
to a private contract related to the purchase of shares, finds that noncompliance by
Claimants does not sufficiently compromise a significant interest of Uzbekistan so as to
render proportionate the exclusion of the investment from the protections of the BIT.

In assessing the significance of the obligation, the Tribunal notes that the sanctions
generally applicable for violations of Law No. 218-I are set forth in Article 31 entitled
“Responsibility for violations of securities legislation”. It is true that Article 22 contains
within itself the specification of sanctions applicable to certain violations of that Article.
However, those situations do not include the specific act of noncompliance alleged in this
case. As a result, the Tribunal concludes that the Article 31 sanctions generally applicable
are those applicable to the alleged act of noncompliance. The sanctions specified in
Article 31 do not include rendering a transaction null and void, but rather specify a range
of fines or penalties.

As to the seriousness of Claimants’ action, a failure to register is a deliberate act. However,
the Tribunal also notes as possibly mitigating factors that certain of the factors set out at

308 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, | 44.
3 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 222.
50 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 222.

98

449.

450.

451.

452.

453.

paragraphs 429 to 432 above are also applicable to this alleged violation. In particular, the
regulatory framework was under development at this time.

Considering the seriousness of the obligation in concert with the seriousness of the
conduct of Claimants, the Tribunal by majority concludes that noncompliance by
Claimants with Article 22 as alleged does not sufficiently compromise a significant
interest of Uzbekistan so as to render proportionate the exclusion of the investment from
the protections of the BIT.

On the minority view, this analysis of Article 22 draws an artificial distinction between
the English and Tashkent SPAs. The BC and KC plants were each subject to one sale. The
sets of SPAs relate to the same, single, transactions. The English SPAs may have been
“private contracts”, but that is because the Claimants and Sellers wrongly concealed them,
and concluded them off the TSE. Such an approach would have been satisfactory if the
entire transaction was properly kept off the TSE. However, the deal was done on the
Exchange, and as such the true price had to be disclosed. If parallel private contracts were
permissible, Article 22 would be defeated in its purpose, and the TSE (as with any
exchange) could simply not function. One may only pause to consider how such an
arrangement might have been treated had it been attempted on exchanges in London or
New York (by way of examples) for its severity to be appreciated. On this view, the
compromise of an interest of Uzbekistan is significant, meets the legality test, and the
objection should be allowed.

(2) Cabinet of Minister’s Resolution No. 285, Appendix 2 Article 5

Respondent refers to the Cabinet of Minister’s Resolution No. 285, Appendix 2 Article 5
(Transactions in Securities on TSE). The Resolution provides that “[t]ransactions on the
secondary market for purchase and sale of shares of open joint stock companies are
concluded exclusively on stock exchanges and organized out of exchange securities
market”. Respondent argues that Claimants violated this provision by concluding the
English SPA outside of the TSE.

Claimants assert that Resolution No. 285 does not require that the English SPAs to be
concluded and registered on the TSE. According to Claimants, Respondent selectively
quotes from Resolution No. 285, but when reviewing the full provision, it is “clear that
the Claimants were not required to use a single contract for their majority acquisitions”:*"!

Cabinet of Minister’s Resolution No. 285 is “legislation” for the purposes of the legality
requirement. Article 5 of Appendix 2 provides:

3! Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 217 (emphasis in original).

99

454,

455.

456.

457.

312

Transactions for purchase and sale of securities (hereinafter —
transactions with securities), except for transactions concluded
without intermediary and performed while concluded, are concluded
in written form by signing by the parties of a single document — the
contract, as well as by other methods (exchange of letters, telegrams,
facsimile and other means of communication, signed by party that
sends them), allowing to fix in a documentary form the will of the
parties.?!

Claimants argue that the language “as well as by other methods [...] allowing to fix ina
documentary form the will of the parties” makes clear that Resolution No. 285 did not
require the English SPAs to be registered on the TSE.

The Tribunal considers the Article in question to be unclearly drafted both as to what is
required and as to the scope of its application. The Tribunal further notes that Articles 31
and 32 of Appendix 2 set forth the potential sanctions for violations of rules in the
Appendix. Those sanctions are limited to the deprivation of qualification certificates or
the suspension or revocation of licenses for conducting activities with securities.

The Tribunal therefore considers this law not to reflect a high degree of significance in
the sense of the test the Tribunal is here employing for the legality requirement. When the
lesser degree of seriousness of the law is considered in concert with the Claimants’
conduct in the context of the alleged violation, as set out at paragraphs 429 to 432 above,
the Tribunal considers that, even if it were to conclude that Claimants had not complied
with this provision, the act, and the manner in which such act would have taken place in
this case, would not be sufficient to render proportionate the the exclusion of the
investment from the protections of the BIT.

(3) | Order No. 2003-08

Respondent submits that Order No. 2003-08 “provides that transactions for the sale and
purchase of shares in public companies that are concluded outside the Stock Exchange or
the organized over-the counter exchange in Uzbekistan ‘shall be deemed null and
void’”.*!3 Mr. Mamatov, Respondent’s expert as to the practice of the TSE, states that the
English SPAs “needed to be concluded and registered in the Republic of Uzbekistan,

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 217 (quoting R-0005, Cabinet of Ministers Resolution No. 285

dated 8 June 1994, App. 2, Art. 5 (emphasis supplied by Claimants)).
313 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, { 46 (quoting R-0070, Order No. 2003-08 dated 26 May 2003,

Sec. 2(5).

100

458.

459.

460.

461.

because they are agreements for the sale and purchase of shares in two open joint stock
+ 314

companies in Uzbekistan”.
Claimants submit that “[a]lthough Resolution No. 285 does generally require transactions
for the purchase and sale of OJSC shares” to be concluded on the TSE, Respondent has
provided a misleading translation of the provision. In particular, Claimants assert that
Order No. 2003-08 provides that “off-exchange sales of securities shall be considered to
be invalid,” rather than “null and void” as asserted by Respondent.*!> In support,
Claimants refer the Tribunal to the second report of their expert, Professor Butler, where
he states in relevant part that:

Article 5 of the Statute, as noted above, refers to “invalidity”
(“HeelicTBuTembHocT”) and does not qualify a transaction as null
(“auutoxuas’). As I explained earlier, invalid transactions could be
either null or contested. The court of the relevant jurisdiction shall
determine whether the transaction is null or contested and would be
in the position to invalidate it. I do not believe Mr. Mamatov has
authority to pronounce a transaction null and void based on the
language of the Statute.*!°

Before assessing the opinion of Claimants’ expert as to the Uzbekistan law, the Tribunal
notes and finds significant that Respondent did not avail itself of the opportunity to cross-
examine Professor Butler, the only expert on Uzbekistan law in this proceeding. Such an
examination would have tested his evidence on this and other points of law.

Having reviewed Professor Butler’s report, the Tribunal, on the basis of the evidence before
it, finds the sanction provided in this provision of Order No. 2003-08 to be that the
transaction may be declared invalid, not that the transaction is null and void. Before
proceeding to the significance of that distinction, the Tribunal first considers Claimants
argument that it did not act contrary to Order No. 2003-08.

In this regard, Respondent’s expert Professor Black opines: “Article 3 of the Civil Code
of the Republic of Uzbekistan establishes that the Civil Code trumps Uzbek securities
laws, which trump governmental regulations”. 3!” On this basis, Claimants contend that
even if Respondent’s arguments were accurate concerning consequences under Uzbek
law, it would be inconsistent with the fundamental principle of freedom of contract and

314 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, J 43. See also Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections,
4 218 (citing Mamatov I, {4 28, 30).

515 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 220 (citing R-0070, Order No. 2003-08 dated 26 May 2003,
Art. 5; Butler II, $f 44-45, n. 74).

6 Butler II, 145.

37 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 223 (citing Respondent's Reply on Preliminary Objections,
4 136; Black, 1 53).

101

hence the Uzbek Civil Code, which would trump any regulation or Order.*!* In response,
Respondent submits that the freedom of contract principle cannot override Uzbek
securities laws, which requires a transaction agreement relating to the sale and purchase
of securities be registered at the TSE.*!° The Tribunal has doubts as to the proposition
asserted by Professor Butler and Claimants but given the Tribunal’s conclusion below
need not resolve this issue.

462. In particular, on the basis of Professor Butler’s evidence Claimants argue that Order No.
2003-08 would not be a fundamental violation of law as “invalid” transactions can either
be “contested” (i.e. potentially voidable) or null (i.e. void), and such a transaction would
need a further court determination as to such invalidity initiated by person with
standing.*”°

463. In assessing the significance of the obligation, the Tribunal agrees that the sanction
specified does not provide that the transaction is null and void. As noted, Professor Butler
argues that the transaction may be necessarily void but also instead potentially voidable.
The distinction between void and voidable can be likened to that between a substantial
mandatory sentence and a range of possible sentences that includes the mandatory
sentence. Neither formulation reflects trivial obligations. But the provision of a mandatory
substantial sentence reflects a greater seriousness than the provision of a possibly equal
sentence to be determined in a court’s discretion. As with several other provisions of
Uzbek law, the meaning of the use of the phrase “invalid transaction” is contested by the
Parties. The Tribunal notes the different views of Claimants’ legal expert, Professor
Butler, and Respondent’s expert, Mr. Mamatov. A majority of the Tribunal considers
Professor Butler’s evidence to be the more persuasive of the two. The majority recalls that
Mr. Mamatov’s educational background is in economics rather than in law. On this basis,
the majority believes it important to distinguish the respective spheres of expertise and
does not see the justification for extending Mr. Mamatov’s particular experience with the
TSE to how a court would assess the appropriateness of voiding a transaction under the
law at hand. As significantly, Respondent has not presented the Tribunal with a record of
prosecutions under this law nor with any commentary as to the possible criteria that would
likely influence a judge seeking to make such a determination so as to aid this Tribunal
assessment. Finally, the majority finds it significant that Respondent chose not to call and
cross-examine Professor Butler on this and other points of Uzbek law.

464. The obligation at issue is not trivial. However, the Tribunal’s majority view is that the
Respondent has not carried its burden in establishing the seriousness of the alleged act of
noncompliance. Even accepting that there exists an act of noncompliance to be considered

318 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 225.
39 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, { 70.
320 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 221.

102

in concert with Claimants conduct in the context of the alleged violation, as set out at
paragraphs 429 to 432 above, the Tribunal by majority finds that such an act of
noncompliance does not result in a compromise of an interest of sufficient significance so
as to render proportionate the exclusion of the investment from the protections of the BIT.

465. On the minority view, the obligation of disclosure and truthfulness on the Exchange is
obviously fundamental (as is the case with any exchange). Against this context, the
severity of the violation is not lessened because the law refers to “invalid” rather than
“null and void”. The use of the term “invalidity”, together with other rules on
transparency, points to a significant interest of the Host State. The significance of the
interest of the Host State in the operation of its stock exchange cannot be subverted by the
freedom of contract of Claimants. Further, the minority notes the long and first-hand
experience of the operation of the TSE of Mr. Mamatov (unlike Professor Butler), and
considers his evidence probative as to the disclosures of information, and the requirements
of transparency and truthfulness, that were vital for the TSE. Further still, the minority
does not regard the three aspects of Claimants’ conduct relied upon here by the majority
as sufficient to reduce the severity of the violation. All three aspects, according to the
minority, are trumped by the Claimants’ own evidence that they intentionally provided
false information on the all-important issue of price to the Exchange, because this was the
only way to do the deal, given Sellers’ demands. The minority view would conclude that
the investment therefore falls outside the scope of Article 12 of the BIT on this ground.

F. Alleged Violations Relating to False Disclosure and Concealment in the
Registration of the Tashkent SPAs

466. Respondent submits that through Mr. Kim’s instructions to his broker, Mr. Pak, and other
actions of the Claimants, Claimants registered a false price for the purchased shares on
the TSE. Respondent submits the Tashkent SPAs are invalid as they were registered on
the basis of false disclosures and concealment and that such actions give rise to numerous
further violations of Uzbek law. The following sections consider each alleged violation in
turn.

(1) — Civil Code, Article 116
467. Article 116 of the Civil Code provides: “A transaction whose content does not correspond

to the requirements of legislation, and also concluded for a purpose knowingly contrary
to the foundations of the legal order or morality shall be null”,*7!

1 CL-0370, Civil Code, Art. 116.

103

468.

469.

470.

471.

472.

473.

474.

322

Respondent asserts that Claimants deliberately concealed the price paid for the BC and
KC shares from the Uzbek securities market by registering the transactions on the TSE at
a false price. *7?

In assessing the significance of the obligation, the Tribunal observes and holds at the
outset that Article 116 is of a high level of seriousness. The provision states that certain
transactions are null, and in the Tribunal’s view such a provision provides a strong
indication as to the seriousness of the law.

In its assessment of the seriousness of the alleged violation, the Tribunal observes that
there are two elements to a violation of Article 116. First, the transaction must be “not
correspond to the requirements of legislation”. Second, the transaction must “also [be]
concluded for a purpose knowingly contrary to the foundations of the legal order or
morality [...]”.

As to the first element that the transaction not correspond “to the requirements of
legislation”, this question is one with which the entirety of the Third Objection is
concerned. However, in light of the majority’s finding as regards the second requirement
of Article 116 of the Civil Code, in the following paragraphs, it is not necessary to focus
here on the question of whether transactions did not correspond to the requirements of
legislation.

In particular, a violation of Article 116 of the Civil Code secondly requires such non-
correspondence with legislation to be concluded for a purpose knowingly contrary to the
foundations of the legal order or morality.

The majority of the Tribunal recalls its discussion of Claimants’ intentions as regards the
allegation of fraud at paragraphs 425-439 above and in particular whether the Claimants
acted “in order to induce third parties to buy/sell” and “with the intent to mislead other
market participants”. The reasons that the majority of the Tribunal did not find such intent
to have been established are applicable mutatis mutandis to the specific intent required
under Article 116.

Respondent’s allegation that such intent existed is not sufficient. Nor can it be the case
that any deliberate noncompliant act can be elevated to an act knowingly contrary to the
foundations of the legal order or morality and therefore to violate not only the relevant
legislation but also Article 116. Indeed, Professor Butler — Claimants’ expert as to
Uzbekistan law — points the Tribunal’s attention to the statement of the Plenum of the
Supreme Economic Court of Uzbekistan that “foundations of the legal order” means
“legal norms . . . aimed at the preservation and protection of the constitutional order,

Respondent's Closing Presentation, p. 79.

104

475.

476.

477.

human rights and freedoms, civil defense, security and economic system of the state
(illegal arms exports, tax evasion, etc.)” and that the norm of “public morality” refers to
“viola[tion of] existing in the society notions of good and evil, right and wrong, virtue and
vice, etc.”.??? The majority of the Tribunal finds persuasive Professor Butler’s conclusion
that not every contract contrary to the laws of Uzbekistan also violates Article 116 but
rather that under Article 116 “transactions that are entered into knowingly with a purpose
of committing actions against the very foundations of law and morality of Uzbekistan
would be deemed null—‘antisocial’ acts, as they are called in practice, ‘the most
‘dangerous’ and ‘damaging’ contract with the gravest consequences”.**4 As noted
previously, the majority of the Tribunal finds significant that Respondent chose not to call
and cross- examine Professor Butler on this and other points of Uzbek law.

The majority of the Tribunal does not find the record before it establishes that Claimants’
purpose was knowingly contrary to the foundations of the legal order or morality. It may
be the case that the Claimants’ transaction did not correspond with some requirement of
legislation, but the majority does not find the intent to act contrary to the foundations of
the legal order or morality necessary for noncompliance with Article 116. The Tribunal’s
majority therefore holds that Respondent fails to establish the elements required for a
violation of Article 116.

On the minority view, in accordance with the reasoning set out at paragraphs 440, 450,
and 465 above, there is a breach of Civil Code Article 116, and the breach is such that it
compromises a significant interest of the Host State. As noted previously, on the
Claimants’ own evidence, the true price was intentionally concealed from the Exchange.
And such a concealment was self-evidently contrary to the bases of the legal order and
morality — as would have been manifest to anyone who has had any prior dealings with a
public exchange. In this regard, it may be recalled that the Claimants are highly
sophisticated international businessmen, with no doubt intimate knowledge of such
matters. The minority view would conclude that the investment therefore falls outside the
scope of Article 12 of the BIT on this ground.

(2) Civil Code, Article 124

Article 124 of the Civil Code provides:

%3 Butler II, {29 (citing CL-0372, Decree of the Plenum of the Supreme Economic Court No. 269 dated 28 November
2014, 412

34 Butler II, { 30 (citing CL-0371, S. M. As’ianov, in Kh. R. Rakhmankulov (ed.), Kommentapuii x Ppaxxaauckomy
kogexcy Pecny6uxu Y36exuctan [Commentary to the Civil Code of the Republic Uzbekistan] (Tashkent, 2010) I,

p. 304.

105

A transaction concluded only for form, without the intention to
create legal consequences, shall be null (fictitious transaction).

If a transaction is concluded for the purpose of concealing another
transaction (sham transaction), then the rules relating to such
transaction which the parties actually had in view shall apply.*?°

478. This allegation has a confused history in this proceeding as it was unclear whether
Respondent alleges that Claimants failed to act in compliance with both the first and
second paragraphs of Article 124. Claimants submit that Respondent confuses the
concepts of “sham” and “fictitious” under Uzbek Civil Code Article 124.326 Moreover,
Claimants assert that during the hearing, Respondent failed to advance an argument based
on Article 124(1) (“fictitious” transactions), and Professor Black, Respondent’s own
expert, testified that this provision is irrelevant to the facts of this case and instead focused
on Article 124(2), which demonstrates that the Respondent has conceded there was no
Article 124(1) violation.*2’ Claimants’ expert, Professor Butler, explains that under Uzbek
law a “fictitious” transaction “is one concluded without an intention to create legal
consequences and is null”.*?® Claimants contend that Tashkent SPAs clearly did create the
legal consequences that the parties intended them to, and Professor Butler therefore
concludes “it is clear that neither the Tashkent nor English SPAs are ‘fictitious’ as a matter
of Uzbek law”.3°

479. The Tribunal agrees that the Respondent appears to have conceded at the Hearing (Part
II) to not pursue any allegation under the first paragraph. Nonetheless, for the sake of
completeness and out of an abundance of caution, the Tribunal holds that the record does
not establish a violation of the first paragraph in that the transaction is not fictitious but
rather without doubt created “legal consequences”.

480. As to the second paragraph of Article 124 of the Civil Code, Respondent argues that the
use of a false price renders the transaction a sham and invalid. Relying on its expert,
Professor Black, Respondent explains that the Tashkent SPAs “were sham because they
contained false prices and they were used to hide the actual U.K. transactions at the actual
prices, and the result was that the false prices were reported to the Tashkent Stock
Exchange...and then to the public”.**° According to Respondent, further demonstrating
the “sham” transaction, it is undisputed that Claimants’ obligation to remit the US$2.2

5 CL-0370, Civil Code, Art. 124.

26 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 224.

327 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 56.

8 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 227.

9 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, | 228.

330 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, 69 (citing, Prof. Black, Hearing Tr., Day 7, 1587:3-7).

106

million for the purchased securities under the Tashkent SPAs was never intended to be
fulfilled or enforced.**!

481. Claimants dispute Respondent’s allegations that the BC and KC transactions undertaken
at the TSE were “sham contracts that described fictitious transactions”,**? “because
Claimants allegedly ‘deliberately concealed the price paid for those shares from the
[TSE]’ by registering th[ose] transactions at a false price”.***

482. Claimants first contest Respondent’s characterization of the Tashkent SPAs as “sham”
transactions. Professor Butler explains a “sham” transaction is one that “is entered into to
conceal another transaction”.**4 Claimants assert that the Tashkent SPAs are not “sham”
transactions as they were real undertakings that were expressly mandated by the English
SPAs, and the two sets of agreements were distinct and complementary.** There were
two different prices as the Tashkent SPAs contemplated only share transfers whereas the
English SPAs included the amount plus the consideration for the control premium, the
escrow agreement, the representation and warranties and the arbitration rights, among
others.**° Claimants contend that “Respondent may not vitiate a contract that the parties
entered into in good faith and in accordance with the Civil Code, particularly where, as
here, the structure of the transaction Respondent challenges is a direct result of the failures
of Respondent’s own regulatory system”.**”

483. As concluded above, the Tribunal accepts to an extent Claimants’ argument that the
English SPAs do more than the Tashkent SPAs in terms of gaining a “control Premium”
and granting various rights such as a choice of law and choice of court agreement. But
those additions in the Tribunal’s opinion can’t explain fully the difference between the
price paid by Claimants in the English SPAs and the price recorded on the Tashkent SPAs.

484. Second, Claimants rely on the opinion of its expert Professor Butler to argue that the
provision of the first paragraph rendering the transaction “null” is not applicable to the
second paragraph which instead renders the sham transaction invalid so that reference is
made to the true transaction. The Tribunal finds this view to correctly represent the text.
The result of the second paragraph does not reflect the seriousness of declaring a
transaction void because of seriousness of the interest potentially compromised. Article
124(2) instead makes clear which of two applicable transactions is the one that will apply.
Article 124(2) would do this regardless of whether the sham is one that is minor or major.

 

331 _ Respondent ‘ost-Hearing Brief, | 69.

Hearing Brief, | 54 (citing Mamatov II, { 19 (emphasis added)).
jaimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {[ 102.

aimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {
jaimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {{[ 230, 233. Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 1102.
aimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {| 233.

aimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {| 233.

 

[ 229.
I

360
37¢

gogaor

107

It may be that Claimants’ act does not comply with other laws of Uzbekistan that reflect
serious interests, but the Tribunal by majority does not regard Article 124(2) as such a
law.

485. The Tribunal by majority concludes that Respondent has not carried its burden in
establishing the seriousness of the alleged act of noncompliance. Accepting that there
exists an act of noncompliance to be considered in concert with Claimants conduct in the
context of the alleged violation, as set out at paragraphs 429 to 432 above, the Tribunal
by majority finds that such an act of noncompliance does not result in a compromise of
an interest of sufficient significance so as to render proportionate the exclusion of the
investment from the protections of the BIT.

486. On the minority view, the Tashkent SPAs were necessary to secure transfer of title in the
shares and in this sense were not “sham” or “fictitious”. However, the Tashkent SPAs
were “sham” or “fictitious” insofar as they purported to set out the terms under which title
was transferred. Contrary to the impression they were designed to convey, the Tashkent
SPAs were never intended to be performed (i.e. the shares would never have been sold at
the price and on the terms set out). Thus, in the words of Article 124 of the Uzbek Civil
Code, the Tashkent SPAs were clearly transactions “concluded for the purpose of
concealing another transactions (sham transactions)”. Having said this, however, the
effect of Article 124 of the Uzbek Civil Code is such that the consequences of such a sham
or fictitious contract are those provided for in other legislation (including those provisions
addressed elsewhere in this section).

(3) Law No. 260-II (Law on Exchange Activity), Articles 7, 15 and 27

487. Law No. 260-II was adopted so as “to regulate relations related to the establishment and
activities of exchanges”.*** Article 7 provides that the “main principles” of exchange
activity are “openness and publicity of exchange trades; freedom of formation of prices
during exchange trades; voluntariness of concluding exchange transactions; equality of
conditions of participation in exchange trades for all exchange members”.

488. An “exchange” is defined as “a legal entity creating necessary conditions for trading in
exchange commodities by arranging and holding public and open exchange trades on the
basis of established rules in previously identified venue and time”.**? The law is directed
at “members of an exchange” defined as “those who had purchased or received a
brokerage place in procedure established by the exchange”.*™° Also mentioned are

338 R-0008, Law No. 260-II dated 29 August 2001, Art. 1.
3 R-0008, Law No. 260-II dated 29 August 2001, Art. 3.
40 R-0008, Law No. 260-II dated 29 August 2001, Art. 16.

108

participants of exchange transactions” which are defined as “[m]Jembers of the

exchange”.*"!

489. Article 6 provides in part that:

In case of violation by exchanges or their members of legislation on
exchanges and exchange activity, the authorized bodies for
regulating the activity of exchanges may issue compulsory
directives requiring elimination of revealed violations.

In case of non-compliance of exchanges with directives of
authorized bodies and provisions of Articles 14 and 15 of this Law,
the authorized bodies may suspend the license of the exchange for a
period of not more than ten working days or go to law requesting
suspension of the license for a period of more than ten working days
or termination of license.*4

490. Article 15 provides:

An exchange may not carry out a direct production, trade, trade and
brokerage activity or be a founder (shareholder) of other legal
entities, except for cases provided by legislation.

Public authorities and bodies of public administration may not act
as a founder (shareholder) of an exchange, except for the cases
provided by legislation.

The exchange employees are prohibited from acquiring a brokerage
place and use the classified information for purposes not related to
their job description.

The following are not allowed in the exchange:

trade in commodities not included in the exchange bulletin;

any type of concerted actions of participants of exchange trades that
may entail a change in current exchange prices or their fixation;

spread of false information that may be the reason for artificial
change in the market structure;

registration of an exchange transaction concluded between its
members without exchange trades.*47

41 R.0008, Law No. 260-II dated 29 August 2001, Art. 24.
22-0008, Law No. 260-II dated 29 August 2001, Art. 6.
3.0008, Law No. 260-II dated 29 August 2001, Art. 15.

109

491.

492.

493.

*4 Respondent's Post

Respondent alleges that the nondisclosure of the correct price on the TSE by Claimants
did not comply with Articles 7, 15 and 27 of Law 260-II. In particular, Respondent points
to the prohibition in Article 15 of the “spread of false information that may be the reason
for artificial change in the market structure”.**4 Respondent argues that Claimants’ alleged
investment is illegal as Mr. Kim instructed his broker Mr. Pak to register transaction
documents showing that Kaden and Nabolena purchased shares on the TSE for a price
that he knew was not the actual price.*#> Claimants argue that (1) the obligations in Article
15 are “only applicable to professional market participants”, and (2) Respondent has not
established the elements of noncompliance with Article 15. Respondent argues that
Article 27 of Law 206-II extends the obligations of the law to the “persons” responsible
for violations. Claimants respond that Article 27 refers to responsibility under “established
procedure” which in turn is a reference to Order No. 2002-04 and goes on to argue that
persons other than exchange participants thus would require conduct which violates a
separate specific law.*4°

The Tribunal finds that the obligations in Article 15 of Law 260-II, reflecting the focus of
the law as a whole, are directed at Members of the exchange and that therefore the
Respondent has not established that Claimants — who are clients rather than members in
the language of the Law — acted in non-compliance. The Tribunal accepts that Article 27
of Law 260-II is applicable to all persons responsible, including Claimants. However, the
reference in Article 27 to “established procedure” indicates that Claimants ultimately
would be responsible under a separate specific law. It is to such other law that the Tribunal
must look to assess whether the Claimants acted in noncompliance with legislation.

(4) Law No. 218-I (Law on Functioning Mechanism of Securities Market),
Articles 6, 25 and 31

Article 6 of Law No. 218-I provides that the “[m]ain principles of trading in the securities
market” include “pricing based on actual current demand and supply; strict compliance
with the legislation on the securities market by all participants; [...] providing full
disclosure about the securities and their issuers[;] transparency and accessibility of that
information; protection of the interests of investors and issuers; [and] prohibition and
prosecution of fraud and other illegal activities at the securities market”. *47

 

Hearing Brief, { 62.

5 Respondent’s Closing Presentation, p. 79.

6 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 112-117.

47 R.0075, Law No. 218-I dated 25 April 1996, Art. 6. Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, {51 (citing
Art. 6 and 25 of Law No. 218(I)); Mamatov I, 118; Pak II, 13.

110

494.

495.

496.

497.

498.

499.

Article 25 of Law No. 218-I prohibits “manipulation at the securities market through bogus
transactions”. Respondent argues that Claimants are in breach of this provision insofar as
Claimants disclosed false purchase price for the BC and KC shares to the TSE.*“*

Article 31 of Law No. 218-I provides that:

Securities market participants for violation of securities legislation shall be liable
in accordance with established procedure. In case of violation of the securities
legislation the economic sanctions to the securities market participants shall apply
for: [...] misleading investors and supervising authorities by release (provision) of
deliberately false information - in the amount of 300 to 400 times the amount of the
minimum wage.*4?

“Securities market participants” is defined in Article 2 as including investors.*°°

Respondent alleges that Claimants are in breach of Article 25 in that Claimants disclosed
false purchase price for the BC and KC shares to the TSE.**!

Respondent also alleges that Claimants’ alleged investment breaches Article 31 in that Mr.
Kim instructed his broker Mr. Pak to register transaction documents showing that Kaden
and Nabolena purchased shares on the TSE for a price that he knew was not the actual
price.**?

As stated above in regard to other allegations, the Tribunal concludes that Claimants
entered a price on the TSE that did not reflect the full price paid for those shares. However,
as also stated above, the Tribunal by majority finds that Respondent has not established
that Claimants intended to mislead investors and supervising authorities. Likewise, the
Tribunal by majority finds that Respondent has not established that Claimants intended to
manipulate the market.

Even assuming the Claimants were found to have acted in non-compliance with these
provisions, the Tribunal by majority does not regard the sanctions provided for these
provisions to reflect a seriousness to the obligations that renders proportionate the removal
of protection of the BIT. Therefore, the Tribunal by majority considering this lesser degree
of seriousness of the obligation in concert with the context of the alleged violation, as set
out at paragraphs 429 to 432 above, the Tribunal concludes that, even if it were to conclude

48 R.0075, Law No. 218-I dated 25 April 1996, Art. 25. Respondent’s Closing Presentation, p. 79.
49 R.0075, Law No. 218-I dated 25 April 1996, Art. 31.

350 R-0075, Law No. 218-I dated 25 April 1996, Art. 2.

351 Respondent’s Closing Presentation, p. 79.

352

Respondent's Closing Presentation, p. 79.

111

500.

501.

502.

503.

504.

that Claimants had acted in non-compliance with either provision, the act would not be
sufficient so as to render proportionate the loss of application of the BIT.

On the minority view, in accordance with the reasoning set out at paragraphs 440, 450,
and 465 above, there is a breach of Articles 25 and 31 of Law No. 218-I, and the breach
is such that it compromises a significant interest of the Host State. The minority view
would conclude that the investment therefore falls outside the scope of Article 12 of the
BIT on this ground.

(5) | Order No. 04-103 (Order on the Prevention of Stock Market
Manipulation), Article 2.3.2

Article 2.3.2 of Order No. 04-103 provides that “[i]n order not to be accused of
manipulating in the securities market”, all market participants are prohibited from
“distribut[ing] / transmit[ting] information to other participants or to make any statement,
which, in terms of time and / or the circumstances under which they were made, is false or
misleading [to] any other market participants, and in respect of which the declarant was
aware that it is false and misleading”.*°? Article 1.4 of the same Order indicates that
“securities market participants” includes not only professional participants but also
“investors”.

Respondent argues that Claimants’ alleged investment does not comply with this provision
because Claimants disclosed a false purchase price for the BC and KC shares to the TSE.

The Tribunal first recalls that it accepts to an extent Claimants’ argument that the English
SPAs do more than the Tashkent SPAs in terms of gaining a “control Premium” and
granting various rights such as a choice of law and choice of court agreement. But those
additions in the Tribunal’s opinion can’t explain fully the difference between the price paid
by Claimants in the English SPAs and the price recorded on the Tashkent SPAs.

A close examination of the obligation in Article 2, however, makes clear that the
consequence of noncompliance with Article 2.3.2 under the Order is to allow for the
accusation of manipulation and a referral of the matter to the court. This conclusion in part
arises from the opening of Article 2 which states that certain steps are “forbidden”, if the
participant wishes “to not be accused of manipulating in the securities market’. In other
words, the conditional language indicates that certain “steps” may give rise to the
possibility of accusation. And indeed, the Tribunal notes that the Order itself does not
specify the applicable sanction, but rather in Article 3.1 (as amended in 2008) provides that
“Tijn case of finding signs of price manipulation in the securities market (in the activities

353 R-0013, Order No. 04-103 dated 25 June 1999, Art. 2.3.2.
354 Respondent’s Closing Presentation, p. 79.

112

505.

506.

507.

of the Participant) by authorized state body or its territorial bodies, within ten days of
inspections materials of declaration accepting the fact of price manipulation goes to the
court”.**° In other words, the presence of “signs” (e.g., noncompliance with Article 2.3.2)
lead to referral to a court for prosecution under another law.

The Tribunal considers that when this lower degree of priority is taken with the context
of the alleged violation, as set out at paragraphs 429 to 432 above, the majority of the
Tribunal concludes that, even if it were to conclude that Claimants had acted in
noncompliance with this provision, the violation would not be sufficient to render
proportionate exclusion of the investment from the scope of the BIT.

On the minority view, the consequence of the matter “go[ing] to the court” is not sufficient
to indicate a lesser degree of seriousness of the law. In accordance with the reasoning set
out at paragraphs 440, 450, and 465 above, there is a breach of Order No. 04-103, and the
breach is such that it compromises a significant interest of the Host State. The minority
view would conclude that the investment therefore falls outside the scope of Article 12 of
the BIT on this ground.

(6) Order No. 2002-06 (Securities Disclosure Order), Articles 25 and 28

Order No. 2002-06 provides in its preamble that the “present Regulation [...] establishes
the requirements towards the participants of the securities market on disclosure by them
[of] the information” and applies “to all participants of the securities market, except the
banks”. Section 1 of the Order sets forth “general provisions”. Sections 2 through 6 then
proceed — each in turn — to address the disclosure requirements of issuers (Section 2),
professional participants (Section 3), organizers of the trades (Section 4), owners of the
securities (Section 5), investors (Section Sbis) and the authorized state body (Section 6)”.
Section 7 is entitled “concluding provisions”, and consists of Articles 28 and 29. Article
28 of Order No. 2002-06 provides that “[p]articipants of the securities market shall bear
responsibility established by the legislation for the improper disclosure of the information
at the securities market or disclosure of the information, which is misleading”.*°°
Respondent argues that Claimants’ investment is illegal as Claimants disclosed a false
purchase price for the BC and KC shares to TSE.°*”

355 R-0013, Order No. 04-103 dated 25 June 1999. The Tribunal notes that the text of Order No. 04-103 has been the

subject of amendment several times

  

since Claimants’ acquisition of the majority shares in BC and KC. The Tribunal

further notes that, after the most recent amendments to the Order, the consequence of “finding of signs of price
manipulation in the securities market” is that the matter “goes to the court”. Importantly, the Order does not specify
further consequences.

356 R-0003, Order No. 2002-06 dated 27 March 2002, Art. 28.

357 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {J 62-64.

113

508. Section Sbis on the disclosure obligations of investors has three articles. Article 25bis is
most pertinent and provides:

Investor is obliged to disclose the information on the intention to
buy (through one or several transactions) independently or jointly
with his affiliated persons 15 and more percents of the total volume
of the charter capital of the open joint stock company through the
preliminary publication of the following mandatory information:

Surname, name and patronymic name of the investor for the natural
person or full name for the legal person;

Full name of the issuer and its address;
Type of the shares being procured;
Quantity of the shares being procured (pieces);

Volume of the shares being procured (in percent to the total volume
of the charter capital of the company).*°*

509. According to Respondent, the share purchase price is a material term that must be
disclosed accurately, that price being reflected in the TSE Rules in force in 2006 and the
transaction cards.*°° Respondent, in contending there is generally a price disclosure
obligation, submits that “Claimants erroneously assert that the only disclosure obligations
under Uzbek law are listed in Order No. 2002-06, and that ‘no provision of Uzbek law or
regulations were violated by Claimants’ failure to disclose’ the real transaction price of
US $34 million”.* Respondent submits that while Order No. 2002-06 contains specific
disclosure requirements when investors “intend to purchase 15 percent or more or when
they complete a purchase for 35 percent or more of a security, the share purchase price
must be disclosed and published for all transactions at the TSE”.*°! Moreover, there is an
affirmative obligation to disclose that extends beyond brokers.*°

510. Claimants’ response in terms of Order No. 2002-06 is to emphasize that although specific
disclosures are required of investors, price is not one of them.** Investor disclosures
required pursuant to Article 25bis of Order No. 2002-06 are: “[1] [s]urname, name and
patronymic name of the investor for the natural person or full name for the legal person;
[2] [fJull name of the issuer and its address; [3] type of the shares being procured (pieces);

358 R-0003, Order No. 2002-06 dated 27 March 2002, Art. 25bis.
3° Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {ff 62-64.

360 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, 64.

361 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 64 (emphasis in original).
32 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {ff 66-68.

363 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, { 120.

 

114

S11.

512.

513.

514.

[4] volume of the shares being procured (in percent to the total volume of the charter
capital of the company)”.*™ The price is not included, and it is therefore not a term that
the investor must disclose.** Claimants submit that Respondent’s expert Professor Black
acknowledged that “there is no ‘affirmative requirement in this Order [Securities
Disclosure Order No. 2002-06] that the price of the transactions [English SPAs] be
disclosed’”.*%

The Tribunal agrees that Article 25 of Order No. 2002-06 by its own terms does not place
on investors a duty to disclosure the price. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that
Respondent has not been established that Claimants failed to comply with Article 25.

As far as Respondent’s argument that Claimants acted in noncompliance with Article 28,
the Tribunal does not read Article 28 or 29 as containing independent obligations but rather
as general provisions applicable to and supplementing all of the previous articles.
Therefore, the Respondent not having established noncompliance with an article placing
an obligation to disclose on the Claimants, Tribunal concludes that Respondent has not
established that Claimants failed to comply with Article 28.

(7) TSE Rules, Rule 2

Claimants further dispute Respondent’s attempt to argue that Claimants breached certain
TSE Rules that were only applicable to brokers and professional exchange members.*”
For example, Claimants explain that the price on the transaction cards is to be filled in by
the broker, and investors had no obligation to report or disclose anything to the Stock
Exchange.*°* Moreover, under the TSE Rules, Claimants could not have reported or
disclosed anything on the transaction card as it “was completed, by the brokers, after the
trades were completed and the prices on the transaction card were taken from the trading
system”.*® The Parties have also agreed that the TSE Rules are not part of the laws of
Uzbekistan (the TSE Rules are not normative-legal acts).°””

The Tribunal does not consider the TSE Rules to fall within the formal scope of the
legality requirement insofar as the TSE Rules are not normative-legal acts. As a result,
there can be no relevant illegality as regards this allegation, and therefore the investment
does not fall outside the scope of Article 12 of the BIT on this ground.

G. Alleged Violations Relating to Fraud Causing Significant Harm to the State,

3o4 oo 0003, Order No. 2002-06 dated 27 March 2002, Art. 25; see also Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {{] 118-125.

 

s’ Post-Hearing Brief, 120.
s’ Post-Hearing Brief, 120.
s’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {| 248.
s’ Post-Hearing Brief, 124.
s’ Post-Hearing Brief, 124.

3 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, { 123.

115

515.

516.

517.

518.

519.

520.

  

 

376 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objectio

the BC and KC Minority Shareholders, the TSE, and the Brokers

Respondent alleges that false disclosures and concealment by the Claimants caused
significant harm to the State, the BC and KC minority shareholders, the TSE and the
brokers, resulting in illicit benefits to Claimants and giving rise to a further four violations
of Uzbek law. In particular, Respondent asserts that Claimants defrauded the State, the
TSE, their broker, and the minority shareholders of BC and KC in violation of Uzbek
law.37!

Claimants draw attention to the fact that Respondent has failed to prove that there are
“general antifraud provisions of the Uzbek Civil and Criminal Codes”, and, as Professor
Butler shows, Respondent instead cites to “Article 123 [...] a narrow provision dealing
with fraudulent contracts, [...] and Articles 168 and 184 of the Criminal Code [that]
prohibit specific fraudulent actions (swindling and tax evasion)”.*”

Claimants assert that these provisions are inapplicable to this case as: (1) Claimants did
not commit criminal fraud in violation of Article 168 (swindling) or (2) Article 184 (tax
evasion) of the Criminal Code; nor did (3) Claimants commit civil fraud as they did not
deliberately induce anyone to enter a transaction by fraud.*”7

(1) Criminal Code, Article 168

Respondent argues that Claimants’ actions are in violation of Article 168 of the
Uzbekistan Criminal Code. Article 168 provides: “[f]raud, that is, acquisition of
someone’s property or the right thereto by deception or abuse of confidence” is punishable
by fine, correctional labor or arrest.374

Claimants argue that a finding of criminal law is within the exclusive jurisdiction of Uzbek
courts and should not be inferred during these proceedings.*”> Moreover, Claimants stress
that Respondent has not even indicted Claimants despite knowing of these “alleged”
crimes for over a year.>”°

Both “swindling” and “tax evasion” require “proof of direct intent to commit crime”,
which Claimants assert is absent in this case. Claimants argue that there was no intent to
deceive anyone. With respect to “swindling”, the Uzbek Supreme Court has clarified that
there must be a “gratuitous acquisition of another’s property”, and it is undisputed that in

37! Respondent’s Closing Presentation, p. 148.
Claimants’

Post-Hearing Brief, | 158 (citing Butler II, 4451-52).
” Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 257.
riminal Code, Art. 168.
” Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 258.
s, 258.

 
   

 
  

 

116

this case each contracting party to the share purchase agreement received consideration.*””
Claimants further contend that Sellers have never complained about the transaction nor
did Claimants intend to deceive or “swindle” the minority shareholders.*”* According to
Claimants, Respondent has not provided evidence that “the minority shareholders actually
knew about and relied on the supposedly misstated TSE price” so “their decision could
not have been influenced by it” and hence there would be no “swindling”.*”? Claimants
note that Respondent chose not to cross-examine either Ms. Nurmakhanova or Mr.
Deneschuk, Claimants’ witnesses involved in the minority acquisitions.**°

521. Moreover, Claimants assert that even if such allegations were true (which Claimants
deny), as Respondent alleges a violation of Article 168 only with respect to the minority
shareholder acquisitions, the Tribunal would still retain jurisdiction over the majority
stake acquisition.**!

522. The Tribunal notes that the determination of criminal charges is a matter for the criminal
justice system of the Host State. However, the Tribunal may conclude, on the basis of an
examination of the law of the Host State and the facts that pertain to an allegation, that
there has been non-compliance with legislation sufficient to trigger the legality
requirement. In this regard, the commission of a criminal offence under Article 168, if
established, would constitute an illegality sufficient to cause the investment to fall outside
the scope of Article 12 of the BIT as the loss of the protection of the BIT, and the vitiation
of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, would be a proportionate response to an illegality of such
significance.

523. The Tribunal notes that in this case, Respondent has not proven any of the elements of the
alleged crimes. As a result, the Tribunal concludes, on the basis of the arguments and the
evidence before it, that there is no illegality as regards this allegation, and therefore the
investment does not fall outside the scope of Article 12 of the BIT on this ground.

(2) Criminal Code, Article 184

524. Article 184 of the Criminal Code of Uzbekistan provides: “[i]ntentional concealment or
understatement of profit (income) or other taxable objects as well as other evasion from
taxes, duties, or other payments, established by the State, in large amount” is punishable
by fine, correctional labor, arrest, or imprisonment.**? Respondent in addition directs the

aimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 260.
aimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 260.
aimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, { 68.

80 Claimants’ P.
381 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {{ 65 (citing Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, | 85; Respondent's Reply, {if
76,148,153, 205; Respondent’s Closing Presentation, Disclosure, slide 71).

382 R-0027, Criminal Code, Art. 184.

377 C|,
378 Cy,
379 Cy,
380 Cl;

 

117

525.

526.

527.

528.

529.

Tribunal’s attention to Article 30 of the Criminal Code which provides in relevant part:
“[...] helpmates shall be subject to liability under the same Article of the Special Part of
this Code, as committers”.3*%

As to Respondent’s “tax evasion” argument, Claimants highlight that Respondent did not
excerpt the entire text for Article 184, which Claimants’ expert, Professor Butler, explains
would have shown that criminal responsibility under this provision “is possible only after
the relevant tax authorities impose administrative penalty for the same act”.***
Additionally, Claimants assert that they had no duty to pay taxes on their acquisition; only
Sellers would have to pay on the sale proceeds.**> Claimants submit that “Respondent’s
accusations of tax evasion are therefore not only purely speculative, but also directed at
the wrong party”.*8°

Claimants assert there was no Article 184 violation as Respondent failed to adduce
evidence of the “specific taxes that Claimants supposedly avoided paying” and nor did
Respondent produce an Uzbek tax expert or question any of Claimants’ witnesses on this
allegation.**”

Claimants also highlight the Respondent’s argument regarding Ms. Karimova’s
involvement as being inconsistent: Respondent argues, on the one hand, “Claimants
agreed to assist the Sellers in evading taxes as a ‘quid pro quo’ for a reduced share
purchase price” while on the other hand arguing “Claimants agreed to pay an increased
share purchase price as a bribe for Ms. Karimova”.***

As regards Respondent’s argument that Article 184 was violated as the Agency
Agreement contained a lower price, Claimant points out that Respondent’s expert
Professor Black “conveniently overlooks the fact that the payment he is referring to are
actually fees due to a commercial broker under a commercial agency agreement rather
than fees due to the TSE”.**°

In their Post-Hearing Brief, Claimants also respond to a new argument raised by
Respondent at the closing, namely that the agency agreements with Mr. Pak’s firm, Tenet
Invest, were voidable as the price at which the commission was based is “false”.*”

Claimants dispute this allegation for two reasons: (1) the Tashkent SPAs contained the

383 R-0027, Criminal Code, Art. 30.
384 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 261.

385

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 261.

386 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 263.

I
I
389 Cy,
I

   

Hearing Brief, 62.
Hearing Brief, { 64 (emphasis in original).

jaimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {| 59.

3 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 94.

118

530.

531.

532.

533.

 

 

actual price at which the BC and KC shares traded on the TSE and the English SPAs did
not conclude the BC and KC transactions so they were not subject to the registration
requirements under Articles 5 and 17 of Resolution No. 285; and (2) given the history and
prior transactions where Tenet Invest played a role for BC shares, as elucidated by “Mr.
Pak’s prevarication and eventual volte-face on the stand,” “there can be no serious doubt
that [Mr. Pak] was well aware of the full terms of the BC and KC transactions”.*?!

In the Tribunal’s view, Respondent has not established any of the elements of the alleged
crime. As a result, the Tribunal concludes on the basis of the arguments and the evidence
before it that the investment does not fall outside the scope of the BIT as a result of an act
of noncompliance with legislation under Article 12.

(3) Civil Code, Article 123

Article 123 of the Civil Code provides: “A transaction concluded under the influence of
fraud, coercion, threat, or ill-intentioned agreement of a representative of one party with
the other party [...] may be deemed by a court to be invalid upon the suit of the victim’”.**
Claimants’ expert, Professor Butler, explains that “there is no civil-law ‘anti-fraud’
provision”, and Article 123 is inapplicable and in any event would only concern the parties
to the transaction (not third parties).*°? Professor Butler further asserts that, unlike the
common law concept of fraud, Article 123 would not prohibit fraud, but rather only give
the alleged victim a right to invalidate the transaction (until then it would be valid).°* At
any rate, according to Claimants, the managers of BC and KC did not coerce or defraud
the minority shareholders nor did they defraud or intend to defraud anyone through the
planned UCG IPO.**° Claimants further submit that “Respondents failure to confront Mr.
Deneschuk, along with its abandonment of its original Article 123 argument in its closing,
is quite telling. There was no coercion and no deceit toward the minority shareholders,
and there can be no violation of Article 123”.°°°

Claimants also dispute Respondent’s allegations that Claimants engaged in “securities
fraud” and “manipulation”, in violation of Clauses 2.3.2, 2.3.3 and 2.3.4 of the
Manipulation Order and Article 123 of the Uzbek Civil Code and Article 168 of the
Criminal Code, by ‘“‘making false disclosures to the Exchange’ and allegedly
‘defraud[ing] BC and KC’s Minority Shareholders from whom Claimants purchased

391 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {11 96-97.

70, Civil Code, Art. 123.

ants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {| 264.

ants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, { 265.

ants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, ff 268-410.

 

396 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, { 100.

119

shares at below-market prices’”.*°’ Claimants contend that: (1) as previously explained,
there was no “false disclosure’; (2) there is no concept of “securities fraud” in Uzbek law;
and (3) as a matter of fact and Uzbek law, Claimants did not commit manipulation.*°*

534. Claimants explain that Uzbek Civil Code Article 123 and Uzbek Criminal Code 168,
which form the bases of Respondent’s securities fraud allegations, do not concern
securities.*”” Instead, Claimants explain that Uzbek law “only defines the acts that must
be avoided ‘[t]o avoid being accused of manipulation in the securities market’”.4°°

535. Further, as explained by Claimants’ expert Mr. Strahota, “under the general notion of
‘securities fraud,’ Respondent would need to prove scienter on behalf of Claimants, and
reliance on behalf of the minority shareholders”.*°' Again, Claimants contend “there is no
proof that Claimants intended to violate the securities laws” and “absolutely no proof the
minority shareholders in any way relied upon the prices at which BC and KC majority
stakes were traded on the TSE when deciding whether to sell their shares”. 4°

536. The Tribunal’s majority recalls its conclusions that Respondent has not proven its
allegations that Claimants engaged in fraud in violation of Uzbek law. On the basis of the
record before it, there is not a sufficient foundation on which the Tribunal majority can
find that Claimants had an intention to mislead other market participants or to manipulate
the market. Respondent alleges that Claimants sought to defraud minority shareholders,
and has explained how this could have happened. However, a majority of the Tribunal
does not find this allegation established by the actual record before it. The Tribunal holds
that Respondent has not established that a transaction was made under the influence of
“fraud, coercion, threat, or ill-intentioned agreement of a representative of one party with
the other part”. Indeed, Article 123 is addressed to vitiating factors between contracting
parties, where such factors have not been established and indeed the intended situation is
not applicable.

537. The Tribunal’s minority view is in concordance with the majority on the outcome as
regards this ground albeit with different reasons. As set out earlier, the minority disagrees
with the majority with respect to whether Claimants engaged in fraud in violation of
Uzbek law. However, the minority agrees that the specific requirements of Article 123 (a
“transaction concluded under the influence of fraud, coercion, threat, or ill-intentioned
agreement of a representative of one party with the other party”) are not satisfied here. As

37 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, J 248.

388 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, J 248.

3° Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, J 249.

400 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 249 (citing Butler II, | 50; CL-0381, Order No. 04-103 on
Prevention of Manipulations of the Securities Market dated 25 June 1999).

401 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 157.

402 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 157.

120

538.

539.

540.

S41.

noted above, this provision appears to be addressed to vitiating factors as between
contracting parties, of which there were none proven in this case.

H. Claimants’ Argument that Respondent is Estopped from Raising Ilegality

Claimants contend that Respondent should be estopped from raising the illegality defense.
At its core, Claimants argue that Respondent must have known that the prices stated in the
Tashkent SPAs were lower than the fair market price of the majority shares, especially
given that this was a transaction in the strategic cement industry involving Kazakh
purchasers and Ms. Karimova.*°? This lower Tashkent Stock Exchange price is a critical
element of the acts of noncompliance alleged by Respondent. Respondent disputes such
knowledge. Respondent also notes that Claimants did not plead any of the “essentials of
estoppel in international law’, namely “(1) a statement of fact which is clear and
unambiguous; (2) this statement must be voluntary, unconditional, and authorized; and (3)
... reliance in good faith upon the statement either to the detriment of the party so relying
on the statement or to the advantage of the party making the statement”.4°*

Given the Tribunal majority’s denial of Respondent’s Third Objection, it need not consider
Claimants’ plea that Respondent should be estopped from raising its illegality objection.*°

In the view of the minority, Claimants’ estoppel argument is unpersuasive, given that: (a)
there is no evidence — at least so far in these proceedings — that Respondent had the requisite
knowledge of the false prices (and no basis to attribute Ms. Karimova’s alleged knowledge
in this regard); and (b) there is no evidence of detrimental reliance on any representation
or conduct by Respondent on the part of Claimants.

I. Conclusion on Third Objection

The Tribunal, by a majority, finds that Respondent either has failed to establish that
Claimants acted in noncompliance with various laws or that such acts of noncompliance
do not result in a compromise of an interest that justifies, as a proportionate response, the
harshness of denying application of the BIT. The minority view is that Respondent has
established the intent required to conclude that Claimants acted in noncompliance with
various laws and that such acts of noncompliance — particularly the nondisclosure of the
price paid for the shares — result in the compromise of a correspondingly significant interest

403 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {| 435.

404 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, {213 (citing RL-0098, Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Canada, NAFTA,
Interim Award dated 26 June 2000.

4°5 The Tribunal notes, however, that the pleadings present two opposing conceptions of estoppel present in investment

arbitration. An advantage of the legality requirement te:

 

adopted in this Decision is that the equitable notions

underlying Claimants’ argument, in particular the significance to be accorded inaction by the Host State are
incorporated in part as factors to be considered in the Tribunal’s analysis of the significance of the obligation to the
State and the serious of the investor’s conduct.

121

of Uzbekistan that renders proportionate the exclusion of the investment from the
protections of the BIT.

542. The Tribunal also finds that one alleged act of noncompliance does not involve
noncompliance with a law as that term is defined in Article 12. The Tribunal, by a majority,
denies Respondent’s Third Objection to its jurisdiction.

X. THE FOURTH JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTION - CORRUPTION

543. Respondent’s fourth objection is that Claimants procured their investment through
corruption and that the claim so procured, as a consequence, is not admissible. Corruption
is antithetical to the rule of law in its broadest sense. The international community, many
nations and many investors have repeatedly stressed the importance of combatting
corruption. The primacy of this effort is distinct from the task of establishing the presence
of corruption. The Tribunal in considering this objection thus first examines the threshold
matter of the burden of proof and the significance to be afforded “red flags”. The Tribunal
then proceeds to consider (1) Respondent’s argument that a payment to Ms. Karimova of
approximately US$8 million by Claimants disguised within the price for their acquisition
of KC and BC constituted a bribe in violation of Article 211 of the Criminal Code; (2)
Respondent’s argument that that payment constituted a bribe in violation of international
public policy; and (3) Respondent’s argument that a payment by Claimants of US$3 million
to Mr. Bizakov constitutes corruption. The following sections discuss each of these aspects
of the fourth objection in turn.

A. The Burden of Proof and the Significance to be Afforded Red Flags

544. As in other corruption cases, the Parties differ on whether the allegation of corruption, as
with other crimes, need be established with an exacting standard such as “clear or
convincing evidence” or whether the difficulty of proving corruption indicates that the
violation need only be established with “reasonable certainty”.*°° The Tribunal observes
that the international community and many nations have placed a high priority on
combatting corruption and that it may be the case that the standard of proof is shifting in
this area of law.

545. Where the allegation is that the alleged act violated a provision of a particular Host State’s
law, then it follows that the standard of proof to be employed is that provided for in that

 

46 Respondent points to the award of the tribunal in Meral-Tech v. Uzbekistan where it is stated: “As in World Duty
Free, the present factual matrix does not require the Tribunal to resort to presumptions or rules of burden of proof
where the evidence of the payments came from the Claimant and the Tribunal itself sought further evidence of the
nature and purpose of such payments. Instead, the Tribunal will determine on the basis of the evidence before it
whether corruption has been established with reasonable certainty. In this context, it notes that corruption is by essence
difficult to establish and that it is thus generally admitted that it can be shown through circumstantial evidence”.
RL-0030, Metal-Tech, | 243 (emphasis added).

 

 

 

 

 
  

122

law. In this respect, the Parties in this case have not argued what the applicable standard of
proof is before Uzbekistan courts adjudicating an alleged violation of Article 211.
Moreover, as will become clear in the following sections, regardless of whether the
standard of proof is “reasonable certainty” or “clear and convincing evidence”, the Tribunal
holds that the allegations of bribery and corruption have not been established by the
evidence presented in this proceeding.

546. As acentral part of the evidence supporting its objection, Respondent identifies certain red
flags in relation to Claimants’ alleged dealings with both Ms. Karimova and Mr. Bizakov.
In particular, Respondent focuses on convoluted and complex aspects of Claimants’
acquisition of the shares in BC and KC arguing that they raise red flags indicating potential
corruption.*”” Respondent points to the urgency of the payments; 4°
diligence or site visits;* the fact that payments were made through a third-party
intermediary; *!° the fact that payments were made to bank accounts in a third country; *!!
and the multilayered corporate structures involved.*!? Respondent also argues that further
red flags are present in that the TSE prices were different than those stated in the English
SPAs (a circumstance detailed in the Third Objection) and there were later illegal acts taken
by Kaden.*!* Respondent adds that Claimant’s failure to produce requested documents
justifies the Tribunal drawing adverse inferences as to the existence of corruption.
Respondent cites several ICC cases in which it is argued that the tribunal relied on red flags
to conclude that corrupt practices were involved. *!#

the lack of formal due

547. Claimants in response argue, among other things, that the complicated means of acquisition
and the financing structure do not violate any laws, and that the presence of many corporate
layers are elements commonly seen in transactions in the CIS region. Claimants argue that
some of the circumstances cited to as red flags were conditions contractually required by
the seller. Claimants argue that a mere existence of red flags may assist a fraud examiner

407 The red flags cited are drawn from slides 90-91 of Respondent’s Opening Presentation.

408 Kim 1, 18.

0 Kim 1, 18.

0 Kim 1, 20.

41 Kim IIL, 4 26.

412 Respondent's Reply on Preliminary Objections, 353.

413 Kaden Invest Limited (BVI): Paid USS15 million to Finex, US$1.5 million to Swansea, and US$2.4 million to
Playrise; Nabolena Limited (Cyprus): Paid US$18.98 million to Finex, US$1.5 million to Swansea, and US$520,000
to Playrise; Finex Limited (Hong Kong): Received US$33.98 million from Kaden and Nabolena; Swansea Enterprises
Corp. (BVI): Received US$3 million from Kaden and Nabolena; Playrise Limited (United Kingdom): Received
US$2.92 million from Kaden and Nabolena and then transferred a large amount of these funds back to Kaden and
Nabolena. Respondent's Opening Presentation , slide 44. See also Respondent’s Opening Presentation, slide 51.

414 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, | 234. See e.g. RL-0137, ICC Case No. 13914 dated March 2008,
ICC Bulletin Vol. 24, Special Supplement 2013, pp. 77-79; RL-0125, ICC Case No. 8891, Final Award of 1998,
reprinted in 4 Journal du Droit International 1076 (2000), pp. 1080-1082; RL-0138, Principality of Lichtenstein v.
Federal Republic of Germany, ICC Case No. 6497, Final Award of 1994, reprinted in 24a Y.B. Comm. Arb. (1999)
71, 75, 9 17-29.

 

123

548.

549.

550.

551.

552.

553.

in formulating a hypothesis and focus its investigation. However, Claimants state that the
red flags, of themselves, do not constitute actual evidence of fraud or corruption.‘
Claimants further contend that many of the above listed flags are in fact normal features of
transactions in the business environment in the CIS region.*!°

The Tribunal first finds that red flags most often provide only circumstantial, as opposed
to direct, evidence. As circumstantial evidence, red flags can play an important supporting
role in the assessment of guilt. Whether red flags can directly establish, for example, an
element of a crime depends on the legal system applicable. There is not a universal answer.

The Tribunal second finds red flags useful in triggering an awareness that a transaction
does not conform with the characteristics usually found in comparable transactions.
Simultaneously, an examination of circumstances that give rise to red flags must take the
surrounding context into consideration. In this sense, the Tribunal finds persuasive
Claimants assertion that the business and personal safety considerations in the CIS
countries at the time in question in this dispute justified the taking of extra measures so as
not to call attention to any individual’s wealth or business dealings. This explanatory
surrounding context does not negate the red flags in their entirety, but rather may lessen
the strength of the red flags identified.

The Tribunal has concerns about several aspects of the transactions that led to Claimants’
investment. These concerns relate to some — albeit as set out below not all — of the red flags
that Respondent contends are present in this dispute. As a result of its concerns, the
Tribunal has taken particular steps throughout its consideration of this objection to subject
those transactions to heightened scrutiny.

First, the Tribunal acceded to an expansive additional document request by Respondent as
regards financial aspects of the purchase of the shares, and undertook itself to examine for
relevancy the documents requested by Respondent (despite a lack of apparent relevancy or
materiality).

Second, the Tribunal has conducted a rigorous examination of Respondent’s allegations as
regards Claimants’ alleged interactions with both Ms. Karimova and Mr. Bizakov. In doing
so the Tribunal has examined the allegations in relation to both national law and
international public policy.

As a final point, the Tribunal notes that its focus, at this stage of these proceedings, is on
jurisdictional matters and therefore on bribery or corruption only that pertains to

+15 Knyazev, 4.2.
416 Knyazev, | 3.28.

124

554.

Claimants’ initial investment. Any matters as regards bribery or corruption that arose later
are more appropriately addressed at the merits stage.

A. Respondent’s Assertion That an Excess Payment to Ms. Karimova was a
Violation of Article 211 of the Uzbekistan Criminal Code

Respondent argues that a payment to Ms. Karimova of approximately US$8 million by
Claimants disguised within the price for their acquisition of KC and BC constituted a bribe
in violation of Article 211 of the Criminal Code. This article, entitled “Bribe-giving”,
provides:

Bribe-giving, that is, knowingly illegal provision of tangible
valuables to an official, personally or through an intermediate
person, or of pecuniary benefit for performance or nonperformance
of certain action, which the official must or could have officially
performed, in the interests of the person giving a bribe-
shall be punished with fine up to fifty minimum monthly wages, or
correctional labor up to three years, or arrest up to six months, or
imprisonment up to three years.
Bribe-giving:
a) repeatedly, by a dangerous recidivist or a person who has
previously committed crimes punishable under Articles 210 or 212
of this Code;
b) in large amount —
shall be punished with imprisonment from three to five years.
Bribe-giving:
a) in especially large amount;
b) in the interests of an organized group;

c) by an authorized official —
shall be punished with imprisonment from five to ten years.
(Paragraphs 2 and 3 as amended by Law of 29.08.2001.)
The person who has given a bribe shall be discharged from criminal

liability in the instance if there was extortion with regard to the
person, or he communicated voluntarily about the event of the

125

555.

556.

557.

558.

crime, after having committed criminal actions, repented honestly,
and facilitated actively detection of the crime.*!”

Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction is grounded in the BIT as a breach of the legality
requirement contained in Article 12 of the BIT. Under the Tribunal’s test of whether an act
of noncompliance by virtue of Article 12 places an investment outside the scope of
application of the BIT, the Tribunal examines the circumstances of the investor’s act in
concert with the seriousness of the obligation in the law. As regards an act of
noncompliance with Article 211 of the Criminal Code, it is the view of the Tribunal that in
virtually all circumstances that the Tribunal can envision, such noncompliance would meet
that test.

In the case of bribery, the Tribunal has no hesitancy in viewing a prohibition on bribery or
corruption of governmental officials as a matter of great importance to the Host State. As
indicated in the text of Article 211 — bribery requires the “knowingly illegal” act with intent
on the part of the investor to gain a particular advantage. The requirement that there be
intent renders the action of the investor a serious breach in virtually all cases. The Tribunal
does not foreclose that there may exist a set of circumstances that does not trigger the
illegality requirement: for example, the provision of an item with trivial value that an
Uzbek court might find deserving of only a minimal fine. However, as the Tribunal’s
analysis demonstrates, the matters in this dispute are likely to surpass any such threshold.
The issue therefore presented by this portion of Respondent’s Fourth Objection is not
whether a violation of Article 211 potentially triggers the legality requirement, but rather
whether Respondent has established that Claimants violated Article 211.

The criminal law of Uzbekistan generally and the language of Article 211 specifically
require that the elements of the crime of bribe-giving be established by the prosecution.
Correspondingly, in the context of this objection to jurisdiction, it is Respondent that bears
the burden of establishing the elements of this offence.*!*

There are four elements underlying Respondent's allegation that Claimants violated Article
211 of the Criminal Code. The first two elements are objective: (a) did Claimants make an
overpayment as a part of the purchase price; and (b) was that overpayment made to Ms.
Karimova? The second two elements are mixed questions of fact and law: (c) was Ms.
Karimova an “official” of the Government and (d) was the overpayment intended “for
performance or nonperformance of certain action, which the official must or could have
officially performed, in the interests of the person giving a bribe”?

417 R.0027, Criminal Code, Art. 211.
418 See CL-0356, Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/98/04, Award dated 8
December 2002, {| 117, in which the tribunal states that “the Tribunal notes that Egypt — which bears the burden of

proving such an affirmative defense — has failed to present any evidence that would refute [...]

126

559.

560.

561.

562.

563.

564.

To resolve these questions in these proceedings this Tribunal does not, per se, apply the
criminal statute of Uzbekistan. Rather, it looks to the content of the statute to determine
whether, owing to a breach of its terms, the investment in this dispute falls outside the
scope of application of the Treaty as described in Article 12 of the BIT.

a. Whether an overpayment was made as a part of the purchase
price

Respondent asserts that the alleged bribe consisted of payment of monies over and above
the actual value of the shares purchased. Respondent asserts that such an overpayment is a
common means in CIS countries by which a bribe is paid.*!?

It is undisputed that Claimants paid to the seller US$33.98 million for the acquisition of
the shares.*”° As to the value of the shares of BC and KC at the time of acquisition,
Respondent cites statements of Claimants’ witnesses and statements in later consolidated
financial statements as indicating that the actual value of the shares was US$25.8 million.
The difference of US$8.2 million is argued by Respondent to be an overpayment made
without apparent justification that “should be deemed bribes”.*?!

Claimants dispute the method of valuation made by Respondent and its interpretation of
the statements in the record. Claimants’ valuation expert concludes that the price paid for
the shares of BC and KC in 2006 was a reasonable one.*7?

The Tribunal concludes that it is difficult to assess whether or not any overpayment was
made since there is uncertainty in valuing the shares themselves. Moreover, even if there
were some overpayment, the mere fact of such an overpayment would not in and of itself
establish that the overpayment should be regarded as a bribe. It is difficult to determine
whether such an overpayment indicates an error in judgment of the buyer or reflects a
failure in market valuation of the asset — such a failure being apparent to the buyers but not
to other market participants.

Ultimately, however, given not only the uncertainties mentioned above but also, as set out
below, the failure of Respondent to establish the other elements of bribe-giving, the
Tribunal need not decide whether an overpayment was made or whether any such over-
payment constitutes a bribe.

b. That the overpayment, if any, was made to Ms. Karimova

+19 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {][ 23-25.

+20 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, {][ 21-22; Respondent’ s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for
Bifurcation, J 63; Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 248.

“21 Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, {| 14.

+22 Navigant II, { 36.

127

565. No document in the record states who was the seller of the shares of BC and KC. Although
the record indicates that the purchase price was paid into an account with Finex Bank, the
ultimate beneficiary of that payment is not stated. Likewise, the contract of sale does not
name Ms. Karimova. However, it appears quite clear from the record that the investors in
this transaction assumed that the seller was Ms. Karimova.

566. Respondent points to a number of statements by Claimants, which indicate that Claimants
believed that the actual seller of the BC and KC shares was Ms. Gulnara Karimova:*>

e Claimants felt comfortable moving forward with the transaction because they were
dealing with Ms. Karimova and wanted a relationship of trust with her.*74

e From the beginning, Claimants believed that Ms. Gulnara Karimova had the ability
to protect or destroy their investment.*?>

e Claimants believe that Ms. Karimova later influenced State entities that allegedly
destroyed Claimants’ investment in BC and KC.*7°

567. Claimants do not dispute that they believed that the seller of the shares was Ms. Karimova.
Rather, they point out that the record itself does not confirm this with certainty.

568. The Tribunal finds on the basis of the evidence before it that the seller in all likelihood was
Ms. Karimova and that the overpayment, if any, therefore was made to her.

c. That Ms. Karimova was an “official” of the Government

423 Request for Arbitration, {] 4, 28, 44; Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, {{ 14, 19; Claimants’ Counter-Memorial
on Preliminary Objections, §§[ 253, 270; Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {{] 10, 15, 24, 135-136,
174,181; Kim 1, (10, 11, 15, 21; Kim I, §[ 20, 24, 53; Kim III, (ff 7,12, 25, 35; Nurmkhanova, {[ 17, 19-20, 37, 39-
40, 43-44; Sauer, | 37; Zaitbekova, {§] 18-20.

#4 Kim I, J 15: “Knowing that purchasing major companies in Uzbekistan was not going to be the same as making an
acquisition in say the U.S. or U.K., that we were dealing with the President’s daughter, that we wanted to build a long-
term relationship of trust with the seller for potential future deals, and that the seller had a team of Uzbek lawyers and
advisors to drive the process of completing the transaction to meet Uzbek law requirements, we felt comfortable
moving forward”.

#25 Sauer, 37: “[W]e did not wish to antagonize Ms. Karimova who was a powerful person in Uzbekistan due to her
personal wealth and political connections. Claimants decided that they had no choice but to honor the requirement for
confidentiality for fear that she would retaliate against our investments in Uzbekistan if we did not. As she owned a
lot of assets in the country, we knew we were likely to do business with her again”. Zaitbekova, {| 18: “We were afraid
that Ms. Karimova and her associates would harm our investments in the country if we breached our obligation of
confidentiality”.

#6 Claimants’ Request for Arbitration, {[ 44.

  

128

569.

570.

S71.

572.

573.

Both governmental officials and private persons are susceptible to corruption in its
ordinary meaning. However, Article 211 is concerned only with the corruption of public
officials, not private citizens. A commentary on this portion of the Criminal Code states:

Bribery is an umbrella term comprising three independent crimes in
public office against the procedure of functioning of supervisory
authorities: bribetaking, bribe-giving and mediation in bribery. [...]
High degree of social danger of such offence as bribetaking is
defined by the fact that it roughly deforms the established procedure
for performance of official powers by the officials and thus outrages
the behalf civil service. A bribe is the most typical and characteristic
display of corruption — the most dangerous criminal phenomenon
which undermines the bases of power and government, discredits
and undermines its prestige in the eyes of people, acutely affects
legal rights and interests of general public.*?”

 

Article 211 thus requires the person who receives the bribe to be an “official” of the
government. The payment of funds to a private person does not fall within the ambit of
“bribe-giving” in Article 211 of the Criminal Code.

As to whether Ms. Karimova was a “government official”, it is undisputed that Ms.
Karimova is the daughter of the then-President of Uzbekistan. That relationship rendered
her a “politically exposed person”.*?® However, although that characterization can suggest
a greater risk that bribery or corruption may play a role in a transaction, neither Ms.
Karimova’s familial relationship, nor her status as a “politically exposed person”, of itself
can render her a government official in the sense of Article 211 of the Criminal Code.

Respondent draws the Tribunal’s attention to the evidence of Claimants’ expert witness,
Professor McGlinchey, who refers to Ms. Karimova as “[t]he president’s daughter,
working in various high-ranking government positions in the mid-2000s”.4?? Respondent
itself states that “Ambassador Karimova was an advisor to the Minister of Foreign Affairs
from 2005 to 2008 and thus an Uzbek Government official at the time of the payments”.*”°

It is undisputed that at various points in time, Ms. Karimova has held various government
posts. The question, however, is whether she was a government official at the relevant time
under Article 211, namely when the shares were acquired in early 2006. The Tribunal in
this regard notes several exhibits in which reference is made to Ms. Karimova having
governmental roles before early 2006:

427 R-0064, M.Kh. Rustambayev, Statement on the Criminal Code of the Republic of Uzbekistan (2004).
+28 Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, {{ 7.

+29 Respondent's Reply on Preliminary Objections, { 221 (citing McGlinchey, 72).

+80 Respondent's Reply on Preliminary Objections, 233.

129

e “Karimova, 37, served as a deputy foreign minister and was listed as an adviser to the
Uzbek ambassador to Russia from 2003-05”.43!

e “[Karimova is] now [in 2004] officially listed as an aide at the Uzbek Embassy in
Moscow”.432

574. The Tribunal further notes additional exhibits that support the claim that, after 2006, Ms.
Karimova was to serve as Uzbekistan’s ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva, and
as Uzbekistan’s ambassador to Spain.*°

575. The evidence in the record thus indicates that Ms. Karimova did hold governmental posts
both before and after the relevant period. However, the record does not substantiate
Respondent’s claim that Ms. Karimova held such a post during the period of share
acquisition by Claimants. The Tribunal does not find the general statement of Professor
McGlinchey whose expert report “examines how the Uzbek state governs”** to be
intended to provide a definitive statement of the governmental role of Ms. Karimova at the
time in question. Finally, Respondent’s statement that Ms. Karimova “was an advisor to
the Minister of Foreign Affairs from 2005 to 2008” is not sufficiently specific to establish
that she was a government official in the sense of Article 211 of the Criminal Code. The
Tribunal notes both that Respondent, the Government of Uzbekistan, is presumably in a
position to document what persons served as its officials and that there is a dearth of
evidence in this regard.

576. The Tribunal considers that an alternative means by which to meet the “government
official” part of the test relies on a commentary to Article 211 of the Criminal Code. This
commentary claims that the objective element of giving a bribe can be fulfilled by a
payment to an official or through a mediator.**° Indeed, Article 211 states that bribe-giving
is “knowingly illegal provision of tangible valuables to an official, personally or through
an intermediary person [...)’. However, Respondent does not argue that Ms. Karimova
acted as an intermediary delivering the bribe to an official, and the Tribunal’s
determination is that all parties consider Ms. Karimova to be the ultimate beneficiary of

431 €.0513, Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty, “Uzbek President’s Daughter Appointed Ambassador to Spain”, dated
25 January 2010.

482 CL-0043, S. Ostrovsky, “MTS Pays Premium to Uzbek ‘Princess’”, Moscow Times dated 19 July 2004.

433 CL-0020, S. Kendzior, Nations in Transit: Uzbekistan (Freedom House, 2013), p. 622: “In her spare time,
Karimova has served as Uzbekistan’s ambassador to Spain and representative to the UN Council in Geneva”; CL-
0005, E. McGlinchey, Chaos, Violence, Dynasty: Politics and Islam in Central Asia, 1st ed. (Pittsburgh: Univ:
of Pittsburgh Press, 2011), p. 115: “Gulnara Karimova, when not in Madrid serving as her father’s ambassador to
Spain, applies her considerable wealth to bring international stars to Tashkent”.

434 McGlinchey, {| 6.

435 R-0064, M.Kh. Rustambayev, Statement on the Criminal Code of the Republic of Uzbekistan (2004), p. 8.

 
  

   

 

130

the payments made as part of Claimants’ transactions. This is therefore not a relevant
means by which to meet the “government official” part of the test in this case.

 

  

 

577. The Tribunal holds Respondent has not substantiated its assertion that Ms. Karimova was
a government official during the relevant period so as to satisfy the requirements of the
Article 211.

d. Performance or nonperformance of certain action, which the
official must or could have officially performed, in the interests
of the person giving a bribe

578. The second aspect of this part of the test in Article 211 of the Criminal Code is that a bribe
was given “for performance or nonperformance of certain action, which the official must
or could have officially performed, in the interests of the person giving a bribe”.

579. Respondent, first, places reliance on a commentary to Article 211 to argue that no specific
action is necessary for the article’s requirements to be met. Claimants, on Mr. Kim’s
account, sought to develop a “relationship of trust” with Ms. Karimova in anticipation of a
long-term business relationship.**° Respondent argues:

[...] while Claimants assert that “establishing goodwill or trust
relations is not considered a bribe where the Government official
performs no official actions,” the commentary to the Criminal Code
confirms that “/c]ases when the conditions of the acceptance of the
bribe object are not stipulated but the parties understand that the
bribe is handed to satisfy the interests of the briber should be
qualified as bribery... .” As the commentary explains, “/s]uch
situations are quite typical for the present-day conditions when
representatives of organized crime with a view to the corruption of
officials take charge of their ‘upkeep’, reasonably reckoning that in
case of a need [the official] will have no option but to act in their
interests”.37

580. Whether in fact there was an instance of an “upkeep bribe” is a matter that may arise at the
merits stage of these proceedings. At this stage, Respondent does not link its broad
interpretation of Article 211 of the Criminal Code as regards an “upkeep bribe” to the
acquisition of the investment by Claimants.

581. Respondent, second, argues that Claimants sought to have Ms. Karimova play a role as
regards the consent of the Uzbek Antimonopoly Commission to Claimants’ acquisition of
the shares in BC and KC. It is this argument that is most similar to the majority of cases of

436 Kim I, 15.

+37 Respondent’ s Post-Hearing Brief, J 12 (citing R-0066, Z. Gulomov et al., Commentaries to the Criminal Code of
the Republic of Uzbekistan (1997) (emphasis added by Respondent).

131

582.

583.

584.

585.

586.

438 C.0327, Lett

alleged corruption wherein a participant to a transaction is the government itself or where
governmental approvals or permits are necessary.

The Tribunal notes that the authority to which Respondent refers, paragraphs 42-44 of the
Request for Arbitration, offers no support for Respondent’s claim. Those paragraphs relate
to a different acquisition by Claimants; do not make mention of the Uzbek Antimonopoly
Commission; and do not make reference to BC or KC. This appears to be an obvious
inaccuracy in Respondent’s argument on this point.

The record indicates that on 25 November 2005, Kaden and Nabolena applied for the
consent of the Uzbek Antimonopoly Commission to the acquisition of BC and KC
respectively. The relevant letter from Nabolena is exhibited, dated 25 November 2005.48
Both BC and KC received the requisite consents on 16 January 2006.**? The Tribunal notes
that there is no evidence, as regards the Uzbek Antimonopoly Commission’s decision, that
any bribe was sought or given to influence the outcome.

Respondent, third, places reliance on Mr. Kim’s statement that “there was no other seller
from whom we could buy a cement plant in Uzbekistan, so our choice was to work to the
sellers’ deadline and terms or leave these assets for a competitor to acquire”.
Respondent argues that this demonstrates that Claimants agreed to Ms. Karimova’s terms
and therefore that “the payment was made to obtain Claimants’ investment, as no such
investment would have been possible without the payment”. The Tribunal, however, does
not agree that this is of necessity the correct interpretation of Mr. Kim’s comments. In
particular, the “terms” in question might be said to refer to the limitations on due diligence
or the non-retention of Uzbek counsel and cannot, without more, be taken to mean that
Claimants admit to making corrupt payments or paying bribes to Ms. Karimova.

Respondent, fourth, places reliance on Ms. Zaitbekova’s statement that Claimants “were
concerned, if not afraid, that [Ms. Karimova’s] people would infringe or would jeopardize
our assets. Yes, we were concerned about that”.4#! The Tribunal does not find Respondent’s
use of this statement persuasive as regards Article 211 of the Criminal Code.

First, the test in Article 211 of the Criminal Code requires the identification of “certain
action” that the government official must or could take “officially”. The statement upon
which Respondent places reliance does not identify any such action and does not
demonstrate how — whatever position she is said to have held — Ms. Karmiova could have

 

 

r from Nabolena Limited to the Antimonopoly Committee dated 25 November 2005.

439 €-0189, Decision of the Antimonopoly Committee on Consent to the Acquisition of KC dated 16 January 2006 ;
C-0153, Decision of the Antimonopoly Committee on Consent to the Acquisition of BC dated 16 January 2006.

40 Respondent’s Reply on Preliminary Objections, {{ 255 (citing Kim II, 21 (emphasis added by Respondent)).

#1 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {| 11 (citing Zaitbekova, {| 18and Ms. Zitbekova’s oral evidence. See Ms.
Zaitbekova, Hearing Tr., Day 3, 719:15-18).

132

587.

588.

589.

590.

“officially” taken such action. Respondent’s claim does not demonstrate any nexus
between Ms. Karimova’s position, if any, and any action that might have been taken.

Second, Article 211(3) of the Criminal Code provides that a person “who has given a bribe
shall be discharged from criminal liability in the instance if there was extortion with regard
to the person”. It is not the Tribunal’s role to determine criminal liability. However, the
Tribunal finds that if Claimants were to be culpable under Article 211 of the Criminal Code
as a result of the inferences that Respondent seeks to draw from Ms. Zaitbekova’s
statement, so too would that culpability be discharged as a result of the extortionate nature
of the alleged conduct by Ms. Karimova that was feared. Under such circumstances,
wherein national law would discharge liability, it would not be appropriate for the Tribunal
to conclude that such actions vitiate the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

The Tribunal concludes that Respondent fails to identify what, if any, action that Ms.
Karimova took or could have taken as a result of any government position she may have
held, so as to advantage the Claimants and thereby establish that the terms of Article 211
of the Criminal Code have been met.

In conclusion, the Tribunal notes the statement of the tribunal in Sistem v. Kyrgyz Republic.
In its award the tribunal held that an “important element of the concept of bribery or
corruption is the link between the advantage bestowed and the improper advantage
obtained”.*# This Tribunal agrees. Proof of bribery or corruption may be difficult but it is
fundamental that the severe consequences that follow a finding of corruption justify the
need for such a linkage. The casting of doubt or aspersions as to the probity of a transaction
is not sufficient. As stated above, red flags may serve to heighten scrutiny. Red flags as
circumstantial evidence likewise can play an important supporting role in the assessment
of guilt. Under the law of Uzbekistan and under Article 211, however, Respondent has not
established that red flags can of themselves substantiate the most basic required elements
of the crime of bribe giving as set forth in Article 211.

The Tribunal further notes that the centrality of Ms. Karimova to Respondent’s objection
begs the question as to why Respondent did not (a) provide witness testimony from Ms.
Karimova who at the time was in the government’s custody or (b) explain why this would
not have been possible. The Tribunal also notes that Respondent has not made available in
this proceeding the results of any governmental investigation that may have taken place
into Ms. Karimova’s role. And the Tribunal further notes that Respondent has not made
available the testimony of other individuals known to assist Ms. Karimova in her business
dealings and who may be in Respondent’s custody or otherwise accessible to it.

+2 CL-0196, Sistem , 43.

133

591. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal concludes that Respondent has not met its
burden of proof, and therefore denies Respondent’s objection that an excess payment by
Claimants to Ms. Karimova was in violation of Article 211 of the Uzbekistan Criminal
Code so as to render the claim inadmissible under Article 12 of the BIT.

B. _ Respondent’s Assertion That an Excess Payment to Ms. Karimova was
Contrary to International Public Policy Prohibiting Corruption

592. Respondent argues that the factual case put forward in the previous section as regards
Article 211 of the Criminal Code is also such as to violate not only the Uzbekistan law
regarding corruption, but also international public policy regarding corruption thereby
rendering the claim inadmissible.

593. Other tribunals have found there to be an international public policy against corruption, the
violation of which would result in the inadmissibility of a claim where the investment at
issue was made possible by such corruption. The Tribunal agrees that such an international
public policy exists and is present implicitly in BITs.* The Tribunal observes that this
aspect of international public policy is not defined with the specificity found in the
Uzbekistan Criminal Code. This is because of the uncodified nature of international public
policy despite the seriousness of both the allegation and the consequence.

594. The task of specifying the content of an international public policy against corruption may
be undertaken by reference to international instruments addressing corruption.*+ The
Tribunal has reviewed the international instruments on corruption in the record in this
proceeding.*4> Having done so, the Tribunal holds that the international public policy
against corruption, like Article 211 of the Uzbekistan Criminal Code, focuses on situations
that aim at the corruption of governmental officials.

+43 As an implicit requirement that may be displaced by explicit text, the Tribunal does not foreclose the possibility
that parties to a BIT or other treaty might chose to address corruption explicitly through mechanisms that sanction
such conduct in ways other than the denial of admissibility.

44 Respondent cites RL-0005, OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International
Business Transactions dated 17 December 1997; RL-0006, United Nations Convention Against Corruption, General
Assembly Resolution No. 58/4 dated 31 October 2003.

445 Respondent cites RL-0005, OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International
Business Transactions dated 17 December 1997; RL-0006, United Nations Convention Against Corruption, General
Assembly Resolution No. 58/4 dated 31 October 2003. The Tribunal notes that Respondent also relies upon several
commenta See RL-0054, B. Cremades and D. Cairns, Transnational Public Policy in International Arbitral
Decision-Making: The Cases of Bribery, Money Laundering and Fraud, in Arbitration: Money Laundering,
Corruption and Fraud (K. Karsten, A. Berkeley, eds., ICC Publishing S.A., 2003); RL-0120, I. Zerbes, The Offense
of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials, in The OECD Convention on Bribery: A Commentary (M. Pieth, L. Low, and
N. Bonucci, eds., 2014); RL-0123, G. Ware, et al., Corruption in Public Procurement: A Perennial Challenge, in The
Many Faces of Corruption: Tracking Vulnerabilities at the Sector Level 300 (J. E. Campos and S. Pradhan, eds., 2007).

  

 

 

  

  

134

595.

596.

597.

598.

599.

+46 See RL-0005, OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International B
Transactions dated 17 December 1997; RL-0006, United Nations Convention Against Corruption, General Ass

For instance, that the OECD Convention, which Respondent cites as indicative of
international public policy, takes as its focus the bribery of government officials.“4° Thus,
the titular concern of the OECD Convention is “Combating Bribery of Foreign Public
Officials in International Business Transactions” and the substantive provisions of the
Convention bear out this conclusion. The UN Convention, which Respondent also cites,
also has this focus.

Simultaneously, the Tribunal acknowledges that the effort to combat corruption is an
evolving area. Insofar as the UN Convention makes broader reference to “Trading in
Influence”, or “Bribery in the Private Sector”, the relevant articles of the Convention use
the language “consider making”. This language matches the evolving and serious effort to
combat corruption. It also suggests a lower level of consensus amongst the parties to the
Convention as to corruption within the private sector, a sector governed by a broad range
of criminal statutes. In that sense, the language employed, if anything, supports the
conclusion that the scope of international public policy is focused on the corruption of
governmental officials.**”

Respondent cites World Duty Free and Metal-Tech as authority for the argument that
payments to officials constitute corruption contrary to international public policy.*#* The
Tribunal notes that the payment in World Duty Free was to the President of the Host State
and that the payment in Metal-Tech was to officials in the Host State government. These
authorities add weight to the conclusion that the scope of international public policy is such
that it relates to bribery and corruption of public officials.

The Tribunal concludes, on the basis of the record, that international public policy, as
applicable to this dispute, is in concordance with Article 211 of the Uzbek Criminal Code
and takes the bribery and corruption of government officials as its focus. Moreover, the
Tribunal concludes that there is no clear consensus that the scope of the prohibition on
bribery in international public policy at present extends beyond those circumstances that
aim at the corruption of government officials.

The Tribunal recalls its conclusions above that Respondent did not establish that Ms.
Karimova is a governmental official and that even if Ms. Karimova were a government

  

Resolution No. 58/4 dated 31 October 2003.

+47 RL-0006, United Nations Convention Against Corruption, General Assembly Resolution No. 58/4 dated 31
October 2003, Art. 18 and 21.

+48 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {| 223-225 (citing RL-0053,
World Duty Free Company Limited v. Republic of Kenya, \CSID Case No. ARB/00/7, Award dated 4 October 2006;
RL-0030, Metal-Tech).

135

official as required by Article 211, Respondent has failed to establish that there was any
advantage improperly sought by, or provided to, Claimants.

600. On these bases, the Tribunal denies Respondent’s objection that a payment by Claimants
to Ms. Karimova was contrary to international public thereby rendering the claim
inadmissible.

C.  Respondent’s Assertion that a Payment by Claimants to Mr. Bizakov
Constitutes Corruption in Violation of International Public Policy

601. Respondent’s third allegation of corruption rests upon a payment of US$3 million to Mr.
Bizakov as a part of the complex and convoluted purchase transaction. Respondent argues
that this alleged bribe renders the claim inadmissible by virtue of the international public
policy against corruption. Respondent’s allegation emerged over the course of the
proceedings as the details of the purchase transaction became clearer during document
production.

602. Respondent in this aspect of the fourth objection emphasizes the complexities in terms of
the levels of corporate structures involved in the purchase and the role and payment made
to Mr. Bizakov as well as possibly other payments to unknown persons. Claimants in
response argue, among other things, that the complicated means of acquisition and
financing structure do not violate any laws, and that the presence and role of persons such
as Mr. Bizakov who can facilitate introductions are elements commonly seen in
transactions in the CIS region.

603. Claimants in their Memorial on the Merits describe Mr. Bizakov as a “prominent Kazakh
businessman, who had previously introduced Claimants to the Kanstsky Cement Plant
opportunity in Kyrgyzstan”.*4? Claimants state that Mr. Bizakov, “as the conduit for the
exchange of information between Claimants and the seller”, provided the introduction to
the seller in a series of meetings in Almaty in Spring-Summer 2005 with Mr. Kim
eventually joining such meetings as they extended into early Autumn 2005.** As to the
services provided by Mr. Bizakov, Claimants assert that he:

#9 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, {{ 18, (citing Kim I, 10). See also Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary
Objections, 10 (“By the end of 2005, Claimants had already acquired the Novotroitsk and Kant cement plants in
Russia and Kyrgyzstan, respectively. In the meantime, in the spring of that year, Claimants learned from Mr.
Nurlan Bizakov, a prominent Kazakh businessman who also introduced Claimants to the Kant acquisition, that there
may be an opportunity to complement their growing cement holding with the BC and KC plants in Uzbekistan”.
(footnote omitted)).
450 Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, {| 20. See also Claimant’s Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {11
(“Negotiations then commenced with the sellers of BC and KC via the intermediation of Mr. Bizakov, and lasted on
and off for a number of months before Claimant Kim finally attended the first meeting with the sellers themselves in
Tashkent in autumn 2005”.).

    

136

e introduced Claimants to the acquisition opportunity;*> !

e provided insight and advice on the Uzbek cement industry;*>?

3

¢ facilitated Claimants’ introduction to sellers*? and acted as an intermediary

between Claimants and sellers;*>*+

© provided financial data on plants, including plant capacity;* and

© reviewed initial English law SPAs.*°°

604. Mr. Bizakov’s involvement in the transaction is memorialized in two brief consulting
agreements.**” Neither agreement names Mr. Bizakov but rather both agreements refer to
Swansea Enterprises Corp. as the “Consultant, represented by K. Zhorayeva, acting on the
basis of the power of attorney[...]” allegedly given by Mr. Bizakov. The agreements
indicate that they each were entered into on 15 December 2005. Claimants state that “[w]ith
the deal done,” the agreements were drawn up “to pay Mr. Bizakov his commission for
introducing them to the opportunity”.**

605. Respondent offers no evidence that Mr. Bizakov had or has any relationship to the
Government of Uzbekistan. Respondent also offers no evidence that Mr. Bizakov had any
contact with the Government of Uzbekistan. Respondent solely points to Mr. Bizakov’s
role as a conduit between Claimants and Ms. Karimova (or her representative). Respondent
likewise has offered no evidence of any attempt by Mr. Bizakov to secure any advantage
from the Government of Uzbekistan by way of a bribe.

606. Respondent rather alleges there are red flags that “bear all the recognized indicia of
corruption for transactions involving intermediaries”.*°° The Tribunal recalls its
consideration of red flags at paragraphs 544-553 above. The Tribunal considers that the
presence of red flags indicates that a transaction merits particular scrutiny. In relation to

451 Kim I, 10; Kim III, | 35; Sauer, | 34; Nurmakhanova, {| 17; Zaitbekova, 9.

452 Kim I, {| 10; Kim II, {{ 20; Sauer, { 34; Nurmakhanova, 17.

453 Kim I, | 12; Nurmakhanova, {| 45.

454 Kim I, {| 12; Kim II, 18.

455 Kim III, (ff 16, 35.

456 Kim III, ¥ 35.

457 See (1) C-0625, Agreement on provision of financial advisory services for acquisition of participation interest in
the charter capital between Nabolena Limited (a Cypriot company) and Swansea Enterprises Corp. (a British Virgin
Islands company); and (2) C-0626, Agreement on provision of financial advisory services for acquisition of
participation interest in the charter capital between Kaden Invest Limited (a British Virgin Islands company) and
Swansea Enterprises Corp. (a British Virgin Islands company). Both agreements state that they were entered into on
15 December 2005.

458 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, J 17.

459 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 27 (emphasis in original).

    

137

607.

460 py

layrise Ltd. is a UK-based company owned by Claimants with which Kaden made certain transactions.

Mr. Bizakov, the Tribunal undertook such additional scrutiny by, among other things,
acceding to an expansive additional document request by Respondent as regards financial
aspects of the purchase of the shares, and undertaking itself to examine for relevancy of
the documents requested by Respondent despite a lack of apparent relevancy or materiality.

In particular, on 6 July 2015, Respondent submitted a letter requesting that the Tribunal
order Claimant to produce Kaden’s unredacted bank statements and to produce Playrise’s
bank records,* both entities being present in the corporate chain of the purchase of the
majority of shares of KC and BC. With respect to both of these requests, Claimants
objected on the basis of relevancy and materiality, and lack of exceptional circumstances.
Claimants later at the Hearing (Part I) indicated they would not object for the Tribunal, but
not Respondent, to review the documents to determine their relevance. In Procedural
Order No. 9 of 15 August 2015, the Tribunal ordered:

Claimants to provide the Tribunal, but not Respondent, with (i)
Kaden’s unredacted bank statements, original and translation,
corresponding to Enclosure 5 to Claimants’ letter of 11 June 2015
and (ii) Playrise’s bank statements from December 2005 to
December 2006, within 7 days of this Order. The Tribunal, at its
discretion, shall determine the relevancy and materiality of the
documents in question and inform the Parties of its decision and
further steps, if any, in due course. The Tribunal may request
guidance from the Respondent as to the Tribunal’s review of the
documents produced if and when it concludes such guidance would
assist the Tribunal.

In Procedural Order No. 10 of 13 October 2015, the Tribunal denied Respondent’s
production request explaining:

8. Claimants complied with the Tribunal’s Procedural Order
No. 9 [...]

9. The Tribunal meticulously reviewed this documentation. In
particular, the Tribunal has paid significant attention to the major
transactions in the relevant periods and cross-referenced the entities
involved in these transactions and the titles of such transactions
against entities named and entries identified in the Parties’ pleadings
and other submissions in this arbitration. No matching entities or
entries were identified. Given this review, the Tribunal does not find
Respondent’s request for production of the unredacted bank

See

 

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, {| 144 and the exhibits to which reference is made in n. 417, also at
that paragraph.

138

608.

609.

610.

6ll.

612.

statements of Kaden and Playrise’s bank statements for the relevant
time period to be material to the present dispute.

The Tribunal therefore did not find, on the basis of its examination, any evidence of
corruption so as to merit a conclusion that the transaction was illegal or contrary to public
policy. Nevertheless, Respondent makes several particular arguments as regards Mr.
Bizakov, and his relationship with Claimants. The Tribunal considers those arguments and
offers its conclusions as follows.

First, Respondent argues that Mr. Bizakov has not carried out consulting services in
Uzbekistan previously. The Tribunal does not give much significance to this allegation.
First, it is not known to the Tribunal whether in fact Mr. Bizakov has not operated in
Uzbekistan previously. Second, and more significantly, Mr. Bizakov’s experience in
relevant part is in relation to the concrete industry in Central Asia. Respondent does not
dispute Claimant’s assertion that Mr. Bizakov assisted Claimants with previous purchases
they made of concrete plants in Russia and Kyrgyzstan. Absence of work in the country
previously is a possible indicator that the person involved had nothing to offer as a
consultant. But in this case, the Tribunal finds the relevant experience not to be work in the
country per se but rather experience in the industrial sector in the region concerned.

Second, Respondent points out that Swansea Enterprises Corporation is not based in
Uzbekistan. However, the Tribunal finds persuasive the argument that the prevailing
business situation, as well as personal safety questions, associated with the CIS countries
at the relevant time calls for caution as to what should be regarded as unusual.

Third, Respondent argues that the contracts appear to be shams because they require
payment “irrespective of whether the transaction was completed”.**! Claimants, however,
from the outset of their pleadings have stated that Mr. Bizakov’s work took place from
spring to autumn of 2005 and that in this sense the work was already completed by the time
of the agreements.

Fourth, Respondent also argues that the size of the commission to Mr. Bizakov is of
concern. The Tribunal agrees that a payment of US$3 million on a purchase price of
US$33.98 million would appear high in the context of a developed economy with more
available information and robust rule of law. Thus, the payment is high when compared to,
for example, the commission formula employed on Wall Street, the relevance or
application of which was contested by the Parties. Claimants respond that Uzbekistan:

[...] was not a market where an investor could simply approach a
seller and do a deal. There was not that kind of information flow or
market. Investors relied on intermediaries such as Mr. Bizakov to

461 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {| 28.

139

613.

614.

615.

introduce them to potential deals and, unsurprisingly, those
intermediaries who were able to do so successfully expected, and
received, a commission for it. Indeed, both the acquisition price
itself and the commission to Mr. Bizakov were funded via loans
from KKB, a major Kazakh bank, which was evidently satisfied that
it was appropriate for it to lend the sums requested.*™

Claimants further contend that the commission paid to Mr. Bizakov was an accepted
practice and the amount paid within the accepted percentage of the total contract price.
The Tribunal finds Claimants’ explanation of the different circumstances as to market
information prevailing in that time in Uzbekistan to be persuasive. The Tribunal still
regards the commission paid as large but to constitute a red flag of less significance. This
is particularly the case when the commission is compared with that referred to in a
previous arbitration as summarized in the next paragraph.

Fifth, Respondent argues that the award in Metal-Tech v. Uzbekistan involves comparable
facts and should guide this Tribunal.**? The Tribunal disagrees. First, Metal-Tech involved
a joint venture with the Government while these proceedings involve a transaction between
two private parties. In Metal-Tech, the consultant was a national of Uzbekistan, a
government official, and a brother of the Prime Minister.*™ In the present case, the
consultant is not a national of Uzbekistan and has no known relationship to the Government
of Uzbekistan. Most importantly to the question of the size of commission to Mr. Bizakov,
the consultant in Metal-Tech was paid US$3.5 million which “exceeded [claimant’s] initial
cash contribution to the venture and amounted to nearly 20% of the entire project cost”,*°>
while Mr. Bizakov’s commission of US$3 million in contrast was just under 10% of the

shares acquisition price.

Respondent has not proven, either to the standard of “clear and convincing evidence”, or
“reasonable certainty” that the payment of US$3 million to Mr. Bizakov was an act
contrary to the international public policy against corruption thereby rendering the claim
inadmissible. The Tribunal therefore denies Respondent’s objection to its jurisdiction on

these grounds.
D. _ Tribunal Conclusions as to the Fourth Objection

On the basis of the evidence before it, the Tribunal holds that Respondent has not
established that any payment to Ms. Karimova was a violation of Article 211 of the
Uzbekistan Criminal Code or in violation of international public policy against corruption.

462 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Preliminary Objections, 17.
463 RL-0030, Metal-Tech.

464 RL-0030, Metal-Tech, ff 225-27.

465 RL-0030, Metal-Tech, | 199.

140

616.

617.

XI.

618.

619.

620.

621.

On the basis of the evidence before it, the Tribunal holds that Respondent has not
established that a payment by Claimants of US$3 million to Mr. Bizakov constitutes
corruption in violation of international public policy against corruption.

Given these holdings, the Tribunal denies Respondent’s fourth objection.
COSTS

Both Parties claim their costs in these proceedings. Respondent argues that the Tribunal
should award “Respondent its full costs and expenses associated with defending against
Claimants’ claims”.*°° Claimants argue that the Tribunal should award “Claimants all of
their legal fees and all of their costs and expenses incurred in the jurisdictional stage of
these proceedings”.*°7

Under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 28 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
the Tribunal may, in its award, decide which party should pay (a) the costs of the
arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the charges of the Centre,
and (b) legal and other costs incurred by each party. ICSID Convention Article 61(2) and
ICSID Arbitration Rule 28 grant the Tribunal substantial discretion in the allocation of
costs. One principle applied in the exercise of that discretion is the widely-accepted view
that costs follow the event, that is, the costs of the prevailing party should be borne by the
losing party. However, the question of who prevails is better and certainly more fully
understood at the conclusion of the merits phase. On this basis, the Tribunal defers the
general request for costs to the final award in this proceeding.

However, as regards this Decision on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over Claimants’ matter set
forth in its Request for Arbitration, the Tribunal finds it necessary and appropriate to take
particular note of two issues: (A) the inadequate safeguarding of confidential information
regarding the Anonymous Experts; and (B) one additional matter of concern as regards the
conduct of one of the Claimants. The Tribunal takes note of each issue in turn before it sets
out its decision on costs.

A. The Inadequate Safeguarding of Information Regarding the Anonymous
Experts**

The Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 6 dated 1 July 2015 and deciding that an “attorney
eye’s only” approach would be adopted and that a Confidentiality Agreement would be
concluded by the Parties rested in part on its finding in Procedural Order No. 4 that the

466 Respondent’s Memorial on Preliminary Objections and Request for Bifurcation, {{ 255.

467 C|

laimants’ Counter-Memorial on Preliminary Objections, { 285.

468 The full history of the procedural issues surrounding the Anonymous Experts is set forth at paragraphs 71 to 124
of this Decision.

141

622.

623.

624.

625.

626.

627.

628.

evidence submitted supported prima facie “Claimants[’] assertion of a substantial risk to
the expert assuming the identity of the expert [was] disclosed”.

The negotiation of the Confidentiality Agreement called for in Procedural Order No. 6 was
contentious. Among other things, the Parties disagreed on the resolution of disputes under
the agreement as well as the necessity of an indemnity clause. On 13 July 2015, the
Tribunal wrote to the Parties with its views as to the terms of the Agreement and stated that
“it is also the view of the Tribunal that the strength of such an agreement rests first
and foremost upon the reputation and standing of the firms and counsel involved”.*© A
Confidentiality Agreement was concluded on 15 July 2015.

As noted at paragraph 94, there followed two (both accepted as inadvertent) disclosures of
confidential information by counsel for Respondent that twice derailed extensive efforts
aimed at assessing whether it was appropriate to grant anonymity to the two experts and
potentially to allow for the Tribunal to hear both their opinion and the cross examination
of them.

After twice being derailed in potentially engaging with the issues raised by expert opinions
of the Anonymous Experts, complex arrangements were undertaken by the Tribunal and
Parties for a third attempt shortly prior to the Hearing (Part II).

Of prime concern to the Tribunal at this stage is the third disclosure of confidential
information that ultimately led to the collapse of these arrangements, to a loss of confidence
by the Anonymous Experts in the integrity of the system in place, and to the withdrawal of
the Anonymous Experts from these proceedings out of concern for their interests and even
safety.

The third disclosure arose because Counsel for Respondent copied a high-ranking official
of the Uzbekistan Government on an email that contained confidential information relating
to the Anonymous Experts. Respondents’ Counsel indicated that the email was deleted by
the official and stated that the inclusion of the official was an inadvertent oversight on its
part.

The Tribunal makes no finding as to intention of Respondent’s Counsel as regards these
incidents. It suffices to say that the Tribunal finds that Respondent’s Counsel did not
approach the implementation of the Confidentiality Agreement with the professionalism to
be expected.

At a confidential session held prior to the Hearing (Part II), the Tribunal inquired into the
process utilized by Counsel for Respondent to safeguard the information entrusted to it.

462 Email from the Tribunal to the Parties dated 13 July 2015.

142

629.

630.

631.

The Tribunal recalls the following exchange which came after Respondent Counsel’s
description of the process used:

[Tribunal]: Thank you. Is there an individual responsible for this
system that is described [by you], a named individual?

[Counsel for Respondent]: We have an IT department that set up a
number of these things. I don't know that we--

[Tribunal]: I'm sorry, responsible. Is there a person designated in
this case to be responsible for confidentiality in handling what seems
to be a complex group of people?

[Counsel for Respondent]: I think we are all very careful, [Counsel
B], myself, [Counsel C]. We all are the ones who--

[Tribunal]: So there is not a particular person?
[Counsel for Respondent]: We have three of us at least.

[Tribunal]: Three of you at least. Is there a written protocol? I see
elements of what you would describe could be in a protocol, but is
there a written protocol?

[Counsel for Respondent]: Other than the Agreement? No, there is
not. The Agreement is what we follow.*”

The disclosure described in paragraph 626 led to the withdrawal of the Anonymous Experts
from these proceedings after significant time had been spent and costs had been incurred
to facilitate their participation. The Anonymous Experts appropriately concluded in the
Tribunal’s view that the information entrusted to the care of Counsel for Respondent would
not be properly safeguarded.

The Confidentiality Agreement existed because of what the Tribunal found to be a prima
facie supported assertion of risk, including physical risk, to the Anonymous Experts. In the
Tribunal’s view, Respondent’s Counsel failed to adopt adequate procedures to ensure the
integrity of the information entrusted to it. The Tribunal in this matter does not believe it
is calling for a high bar of conduct. Rather, it observes a lack of serious engagement with
the duties assumed under the Confidentiality Agreement.

In conclusion on this point, the Tribunal determines that it is appropriate for Respondent
to bear the expenses associated with the Anonymous Experts in these proceedings.

4” Hearing Tr., Confidential Session, November 9, 2015, 20:16-21:13.

143

632.

633.

634.

635.

636.

637.

The expenses related to the Anonymous Experts have three elements: (1) the fees and
expenses of the Tribunal, including those of its Assistant; (2) the expenses associated with
the logistical arrangements arising from additional hearing sites; and (3) the costs incurred
by the Parties.

The Tribunal has examined its work in, among other things, preparing and deliberating
upon numerous Procedural Orders dealing with the Anonymous Experts, and meeting with
the Parties both via teleconference and in special hearings. The fees and expenses
associated with this work are estimated conservatively to be $80,000.

The ICSID Secretariat has examined the direct expenses associated with, among other
things, establishing full-service hearing venues at undisclosed sites several times as well
as the direct expense of having present at such hearing sites a representative of ICSID. The
direct expenses associated with these efforts are estimated conservatively to be $40,000.
The Tribunal finds these direct expenses to be reasonable.

The Tribunal requested the Parties to submit a statement of their costs and particularly
requested that Claimants identify those costs incurred in relation to the Anonymous
Experts. In its filing dated 22 December 2015, Claimants identified such costs, totaling
£259,519.76. The Tribunal finds the costs itemized by Claimants to be reasonable.

The Tribunal holds that Respondent should bear its own costs as they relate to the
Anonymous Experts and compensate Claimants for their costs, their share of the fees and
expenses of the Tribunal and their share of the direct expenses associated with additional
hearing sites as such costs, fees and expenses relate to the Anonymous Experts. The
Tribunal, therefore, awards Claimants the amounts of £259,519.76 and $60,000, these
amounts to be paid by Respondent within 30 days of the date of this Decision. After 30
days from the date of this decision, interest shall accrue on any unpaid amount at the rate
of Libor plus 1% until such compensation is paid in full to Claimants.

B. Additional Matter of Concern — Conduct of Specific Claimant

As to Claimant, the Tribunal is deeply troubled by the conduct of Mr. Kim during the
Hearing (Part I). Mr. Kim surreptitiously took photographs during his witness testimony,
later posting at least one of these photos on social media accompanied by offensive
language and the statement “White & Case must die”. Mr. Kim acknowledged and
apologized for this conduct in a subsequent letter to the Tribunal. Mr. Kim’s conduct at its
best was jejune and evidenced an absence of maturity. At a minimum, the conduct is deeply
offensive to Counsel for Respondent and to this Tribunal. The Tribunal finds that his
conduct indicates a lack of trustworthiness to his testimony given at the same exact time.
The Tribunal discounted the probative value of his testimony substantially as a

144

638.

639.

XII.

640.

consequence. This unacceptable conduct will be a factor in the Tribunal’s final allocation
of costs in this proceeding.

C. The Tribunal’s Conclusion on Costs

The Tribunal will make its overall decision as to the awarding of costs as part of the final
award in these proceedings.

However, on the matter of the costs of this proceeding associated with the Anonymous
Experts, the Tribunal holds Respondent should bear its own costs as they relate to the
Anonymous Experts and compensate Claimants for their costs, their share of the fees and
expenses of the Tribunal and their share of the direct expenses associated with additional
hearing sites as such costs, fees and expenses related to the Anonymous Experts. The
Tribunal, therefore, awards Claimants the amounts of £259,519.76 and $60,000, these
amounts to be paid by Respondent within 30 days of the date of this Decision. After 30
days from the date of this decision, interest shall accrue on any unpaid amount at the rate
of Libor plus 1% until such compensation is paid in full to Claimants.

DECISION
On the basis of the foregoing, the Tribunal holds:

(a) Respondent’s First Objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, in relation to
the nationality of Claimants, is denied;

(b) Respondent’s Second Objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, in relation
to whether Claimants are “investors” who made an “investment”, is denied;

(c) Respondent’s Third Objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, in relation to
whether Claimants’ investment was “illegal”, is denied by majority;

(d) Respondent’s Fourth Objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, in relation to
allegations of bribery and corruption, is denied;

(e) Claimants are awarded their costs of this proceeding associated with the
Anonymous Experts in the amount of £259,519.76;

(f) Claimants are awarded their share of fees and expenses of the Tribunal, as well

as their share of direct expenses associated with additional hearing sites, as such
fees and expenses relate to the Anonymous Experts in the amount of $60,000;

145

(g) Claimants are entitled to recover interest from Respondent on the sum referred
to in (e) and (f) above from the 30th day following the date of this Decision, at
the applicable six month LIBOR plus 1% rate through until the date of payment,
with such interest being compounded six-monthly; and

(h) Respondent is to bear its own costs and its share of the fees and expenses of
the Tribunal, as well as its share of direct expenses associated with additional

hearing sites, as such fees and expenses relate to the Anonymous Experts.

641. The Tribunal will proceed to the scheduling of the merits phase of the proceedings.

146

A le Cr eZ

The ean Yves Fortier PC, C.C., 0.Q., Q.C. Mr. Toby Landau, Q.C.
\ Arbitrator Arbitrator

 

Professor David D-
President of the Tribunal

147

