INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between

VM SOLAR JEREZ GMBH;

M SOLAR VERWALTUNGS GMBH;
SOLARIZZ HOLDING VERWALTUNGS-GMBH;
M SOLAR GMBH & Co. KG;
SOLARIZZ HOLDING GMBH & Co. KG; AND
Dr. HELMUT VORNDRAN
(CLAIMANTS)

and

KINGDOM OF SPAIN
(RESPONDENT)

ICSID Case No. ARB/19/30

 

DECISION ON THE PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY
PROF. DR. GUIDO SANTIAGO TAWIL

 

Chairman of the Administrative Council
Mr. David R. Malpass

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Catherine Kettlewell

Date: 24 July 2020

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Claimants:

Dr. Sabine Konrad

Morgan, Lewis & Bockius LLP
OpernTurm

Bockenheimer Landstrasse 4
60306 Frankfurt am Main
Germany

Representing the Kingdom of Spain:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

José Manuel Gutiérrez Delgado
Pablo Elena Abad

Rafael Gil Nievas

Alberto Torré Molés

Elena Ofioro Sainz

Juan Antonio Quesada Navarro
Gloria de la Guardia Limeres
Ana Maria Rodriguez Esquivias
Javier Comerén Herrero
Eugenia Cediel Bruno

Luis Vacas Chalfoun

Maria del Socorro Garrido Moreno
Francisco de la Torre

Abogacia General del Estado
Departamento de Arbitrajes Internacionales
Ministerio de Justicia

c/ Marqués de la Ensenada, 14-16, 2* planta
28004, Madrid

Spain

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION AND THE PARTIES ..........cccsceescssesssesessessescseeeesesssaeeeeeeeeeeesesnsaeseeeeeey! 4
Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 4
Ill. THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS 8
A. The Respondent’s Disqualification Proposal and Further Observations ...............0008 8
B. The Claimants’ Response 16
Cc. Prof. Tawil’s Explanations 18
D. Parties’ Comments on the FRE/F Disqualification Decision..........0....0cceeeeee ees 18

a. The Respondent’s Final Cc 18

b. The Claimants’ Final Cc 19

IV. ANALYSIS 20
A. The Request for a third party recommendation .............0.0c cece eee eeeeeeeteeeeeeeeteeneeeeeee 21
B. Legal Standard 21
Cc. Application of the Standard 23

a. Prof. Tawil’s multiple appointment «0.0.0.0... cee cece cee eeeeeeecseeeceeeeeeceeeteseeeeeeeetee 23

b. Prof. Tawil’s dissenting opinions 25

 

V. DECISION 26

Il.

INTRODUCTION AND THE PARTIES

This case concerns a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the basis of the Energy Charter Treaty,
which entered into force for Germany and Spain on 16 April 1998 (the “ECT”), and the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of

Other States, which entered into force on 14 October 1966 (“the ICSID Convention”).

The Claimants are VM Solar Jerez GmbH, M Solar Verwaltungs GmbH, Solarizz Holding
Verwaltungs-GmbH, M Solar GmbH & Co. KG, Solarizz Holding GmbH & Co. KG, each
constituted under the laws of Germany, and Dr. Helmut Vorndran, a national of Germany

(jointly, “the Claimants’).
The Respondent is the Kingdom of Spain (“Spain” or “the Respondent”).

The Claimants and the Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as “the Parties”
and the term “Party” refers to either the Claimants or the Respondent. The Parties’

representatives and their addresses are listed above.

This decision addresses the Respondent’s Proposal to Disqualify Prof. Dr. Guido Santiago
Tawil in the present proceedings. Below is a summary of the procedural history relevant to

this decision.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 17 September 2019, ICSID received a Request for Arbitration submitted by the

Claimants against Spain.

On 4 October 2019, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for Arbitration
pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention.

By a letter of 3 December 2019, the Claimants informed ICSID that they opted for the
formula in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. Therefore, the Tribunal would

consist of three arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each party, and a presiding arbitrator

to be appointed by agreement of the parties.

On the same date the Claimants appointed Professor Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil, a national

of the Argentine Republic, as an arbitrator in this case.

On 5 December 2019, Prof. Tawil accepted his appointment as an arbitrator in this case.
Prof. Tawil provided a signed declaration and an accompanying statement pursuant to Rule
6(2) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration
Rules”). The Secretariat transmitted the signed declaration and statement to the Parties on
9 December 2019. In his statement, Prof. Tawil disclosed the following:

“Although there are no circumstances that, in my opinion, should affect my

reliability to render an independent judgement in this case, I consider my
duty to disclose the following facts:

- Claimant counsel in the case (Dr. Sabine Konrad) acted as counsel
representing the party that appointed me in the Opic v Venezuela case
(ICSID Case No. ARB/10/14). The case was initiated in 2010 and an
award was rendered in 2013.

- Ihave been appointed in three cases to which Respondent is a party.
While two of those cases, the Charanne and Isolux SCC cases ended in
2016, I also act in the Steag v. Kingdom of Spain case (ICSID Case
ARB/15/4), which is still pending.

To the best of my knowledge, I have had no other present or past
relationship with the parties or counsel acting in the present case.”

On 11 December 2019, the Respondent appointed Dr. Ioana Knoll-Tudor, a national of

Romania, as an arbitrator in this case.

On 13 December 2019, Dr. Knoll-Tudor accepted her appointment and provided a signed

declaration pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(2).

By communications of 13 December 2019, the Parties informed the Centre of an agreed

formula to appoint the president of the Tribunal in this case.

20.

On 29 January 2020, the Parties informed the Centre of an amendment to the agreed
formula to select the president of the Tribunal in this case. The Parties selected a list of

candidates and then ranked each candidate in order of preference.

On 16 March 2020, the Parties informed the Centre of their agreement to seek the

appointment of Mr. Michael Collins, a national of the United Kingdom.

On 20 March 2020, Mr. Collins accepted his appointment as presiding arbitrator and
provided his signed declaration pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(2).

On the same date, the Secretary-General notified the Parties that all three arbitrators had
accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted on

20 March 2020, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1).

On 2 April 2020, the Respondent proposed the disqualification of Prof. Tawil, in
accordance with Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9
(the “Proposal’”).

On the same date, the Centre informed the Parties that the proceeding had been suspended
until the Proposal was decided, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6). The Parties were
also informed that the Proposal would be decided by the other Members of the Tribunal,
Mr. Michael Collins and Dr. Ioana Knoll-Tudor (the “Unchallenged Arbitrators’), in
accordance with Article 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(4).

On 3 April 2020, the Centre transmitted to the Parties and Prof. Tawil the procedural
calendar for the submission of written observations on the Proposal, which had been fixed

by the Unchallenged Arbitrators, as follows:

i 17 April 2020 - the Claimants to submit a response to the Respondent’s
Proposal;
ii. 24 April 2020 - Prof. Tawil to furnish any explanations;
iii. 1 May 2020 - the Parties to submit any further observations on the Proposal.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

On 17 April 2020, in accordance with the procedural calendar, the Claimants filed their
Response to the Proposal (“Response”), requesting the two Unchallenged Arbitrators to

reject the Proposal.

On the same date Prof. Tawil furnished his explanations pursuant to ICSID Arbitration
Rule 9(3). By letter of 17 April 2020, the Parties were invited to submit their final
observations by 24 April 2020.

On 24 April 2020, the Respondent filed Further Observations in relation to its request for
disqualification (the Respondent’s “Further Observations”). The Claimant did not file

any further observations.

By letter of 29 April 2020 the Unchallenged Arbitrators invited the Respondent to provide
a copy of the decision of the Board of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce in FREIF
Eurowind Holdings Ltd. v. Spain [SCC Case No. 2017/060], dated 7 January 2020 (the
“FREIF Disqualification Decision”), to which the Respondent had referred in its Further
Observations. The Unchallenged Arbitrators indicated that no further submissions were

required.

On | May 2020, the Respondent furnished the Unchallenged Arbitrators with a copy of the
FREIF Disqualification Decision.

On 15 May 2020, the two Unchallenged Arbitrators advised the Secretary-General that
they were equally divided with respect to the Respondent’s Disqualification Proposal. On
the same date, ICSID informed the Parties that pursuant to Article 58 of the ICSID
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(4), the Proposal would be decided by the Chair

of the Administrative Council.

On 17 May 2020, the Claimants requested an opportunity to comment on the FREIF
Disqualification Decision. On 18 May 2020 both parties were offered the opportunity to
simultaneously submit additional comments on the FRE/F Disqualification Decision. On
19 May 2020, the Respondent requested information on the basis for the Secretariat’s offer
to accept further comments on the FRE/JF Disqualification Decision. The Secretariat

replied on 22 May 2020 extending the deadline for the parties to comment on the FREIF

28.

Ill.

29.

30.

31.

32.

Disqualification Decision. On 27 May 2020, both parties submitted additional comments

on the FREIF Disqualification Decision.

On 18 June 2020, the Respondent inquired whether the Secretariat would request the
Permanent Court of Arbitration (“PCA”) for a recommendation of the Disqualification
Proposal of Prof. Tawil. On 23 June 2020, the Secretariat responded that the Secretary-
General concluded that the circumstances of the case did not justify requesting an external

recommendation.

THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

A. The Respondent’s Disqualification Proposal and Further Observations

In support of its disqualification proposal, the Respondent relies on the ICSID Convention,
other applicable international conventions, international custom and the general principles
of law recognized by civilized nations as reflected in Article 38 of the Statute of the

International Court of Justice.!

The Respondent submits that arbitrators must exercise independent and impartial judgment

pursuant to Articles 57 and 14 of the ICSID Convention.”

The Respondent notes the difference among the three original texts of Article 14 of the
ICSID Convention. While the English version of Article 14 refers to persons who “may be
relied upon to exercise independent judgment” and the French text states that persons
appointed to panels must “offrir toute guarantie d’indépendance dans l’exercice de leur
fonctions’, the Spanish version provides that arbitrators must “inspirar plena confianza en

su imparcialidad de juicio.”

In view of the difference among the three authentic language versions of Article 14 of the
ICSID Convention, the Respondent argues that this Article should be interpreted in
accordance with Article 33(4) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties as

requiring arbitrators to be independent and impartial.* In this context, it notes that “among

' Proposal, {{ 2 and{f 6.
? Proposal, {ff 8-10.
3 Proposal, { 12, citing Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. 23 May 1969. Article 33(4), Annex 03.

33.

34.

35.

36.

the objectives and purposes of the ICSID Convention is the peaceful settlement of
investment disputes through conciliation or arbitration that must respect the due and fair
process’”* which includes the fundamental right to be heard by an independent and impartial

tribunal.

The Respondent also relies on “international custom in arbitration practice” to argue that

ICSID arbitrators can be disqualified if there is “any reasonable doubt”*

concerning their
independence and impartiality. It argues that the word “manifestly” in Article 57 of the
ICSID Convention cannot be interpreted “against the international custom, reflected in
international conventions, in the practicioners (sic) rules and in national legislations
...[that] guarantee the disqualification of the arbitrators when there is a justifiable and

reasonable doubt about their independence or impartiality.”°

In this respect, the Respondent supports its allegation on Article 10(1) of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, to General Principle 1 of the IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in
International Arbitration (“IBA Guidelines”), to the American Arbitration Association
International Arbitration Rules and to the Rules of the London Court of International

Arbitration.”

Finally, the Respondent also relies on “general principles of law recognized by civilized
nations,” which, it submits, guarantee the independence and impartiality of adjudicators®
by allowing for challenge and disqualification if there is “any slight doubt that they are

biased.”°

The Respondent submits that Articles 57 and 14 of the ICSID Convention must therefore

be interpreted as “an obligation” to disqualify an arbitrator if there is “any indication” of

4 Proposal, {{ 13.

5 Proposal, {{ 26.

© Proposal, {{ 30.

7 Proposal, {| 14, 24-30, citing IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration, adopted by
resolution of the IBA Council 2014, General Principle 1, Annex 04; American Arbitration Association (AAA) -
International Arbitration Rules as amended ad effective September 1, 2000 (Rules for International Arbitration of the
American Arbitration Association (AAA), article 7, Annex 05; London Court of International Arbitration Rules
(LCIA), 1998, article 5.2. Annex 06.

8 Proposal, {fff 31-33.

° Proposal, { 32.

lack of independence or impartiality, or “any slight doubt” that the adjudicator is biased.'°
The Respondent contends that general principles of law do not require the challenging party
to prove actual bias. Rather, according to the Respondent, it is enough that such bias can

be inferred from the facts of the case.!!

37. On this basis, the Respondent concludes that the applicable international framework allows
for disqualification if there are “justifiable doubts” as to the arbitrator’s independence or

impartiality.

38. The applicable standard, according to the Respondent, is an “objective standard based on

12

the reasonable analysis of evidence by a third party.”"~ The Respondent further argues that

Article 14(1) “only requires ‘the appearance of such dependence or bias,” as decided by

the Committee in the EDF case. '°

39. Based on this standard, the Respondent challenges the appointment of Prof. Tawil on two

grounds, namely:

a. That Prof. Tawil had three previous appointments by investors in arbitration
cases against Spain’ that allegedly share multiple common factual and

legal issues with the present case,!> and

b. That Prof. Tawil prejudged core issues arising in the present case, as

evidenced by his dissenting opinions rendered in Charanne and Isolux.'®

10 Proposal, ff 23, 32.

'! Proposal, { 33.

"2 Proposal, {| 53-54, citing Blue Bank 1 & Trust (1 dos) Ltd v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuel
ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20, Decision on the Proposal to Challenge the Majority of the Tribunal Submitted by the
Parties, 12 November 2013 (“Blue Bank 2013 Decision”), {{ 58, 37, Annex 11; Burlington Resources, Inc. v.
Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Decision on the Proposal to Challenge Mr. Francisco Orrego
Vicuiia, 13 December 2013, {{ 65, 77 (“Burlington”), Annex 12, and Repsol S.A. and Repsol Butano S.A. v. Argentine
Republic, \CADI Case No. ARB/12/38, Decision on the Proposed Challenge of the Majority of the Tribunal, 13
December 2013 (“Repsol”), {{{ 71-72, Annex 13.

3 Proposal { 55, citing EDF International S.A., SAUR International S.A. and Le6n Participaciones Argentinas S.A. v.
Argentine Republic, 1CSID case No. ARB/03/23, Decision dated 5 February 2016 (“EDF”), | 126, Annex 14.
'4Specifically, Charanne and Construction Investments v. Kingdom of Spain, SCC Case No. V062/2012
(“Charanne’’y; Isolux Netherlands, BV v. Kingdom of Spain, SCC Case No. V2013/153 (“Isolux”), and STEAG GmbH
v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID case ARB/15/4 (“STEAG’).

'5 Proposal, { 43.

'6 Proposal, 45.

 

 

 

40. On the first ground, the Respondent argues that multiple appointments in different cases

against the same party give rise to a two-fold risk of bias:

(a) on one hand, a possible economic benefit of prospective regular appointments

by claimants.

(b) on the other hand, the possibility that the arbitrator may be influenced by factors
outside of the record in the instant case resulting from knowledge derived from

similar or identical cases. !7

Al. The Respondent points out that multiple appointments carry a risk of bias. To this end, the
Respondent cites several provisions included in the Orange list of the IBA Guidelines. It
further relies on other decisions on disqualification proposals that address the issue of

multiple appointments as a risk of a potential conflict of interest (e.g. Tidewater'®).

42. The Respondent acknowledges that multiple appointments could not, per se, be a cause for
disqualification, without any other circumstance, but submits that they are not
“innocuous.”!? Citing the decision in Opic Karimum, and noting that Prof. Tawil was

involved in this decision, the Respondent submits that:

“multiple appointments of an arbitrator by a party or its counsel constitute
a consideration that must be carefully considered in the context of a
challenge”

and that:

“Tn a dispute resolution environment, a party’s choice of arbitrator involves
a forensic decision that is clearly related to a judgment by the appointing
party and its counsel of its prospects of success in the dispute. multiple
appointments of an arbitrator are an objective indication of the view of

 

parties and their counsel that the outcome of the dispute is more likely to be

"7 Proposal, { 39.

'8 Proposal, 38, citing Tidewater Inc. v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB/10.5, Decision
on Claimants’ Proposal to Disqualify Professor Brigitte Stern, 23 December 2010 (“Tidewater”), J 62, Annex 27.

'9 Proposal, { 41.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

successful with the multiple appointee as a member of the tribunal than
would otherwise be the case.””°

Relying on Serafin Garcia Armas,?! the Respondent argues that the concerns raised by
multiple appointments of the same arbitrator could be further exacerbated if the

proceedings require the examination of the same issues of fact and law.”

The Respondent argues that the three previous proceedings in which Prof. Tawil sat as an

23 with the current

arbitrator (Isolux, Charanne, STEAG) shared “essential similarities’
proceeding, i.e. the three of them (i) were against the same respondent (Spain), (ii) relate
to the same disputed measures concerning the renewable energy sector, over similar
periods of time and (iii) were based on the ECT.» The Respondent further suggests that

these similarities increase the risk of bias inherent in multiple appointments.”°

On the second ground, the Respondent submits that in two previous cases — Charanne
and Isolux— Prof. Tawil already expressed his views on a number of issues that also arise
in the present case. The Respondent submits that clearly he has “‘prejudged the core issues

in discussion in the case at hand.””°

In particular, the Respondent points to four issues upon which it considers that Prof. Tawil

has already expressed his views and prejudged the present case. These issues are:?”

i the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to decide on intra-EU disputes (a German

Claimant investors against the Kingdom of Spain) pursuant to the ECT;

ii. whether Royal Decree 661/2007 (“RD 661/2007”) and Royal Decree
1578/2008 (“RD 1578/2008”) were issued with the aim of attracting

 

2° Proposal, {| 41, citing Opic Karimum Corporation v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No.
ARB/10/14, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify Professor Philippe Sands, Arbitrator, 5 May 2011 (‘OPIC
Karimum’’), { 47, Annex 29.

2! Serafin Garcia Armas and Karina Garcia Gruber v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Decision on
Disqualification of Arbitrator Mr Guido Santiago Tawil, 8 May 2013 (“Serafin Garcia Armas”),] 49, Annex 28.

~ Proposal, {{ 42, citing Serafin Garcia Armas, 1 49, Annex 28.

3 Further Observations, {{ 37.

ad * Proposal, 43-44.

 

27 Proposal, {| 50.

47.

48.

49.

investors and whether they created, by themselves, legitimate expectations

for investors;

iii. whether the regulatory regime at the time of the investment constituted a
guarantee of special remuneration that excluded any subsequent

modifications, and

iv. the fact that in his previous decisions, Prof. Tawil relied on two “very
concrete elements”, namely (i) the temporary scope of RD 661/2007; and
(ii) the fact that it was intended to attract certain groups of investments, both
elements having been underscored by the Claimants in their Request for

Arbitration.

The Respondent also relies on the brevity of Prof. Tawil’s dissents in the Charanne and
Isolux cases, pointing out that Prof. Tawil barely referenced the evidence in the record, and
they lacked a solid analysis as to why he considered the reasoning of the majority ill-

founded or flawed.*

Finally, the Respondent requests that if the challenge decision is to be taken by the Chair
of the ICSID Administrative Council because the Unchallenged Arbitrators are equally
divided, the recommendation of the PCA should be sought “as an independent third party
that can appreciate better .. whether [there] is or is not a lack of independence and

9929

impartiality of the Challenged Arbitrator.

In its Further Observations the Respondent reiterates its reliance on Article 38 of the
International Court of Justice Statute and submits that the ICSID Convention requires a
harmonious interpretation of other international instruments. The Respondent further refers
to other treaties to which Germany and Spain are party, including Article 47 of the
European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights, Article 6 of the European Convention on
Human Rights, and Article 10 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human

Rights, and submits that “the ICSID Convention cannot be interpreted as if the State Parties

28 Proposal, 47.
2° Proposal, Petitum,  80(c).

50.

51.

52.

53.

have lowered the independence and impartiality standards of the adjudicators or have

renounced the fundamental rights of the parties in a dispute.”*°

The Respondent further refers to standards of disqualification pursuant to national
legislation, citing in particular a recent decision of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce
in which a similar application brought by Spain seeking the disqualification of Prof. Kaj.

Hobér was successful.*!

The Respondent contends that the applicable test in ICSID cases cannot be different
because Article 57 of the ICSID Convention uses the word “manifestly”. According to the
Respondent, “it is enough that bias can be inferred from the facts of the case and that must

determine the success of the challenge.”*?

The Respondent rejects the Claimants’ arguments concerning its allegedly contradictory
behaviour in other proceedings as unfounded and irrelevant, and submits that the only issue
to be decided is whether there are doubts as to the independence and impartiality of Prof.

Tawil.*?

The Respondent accepts it bears the burden of proof and submits that it has satisfied such
burden by identifying:**
i the three previous proceedings on which Prof. Tawil has been appointed by
the claimants in cases brought against Spain;

ii. the essential similarities among the four proceedings;

iii. the fact that in two of these cases Prof. Tawil has already expressed his
opinion in a way that allows no room for a different decision in the present

proceeding;*> and

30 Further Observations, {ff 11-14.

3! Further Observations, {{] 15-18, citing FREIF Eurowind Holdings Ltd. v. Spain, SCC Case No. 2017/060.
* Further Observations, {{ 20.

* Further Observations, {{{[ 26-33.

* Further Observations, {{{[ 34-40.

5 Further Observations, {{ 38.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

iv. the substantial similarities of Prof. Tawil’s opinions in the Charanne and
Isolux cases (including a cross-reference in the latter to his earlier dissent in
the former),*° and the “blatant lack of reference” in both of his dissenting

opinions in both cases to the evidence on record.

The Respondent also submits that Prof. Tawil’s “ominous silence” in not seeking to
confront the grounds for disqualification in his explanations contrasts with his position
when challenged in Serafin Garcia Armas, and shows that he lacks the necessary

independence and impartiality in this case.*”

The Respondent further argues that Prof. Tawil did not try to explain any difference

between the two previous cases (/solux and Charanne) and the present case.

The Respondent points out that in the present case, the disputed measures are
RD/661/2007, RD 1566.2010, Royal Decree 1565/2010, Royal Decree Law 14/2010,
Royal Decree Law 1/2012, Law 15.2012, Royal Decree Law 2/2013, Electricity Sector Act
24/2013, Royal Decree 413/2014 and Ministerial Orders of 2014 and their effect in the

Claimants’ alleged investment in the photovoltaic plants since 2008. **

In this respect, the Respondent recalls that in the Charanne case the photovoltaic facilities
were acquired in 2009 and the disputed measures were mainly implemented in 2010.
According to the Respondent, Prof. Tawil “expressed an opinion considering that RD
661/2007 contained a stabilization representation that Claimants were entitled to rely upon,

so that no changes whatsoever could be introduced by the Kingdom of Spain.”*?

With respect to the /solux case, the Respondent points out that it also involved alleged
investors in photovoltaic plants and that the dispute referred to events that took place in

2013. According to the Respondent, in that case Prof. Tawil repeated the views expressed

36 Jsolux, Prof. Dr. Guido S. Tawil Dissenting Opinion, p. 1.

%” Further Observations, {| 65-69. In that case Professor Tawil explained that in the four previous cases involving
Venezuela in which he had been appointed the factual and legal issues were different from the factual and legal issues
arising in the case in which he was challenged.

38 Further Observations, {[ 58.

°° Further Observations, {{ 59, citing Charanne, Final Award, Dissenting opinion of Prof. Tawil, 21 January 2016,
Annex 26.

59.

60.

61.

62.

in the Charanne case. *° The Respondent argues that in both dissenting opinions, Prof.
Tawil concludes that the Spanish regulation contained stabilization commitment regardless

of whether there was a specific representation made to an investor.*!

B. The Claimants’ Response

The Claimants contend that the Respondent’s proposal to disqualify Prof. Tawil lacks any

merit.

The Claimants submit that the legal standard to be applied is in Articles 57 and 14(1) of
the ICSID Convention and that disqualification is only mandated when an arbitrator lacks
the necessary independence and impartiality. The impartiality and independence,

Claimants add, must be assessed from the perspective of an objective third party.‘

The Claimants also submit that only a manifest lack of the qualities required by Article
14(1) of the ICSID Convention is sufficient, and that “manifest” is now understood in
ICSID practice to mean “evident” or “obvious” — thereby setting a particularly high
threshold, upon which the challenging party bears the burden of proof.**

On the first ground, the Claimants argue that the previous three appointments by investors
against Spain are a non-issue with regard to Prof. Tawil’s independence and impartiality.
The Claimants point out that Spain has conceded that “the mere fact of multiple
appointments could not be, per se, a cause for disqualification always, without any other
circumstances.”** The Claimants add that “other circumstances” are not present in this case
where the challenged arbitrator has not received multiple appointments from the same
party, or the same law firm, which are the situations addressed by Sections 3.1.3 and 3.3.8
of the IBA Guidelines’ Orange List.*> The Claimants reject the Respondent’ s contention

that the IBA Guidelines can be applied by way of analogy to a case where the same

4° Further Observations, { 60, citing /solux, Award, Dissenting Opinion Prof. Tawil, 12 July 2016, Annex 25.

4! Further Observations, { 62(B).

+ Response, pp. 1-2, citing Blue Bank 2013 Decision, {| 60, Attachment 1.

43 Response, pp. 2-3.

+ Response, p. 3, citing Proposal, {{ 41.

+ The claimants in each case in each of the four cases against Spain in which Prof. Tawil has been appointed are
different. The same law firms (Bird & Bird LLP and Latham & Watkins LLP) acted for the claimants in the Charanne

and Isolux ci

 

‘s, but a different law firm is acting for the claimants in the STEAG case (Clifford Chance LLP), and

yet another law firm is acting for the Claimants in this case (Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP).

16

63.

64.

65.

arbitrator has been appointed by different claimants in a number of cases against the same
respondent. The Claimants also submit that the cases relied upon by the Respondent in
support of its argument (Tidewater and Opic Karimum) actually support the Claimants’
position, in that the challenges in both cases were dismissed notwithstanding the fact of

multiple appointments by the same party, represented by the same law firms.*°

On the second ground, the Claimants point out that the Respondent has not challenged
Prof. Tawil’s appointment in STEAG, which is the third of his prior appointments, although
the Respondent has known of his dissents in the two earlier cases since June / July 2016.*”
Accordingly, the Claimants submit that the Respondent ought to be found to have waived

any alleged conflict arising out of Prof. Tawil’s previous dissents.

The Claimants further indicate that in the present case the Respondent proposed a number
of individuals as presiding arbitrator who had previously sat, or currently are sitting, in
renewable energy arbitrations in which Spain was (or is) the respondent. In particular, they
point to the Respondent’s proposal of Mr. Yves Derains, who was the president of the
tribunal that rendered the majority award in the Respondent’s favor in /solux.** The

Claimants submit that this particular conduct contradicts the Respondent’s current position.

The Claimants also submit that the decisive fact pattern in this arbitration is fundamentally
different from the fact patterns in Charanne and Isolux. The Claimants’ case is based on
two factual premises: that (i) the Claimants’ investments were made under RD 661/2007
in reliance on Spain’s assurances of stability contained therein, and (ii) the Claimants’
investments were negatively impacted by the elimination of the Régimen Especial as of
2012. In contrast, Charanne was concerned with investments that were impacted only by
the 2010 Measures, and not by the 2013 Measures;*? Jsolux , on the other hand, concerned
an investment made in 2012 (i.e. after the 2010 Measures, in the context of a different

regulatory environment). According to the Claimants, the present case can be distinguished

“© Response, pp. 3-5.

47 The tribunal’s

ard in Charanne is dated 21 January 2016; in Jsolux it is dated 12 July 2016.

 

48 Response, pp. 6-7.
*° Response, p. 7, citing Charanne, Award, 21 January 2016, ff] 481, 542, Attachment 16.

17

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

from Charanne and Isolux, since it deals with an investment made in 2009 (i.e. before the

2010 Measures) and that primarily impacted by the 2013 Measures.*°

The Claimants submit that no criticism can be levelled at Prof. Tawil on the ground that
his dissenting opinions were too short or lacked depth of analysis. On the contrary, their

comparative brevity is consistent with the practice in many other ICSID arbitrations.*!

The Claimants add that Spain’s allegations regarding Prof. Tawil’s alleged prejudgment of
the intra-EU objection in Charanne and Isolux is also a non-issue. The Claimants point out
that the intra-EU objection has been rejected by 20 tribunals. Additionally, the awards and

dissents in Charanne and Isolux pre-date the Achmea judgment of 6 March 2018.

The Claimants object to any involvement of the PCA in this disqualification matter. They
submit that the Respondent failed to point to any legal source that would allow for its
involvement, and that there are no exceptional circumstances in this case that would
warrant such a course.*>
C. Prof. Tawil’s Explanations
On April 17, 2020, Prof. Tawil sent the following message to the ICSID Secretariat in
relation to the Respondent’s Proposal for his disqualification:

“(...) after carefully reviewing the parties’ submissions on the matter I find

the proposal for my disqualification with no merits.

IT hereby reaffirm my independence and impartiality to act in this case and

fully confirm my December 5, 2019 declaration.”

D. Parties’ Comments on the FREIF Disqualification Decision

a. The Respondent’s Final Comments

The Respondent contends that ICSID proceedings are not an “isolated island” within the

applicable international law. Rather, the law applicable to this case (as in the FREIF

5° Response, pp. 7-8.

5! Response, p. 8.

* Response, p. 8-10.

53 Response, pp. 11-12.

71.

72.

73.

74.

Disqualification Decision) refers to a common legal basis that includes international
conventions, general principles of law recognized by civilized nations, and international
custom.** The Respondent concludes that all of these sources result in the “necessity of a
guarantee of impartial arbitrators/adjudicators, and all of them lead to the necessity of the

disqualification of Mr. Tawil.”*°

The Respondent further argues that the UNCITRAL Rules and the IBA Guidelines provide
for the disqualification of an arbitrator if there are any doubts concerning impartiality or
independence. According to the Respondent, the disqualification of arbitrator Kaj Hobér

in FREIF strengthens the guarantees of an arbitral proceeding.*°

The Respondent reiterates the alleged factual and legal similarities of this case with
Charanne and Isolux with respect to which Prof. Tawil already expressed his opinion.
Consequently, according to the Respondent, it is clear that Prof. Tawil has prejudged core

issues relevant for this case.

The Respondent further compares the factual basis of the disqualification of Mr. Hobér in
the FREIF case with the present proposal for disqualification i.e. a single dissenting
opinion on the issues to be resolved in the FREIF case against the backdrop of similar
factual and legal.*” According to the Respondent Prof. Tawil has already expressed his
views on the same legal and factual issues (RD 661/2007, the changes to the Spanish Legal
Framework, the ECT) in two cases. The Respondent argues that if in the FREIF
Disqualification Decision the conclusion was that Mr. Hobér did not offer a guarantee of
impartiality precisely because of his dissenting opinion, that this same reasoning should

apply to Prof. Tawil.**

b. The Claimants’ Final Comments

The Claimants argue that the FRE/F Disqualification Decision lacks any persuasive force

for this disqualification proposal and that it must be distinguished on four grounds.*° First,

54 Respondent’ s Comments on FREIF Disqualification Decision, 26 May 2020, { 23.

55 Respondent’s Comments on FREIF Disqualification De
56 Respondent’s Comments on FREIF Disqualificati
57 Respondent’s Comments on FREIF Di
58 Respondent’s Comments on FREIF Di

ision, 26 May 2020, {{ 23.
n, 26 May 2020, {[ 24.
n, 26 May 2020, {[ 39.
sion, 26 May 2020, {f] 40-41.

  
 
  
     

5° Claimants’ Comments on FREIF Disqualification Decision, 22 May 2020, p. 1.

19

75.

76.

77.

Iv.

78.

79.

© Claimants’ Comments on FREIF Disqualification Decision, 22 May 2020, p
6! Claimants’ Comments on FREIF Disqualification Decision, 22 May 2020, p

that the applicable law is different. The Claimants note that the SCC Board applied Swedish
law to this decision and a legal standard specific to the jurisprudence of the Swedish
Supreme Court. According to the Claimants, the “most evident manifestation for the
distinct legal standards in SCC and ICSID arbitrations is the KS Invest v. Spain case were
the disqualification proposal regarding Prof. Hobér was rejected even though Spain made

the same arguments as in the SCC Case No. 2017/060.”

Second, the Claimants argue that there is no overlap in the factual matrix with the cases in
which Prof. Tawil sat earlier. They note that the Charanne case concerned the 2010
Measures and the Jsolux case concerned an investment made after 2010. The Claimants
repeat that the present arbitration is related to (i) the Claimants’ investment made under

RD 661/2007 and (ii) the Claimants were impacted by the 2013 Measures.°!

Third, the Claimants note that Spain has not challenged Prof. Tawil in all of his arbitrations

against Spain® unlike Spain’s challenge of Prof. Hobér in all of his ongoing arbitrations.

Fourth, the Claimants reiterate that Spain’s behavior in this arbitration is contradictory to
Spain’s own conduct in proposing candidates for president of this tribunal that had

previously rendered decisions in Spain arbitrations.**

ANALYSIS

The Chair of the Administrative Council has considered all of the parties’ submissions but

will refer to them only inasmuch as they are relevant for the present Decision.

The Chair observes, at the outset, that the Proposal was promptly submitted after the

constitution of the Tribunal and neither party has contested its timeliness.

p. 1-2.
p. 1-2.

© The other case is STEAG.

© Claimants’ Comments on FREIF Disqualification Decision, 22 May 2020, pp. 2-3.

The Claimants point to Spain proposing Professor Philippe Sands, Dr. Anna Joubin-Bret, Professor Alain Pellet,
and Mr. Yves Derains. Claimants’ Comments on FREIF Disqualification Decision, 22 May 2020, p. 3, see also
Attachment 73.

80.

81.

82.

A. The Request for a Third Party Recommendation

The Respondent has asked that the Disqualification Proposal be referred to a third party for
an independent recommendation.® In accordance with Article 58 of the ICSID Convention,
the decision on a proposal to disqualify an arbitrator shall be taken by the Chair where the
co-arbitrators are equally divided.® The Chair has requested external recommendations
prior to deciding on a disqualification proposal on rare occasions, and on the basis of the
specific circumstances of the case. Even in those instances, it has been explicitly stated that
the final decision on the proposal would be taken by the Chair, as required by Article 58 of

the ICSID Convention.

 

The circumstances in the present case do not justify requesting an external
recommendation. Accordingly, the Chair decides the Disqualification Proposal on the basis
of the Parties’ submissions and Prof. Tawil’s Explanations, in accordance with Articles 57

and 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9.
B. Legal Standard

Article 57 of the ICSID Convention allows a party to propose the disqualification of any

member of a tribunal. It provides that:

A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the
disqualification of any of its members on account of any fact
indicating a manifest lack of the qualities required by paragraph (1)
of Article 14. A party to arbitration proceedings may, in addition,
propose the disqualification of an arbitrator on the ground that he
was ineligible for appointment to the Tribunal under Section 2 of
Chapter IV.

6 Respondent’s Proposal, { 79; Further Observations, {| 70-72, and Respondent’s Comments on FREIF
Disqualification Decision, {{ 20.

6 ICSID Convention, Art. 58 (“The decision on any proposal to disqualify a conciliator or arbitrator shall be taken by
the other members of the Commission or Tribunal as the case may be, provided that where those members are equally

divided, or in the case of a proposal to di

jualify a sole conciliator or arbitrator, or a majority of the conciliators or

 

arbitrators, the Chairman shall take that decision. [...].””).

83. Several decisions have concluded that the word “manifest” in Article 57 of the Convention

967

means “evident” or “obvious,’”®’ and that it relates to the ease with which the alleged lack

of the required qualities can be perceived.
84. The required qualities are stated in Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention, which provides:

Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high
moral character and recognized competence in the fields of law,
commerce, industry or finance, who may be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment. Competence in the field of law shall be of
particular importance in the case of persons on the Panel of
Arbitrators.

85. While the English version of Article 14 refers to “independent judgment,” and the French
version to “toute garantie d’indépendance dans |’exercice de leurs fonctions” (guaranteed
independence in exercising their functions), the Spanish version requires “imparcialidad
de juicio” (impartiality of judgment). Given that all three versions are equally authentic, it
is understood that pursuant to Article 14(1) arbitrators must be both impartial and

independent.

86. Impartiality refers to the absence of bias or predisposition towards a party. Independence

is characterized by the absence of external control. Independence and impartiality both

BSG Resources Ltd et al. v. Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/22, Decision on the Proposal to
Disqualify all Members of the Arbitral Tribunal, 28 December 2016 (“BSG”) { 54, Attachment 5; Fabrica de Vidrios
Los Andes, C.A. and Owen s-Illinois de Venezuela, C.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB/12/21, Reasoned Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify L. Yves Fortier, Q.C., Arbitrator, 28 March 2016
(“Fabrica 2016 Decision”) { 33; ConocoPhillips Hamaca B.V. and ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria B.V. v. Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal,
1 July 2015 (“Conoco 2015 Decision”) { 82; ConocoPhillips Petrozuata B.V. et al. v. Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, 5 May
2014 (“Conoco 2014 Decision”) { 47, Attachment 4; Abaclat and Others v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/5, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the Tribunal, 4 February 2014, (“Abaclat 2014
Decision”) { 71; Burlington, | 68, Annex 12; Repsol, | 73, Annex 13; Blue Bank 2013 Decision, { 61, Annex 11;
Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20,
Decision on the Proposal of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to Disqualify Mr. Alvaro Castellanos, 2 March
2018 (“Blue Bank 2018 Decision”) { 78.
8 See, e.g., BSG, 54, Attachment 5; Conoco 2014 Decision, { 47, Attachment 4; Blue Bank 2018 Decision, { 78;
Fabrica 2016 Decision, J 33; Abaclat 2014 Decision, 71.
© See, e.g., Blue Bank 2013 Decision, { 58; Annex 11; Burlington, { 65, Annex 12, Repsol, | 70, Annex 13; BSG, J
56, Attachment 5; Conoco 2014 Decision, {| 50, Attachment 4; Blue Bank 2018 Decision, | 77; Abaclat 2014
Decision, { 74.

 

 

“protect parties against arbitrators being influenced by factors other than those related to

the merits of the case.””°

87. Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID Convention do not require proof of actual dependence

or bias; rather, it is sufficient to establish the appearance of dependence or bias.”!

88. The legal standard applied to a proposal to disqualify an arbitrator is an “objective standard
based on a reasonable evaluation of the evidence by a third party.”’? Therefore, the
subjective belief of the party requesting the disqualification is not enough to satisfy the

requirements of the Convention.”

89. The Respondent has referred to other sets of standards in their arguments. While such
standards may serve as useful guidance, the Chair is bound by the standard set forth in the
ICSID Convention. Accordingly, this decision is made in accordance with Articles 57 and

58 of the ICSID Convention.

C. Application of the Standard

a. Prof. Tawil’s multiple appointments

90. The first ground invoked in Spain’s proposal for disqualification of Prof. Tawil relates to
his multiple appointments by investors in other cases against Spain with similar issues to

the present arbitration.

7 See, e.g., Caratube International Oil Company LLP & Mr. Devineci Salah v. Republic of Kazakhstan, \CSID Case
No. ARB/13/13, Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification of Mr. Bruno Boesch, 20 March 2014 (“Caratube”),
53; Annex 17, Blue Bank 2013 Decision, { 59, Annex 11; Repsol, { 70, Conoco 2014 Decision, 51, Attachment 4;
Blue Bank 2018 Decision, 77; BSG, {| 57; Fabrica 2016 Decision, {{ 29; Conoco 2015 Decision, | 81; Burlington, |
66; Universal Compression International Holdings, S.L.U. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB/10/9, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify Prof. Brigitte Stern and Prof. Guido Santiago Tawil, Arbitrators,
20 May 2011 (“Universal”), | 70; Urbaser S.A. and Others v. Argentine Republic, I1CSID Case No. ARB/O7/26,
Decision on Claimants’ Proposal to Disqualify Professor Campbell McLachlan, Arbitrator, 12 August 2010
(“Urbaser’), | 43.

7! See, e.g; Blue Bank 2013 Decision, 59; Annex 11, Burlington, | 66, Annex 12, Repsol, | 71, Annex 13; Caratube,
4 57; Annex 17; BSG, | 57, Attachment 5; Conoco 2014 Decision, {{ 52, Attachment 4; Conoco 2015 Decision, {
83; Abaclat 2014 Decision, {| 76.

® See, e.g., Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and InterAguas Servicios Integrales del Agua S.A.
v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on the Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member
of the Arbitral Tribunal, 22 October 2007 (“Suez”), {| 39; Blue Bank 2013 Decision, {| 60; Annex 11, Caratube, 54;
Annex 17; BSG, { 58, Attachment 5; Conoco 2014 Decision, {{ 53, Attachment 4; Blue Bank 2018 Decision, {| 79,
Fébrica 2016 Decision, {{{| 30-32; Conoco 2015 Decision, {{ 84.

® See, e.g., Conoco 2014 Decision, [ 53, Attachment 4; Blue Bank 2018 Decision, | 79; BSG, | 58; Conoco 2015
Decision, { 84.

 

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

Spain argues that multiple appointments involve a double risk: (i) the incentive of an
economic benefit derived from potential future appointments by investors and (ii) the

knowledge acquired from similar or identical cases. Spain conceded that multiple

   

appointments by investors in itself is not sufficient basis for a disqualification, but then
added that there are “other circumstances” that call for Prof. Tawil’s disqualification. These
“other circumstances” are the alleged overlap of factual and legal issues with the current

case.

The existence of multiple appointments does not establish by itself a manifest lack of
independence and impartiality. In each case, the arbitrator exercises the same independent
arbitral function.”* Objective circumstances must be present to demonstrate that the
arbitrator’s ability to exercise independent judgment can be questioned. A decision to
disqualify an arbitrator may arise from several factors, which collectively support a
founded concern about the independence or impartiality of that arbitrator. Repeated
appointments by investors and income from that arbitration work has not been considered

sufficient in and of itself to establish lack of independence and impartiality.”>

There are multiple and relevant differences between the other cases against Spain in which
Prof. Tawil was appointed (i.e. Charanne, Isolux, and STEAG) with the present case. On
the basis of the evidence provided, these cases involved different (i) investors; (ii) law
firms representing the Claimants; (iii) dates of the alleged investment and (iv) measures.
Thus, the mere existence of these multiple appointments do not rise to the level that would

merit questioning the independence and impartiality of an arbitrator.

In these circumstances, the Chair concludes that there is no objective basis to suggest that
Prof. Tawil will not evaluate the present case with an open mind or that his independence

and impartiality would be affected by his appointments in other cases against Spain.

The first ground for disqualification submitted by Spain is therefore rejected.

74 Tidewater, | 60, Annex 27,
7 See e.g. Tidewater, || 60, Annex 27.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

b. Prof. Tawil’s dissenting opinions

The second ground for disqualification is that Prof. Tawil has prejudged core issues in the

present case as reflected in his dissenting opinions in the Charanne and Isolux cases.

The Respondent’s position is that Prof. Tawil has expressed his views with respect to:
(i) the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on intra-EU disputes; (ii) whether RD 661/2007 and RD
1578/2008 were aimed to attract investment and created legitimate expectations; and
(iii) that the regulatory investment constituted a guarantee which excluded subsequent

modifications.

Additionally, Spain claims that Prof. Tawil’s lack of independence and impartiality is

further evidenced by the absence of any further elaboration in his explanations.

The Claimants assert that the factual premises in this arbitration are different from the fact
pattern in the Charanne and Isolux cases (different time of investments and alleged
measures). The Claimants also point out that Prof. Tawil has not been challenged in the

other ICSID case involving Spain (i.e. STEAG).

The fact that an arbitrator has expressed views on issues of law or fact common to two or
more arbitrations in which that arbitrator is involved is not —without more— evidence of

bias or the appearance thereof.

On the basis of the information on file, the Charanne and Isolux cases involved investments
in Spain by unrelated companies represented by different law firms, made at different

times, and allegedly affected by different measures.

As other tribunals in cases involving Spain have decided, these distinctions are relevant in
the context of renewable energy cases. Even in cases where the issues could be similar, the
arguments, and the manner in which they are presented by different parties, could differ

depending on the particularities of each case.

In these circumstances, a third party undertaking a reasonable evaluation of the facts would
not conclude that Prof. Tawil manifestly appears to lack the required impartiality and

independence to decide this case.

The second ground for disqualification submitted by Spain is also rejected.

Vv. DECISION

105. Having considered all the facts alleged and the arguments submitted by the Parties, and for
the reasons stated above, the Chair rejects the Respondent’s Proposal to Disqualify Prof.

Tawil in this case.

106. The allocation of costs incurred in connection with his decision is a matter for
determination by the Tribunal in the course of the arbitration in accordance with ICSID

Arbitration Rule 28(1), and the Chair makes no decision in this regard.

c f
- sa
David Malpass
Chair of the ICSID Administrative Council

