CASE Num. ARB(AF)/98/2
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR

SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
(ADDITIONAL FACILITY)

BETWEEN:

WASTE MANAGEMENT, INC.

Claimant

and.

UNITED MEXICAN STATES
Respondent

ARBITRAL AWARD

Before the Arbitral Tribunal
constituted under Chapter Eleven
of the North American Free Trade
Agreement, and comprised of:

Mr. Keith Highet
Mr. Eduardo Siqueiros T.
Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades (President)

Date of dispatch to the parties: June 2, 2000

214

TABLE OF CONTENTS

  

 

SECTION
I. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND ......ccccccecceseteeteeseteeeeseteeeenees 1*
Il. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 1... cccececeeceeeseeeseeeseeeeeseeeseseseseseneies 4
TI. FINDINGS OF LAW .....cccceccccccecceeceeteeseteeeesseeseecesseesesseeseees 8
A. LEGISLATION APPLICABLE TO THE FACTS
OF THE CASE ooe.cececccsesesessssscseeseeeeeeeseeeeeeessessseessesseseseseees 8
B. NAFTA CHAPTER XI DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
PROCEDURE oo... ecceceeccceccececeeeeteeseestseseeessesesseessesenesseneeee 9
C. CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO SUBMISSION
OF A CLAIM TO ARBITRATION ........ccccesseeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 11
Consent to arbitration by the Parties to the dispute...... 11
Waiver required under NAFTA article 1121
(i) Concept and scope of the waiver
(ii) Time at which the waiver comes into force ........... 13
(iii) Formal requirements of the waiver submitted
by WASTE MANAGEMENT
(iv) Material requirements of the waiver submitted
by WASTE MANAGEMENT....0......ccceceseseseeees 15
(v) Conduct prohibited by waiver of Article 1121
of the NAFTA .....c.ceceeeesceeeeeeseeeeeseseseeeeeeeseeeeeees 17
Validity of the waiver submitted by WASTE
MANAGEMENT .........ccceceseseseseeeeeseseeeeesesessessesesenenes 21
TV. ARBITRAL AWARD .0....ccccccccccsecceeteeseneeeeeeeesseeseseeseseeseneees 23

* The pages in the above table of contents refer to the page numbering in the original award.

215

216 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

In the City of Washington, D.C., on June 2, 2000.

In the following arbitration before the International Centre for Settlement
of Investment Disputes, file number ARB(AF)/98/2, between:

(i) WASTE MANAGEMENT, INC., a company having its corporate
domicile at First City Tower, 1001 Fannin, 40th, Houston, Texas
77002, United States of America (Claimant) of the first part, and

(ii) the GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES
(Respondent) of the second part,

(hereinafter jointly referred to as the Parties)

the Tribunal hereby makes and renders the following

ARBITRAL AWARD

I. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

§1 On September 29, 1998, WASTE MANAGEMENT, INC.,
formerly known as USA Waste Services, Inc. (hereinafter referred
to as WASTE MANAGEMENT or the Claimant), acting on its
own behalf and on behalf of ACAVERDE S.A. de C.V. (hereinafter
referred to as ACAVERDE), requested from the Secretary-General
of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID), approval of access to the Additional Facility for the Admin-
istration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of ICSID (hereinafter
referred to as Additional Facility) and, jointly, filed a notice for the
institution of arbitration proceedings against the Government of
the UNITED MEXICAN STATES (hereinafter referred to as the
Government of Mexico), in accordance with Article 2 of the Addi-
tional Facility Arbitration Rules (Schedule C).

The request for arbitration seeks compensation by way of
damages for an alleged breach on the part of the state-owned entities,
BANCO NACIONAL DE OBRAS Y SERVICIOS PUBLICOS,

CASES,

§2

217

S.N.C. (hereinafter referred to as BANOBRAS), the MEXICAN
STATE OF GUERRERO (hereinafter referred to as GUERRERO),
and the CITY COUNCIL OF ACAPULCO DE JUAREZ (hereinaf-
ter referred to as ACAPULCO) of the obligations laid down by
Articles 1105 and 1110 of the North American Free Trade Agree-
ment (hereinafter referred to as NAFTA).

The rules applicable to these arbitration proceedings shall be
those contained in the Additional Facility Arbitration Rules, save
to the extent that they may be amended by NAFTA Chapter XI,
Section B, which establishes a dispute settlement procedure in
investment-related matters.

In this regard, NAFTA Article 1120 lays down that, provided
that six months have elapsed since the events giving rise to the
claim, said claim may be submitted to arbitration by a disputing
investor under the Additional Facility Rules.

Upon receipt of the request for approval of access and of the
notice of institution of arbitration proceedings by the Secretary-
General of ICSID, copies thereof and of the accompanying docu-
mentation were dispatched to the Respondent. On 18 November
1998, the Secretary-General notified the parties of his approval of
the request for access to the Additional Facility and registered the
Notice, thereby initiating these arbitration proceedings.

The Arbitral Tribunal was constituted on 3 June 1999 and
was composed of Mr. Julio Trevifio Azcué (appointed by the
Government of Mexico), Mr. Keith Highet (appointed by
WASTE MANAGEMENT) and Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades
(appointed as President of the Tribunal by agreement of the par-
ties). At the first session of the Arbitral Tribunal, which took place
at The Hague, Holland, on July 16, 1999, the Parties acknowl-
edged that the Tribunal had been properly constituted.

On December 3, 1999, Mr. Julio C. Trevifio Azcué tendered
his resignation as arbitrator for health reasons. Pursuant to the pro-
visions established in Article 15 the of Additional Facility Arbitra-
tion Rules, on 9 December 1999, the Arbitral Tribunal accepted
the resignation submitted by Mr. Trevifio, and duly advised the
ICSID Secretary-General of the same. Accordingly, on 4 January
2000 the Government of Mexico appointed Mr. Eduardo Siqueiros
T. as the new arbitrator, who thereupon accepted his appointment,
in accordance with the provisions of Article 18 of the Additional
Facility Arbitration Rules.

218

§3

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

In this arbitration, WASTE MANAGEMENT is represented
by Counsel, Mr. Peter A. Moir of Baker & Botts, L.L.P., a Washing-
ton, D.C. based law firm. The Government of Mexico is repre-
sented by Mr. Hugo Perezcano Dfaz, Legal Counsel serving with
the Directorate-General of the Negotiations Legal Advisory Board,
Subsecretariat for International Trade Negotiations, Ministry of
Commerce and Industrial Development (Secretaria de Comercio y
Fomento Industrial—SECOFI).

At its first session, the Arbitral Tribunal decided that the Claim-
ant would file its memorial of claim, containing all points of fact and
law relating to jurisdiction and the substance of its claims, against the
Respondent, by no later than 29 September 1999. Similarly, the
Respondent was to file a counter-memorial, in which it would con-
tend all arguments of fact and law relating to jurisdiction, by no later
than 29 October 1999, said deadline being extended at the Respon-
dent’s request to November 5, 1999. Subsequently, on 9 November
1999, the Claimant filed pleadings addressing the question of jurisdic-
tion as raised by the Respondent. In view of these submissions, the
Respondent then petitioned for leave to file a rejoinder dealing with
the matter of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, a petition to which this Arbi-
tral Tribunal acceded, 16 November 1999 being set as the maximum
time limit for the filing thereof. Finally, on 19 November 1999, the
Arbitral Tribunal decided to resolve the question of jurisdiction prior
to examining the issue in dispute, and to convoke a hearing for this
purpose on 6 December 1999. Said hearing had to be postponed until
31 January 2000, owing to the arbitration proceedings being sus-
pended by reason of the above-mentioned resignation of the arbitra-
tor, Mr. Julio Trevifio.

On 31 January 2000, the above indicated hearing took place
in Washington, D.C., and was, moreover, marked by the presence
of the Canadian Government and the Government of the United
States of America represented by Ms. Sylvie Tabet and Ms. Andrea
Menaker, respectively. The Government of Canada submitted to
the Tribunal, on 17 December 1999, a written presentation in
regard to the interpretation of NAFTA Article 1121. During the
course of the hearing the representative of Canada declined the
President of the Tribunal’s invitation to address the Tribunal, refer-
ring to the said presentation. The representative of the United
States of America also declined the President of the Tribunal’s invi-

CASES,

§4

219

tation to address the Tribunal. During the course of the hearing, all
parties presented their respective arguments concerning this Arbi-
tral Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

After the hearing, the Arbitral Tribunal met and concluded as
follows:

II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

On 22 July 1998, Baker & Botts, L.L.P, acting for and on
behalf of WASTE MANAGEMENT and ACAVERDE, filed with
the Secretary-General of ICSID a notice of institution of arbitra-
tion proceedings pursuant to Article 2 of the Additional Facility
Arbitration Rules. One of the heads of the above request dealt with
the so-called Conditions Precedent laid down by NAFTA Article
1121 for the submission of a claim to arbitration. These conditions
entail consent by the Claimant to the submission of the claim to
arbitration and waiver of its right to initiate or continue before any
other courts or tribunals, dispute settlement proceedings with
respect to the measures of the Respondent that are alleged to be a
breach of NAFTA. Said waiver was submitted by the Claimant,
couched in the following terms:

‘Additionally, Claimants hereby waive their right to ini-
tiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or
court under the law of any NAFTA Party, or other dispute
settlement procedures, any proceedings with respect to the
measures taken by Respondent that are alleged to be a
breach of NAFTA Chapter Eleven and applicable rules of
international law, except for proceedings for injunctive,

declaratory, or other extraordinary relief, not involving the

payment of damages. This waiver does not apply, how-

ever, to any dispute settlement proceedings involving
allegations that Respondent has violated duties imposed
by other sources of law, including the municipal law of

Mexico.” (emphasis is not from the original).

In view of the waiver tendered, on 29 July 1998 ICSID,
acting through its Counsel, Mr. Alejandro A. Escobar, requested
WASTE MANAGEMENT to confirm that the additional state-

220

§5

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

ment (shown in bold type above) issued by WASTE MANAGE-
MENT did not stray from the waiver required by NAFTA
Article 1121. In reply to this request, on 23 September 1998
WASTE MANAGEMENT sent a letter to ICSID to the following
effect:

“In the Notice of Institution submitted to ICSID on July
22, Claimants effected this waiver, echoing the language
in NAFTA Article 1121. Claimants also set forth their
understanding of the scope of that required waiver. By set-
ting forth this understanding, however, Claimants did
not intend to derogate from the waiver required by
NAFTA Article 1121.” (emphasis is not from original).

In any event, due to one of the procedural requirements to be
met by the Claimant, namely, mandatory notice of intent to sub-
mit the claim to arbitration under NAFTA Article 1119 having
been filed on 6 February 1998 with a body other than that desig-
nated by the Government of Mexico pursuant to the provisions of
NAFTA Article 1137(2), ICSID, by letter dated 25 August 1998,
duly advised the Claimant of the impossibility of continuing pro-
ceedings if said notice were not filed with the pertinent body for
such purpose, namely the SECOFI Directorate-General for For-
eign Investment.

On 29 September 1999, once the formal defect referred to
above had been remedied by notice of intent to submit a claim to
arbitration being forwarded to the body designated by the Govern-
ment of Mexico and being duly registered on 30 June 1999,
WASTE MANAGEMENT again proceeded to lodge notice of
request for arbitration with the Secretary-General of ICSID,
thereby complying with the waiting period established under
NAFTA Article 1119, which requires 90 days to elapse between
service of notice on the disputing party of intent to submit a claim
to arbitration and filing of the notice of request for arbitration
with ICSID Secretary-General. This latter notice was submitted in
the following terms insofar as it pertained to the NAFTA Article
1121 waiver:

‘Additionally, Claimants hereby waive their right to ini-
tiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or

CASES,

221

court under the law of any NAFTA Party, or other dispute
settlement procedures, any proceedings with respect to the
measures taken by Respondent that are alleged to be in
breach of NAFTA Chapter Eleven and applicable rules of
international law, except for proceedings for injunctive,
declaratory or other extraordinary relief, not involving the
payment of damages. Without derogating from the waiver
required by NAFTA Article 1121, Claimants here set
forth their understanding that the above waiver does not
apply to any dispute settlement proceedings involving
allegations that Respondent has violated duties imposed
by sources of law other than Chapter Eleven of NAFTA,
including the municipal law of Mexico.” (emphasis is not
from the original).

In view of the terms in which this last-mentioned waiver was
expressed, on 3 November 1998 ICSID, acting through its Legal
Adviser, Mr. Antonio A. Parra, sent a letter to WASTE MANAGE-
MENT seeking confirmation that the waiver tendered was applica-
ble to any such dispute settlement proceedings in Mexico as might
involve allegations of breaches of any obligations, imposed by
other sources of law, which in substance were not different from
those of a Party State under NAFTA Chapter XI, except for pro-
ceedings for injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary relief,
not involving the payment of damages.

In answer to this request, WASTE MANAGEMENT sent
a letter dated 3 November 1999, expressed in the following
terms:

“With respect to the inclusion in the Notice of Institution,

of the waiver required by NAFTA Article 1121 and USA
Wastes understanding of the scope of that required waiver,

USA Waste hereby confirms that the waiver contained
in the Notice of Institution applies to dispute settlement
proceedings in Mexico involving allegations of breaches
of any obligations, imposed by other sources of law, that
are not different in substance from the obligations of a
NAFTA State Party under Chapter Eleven of the
NAFTA, except for proceedings for injunctive, declaratory,

or other extraordinary relief, not involving the payment of

222

86

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

damages. With respect to USA Waste’s efforts to resolve
its dispute with Mexico outside of the remedies offered
by NAFTA, there are no pending legal proceedings
related to that dispute in which the Government of the
United Mexican States is a named a party.” (emphasis
is not from the original).

Parallel to these events, the Government of Mexico issued a
series of letters and repeatedly voiced its disagreement—as to both
form and content—with the terms of the waiver submitted by
WASTE MANAGEMENT, contending that the Claimant had not
issued said waiver in the terms laid down by NAFTA Article 1121,
and alleging as proof thereof, the existence of legal proceedings
pending resolution that had been initiated by ACAVERDE in
internal fora, namely, two suits brought against BANOBRAS and
one arbitration proceedings against ACAPULCO.

Likewise, the Government of Mexico asserted that said pro-
ceedings dealt with measures which had, moreover, been cited by
WASTE MANAGEMENT as breaches of the NAFTA. Specifically,
these were ACAPULCO’ alleged refusal to pay the invoices sub-
mitted by ACAVERDE under the Concession Agreement entered
into by both parties and BANOBRAS alleged refusal to pay such
invoices, as guarantor for ACAPULCO under a line of credit
agreement entered into by both parties.

In its Memorial of Claim dated 29 September 1999, WASTE
MANAGEMENT, insisting once again in the meaning ascribed to
the waiver as issued, made the following statement:

“While WASTE MANAGEMENT did indeed express its
“understanding” of the scope of the waiver, WASTE
MANAGEMENT has affirmed since it first provided the
waiver that, whatever the waiver means under NAFTA,
WASTE MANAGEMENT intended to give and has
given it.”

Likewise, on the matter of the internal proceedings initi-
ated by ACAVERDE, the Claimant contended that, in this
regard, the former had alleged no NAFTA-related breach of

international law in said proceedings. Accordingly, none of these

CASES,

§7

223

proceedings could be held to have either caused prejudice to
Mexico or forced it to defend duplicate allegations of NAFTA
breaches simultaneously.

For its part, on 5 November 1999, the Government of Mexico
filed a counter-memorial concerning the issue of the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction, stressing the formal and material defects of the waiver
as submitted by the Claimant and the continuance of the actions
instituted by ACAVERDE before other courts or tribunals in
breach of the provisions of NAFTA Article 1121.

In reply, WASTE MANAGEMENT then sent written plead-
ings to this Arbitral Tribunal on 9 November 1999, addressing the
question of jurisdiction, in which the waiver as tendered was
referred to anew in the following terms:

‘As recounted in its Memorial, Claimant has provided
that waiver on several occasions, and on several occasions
has affirmed that the waiver is effective to the full extent
of the scope intended by NAFTA.”

The Government of Mexico submitted a rejoinder, dated 16
November 1999, on the question of jurisdiction, principally
underscoring the duplication of relief sought by the Claimant in
the internal proceedings and the claim brought before this Arbitral
Tribunal, since in both cases these dealt with identical matters and
had been initiated against state-run organisations and political sub-
divisions for whose actions the Mexican Government was liable.

Finally, on 17 January 2000, WASTE MANAGEMENT pre-
sented its observations to the above-mentioned presentation made
by the Government of Canada on December 17, 1999, attaching a
copy of the Decision on Jurisdiction issued by the Arbitral Tribu-
nal in the case of Ethyl Corporation v. The Government of Canada
on 24 June 1998.

IN CONCLUSION:

The question of this Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction arises
from the point in time when the Claimant deemed that, in the
terms submitted, the waiver conformed in all respects to the provi-
sions of NAFTA Article 1121, and the Mexican Government, on

224

§8

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the contrary, deemed that said waiver had not been couched in the
form required by said Article nor had the Claimant’s subsequent
conduct been consistent with the terms of such waiver.

III. FINDINGS OF LAW
A. LEGISLATION APPLICABLE TO THE FACTS OF THE CASE

Prior to setting forth the grounds on which this decision is
based, this Tribunal deems it necessary that the issue raised be
examined afresh and reduced to its essentials, something which, for
the purposes hereof, translates as this Tribunal’s duty to analyse the
validity of the waiver issued by the Claimant under NAFTA Article
1121 paragraph one, subsection (b), the provisions of which reads
as follows:

‘A disputing investor may submit a claim under Article
1116 to arbitration only if:

) the investor and, where the claim is for loss or damage
to an interest in an enterprise of another Party that is a

juridical person that the investor owns or controls directly

or indirectly, the enterprise, waive their right to initiate or
continue before any administrative tribunal or court
under the law of any Party, or other dispute settlement
procedures, any proceedings with respect to the measure of
the disputing Party that is alleged to be a breach referred
to in Article 1116, except for proceedings for injunctive,

declaratory or other extraordinary relief, not involving the
payment of damages, before an administrative tribunal or

court under the law of the disputing Party.”

With regard to the interpretation of this rule, NAFTA Article
1131 states that:

‘A Tribunal established under this Section shall decide the
issues in dispute in accordance with this Agreement and
applicable rules of international law.”

CASES,

§9

§10

811

225

The thrust of this Article permits this Arbitral Tribunal to be
guided, in matters of interpretation, by the rules laid down by the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties signed on 23 May
1969, which establishes the general rule of interpretation of trea-
ties at Article 31:

“1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accor-
dance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms
of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object
and purpose.”

B. NAFTA CHAPTER XI DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURE

Chapter XI of the NAFTA establishes a mechanism for the
settlement of investment disputes, which seeks to assure both equal
treatment among investors of the Parties in accordance with the
principle of international reciprocity, and due process before an
impartial tribunal (NAFTA Article 1115).

Hence, an investor of one of the Parties who maintains that a
host Government has breached its obligations relating to the
investment, as envisaged under Chapter XI, shall be entitled to
submit its claim to arbitration on giving prior notice of its intent
to the disputing party at least 90 days before said claim is formally
submitted to the Secretary-General of ICSID, pursuant to NAFTA
Article 1119.

The above-mentioned NAFTA Article 1119 establishes the
mandatory nature of giving notice of intent to submit a claim to
arbitration to the disputing Party. Said notice, in the present case,
was served by WASTE MANAGEMENT on its own behalf and on
behalf of ACAVERDE, in accordance with the provisions of
NAFTA Articles 1116 and 1117.

Specifically, NAFTA Article 1117, paragraph 1, allows for sub-
mission of a claim to arbitration on behalf of an enterprise coming
within the jurisdiction of the other Party, in cases where the investor
controls said enterprise directly or indirectly. For such purposes,
WASTE MANAGEMENT has, in the exhibits filed along with its
Memorial of Claim, provided evidence of its status as “investor of a
Party, on behalf of an enterprise,” ACAVERDE S.A.

226

§12

§13

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

The notice referred to in NAFTA Article 1119 was registered
by the Directorate-General for Foreign Investment (the body des-
ignated by the Mexican Government to this end) on 30 June 1998,
as is evident from the content of the letter dated 5 July 1998, sent
by the Directorate-General for Foreign Investment to Baker &
Botts, L.L.P.

Once this formality has been duly completed, NAFTA Article
1120 provides that the disputing investor may then formally sub-
mit its claim to one of a number of arbitration mechanisms,
including ICSID Additional Facility, the procedure chosen for the
present dispute.

For the purposes thereof, the Additional Facility Arbitration
Rules, in Article 2, paragraph 1, provide that:

“Any State or national of a State wishing to institute arbi-
tration proceedings (hereinafier called the “Claimant”)
shall send a notice to that effect in writing to the Secretariat
at the seat of the Centre. It shall be drawn up in an official
language of the Centre, shall be dated and shall be signed by
the party sending it.”

Acting in accordance with this Article, the Claimant submit-
ted its notice of arbitration to the Secretary-General of ICSID on
29 September 1998, which was duly registered on 18 November of
said year.

Finally, NAFTA Chapter XI, Section B, Article 1121 lays
down a series of conditions precedent to submission of a claim to
arbitration proceedings, namely, the placing on record of the
Claimant’s consent, as well as a waiver of its right to initiate or
continue before any administrative tribunal or court any proceed-
ings with respect to the measure that is alleged to be a breach of
Article 1117 of the NAFTA, except for proceedings for injunctive,
declaratory or other extraordinary relief, not involving the pay-
ment of damages.

Prior to embarking upon an analysis of the waiver submitted
by the Claimant, this Tribunal deems it necessary to establish the
purpose of the so-called conditions precedent to the submission of
a claim to arbitration, conditions which are contained in NAFTA
Article 1121 and include the mandatory obligation to present said
waiver.

CASES,

$14

§15

$16

227

C. CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO SUBMISSION OF A
CLAIM TO ARBITRATION

Under NAFTA Article 1121 a disputing investor may submit
to arbitration proceedings, to quote literally, “Only if ” certain pre-
requisites are met, comprising, in general terms, consent to and
waiver of determined rights.

In the light of this Article, it is fulfilment of NAFTA Article
1121 conditions precedent by an aggrieved investor that entitles
this Tribunal to take cognisance of any claim forming the subject
of arbitration held in accordance with the dispute settlement pro-
cedure established under Chapter XI of said legal text. Accordingly,
it thus falls to this Tribunal: to monitor the production, both of
the consent and of the waiver, in the terms laid down by NAFTA
Article 1121; and, in addition, when it comes to ascertaining the
existence of a genuine show of intent in line with the terms
required in the waiver, to evaluate the conduct of the waiving party
vis-a-vis effective compliance therewith.

However, this Tribunal is unable to agree with the assertions
put forth by the Mexican Government to the effect that the pur-
ported function of the Arbitral Tribunal, in view of Article 1121, is
to ensure that the disputing investors will make their waiver effec-
tive before every tribunal or in any judicial or administrative pro-
ceeding, in order to comply with the procedure established under
NAFTA Chapter XI Section B, and, in this manner, validate or
perfect the consent to said Treaty. This Tribunal cannot but reject
such an interpretation, since it lacks the necessary authority to bar
the Claimant from initiating other proceedings in fora other than
the present one.

In this case, it would legitimately fall to the Mexican Govern-
ment to plead the waiver before other courts or tribunals.

a. Consent to arbitration by the Parties to the dispute

The essential constituent elements which constitute the insti-
tution of arbitration are the existence of a conflict of interests, and
an agreement expressing the will of the parties or a legal mandate,
on which the constitution of an Arbitral Tribunal is founded. This
assertion serves to confirm the importance of the autonomy of the
will of the parties, which is evinced by their consent to submit any

228

§17

§18

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

given dispute to arbitration proceedings. Hence, it is upon that
very consent to arbitration given by the parties that the entire
effectiveness of this institution depends.

In light of this affirmation, this Tribunal deems it necessary
to analyse, albeit only briefly, the treatment that NAFTA Chapter
XI accords to consent of the parties, when it comes to submitting
a claim to arbitration under the dispute settlement procedure
established therein.

NAFTA Article 1122, paragraph one, reads as follows:

“Each Party consents to the submission of a claim to arbi-
tration in accordance with the procedures set out in this
Agreement.”

From the literal tenor of this Article, it is understood, for
those effects of interest to us at present, that fulfilment, inter alia,
of the prerequisites laid down in Article 1121, would translate as
consent by NAFTA signatory parties to the dispute settlement pro-
cedure established under NAFTA Chapter XI, Section B.

On the basis of the above, it is the understanding of this Tri-
bunal that any analysis of the fulfilment of the prerequisites estab-
lished as conditions precedent to submission of a claim to
arbitration under NAFTA Article 1121 calls for the utmost atten-
tion, since fulfilment thereof opens the way, ipso facto, to an arbi-
tration procedure in accordance with the commitment acquired by
the parties as signatories to said international treaty.

Accordingly, this Arbitral Tribunal proposes to undertake a
detailed analysis of the scope and content of the waiver required
under NAFTA Article 1121.

b. Waiver required under NAFTA Article 1121
(i) Concept and scope of the waiver

The act of waiver per se is a unilateral act, since its effect in
terms of extinguishment is occasioned solely by the intent under-
lying same. The requirement of a waiver in any context implies a
voluntary abdication of rights, inasmuch as this act generally leads
to a substantial modification of the pre-existing legal situation,

CASES,

§19

229

namely, the forfeiting or extinguishment of the right. Waiver thus
entails exercise of the power of disposal by the holder thereof in
order to bring about this legal effect.

‘Whatever the case, any waiver must be clear, explicit and cate-
gorical, it being improper to deduce same from expressions the
meaning of which is at all dubious.

On the basis of the foregoing, any waiver submitted pursuant
to the provisions of NAFTA Article 1121(2)(b) must, depending
upon the petition or request filed, be clear in all its terms with
regard to abdication of given rights by the party proposing to make
said waiver.

(ii) Time at which the waiver comes into force

NAFTA Article 1121, paragraph three, provides that the
waiver shall be included in the submission of a claim to arbitration.
In this regard, NAFTA Article 1137(1)(b) states:

“1. A claim is submitted to arbitration under this Section
when:

b) the notice of arbitration under Article 2 of Sche-
dule C of the ICSID Additional Facility Rules has

been received by the Secretary-General;”

In light of these rules, it is evident that submission of the
waiver must take place in conjunction with that of the notice man-
dated by Article 2 of the Additional Facility Arbitration Rules, and
that from this date it will come into full force and effect with
regard to the commitment acquired by the waiving party to com-
ply with all the terms thereof.

In the case in point, and for the purposes hereof, WASTE
MANAGEMENT submitted notice of request for arbitration to
the Secretary-General of ICSID on 29 September 1998, so that it
was from this date onwards that the Claimant was thus obliged, in
accordance with the waiver tendered, to abstain from initiating or
continuing any proceedings before other courts or tribunals with
respect to those measures pleaded as constituting a breach of the
provisions of the NAFTA.

230

§20

§21

§22

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

(iii) Formal requirements of the waiver submitted by WASTE
MANAGEMENT

Any waiver, and by extension, that one which is now the sub-
ject of debate, implies a formal and material act on the part of the
person tendering same. To this end, this Tribunal will therefore have
to ascertain whether WASTE MANAGEMENT did indeed submit
the waiver in accordance with the formalities envisaged under
NAFTA and whether it has respected the terms of same through the
material act of either dropping or desisting from initiating parallel
proceedings before other courts or tribunals.

The word “form” must be deemed a natural element of any
legal act, since any declaration of intent must be voiced, must be
made known to others. In a life of interrelationships, it is its form
that renders an act recognisable to others. Hence, there is no legal
transaction, dealing or act that is bereft of some given form, how-
ever simple.

In a more technical and precise sense, the concept of form
refers to a given, specific medium that is demanded by the legal
system or the will of the individual for the purpose of voicing
intent. The effectiveness of legal acts is thus rendered dependent
upon the observance of certain forms, which are the only ones per-
mitted as vehicles for expressing such intent.

Thus, a priori, formalism seeks to achieve certain practical
ends, which can substantially be summed up as the attainment
of clarity with regard to the circumstances of the document
issued, the content matter thereof and assurance of proof of its
existence.

A distinction has traditionally been drawn between so-called
ad substantiam or ad solemnitatem and ad probationem formalities.
The former are those that require a class of legal act in order to
exist or come into being. In their case, form is substance, in that
the transactions, dealings or acts do not exist as such, unless they
are executed in the legally regulated form.

The ad probationem form is only required as evidence of legal
transactions, dealings or acts. It in no way conditions the effective-
ness of legal acts, other than in the sense of being thoroughly “legiti-
mated”, whereby it is established that it may only be proved by
means of the legally prescribed form. However, the actual existence

CASES,

§23

§24

231

and validity of the dealing or act is unimpaired by the lack of its
observance.

The subsumption of the above considerations into the terms
of NAFTA Article 1121 translates as the need for any waiver sub-
mitted by an aggrieved investor to comply with certain formal or
ad substantiam requisites clearly set out in paragraph three:

‘A consent and waiver required by this Article shall be in
writing, shall be delivered to the disputing Party and shall

be included in the submission of a claim to arbitration.”

This Article is clear when it comes to establishing the formali-
ties for said waiver: presentation of the waiver in writing, delivery
to the disputing party and inclusion in the submission of the claim
to arbitration. All these requisites were duly complied with by the
Claimant, as is evident from the written text that was dispatched
by same to the disputing Party and registered on 30 June 1998,
and subsequently included in the notice of request for arbitration
dated 29 September of that same year.

This Tribunal accordingly finds that the waiver as tendered by
the Claimant is free of the formal defects attributed to it by the
Respondent with regard to the alleged need for legalisation or
notarisation for possible/potential use in pleadings before other
fora, since, provided that the waiver has been submitted in the
terms laid down by the NAFTA, that is to say, in writing and in
duplicate to both the ICSID and the disputing Party, any appraisal
thereof by other courts, tribunals or parties does not fall within the
purview of this Tribunal.

(iv) Material requirements of the waiver submitted by WASTE
MANAGEMENT.

As has been pointed out by this Arbitral Tribunal, the act of
waiver involves a declaration of intent by the issuing party, which
logically entails a certain conduct in line with the statement issued.

Indeed, such a declaration of intent must assume concrete
form in the intention or resolve whereby something is said or done
(conduct of the deponent). Hence, in order for said intent to
assume legal significance, it is not suffice for it to exist internally.

232

§25

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Instead, it must be voiced or made manifest, in the case in point by
means of a written text and specific conduct on the part of the
waiving party in line with the declaration made.

It thus becomes necessary to assess both the conduct of the
party making the waiver, as well as the liability that said party must
assume should there be a divergence between the sentiments mani-
fested and the conduct actually engaged in, the reason being that
said party, and only said party, is liable for the effectiveness of such
declaration, due to the so-called principle of self-responsibility.

In light of the above, it is clear that the waiver required under
NAFTA Article 1121 calls for a show of intent by the issuing party vis-
a-vis its waiver of the right to initiate or continue any proceedings
whatsoever before other courts or tribunals with respect to the
measure allegedly in breach of the NAFTA provisions. Moreover,
such an abdication of rights ought to have been made effective as
from the date of submission of the waiver, namely, 29 September
1998. The above declaration of intent also calls for a certain type
of conduct on the part of the issuing party, WASTE MANAGE-
MENT, the party making public the commitment acquired by vir-
tue of the above-mentioned waiver.

Hence, by subjecting the Claimant’s conduct to scrutiny, this
Arbitral Tribunal will hereupon proceed to verify the public mani-
festation of the declaration of intent that said Claimant expressed
in the waiver referred to in NAFTA Article 1121.

In the following order of consideration and by means of an
analysis of the statements and documentation furnished by the
Parties, this Arbitral Tribunal deems the following points of fact
proven with respect to internal proceedings initiated by
ACAVERDE prior and/or subsequent to the tendering of the
NAFTA Article 1121 waiver:

1, With reference to the first suit filed by ACAVERDE against
BANOBRAS, it has been shown that on 31 January 1997,
ACAVERDE initiated a mercantile action against BANOBRAS,
involving a claim for a monetary sum plus damages for non-pay-
ment of invoices, arising out of a breach by BANOBRAS of a
credit line agreement, under which it stood as guarantor for the
City Council of ACAPULCO in the event that the latter should
fail to fulfil its payment obligations under the Concession Agree-

CASES,

§26

233

ment. Said action was decided in favour of BANOBRAS on 7
January 1999, leave for appeal being granted on 18 January
1999. On 11 March 1999, the Second Court of the First Circuit
(Segundo Tribunal Unitario del Primer Circuito) upheld the deci-
sion at the first instance.

Contesting this decision, ACAVERDE filed an appeal for

relief on 7 April 1999, which was dismissed on 6 October 1999 by
the Sixth Collegiate Tribunal on Civil Matters of the First Circuit
(Sexto Tribunal Colegiado en Materia Civil del Primer Circuito),
thus rendering the judgement as handed down, final and binding.
Similarly, on 11 August 1998 ACAVERDE brought a second
suit against BANOBRAS for breach of payment of certain
invoices under the credit line agreement. On 12 January 1999,
the Second District Court on Civil Matters of Mexico City
(Juez Segundo de Distrito en Materia Civil de la Ciudad de México)
dismissed said action. ACAVERDE appealed against this deci-
sion on 20 January 1999, which appeal was dismissed on 18
February of the same year by the First Court of the First Circuit
(Primer Tribunal Unitario del Primer Circuito), on procedural
grounds. On 24 February 1999, ACAVERDE filed a plea of
annulment or reversal with the aim of reviving the appeal, a
petition that was rejected by the relevant Court on the follow-
ing day. Finally, ACAVERDE filed an appeal for relief on 9
March 1999, which was decided in favour of BANOBRAS on
20 May of the same year, thereby definitively confirming the
decisions handed down by the previous Courts.
Lastly, on 27 October 1998, ACAVERDE filed a suit in arbitra-
tion against the City Council of ACAPULCO under the aus-
pices of the City of Mexico Chamber of Commerce Permanent
Arbitration Committee, claiming damages for non-payment of
services and breach of a series of obligations under the Conces-
sion Agreement, which proceedings it then subsequently aban-
doned on 7 July 1999.

&

»

(v) Conduct prohibited by waiver of Article 1121 of the NAFTA

Finally, and given the Claimant’s interpretation concerning
actions that it may bring before other courts or tribunals without
violating the content of the waiver established in Article 1121 of

234

§27

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the NAFTA, this Arbitral Tribunal deems it necessary to define the
conduct proscribed by that Article, even though its wording is
clear and should not lead to any confusion or deviation.

As revealed in the factual background, WASTE MANAGE-
MENT has expressed its interpretation of the waiver in various
written communications, which are quoted below:

Notice of institution of arbitration proceedings dated
22 July 1998:

“This waiver does not apply however, to any dispute set-
tlement proceedings involving allegations that Respondent
has violated duties imposed by other sources of law,
including the municipal law of Mexico.”

Notice of institution of arbitration proceedings dated
29 September 1999:

“Without derogating from the waiver required by NAFTA
Article 1121, Claimants here set forth their understanding
that the above waiver does not apply to any dispute settle-
ment proceedings involving allegations that Respondent has
violated duties imposed by sources of law other than Chapter
Eleven of NAFTA, including the municipal law of Mexico.”

According to the interpretation of the waiver maintained by
the Claimant, said waiver would refer exclusively to proceedings
that expressly invoke failure to comply with obligations of interna-
tional law set forth in Chapter XI of NAFTA.

Following this line of reasoning, the Claimant would have
acted in accordance with the terms of its waiver since, in fact,
ACAVERDE did not expressly invoke those provisions of NAFTA
that it considered breached before other courts or tribunals, but
instead, making use of the domestic instruments available to it
under Mexican legislation, instituted several claims for monetary
compensation in respect of unpaid invoices and non-compliance
with various obligations under a line of credit agreement and a
Concession Agreement, considering such conduct “permissible” in
light of its own interpretation of said waiver. This justification of
its conduct is unsustainable for the following reasons:

CASES,

a

235

It is clear that one and the same measure may give rise to dif-
ferent types of claims in different courts or tribunals. There-
fore, something that under Mexican legislation would
constitute a series of breaches of contract expressed as non-pay-
ment of certain invoices, violation of exclusivity clauses in a
concession agreement, etc., could, under the NAFTA, be inter-
preted as a lack of fair and equitable treatment of a foreign
investment by a government (Article 1105 of NAFTA) or as
measures constituting “expropriation” under Article 1110 of
the NAFTA. In any case, it is not the mission of the Tribunal,
at this stage of the proceedings, to make an in-depth analysis of
alleged breaches of the NAFTA invoked by the Claimant, since
that task, should it become necessary, belongs to an analysis of
the merits of the question.

For purposes of considering a waiver valid when that waiver is
a condition precedent to the submission of a claim to arbitra-
tion, it is not imperative to know the merits of the question
submitted for arbitration, but to have proof that the actions
brought before domestic courts or tribunals directly affect the
arbitration in that their object consists of measures also alleged
in the present arbitral proceedings to be breaches of the
NAFTA. The term “alleged” (“presuntamente” in the Spanish
version) appearing in Article 1121 is clearly indicative of the
framework within which we have to operate at this very early
stage of the arbitration proceedings, which means that the ele-
ments of comparison to be used at the time of verifying com-
pliance with the waiver are the presumed or supposed
violations of NAFTA invoked by the Claimant and the actions
effectively in progress before other courts or tribunals at that
time. All of this without prejudice to the possibility, following
an examination of the merits, of the Arbitral Tribunal verifying
compliance or non-compliance as asserted by the Claimant.

In effect, it is possible to consider that proceedings insti-

tuted in a national forum may exist which do not relate to those
measures alleged to be in violation of the NAFTA by a member
state of the NAFTA, in which case it would be feasible that such
proceedings could coexist simultaneously with an arbitration pro-
ceeding under the NAFTA. However, when both legal actions have
a legal basis derived from the same measures, they can no longer

236

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

continue simultaneously in light of the imminent risk that the
Claimant may obtain the double benefit in its claim for damages.
This is precisely what NAFTA Article 1121 seeks to avoid.

In the present hypothesis, this Tribunal understands that the
domestic proceedings initiated by ACAVERDE fall within the prohibi-
tion of NAFTA Article 1121 in that they refer to measures that are also
invoked in the present arbitral proceedings as breaches of NAFTA provi-
sions, namely non-compliance with the obligations of guarantor assumed
under a line of credit agreement requiring BANOBRAS to defray
invoices not paid by ACAPULCO city council, and non-compliance by
ACAPULCO city council through its failure to pay said invoices.

This point was recognised by the Claimant in its written pre-
sentations concerning the question of jurisdiction of 9 November
1999, which stated the following:

“Claimant’ allegations against Mexico in this NAFTA
arbitration are based on five separate “measures” consti-
tuting violations of NAFTA, only one of which relates to
non-payment under contract.”

The fact, expressly admitted by the Claimant, that the object of
the proceedings initiated against BANOBRAS and ACAPULCO
referred to one of the measures allegedly breaching NAFTA provi-
sions is sufficient proof, in the spirit of NAFTA Article 1121, to
include it within the framework of conduct that the waiver should
cover, as referred to in said Article and as proscribed for obtaining
access to an arbitration proceeding as contemplated under NAFTA.

It remains clear that at no time did WASTE MANAGE-
MENT intend to abandon the domestic proceedings, rather, on
the contrary, its manifest intention was to continue legal proceed-
ings against BANOBRAS and ACAPULCO, as revealed by the
communication sent by the Claimant’s representative to the Mexi-
can Government’ representative on 10 February 1999, in which it
is established that:

“..Regarding your request about the ongoing arbitration
proceeding in Mexico, we do not believe that our client is
required to suspend any proceedings in Mexico that it is
otherwise entitled to institute...”

CASES,

§28

§29

§30

237

In conclusion, an interpretation such as the one proposed by
the Claimant and which, as seen by the documentation provided,
has been used, conflicts with the purpose of the waiver established
in NAFTA Article 1121, the wording of which clearly sets forth the
spirit and intent of said waiver, which expressly proscribes the initi-
ation or continuation of proceedings under the law of either party
with respect to a measure allegedly breaching the provisions referred
to in Article 1116 of NAFTA. It is clear that the provisions referred
to in the NAFTA constitute obligations of international law for
NAFTA signatory States, but violation of the content of those obli-
gations may well constitute actions proscribed by Mexican legisla-
tion in this case, the denunciation of which before several courts or
tribunals would constitute a duplication of proceedings.

The Claimant has been perfectly aware of the situation here
described since it reserved the right to bring action in domestic
courts or tribunals and, subsequently, in light of the vicissitudes of
those actions and also of the arbitral proceedings initiated under
the NAFTA, when it forced an a posteriori interpretation of its
waiver, asserting that in the actions before other courts or tribunals
NAFTA provisions had not been invoked, although there is no
doubt that they directly affected the international obligations
assumed by the Mexican Government, given that they had their
origin in the same measures invoked by the Claimant.

If the Claimant, upon formulating its waiver, had clearly
adopted the interpretation it now maintains, it would not have con-
ditioned its waiver with the terms as it did, because under said inter-
pretation, it would have been able to take parallel action in domestic
courts or tribunals without expressly invoking NAFTA provisions
and without thereby affecting these arbitral proceedings.

Also, we are facing proceedings with identical subjects for
purposes of NAFTA Article 1121 since, pursuant to such treaty,
the Mexican Government would have to be liable for those actions
attributable to BANOBRAS and ACAPULCO. This point has
been give sufficient credit through the Respondent's written plead-
ings concerning the issue of jurisdiction.

Based on the foregoing, it is clear that the Claimant issued a
statement of intent different from that required in a waiver pursuant
to NAFTA Article 1121, since it continued with the proceedings ini-
tiated against BANOBRAS after the date of submission of the waiver,

238

§31

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

29 September 1998, until all avenues of recourse had been exhausted.
Likewise, it has also been shown that subsequent to submission of
this claim for arbitration, ACAVERDE initiated arbitral proceedings
against ACAPULCO, which are still ongoing today, although
ACAVERDE requested the return of documents based on its action
of 7 July 1999, as revealed by the documentation accompanying its
memorial, despite the fact that the pertinent forum, i.e. the Arbitral

Tribunal, had not declared the arbitral proceeding closed.

c. Validity of the waiver submitted by WASTE MANAGEMENT

In view of the above, this Tribunal has arrived at the following
conclusions regarding the validity of the waiver tendered:

1. With respect to the content of the text of the NAFTA Arti-
cle 1121 waiver, it is obvious that the Claimant did not limit itself
to a full transcription of the content of this Article, which in itself
is sufficiently complete and clearly reflects the scope of the waiver,
but instead additionally introduced a series of statements that
reflected its own understanding of the waiver submitted, as is evi-
dent from the findings of fact outlined in this arbitral award now
issued hereunder.

This Tribunal cannot concur with the Claimant's earlier asser-
tions regarding its intention to present the waiver in accordance
with the scope of Article 1121, given that it has been established
that for more than 14 months, it systematically failed to comply
with the actual agreement that the waiver of NAFTA Article 1121
requires from those parties seeking to submit a claim to arbitration
in accordance with the dispute settlement procedure set forth in
Chapter XI of the NAFTA. The fact is that the Claimant did not
have the intention of presenting the waiver within the terms pre-
scribed in NAFTA Article 1121, rather, it had the intention to
present it in accordance with its own interests.

2. With respect to clarifications made by WASTE MANAGE-
MENT in its Memorial of Claim of 29 September 1999 and writ-
ten submission of pleadings of 9 November 1999, it is true that, at
the date on which the latter was tendered, WASTE MANAGE-
MENT had instituted no proceedings before any other courts or
tribunals. Yet this fact cannot remedy the breach by WASTE

CASES,

239

MANAGEMENT of one of the NAFTA Article 1121 require-
ments, namely, delivery of a waiver in accordance with the terms
laid down by Article 1121 to the disputing party, and inclusion
thereof in the submission of the claim to arbitration. In view of
WASTE MANAGEMENT’s conduct and the text of its declara-
tion of intent, neither the waiver submitted on 29 September 1998
nor the subsequent attempts to clarify the content thereof corre-
spond to the terms prescribed for these purposes under NAFTA
Article 1121, which requires the waiving party to abstain from ini-
tiating or continuing legal proceedings in any administrative or
judicial tribunal or other dispute settlement procedures (save for
petitions for injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary relief,
not involving the payment of damages).

Accordingly, this Tribunal cannot deem as valid the waiver
tendered by the Claimant in its submission of the claim to arbitra-
tion, in view of its having been drawn up with additional interpre-
tations, which have failed to translate as the effective abdication of
rights mandated by the waiver.

In the light of the foregoing, the claims of the Respondent
must necessarily be allowed, along with the ensuing order against
the Claimant for costs. Nevertheless, on there being no evidence of
recklessness or bad faith on the Claimant's part, this Tribunal is of
the opinion that it would be improper to make an award for such
legal costs as the Respondent may have incurred in the defence of
its interests in this arbitration.

IV. ARBITRAL AWARD

On weighing up all that has been set forth hereinabove, the
documentary exhibits and pleadings drawn up by the parties, this
Arbitral Tribunal is compelled to hold that it lacks jurisdiction to
judge the issue in dispute now brought before it, owing to breach
by the Claimant of one of the requisites laid down by NAFTA
Article 1121(2)(b) and deemed essential in order to proceed with
submission of a claim to arbitration, namely, waiver of the right to
initiate or continue before any tribunal or court, dispute settle-
ment proceedings with respect to the measures taken by the
Respondent that are allegedly in breach of the NAFTA, the afore-
said being in overall accordance with the provisions of said legal
text and the ICSID Additional Facility.

240 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

This Tribunal orders the Claimant to pay the costs of the
present arbitration proceedings, and each of the disputing parties
to defray the respective costs occasioned by its own defence.

The present arbitral award has been adopted by a majority of
the Arbitral Tribunal

Bernardo M. Cremades
President of the Tribunal

Date: May 26, 2000

Keith Highet Eduardo Siqueiros T.
Arbitrator Arbitrator
(subject to the attached
dissenting opinion) Date: May 16, 2000

Date: May 11, 2000

