INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF
INVESTMENT DISPUTES (ADDITIONAL FACILITY)
Washington D.C.

Case N° ARB(AF)/00/3

Waste Management, Inc.

(Claimant)

versus

United Mexican States
(Respondent)

AWARD

Before the Arbitral Tribunal
constituted under Chapter Eleven
of the North American Free Trade
Agreement, and comprised of:

Professor James Crawford, President
Mr. Benjamin R. Civiletti
Mr. Eduardo Magallon Gomez

Secretary of the Tribunal

Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila

Date of dispatch to the parties: April 30, 2004

Procedural History

TABLE OF CONTENTS

B. The Dispute between the Parties
The Bases of Claim under NAFTA

qd) Overview

(2) The status of Claimant as an “investor”

(3) The claim for breach of NAFTA Article 1105
@ The scope and interpretation of Article 1105(1)
(ii) The allegations of breach of Article 1105(1)

(a)
(b)
(©)
(d)
()
(6)
(g)

The conduct of Banobras

The conduct of Guerrero

The conduct of the City

The Mexican legal proceedings
Was there a denial of justice?
The termination phase

The allegation of conspiracy

(iii) | Conclusions as to Article 1105(1)

(4) The claim for expropriation: NAFTA Article 1110
@ The Article 1110 standard

(ii) The Article 1110 standard applied to the enterprise

(iii) | Was there conduct tantamount to expropriation
of Acaverde’s contractual rights?

(iv) Conclusion as to Article 1110

D. The Issue of Costs

AWARD

paragraph

1-39
40-72
73-162

73-76
77-85
86-140
86-99
100-139
102-105
106-107
108-117
118-127
128-132
133-136
137-139
140

141-178
142-155
156-162

163-176
177-178

179-184

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

WASTE MANAGEMENT, INC.
Claimant

Vv.

UNITED MEXICAN STATES
Respondent

AWARD

A. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. On 27 September 2000, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered a
notice for the institution of arbitration proceedings, lodged by Waste Management Inc.
(“Claimant”) under the ICSID Arbitration Additional Facility Rules (“the Rules”) against
the United Mexican States (“Respondent”). The Claimant alleged that the Respondent is
liable under Articles 1110 and 1105 of NAFTA for the actions of various state organs
concerning the Claimant’s investment in an enterprise to provide waste management

services to the City of Acapulco in the State of Guerrero.

2. In accordance with Article 1123 of NAFTA and Article 6 of the Rules, the
parties proceeded to constitute the Arbitral Tribunal. The Claimant appointed Mr.
Benjamin R. Civiletti, a United States national. The Respondent appointed Mr. Guillermo
Aguilar Alvarez, a Mexican national. Pursuant to Article 1124(2), the Claimant requested
the Secretary-General to appoint the President of the Tribunal. The Secretary-General,
following consultations with the parties, appointed Professor James Crawford, an
Australian national, to serve as President of the Tribunal. Pursuant to Article 1125 of
NAFTA, the Claimant had previously agreed, by letter of 19 June 2000 accompanying its

request for arbitration, to the appointment of each individual member of the Tribunal.

3. On 30 April 2001, pursuant to Article 14 of the Rules, the Secretary-
General of ICSID informed the parties that all the arbitrators had accepted their

appointment and that the Tribunal was deemed to have been constituted, and the

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

proceeding to have begun, on that date. By that same letter, the Secretary-General
informed the parties that Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila, Senior Counsel, ICSID, would serve
as Secretary of the Tribunal. All subsequent written communications between the Arbitral

Tribunal and the parties were made through the ICSID Secretariat.

4. On 1 June 2001, the Respondent informed the Centre that it objected to the
competence of the Tribunal. This was the second occasion on which the Claimant had
brought proceedings in respect of its claim. In the first proceeding, ICSID Case No.
ARB/(AF)/98/2, a Tribunal constituted by Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades (President), Mr.
Keith Highet and Mr. Eduardo Siqueiros (hereinafter the “First Tribunal”) rendered an
award declining jurisdiction on the ground that the Claimant had not validly waived its
right to pursue domestic remedies, a waiver required by NAFTA Article 1121 as a
condition precedent to the submission of a claim to arbitration. Moreover this failure could
not be remedied by any act of the Claimant, with the result that the Tribunal lacked
jurisdiction over the claim.' The Respondent argued that the effect of the first
unsuccessful proceedings was to debar the Claimant from bringing any further claim with

respect to the measure alleged to be a breach of NAFTA.

5. On 8 June 2001, the first session of the Tribunal with the parties was held
at the seat of the World Bank in Washington, DC. During the course of the session, the
parties acknowledged that the Tribunal had been duly constituted pursuant to Article 1120
of NAFTA and the Rules. An exchange of views took place on the venue of the
arbitration and on the procedure for dealing with the Respondent’s objection to
jurisdiction based on the previous proceedings, and in particular on the decision of the

previous Tribunal.

6. In its Procedural Order No. 1 of 8 June 2001, the Tribunal laid down
timetables for written observations on the question of venue and on the preliminary
objection. The parties filed their observations on the question of venue on 18 June 2001.
On 6 August 2001, the Tribunal gave the parties an opportunity to make further

observations on the question of venue in light of the possible relevance of the Panama

For the Award of 2 June 2000 see 5 ICSID Reports 443.

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

Convention.” The parties filed their further observations on venue on 28 August 2001.
Subsequently, by a Decision on Venue of the Arbitration dated 26 September 2001, the
Tribunal decided that the venue of the present proceedings would be the same as those of

the first proceedings, viz., Washington, DC.

7. Following a communication from the Respondent dated 16 November 2001
which did not, however, amount to a challenge, one of the Arbitrators, Mr. Guillermo
Aguilar Alvarez, tendered his resignation from the Tribunal. Pursuant to Article 15(3) of
the Rules, the Tribunal accepted his resignation. Pursuant to Article 18(1) of the Rules,
Mexico thereupon nominated Mr. Eduardo Magallén Gomez to fill the vacancy so created.
The Tribunal was reconstituted on December 14, 2001, following Mr. Magallon’s

acceptance of his appointment.

8. Pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1, Respondent lodged a Memorial on
Jurisdiction of 8 August 2001. Claimant lodged a Counter-Memorial on jurisdiction on 9
October 2001. The hearing initially scheduled for 3 December 2001 having been
postponed in order to allow the vacancy on the Tribunal to be filled, the Tribunal
convened at the premises of the World Bank, Washington, DC, on 2 February 2002 to hear

the parties’ oral arguments on jurisdiction. The parties were represented as follows:

Attending on behalf of the Claimant:

Mr. J. Patrick Berry, Baker & Botts LLP
Mr. Richard King, Baker & Botts LLP
Ms. Lorena Perez, Baker & Botts LLP

Mr. Jay L. Alexander, Baker & Botts LLP
Mr. Bob Craig, Assistant General Counsel, Waste Management, Inc.

Attending on behalf of the Respondent:

Mr. Hugo Perezcano Diaz, Lead Counsel, Ministry of Economy,
Government of Mexico
Mr. Salvador Behar Lavalle, Ministry of Economy, Government of Mexico
Ms. Adriana Gonzalez Arce Brilanti, Ministry of Economy,
Government of Mexico
Mr. Cameron Mowatt, Thomas & Partners

2 Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration, Panama City, 30 January 1975, 1438

UNTS 249.

3 The Tribunal’s Decision is reported at 6 ICSID Reports 541.

-5-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

Mr. Carlos Garcia, Thomas & Partners
Mr. Robert Deane, Thomas & Partners
Mr. Stephan E. Becker, Shaw Pittman
Mr. Sanjay Mullick, Shaw Pittman
Ms. Brooke Bentley, Shaw Pittman.

The Tribunal heard, on behalf of the Respondent, Mr. Hugo Perezcano Diaz, and on behalf
of the Claimant, Mr. Jay Alexander.

9. Representatives of the other two NAFTA parties attended the hearing on 2
February 2002:

Attending on behalf of the United States of America:

Mr. Barton Legum, Chief of the NAFTA Arbitration Division, Office of Legal
Adviser, Office of International Claims, Department of State

Mr. David A. Pawlak, Attorney-Adviser, Office of Legal Adviser, Office of
International Claims, Department of State.

Attending on behalf of the Government of Canada:

Mr. Douglas Heath, Embassy of Canada in Washington, DC.

10. In response to certain questions from the Tribunal concerning both the case
as argued before the previous Tribunal and the proceedings brought by the Claimant in
Mexico, the parties provided certain additional information and argument by letters both

dated 19 February 2002.

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

11. On 28 June 2002, the Secretary of the Tribunal notified to the parties the
Tribunal’s Decision on Mexico’s Preliminary Objection concerning the Previous
Proceedings. A copy of the decision is attached as Annex 1. The Tribunal decided that
the Claimant was not prevented from bringing its claim and reserved to a later stage the
issue of the costs and expenses of the jurisdictional phase of the proceedings.’ By the
same letter, the Secretary of the Tribunal informed the parties that the Tribunal understood
that the claim submitted by the Claimant was identical to that previously submitted to
arbitration under NAFTA, and that the Memorial submitted as Appendix D to its Request
of June 19, 2000 stood as the Claimant’s Memorial in the present Arbitration. The
Secretary of the Tribunal further invited the parties to consult with a view to agreeing on

the time limits for the remaining written pleadings.

12. On the basis of the Claimant’s observations of 5 and 13 August 2002 and of
the Respondent’s observations of 6 and 12 August 2002, and in view of the fact that the
parties failed to agree in a schedule for the filing of the remaining pleadings, the Tribunal
set up a schedule for the filing of pleadings by the parties, submissions by the NAFTA

Parties and fixed a date for a hearing on the merits.

13. By letter of 12 August 2002, the Respondent submitted a request for
interpretation and correction of certain translation errors into Spanish regarding the
Tribunal’s Decision of 26 June 2002, invoking Articles 56 and 57 of the Rules. On 13
August 2002, the Secretary of the Tribunal replied to Mexico, explaining that Articles 56
and 57 were only applicable to awards. The Secretary noted that Mexico’s request would,

however, be referred to the Tribunal for consideration pursuant to Article 35 of the Rules.

14. On 14 August 2002, the Secretary on behalf of the Tribunal invited the
Claimant to file by 23 August 2002 any observations it might have in connection with

Mexico’s request of 12 August 2002.

4 The Tribunal’s Decision is reported at 6 ICSID Reports 541.

-7-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

15. On 22 August 2002, in a further letter to the Secretary-General, Mexico
asserted that the Tribunal’s Decision should be treated as an award. On 23 August 2002,
the Acting Secretary-General responded to Mexico’s letter of 22 August 2002, confirming
that the term “award” in the ICSID Convention and Rules refers only to the final award
which disposes of the case. With respect to the Additional Facility Rules, the Acting
Secretary-General noted that these, being based on the Convention, were to the same
effect. He further observed that a party could immediately ask the Tribunal to clarify,
correct or supplement a preliminary or interim decision and that such question would be a

matter for the Tribunal to decide under Article 35 of the Rules.

16. On 23 August 2002, the Claimant replied to the Tribunal’s invitation to
comment. It supported the Secretariat’s interpretation of the term “award” in Articles 56

and 57 of the Rules, and argued that the Mexican request was accordingly inadmissible.

17. In a letter of 30 September 2002, the Secretary incorporated the Tribunal’s
observations to Mexico’s request of 12 August 2002. The Tribunal affirmed that there
was no request before it for interpretation or correction in accordance with Articles 56 and
57 of the Rules. It pointed out, however, that it had the power, while still exercising its
functions and prior to the closure of the proceedings, to give any necessary interpretation
of any of its decisions, to make any necessary supplementary decision, and to correct any
error in the translation of a decision. The Tribunal further indicated that it could exercise
such powers of its own motion or on the request of a party. The Tribunal, however,
rejected Mexico’s request, indicating that the two reasons given by Mexico for requesting
interpretation were not relevant to the further proceedings before the Tribunal and that the
Decision itself was clear. Regarding the correction of the Decision, the Tribunal stated
that the points raised by Mexico did not reveal any inaccuracy in the translation of the

Decision from English to Spanish or any inconsistency between the two versions.

18. By a letter of 23 September 2002, the Respondent requested an order from
the Tribunal requiring disclosure of a series of documents which were said to be “relevant
and necessary for the defense of this case”. The request concerned two issues which were

open at the merits phase, (A) damages and (B) ownership and control of the investment at
issue, the Mexican company, Acaverde, S.A. de C.V., which was the actual concessionaire

(“Acaverde”).

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

19. By a letter of 30 September 2002, the Claimant noted that it was on the
point of delivering to the Respondent’s counsel in Washington, DC, a series of documents
related to an opinion given by the Claimant’s expert witness, Dr. Slottje, indicating that
“most, if not all, of the financial information requested by the Respondent regarding the
issue of damages will be contained in one form or another in those documents”. However,
it declined without an order from the Tribunal to provide documents in Category B,
indicating that the Respondent appeared to be bringing an additional preliminary objection
on the issue of standing. In the Claimant’s view, the procedure followed by the First
Tribunal had ensured that “all arguments of fact and law relating to jurisdiction” were

disclosed; these did not include questions of standing.

20. By a further letter of 30 September 2002, the Respondent stressed that it
had at no stage waived any right to raise other objections to the claim. In any event, it
noted that the Claimant’s ownership and control of Acaverde was relevant to the merits,

including, eventually, to the quantum of damages.

21. On 1 October 2002, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order concerning
Disclosure of Documents, giving a certain number of indications regarding disclosure. The
Tribunal expressed the view that documents concerning Acaverde’s finances and
operations in relation to the concession might be sought, provided they were sufficiently
identified. The Tribunal further indicated that the Respondent’s request for “copies of all
the invoices issued in the period 1994-1998” was prima facie too burdensome, since it was
likely to include large numbers of documents which were not in dispute as such. The
Tribunal agreed that documents clarifying the extent of the Claimant’s ownership and
control of the investment were relevant. Finally, the Tribunal indicated that any remaining
issues concerning specific documents could be referred back to the Tribunal by either

party for a prompt ruling.

22. After an exchange of correspondence between the Respondent and the
Claimant in connection with the production of documents, by a letter of 12 November
2002, the Respondent called on the Tribunal to order that it had access to information

regarding Acaverde in possession of Servicios de Tecnologia Ambiental, S.A. de C.V.

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

(“Setasa”).> The Respondent explained the reasons for its request of the Claimant’s
consent to the hand-over by Setasa of documents that had been provided by a predecessor
of the Claimant under cover of a confidentiality agreement, to enable Setasa to assess the

value of Acaverde.

23. By a letter of 15 November 2002, the Claimant outlined aspects of the
history of its relations with Setasa, underlining that Setasa did not return the documents
provided to it and there had been earlier litigation between Setasa and the Claimant
regarding Setasa’s compliance with the confidentiality agreement. It offered to disclose
directly to the Respondent any responsive documents which were returned to it by Setasa.
The Claimant also called on the Tribunal to order immediate disclosure by the Respondent

of nine classes of documents previously requested to the Respondent.

24. By a letter of 15 November 2002 to the Tribunal, the Respondent sought
directions from the Tribunal as to what it characterized as “the Claimant’s substantial
failure to comply with the Tribunal’s order’. In particular, it sought directions as to two
classes of documents not disclosed. The first concerned Claimant’s conveyance of its
Mexico operations in 1997. The second concerned alleged discrepancies as to the

effective date on which the Claimant’s predecessor acquired Acaverde.

25. By a letter of 20 November 2002 to the Tribunal, the Respondent
summarized the disclosure so far made by the Claimant. It set out in further detail reasons
why the Respondent should be given access to documents in the control of Setasa. It

argued that any disclosure request by the Claimant should be entertained only after the
deposit of the Counter-Memorial, when it could be considered in the light of the

arguments and documents contained in that filing.

26. By letter of 21 November 2002 to the Tribunal, the Claimant commented
on the Respondent’s 15 November 2002 requests for orders. As to the 1997 conveyance,
it offered to make available to the Respondent a redacted version of the agreement, or to

file with the Tribunal an unredacted copy, which the Tribunal could confirm did indeed

Setasa negotiated with Acaverde’s principal shareholder, Sanifill, for the purchase of Acaverde in 1997 and
accordingly received confidential information about the company as part of the due diligence process. It is this
information which was the subject of the Respondent's letter to the Tribunal of 12 November 2002. See further para. 66.

 

-10-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

exclude Acaverde from the sale. As to the Respondent’s second request, the Claimant
noted that the difference between October 1994 and June 1995 in terms of the completed

acquisition of Acaverde was irrelevant to standing under NAFTA Chapter 11.

27. By a letter of 21 November 2002 to the Tribunal, the Respondent rejected
both proposals the Claimant had made as to the Agreement of 1997. The Respondent
further rejected the Claimant’s argument regarding the information requested in

connection with the Cayman Islands transactions.

28. By a letter of 22 November 2002 to the Tribunal, the Claimant attached a

redacted version of the 1997 Agreement.

29. On 25 November 2002, the Respondent requested an extension to file its
Counter-Memorial. The Secretary informed the parties by a letter of 26 November 2002,
that the Tribunal granted the extension requested by the Respondent and indicated the new

schedule for the filing of pleadings.

30. On 27 November 2002, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2
concerning Disclosure of Documents. The Tribunal indicated that to the extent that
documents identified by the Respondent were relevant to the question of ownership or
control but the Claimant had neither disclosed them nor explained why they were not
available, the Tribunal could draw corresponding inferences. It further stated that the
Tribunal did not believe that any additional order was required as to documents pertaining
to control over Acaverde in the period 1994-1995. The Tribunal also decided that the
1997 Agreement did not appear to be relevant to the present dispute, and accordingly did
not order further disclosure. Regarding the documents in possession of Setasa, the
Tribunal found it appropriate that the Claimant disclose promptly to the Respondent all
relevant documents that Setasa might provide to the Claimant. The Tribunal asked the
Claimant to provide the Tribunal with an explanation of the situation within 7 days of the

date of the order.
31. In its Procedural Order No. 2, the Tribunal also addressed the Claimant’s
request for production of 9 categories of documents. The Tribunal granted in part the

Claimant’s request, in particular the documents related to Mexico’s financial expert

-ll-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

evidence, and denied or found not relevant other categories of documents. The Tribunal
directed that the Respondent should disclose the documents concerned at the same time as

the Counter-Memorial or at the latest within 7 days of the filing of the Counter-Memorial.

32. The Respondent lodged its Counter-Memorial on the merits on 6 December
2002. On 13 January 2003, the Claimant requested an extension to lodge its Reply. The
Secretary informed the parties by a letter of 15 January 2003 that the Tribunal had granted
the extension requested by the Claimant and indicated the new schedule for the filing of
pleadings, including the filing of submissions by the NAFTA Parties under NAFTA
Article 1128.

33. The Claimant filed its Reply on the merits on 22 January 2003. The
Respondent filed its Rejoinder on the merits on 7 March 2003.

34. Pursuant to a request of the Tribunal, the parties submitted a joint letter of
12 March 2003 regarding the organization of the hearing on the merits. The parties further
expressed their views by a letter submitted by each party on 13 March 2003. The
Tribunal, having considered the above correspondence, issued directions regarding the
hearing on the merits which were communicated by the Secretary’s letter of 14 March

2003.

35. On 19 March 2003, the Government of Canada filed a submission under
Article 1128 of NAFTA and the United States of America advised the Tribunal on the
same date that it did not intend to make a submission.

36. The hearing on the merits was hold from 7 April until 10 April 2003 at the
premises of the World Bank in Washington DC to hear the parties’ oral arguments and the

witnesses and experts called by them. The parties were represented as follows:

Attending on behalf of the Claimant:

Mr. Bob Craig, Assistant General Counsel, Waste Management, Inc.
Mr. Kemp Sawyers, Baker & Botts LLP

Mr. J. Patrick Berry, Baker & Botts LLP

Ms. Clara Poffenberger, Baker & Botts LLP

Ms. Guillermina Calles, Baker & Botts LLP

Ms. Lila Pankey, Baker & Botts LLP

Ms. Sharon Katz, Baker & Botts LLP

-12-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

Mr.

Ulrich Brunnhuber.

Attending on behalf of the Respondent:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Hugo Perezcano Diaz, Lead Counsel, Ministry of Economy
J. Christopher Thomas QC, Thomas & Partners
Cameron Mowatt, Thomas & Partners

Stephan E. Becker, Shaw Pittman

Adriana Gonzalez Arce Brilanti, Ministry of Economy,
Salvador Behar Lavalle, Ministry of Economy
Alejandra Galaxia Treviiio Solis, Ministry of Economy
Sanjay Mullick, Shaw Pittman

Rolando Garcia, Thomas & Partners

Carlos Garcia, Thomas & Partners

Humberto Guerrero Shaw Pittman.

The following witnesses and experts were heard at the hearing:

Witnesses of the Claimant:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Rodney Proto
H. Steven Walton
Jaime Eduardo Herrera Gutiérrez de Velasco

Witnesses of the Respondent:

Mr.

Mario Alcaraz Alarcon

Experts of the Claimant:
Dr. Daniel Slottje

Experts of the Respondent:

Mr.
Mr.

37.

Carlos de Rivas Ibafiez
Carlos de Rivas Oest.

Representatives of the other two NAFTA parties attended the hearing:

Attending on behalf of the United States of America:

Mr.
Ms.

David A. Pawlak, Office of International Claims, Department of State
Jennifer Gehr, Department of Commerce.

Attending on behalf of the Government of Canada:

Mr.

38.

Douglas Heath, Embassy of Canada in Washington, DC.

Transcripts in English and Spanish of the hearing on the merits were

prepared and distributed to the parties and the members of the Tribunal.

-13-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

39. By letter of 14 April 2003, the Secretary distributed copies of certain
questions from the Tribunal to both parties as made at the end of the hearing on the merits.
The Secretary also informed the parties, following the Tribunal’s instructions, of the
schedule for submitting their answers. The parties submitted their answers to the

Tribunal’s questions on 28 April 2003.

B. THE DISPUTE BETWEEN THE PARTIES

40. The present dispute arises from a concession for the provision of waste
disposal services in the Mexican City of Acapulco in the State of Guerrero, one of the
component states of Mexico. The agreed terms for this operation were laid down in a
Concession Agreement (Titulo de Concesion), the parties to which were the City through
its Council (Ayuntamiento) (“the City”) and Acaverde. Acaverde was a Mexican company
created in 1994. It is said at all relevant times to have been a wholly owned subsidiary of
the Claimant, Waste Management Inc. (“Waste Management”), a Delaware corporation
with substantial interests in municipal waste disposal services in the United States and
elsewhere.® The question of Waste Management’s entitlement to claim under Articles
1116 or 1117 of NAFTA in respect of the present dispute involving Acaverde is an issue
in the case. In this section of the Award, the Tribunal will refer to Acaverde as the actual

contracting party and provider of services under the Concession Agreement.’

41. The Concession Agreement was concluded on 9 February 1995. It was
amended in significant respects by a further agreement of 12 May 1995. Under the
Concession Agreement as so amended (“the Concession Agreement”), Acaverde
undertook to provide on an exclusive basis certain municipal waste disposal and street
cleaning services in a specified area of Acapulco. The area concerned, containing
approximately 9000 residential and commercial addresses, covered the principal tourist
and beachfront area of the City, which is a fraction of the total area of Acapulco, a city of
approximately 1.5 million people. Tourism is the most important service industry in
Acapulco, and there is no doubt that the waste collection system in the tourist area needed
attention.

6 USA Waste Services Inc. merged with Acaverde’s principal shareholder, Sanifill, in 1996. The merged

company was subsequently renamed Waste Management, Inc.

The relationship between Acaverde and its parent companies is discussed at paras. 77-85, below.

-14-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

42. Clause 15 of the Concession Agreement provided that the City would not
grant to any other company or person “any right or concession inconsistent with the rights
of the Concessionaire under this Concession Agreement”. Under the Program of
Operations, the City undertook to enact “such ordinances and local statutes as may be
necessary to forbid manual street sweeping, the collection, transportation, use, recycling or
disposal by any person or entity other than the Concessionaire of any Waste generated
within the Concession Area”. These ordinances and statutes were to be fully and promptly
enforced, both for residential and commercial waste collection. The Parties agreed that the
enactment of the relevant ordinances would be a condition precedent to the
commencement of operations and that Acaverde could “treat as a default any failure of the

City to enforce these ordinances fully”.

43. On 30 June 1995, before Acaverde commenced services under the
Concession Agreement, the City passed and subsequently promulgated a Regulation
regulating the Rendering of the Public Cleaning Service Concession (“the Cleaning
Services Ordinance”). The Cleaning Services Ordinance established exclusivity of waste
collection services, prohibited dumping of rubbish in the area and provided for

enforcement by way of fines. A schedule of rates was attached.

44. Article 8 of the Cleaning Services Ordinance provided that residents or
businesses located in the concession area “must request” the public cleaning service within
90 days of commencement of operations. The Respondent argued that this provision did

not correspond to any substantive obligation in the Concession Agreement, and noted that
the obligation to pay scheduled rates was not imposed on residents as such. Formally this
is true. Only persons who had signed a service contract with Acaverde were obliged to
pay, and owners of holiday apartments in the concession area might not have any incentive
to do so. Furthermore the terms of service contracts were a matter for agreement; the
Ordinance established maximum but not minimum rates and Acaverde could (and did)
enter into contracts at less than the scheduled rate. It is true that the Concession
Agreement clearly contemplated that Acaverde would enjoy exclusivity within the
concession area, and the City would not undermine this exclusivity by granting others the
right to collect waste. But this did not necessarily translate into a situation where
Acaverde’s market penetration in the concession area was sufficient to maintain its

profitability.

-15-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

45. In addition to providing collection services, Acaverde undertook under the
Concession Agreement to build and operate a permanent solid waste landfill for the City
as a whole, which would enable the closure of two existing temporary sites. The City
would provide a site for the landfill “as [a] gratuitous loan for the term of the concession”.
Fees for use of the landfill could be charged, at approved rates, to commercial customers.
Pending the construction of the permanent landfill Acaverde would be given, free of

charge, access to one of the existing sites.

46. The term of the Concession Agreement was to be 15 years from the date of

commencement of services.

47. Under the Concession Agreement, Acaverde undertook to make an initial
investment of up to US$12.8 million. Its charges were to be in accordance with the agreed
schedule, which was an integral part of the Concession Agreement and was subject to
indexation. In return the City would pay Acaverde a monthly fee for services which, after
1 January 1996 would be NP1 million (approximately equivalent to US$170,000 at then-
current exchange rates), and which was also indexed. Acaverde would pay the City a
bonus calculated on the basis of its “success rate” in obtaining payment from customers in
the concession area. The bonus payable was only 3% of certain revenues if the success
rate was between .80 and .849, but rose to 30% with a success rate above .95. This gave
the City some incentive to seek to ensure exclusivity and completeness of coverage. On
the other hand it implicitly acknowledged that such coverage would not necessarily be
achieved. In fact, the success rate never rose as high as .60, and no bonuses were ever

paid to the City under these provisions.

48. Under the Concession Agreement, payments due to Acaverde by the City
would bear interest at a specified rate if unpaid after 60 days. The City undertook to
negotiate with a development bank established by the federal government of Mexico,
Banco Nacional de Obras y Servicios Publicos, S.N.C. (“Banobras”), “an irrevocable,
contingent and revolving line [of credit]” to guarantee “all payment obligations” of the

City for the term of the Concession Agreement (Article 11).

“NP” refers to Mexican New Pesos.

-16-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

49. The Line of Credit Agreement was issued on 9 June 1995. As envisaged
by the Concession Agreement, the parties to the Line of Credit Agreement were the
Government of the State of Guerrero (“Guerrero”), the City and Banobras. It recited the
need to guarantee payment obligations under the Concession Agreement “in the event the
City faces temporary cash flow problems that prevent the City to comply with such
obligations” (Recitals, cl. II). Despite the reference in Article 11 of the Concession
Agreement to “all payment obligations” of the City, the Line of Credit Agreement only
covered “an amount equal to six monthly payments agreed to for the services rendered”,
i.e. NP6,000,000 (Recitals, cl. XI). Demands for payment under the Line of Credit
Agreement could be made by the City or by Acaverde. Disputes under the Line of Credit
Agreement were referred to the federal courts of Mexico to the exclusion of “any other
jurisdiction that might be available to them by reason of their present or future domiciles”

(Clause 14, as translated by the Tribunal).

50. Although the Line of Credit Agreement was clear in limiting the total

amount of credit available at any time to NP6 million, Banobras had the right to divert

federal payments to Guerrero by way of reimbursement. In this regard Clause 6 provided:
“Tn the event that one or more requisitions made against the line [of credit]

are not paid within 90 days, the Bank will proceed without delay to give
effect to the guarantee corresponding to the present and future entitlements

due from federal income to the State Government of Guerrero, thereby
recovering the amounts paid to ‘Acaverde, S.A. de C.V.’ against this
credit.”
Interpreted literally, this provision was directed at the question of replenishment for
Banobras from the federal funds of Guerrero in respect of payments already made to
Acaverde and not repaid by the City. It was not expressed in terms of a right of recourse

by Acaverde against federal funds in the hands of Guerrero.

51. Before the Tribunal there was some discussion as to Acaverde’s role in the

conclusion of the Line of Credit Agreement, and whether it had accepted the limitation of

Translation by the Tribunal. The original reads:

“En caso que una o mis disposiciones hechas contra la linea no se paguen en el plazo de 90 dias, el
Banco procedera sin demora a hacer efectiva la garantia correspondiente al las participaciones
presentes y futuras que le correspondan en ingresos federales al Gobierno del Estado de Guerrero,
recuperando asi las cantidades pagadas a ‘Acaverde, S.A. de C.V.’, con cargo a este crédito.”

  

 

 

-17-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

the Banobras guarantee contained in that Agreement.'° In the Tribunal’s view, although
Acaverde may not have played any role in the negotiation or drafting of the Line of Credit
Agreement, and although it was no doubt unhappy about the limitation of the guarantee
insisted on by Banobras, it nonetheless accepted the resulting situation and went ahead
with its investment. In other words, in the Tribunal’s view, Acaverde accepted that the
Line of Credit Agreement concluded in June 1995 was sufficient to meet the requirements

of the amended Concession Agreement.'!

52. As required by Mexican law, the grant of the Concession for a period of 15

years was approved by Decree of the State Congress in December 1994.'”

53. Disputes under the Concession Agreement were to be submitted to

arbitration in accordance with Clause 17, which provided that:

“Any dispute arising from, or related to, this Concession, shall be submitted
to Arbitration by one Arbitrator jointly appointed by the
CONCESSIONAIRE and the MUNICIPAL COUNCIL. In the event the
parties fail to reach an agreement on such appointment, the Arbitration
shall be conducted by three Arbitrators, one of whom shall be an
independent expert on Mexican Law. In the latter case, the Arbitrators
appointed by the Parties shall jointly select a third Arbitrator, who shall be
designated as President.”

The arbitration was to take place in Acapulco under the rules of Conciliation and

Arbitration of the National Chamber of Commerce of Mexico City.

54. On 15 August 1995, Acaverde began providing services under the
Agreement. Difficulties were encountered almost immediately in enforcing the
exclusivity arrangements contained in the Concession Agreement, and there was strong

customer resistance to paying for waste disposal services, either at all or at the published

we Mr. Rodney Proto, transcript, 7 April 2003, 102; Mr. Steven Walton, ibid., 282-7. Acaverde’s Mexican lawyer,
Mr. Jaime Herrera stated that Acaverde did not participate in the drafting of the Line of Credit Agreement and that its
suggestions in that regard were rejected by Banobras (Herrera Statement, para. 9; see also Banobras’ letter to Sanifill of
19 June 1995). But it is clear that Acaverde, which had agreed to the amended Concession Agreement at Banobras’
insistence, had notice of the precise terms of the Line of Credit Agreement when it commenced operations in August
1995: ibid., para. 8.

n In the correspondence preceding the Line of Credit Agreement, its limitations are consistently spelled out:
in the letter of the State Delegate, Banobras to Acaverde, 26 May 1995. Subsequently (but before operations
commenced), Banobras made it clear that the terms of the Agreement could not be changed: State Delegate, Banobras to
Acaverde, 19 June 1995.

 

2

~ Decree No. 127, 15 December 1994, published in the Guerrero Official Gazette, 3 January 1995.

-18-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

rate.'> Many of those who had previously picked up and/or dumped waste in the
concession area on an informal basis were resistant to the new arrangements. The cast of
resisters included the pig-farmers (porcicultores) who took waste food from restaurants as
food for their animals; the “pirates” (piratas) who ran unauthorised pick-up trucks looking
for (and also dumping) waste, and the hawkers or barrow-men (carretilleros) who would
do small jobs, including waste disposal, for a tip. Acaverde eventually reached an
agreement with the pig-farmers association, but the piratas and the carretilleros were a
continuing source of difficulty.’ In particular, Acaverde complained that permits issued
to the “pirates” allowing them to collect waste in the concession area were not revoked
and even continued to be issued. Acaverde also complained that City drivers were picking

up waste within the concession area in return for tips.

55. In addition, Acaverde complained at the City’s failure to provide premises
for Acaverde’s operations or to enter into the gratuitous loan agreement for the new
landfill. Under the Concession Agreement the City was required to provide, through a
gratuitous loan, a municipally-owned piece of land for use as a permanent landfill. This
would enable the existing open air dumps to be closed. Acaverde complained that the

land, though identified and surveyed, was never made available. In lieu of the proposed
landfill, Acaverde operated a temporary land-fill, and allowed the City to use it to dump

waste collected outside the concession area.'

56. Following initial public unrest at the introduction of Acaverde’s services
and charges, the Mayor of Acapulco in October 1995 is reported as having requested
Acaverde to “make adjustments to fit the Mexican standards”. Mayor Almazan is reported
to have said that “the obligation to contract Acaverde’s services will be eliminated in order
to remove what was previously interpreted as an imposition”.'° There is certainly
evidence supporting the Mayor’s perception that Acaverde’s concession had been
“interpreted as an imposition”. But notwithstanding his statement, neither the Cleaning

Services Ordinance nor the Concession Agreement was amended. The Mayor’s statement

See e.g., Mr. Rodney Proto, transcript, 7 April 2003, 89, lines 7-11.
E.g,, letters of Acaverde to the City, 2 September 1996, 13 December 1996.

See Statement by Mr. D. Harich, a civil engineer employed by Waste Management to design the proposed
landfill.

6 “No es obligatorio Acaverde: ROA”, El Sol de Acapulco, 13 October 1995, p. |

-19-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

may have added to Acaverde’s difficulties, but in the Tribunal’s view it did not cause the
difficulties, nor did it bring about the failure of the enterprise. Rather it was symptomatic

of a public debate about the concession at a difficult time for all concerned.

57. Over time, and with a substantial input of resources, Acaverde built up its
client base in the Concession area to approximately 5000 addresses, i.e., about 55% of the
total; but it was generally forced to offer discounts in order to attract customers. It also
provided considerably more personnel for public street sweeping and collection services
than the minimum required by the Concession Agreement. It is clear that the arrangement
was not commercially viable, taking into account both the lower than expected proportion

of customers serviced and the additional costs incurred.

58. But Acaverde’s financial difficulties were greatly exacerbated in that from
the beginning there were severe problems in ensuring regular payments from the City
under the Concession Agreement. Of 26 invoices presented by Acaverde, the City paid
one in full and made partial payments with respect to two.'’ In June 1996 Banobras paid
invoices for the 4 months January-April 1996 under the Line of Credit Agreement (but
without the indexation element), thereby reducing the City’s indebtedness. This was the
only payment made under the Line of Credit Agreement. On 23 July 1996, Acaverde
requested Banobras to pay the invoice for May 1996, which had not been rejected by the
City and was therefore deemed to have been accepted, and it made a series of similar
requests for subsequent months. On 2 August 1996, Banobras gave two reasons for
denying Acaverde’s request: first, what it stated to be the NP5S.9 million already paid had
not been reimbursed by the City; second, the parties to the Concession Agreement were
actively considering modifications to it in response to the City’s financial crisis.
Banobras’ State Delegate wrote:

“Contractually, the Municipality of Acapulco is obliged to refund all

amounts [paid under the Line of Credit] within 90 days and, if it fails to do

so, the Bank will proceed to use federal contributions made by the
Government of the State.

On the other hand, as you know, in the current negotiations between said
company and the Municipality of Acapulco, it is considered to make
amendments in the Concession Instrument, including the financial part as
the main problem to be resolved. This willingness to amend the Concession

The City made a swap proposal in respect of the 1995 invoices which Acaverde refused, as it was entitled to

-20-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

Instrument was expressed by both parties to the authorities of the
Secretariat of Finance and Public Credit and to the Bank, but, to date, there
is no final proposal accepted by both.

For the above reasons, I am informing you that it is impossible to pay the
bill submitted, until the Municipality refunds to us the amount disbursed
and sends us the agreements accepted by your company and the
Municipality of Acapulco, which are indispensable elements in order to
update the amount of the Line.”

59. Acaverde replied on 6 August 1996. It made the valid point that the
amount it had received under the Line of Credit in June 1996 was only NP4.9 million, and
that fees and interest charges owed by the City to Banobras as a result of payments to
Acaverde should not be counted against it. It also noted that the continuation of its
negotiations with the City was no excuse for Banobras not to comply with its obligations
under the Line of Credit Agreement. Faced with Banobras’ refusal Acaverde reserved its
legal rights:
“our company is forced to terminate the negotiations fostered by your
H[onourable] Institution, we will protect our interests and rights contained
in said Instrument [Concession Agreement] in the venue and form we deem
necessary.”
60. Banobras was in a difficult position. On the one hand the initial Line of
Credit was substantially exhausted, and the seizure of the diminished federal grants to the

City for the purposes of replenishing it would have been a controversial act locally. The

fact that the parties were considering changes to the Concession Agreement was, if not a
justification, at any rate an excuse for not considering the exercise of that power for the

time being.

61. For its part, the City wrote to Banobras on 11 September 1996, reciting
what it claimed were failures on the part of Acaverde to perform its obligations under the
Concession Agreement, requesting it not to make further payments under the Line of

Credit and threatening it with litigation if it did.

62. The Claimant argued that this letter was a mere excuse by the City to avoid
meeting its obligations under the Line of Credit Agreement, that any problems notified to
Acaverde were promptly rectified, and that there was no general complaint from the City,

at the time, as to the level and quality of the service Acaverde was providing. The

-21-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

Respondent argued on the contrary that there were persistent problems. This is a matter
on which the Tribunal can only reach an impressionistic view. It notes the comment by
one witness, who at the relevant time was the City’s Secretary of Finance: in his opinion,
“Acaverde’s service was incomplete, because it only collected garbage from people who
had contracts with the company. But it was efficient for those with contracts.”'* There is
other evidence to the same effect: the commercial side of Acaverde’s operations was

efficiently performed, given the constraints upon it.

63. On the other hand, in the Tribunal’s view, whatever may have motivated
the City’s letter to Banobras of 11 September 1996 it did not simply invent a dispute about
the level of servicing which had no basis in fact. For a variety of reasons the street
sweeping operations conducted by Acaverde were not enough to keep the streets of the
concession area consistently clean. Apart from illegal dumping by pirates and the
inevitable boundary problems of a partial concession in a large city, there was a persistent
problem of “black spots” (puntos negros). For much of the period of operations, Acaverde
did not collect from addresses which were not contracted; from its point of view this was
an attempt to induce residents and businesses to contract with it, and was understandable.
But Acaverde’s sanitary obligations were not limited to removing trash deposited by its
customers. The City had to step in on various occasions to deal with complaints and black
spots, and it continued to have to expend resources and manpower on sanitary operations
in the tourist zone. Whatever the rights and wrongs of the situation, the fact is that the
black spots were a recurring problem. For example on 15 May 1996, Acaverde’s General
Manager wrote to the City stating that:
“Our company is making its best efforts to keep the concession area clean,

so that we are asking for your help to penalize the citizens who throw out
garbage in the streets creating black spots throughout the concession area.”

64. Thus after September 1996, Banobras could argue that—quite apart from
the non-replenishment of the Line of Credit—the City’s non-payment of Acaverde’s
invoices was not the result of the City’s financial crisis. Arguably it arose from a dispute
between Acaverde and the City over the performance of the Concession Agreement, a

dispute which Banobras had no obligation to settle. Whether that position was justified

is Witness statement of Mr. Rogelio Moreno Jarquin, 4 December 2002, para. 8 (emphasis added).

-22-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

under the Line of Credit Agreement was a question—but at any rate it might help to
extricate Banobras from its awkward situation as between Acaverde on one hand and the

City on the other.

65. In a letter to the City of 15 November 1996, Banobras defended its
payment of NP4.9 million in June on the ground that it was fully justified under the
Concession Agreement, and it referred to Acaverde’s subsequent demands for payment
under the Line of Credit up to September 1996, implying that they might require similar
treatment. But in fact it continued to refuse to pay Acaverde’s invoices, and it did not seek

to have resort to federal funds in Guerrero’s hands.

66. By early 1997 the Claimant was seeking to withdraw from Acapulco and to
sell its business. On 27 February 1997 Sanifill, principal shareholder of Acaverde’s
holding company, entered into a 60 day letter of intent with a Mexican company, Setasa,
allowing the latter access to Acaverde’s financial and operating information on a basis of
confidentiality in order to assess the price. Subsequently, on 23 May 1997, a contingent
sale agreement was concluded with a price of NP36.6 million (approximately equivalent to
US$4.7 million at the then current exchange rate). In June 1997, however, Sanifill
discovered that Setasa was in direct communication with the City, and eventually the sale

did not proceed.

67. On 9 October 1997, Hurricane Paulina struck the Acapulco region, causing

hundreds of deaths and enormous destruction.

68. By letter of 27 October 1997—with unhappy timing given that the City was
still reeling from the hurricane—Acaverde announced that with effect from 12 November
1997 it would suspend the provision of services under the Agreement. The tasks it had
performed were immediately assumed by Setasa,'? which contracted with the City rather

than with individual residents.

" In accordance with a request of the City to Setasa, 12 November 1997.

-23-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

69. Over the 27 months of Acaverde’s operations, its invoices to the City
totalled more that NP49 million, of which the City itself paid NP2,225,000 and Banobras

paid NP4.9 million. Approximately 80% of the total amount invoiced went unpaid.

70. Acaverde brought two sets of proceedings before the Mexican federal
courts against Banobras for non-performance of the Line of Credit Agreement. These
proceedings were dismissed and Acaverde’s appeals were likewise dismissed. Acaverde
also commenced arbitration under Clause 17 of the Concession Agreement against the
City (“the CANACO arbitration”); this was subsequently discontinued. The domestic

Mexican proceedings are examined in detail in paragraphs 118-132 below.

71. On 29 September 1998, while the Mexican proceedings were still pending,
Waste Management commenced the first ICSID arbitration, referred to in paragraph 4
above. Indeed it was because those proceedings were pending, and because further
proceedings were possible, that Waste Management qualified the terms of its waiver under
Article 1121, leading to the dismissal of its claim by the First Tribunal. The present
ICSID proceedings were registered on 27 September 2000, by which time Acaverde’s
claims in the Mexican courts had all been dismissed and the CANACO arbitration had
been discontinued without any decision being reached.

72. Despite these developments, Claimant brought precisely the same claim
before the present Tribunal as it had in the first ICSID arbitration. In other words, it did
not express its claim in terms of a denial of justice through the subsequent Mexican
proceedings. By agreement, Claimant’s Memorial in the first proceedings was taken to
constitute its Memorial in the present proceedings. Nonetheless, and in the Tribunal’s
view inevitably, attention was paid both to the outcome and to the reasoning behind the
Mexican court decisions, as well as to the reasons for Claimant’s withdrawal of the
domestic arbitration, having regard to their potential relevance to the claim brought under
NAFTA Chapter 11 to this Tribunal. In the circumstances the Tribunal proposes to ask
whether the facts as disclosed to it involved a breach of NAFTA Articles 1105 or 1110,
even though the position may not have been fully captured in Claimant’s re-filed

Memorial.

-24-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

Cc. THE BASES OF CLAIM UNDER NAFTA

dd) Overview

23. The Tribunal begins by observing that—unlike many bilateral and regional
investment treaties—NAFTA Chapter 11 does not give jurisdiction in respect of breaches
of investment contracts such as the Concession Agreement. Nor does it contain an
“umbrella clause” committing the host State to comply with its contractual commitments.
This does not mean that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to take note of or interpret the
contract. But such jurisdiction is incidental in character, and it is always necessary for a
claimant to assert as its cause of action a claim founded in one of the substantive
provisions of NAFTA referred to in Articles 1116 and 1117. Furthermore, while conduct
(e.g. an expropriation) may at the same time involve a breach of NAFTA standards and a
breach of contract, the two categories are distinct. Even as to Article 1105, while it will be
relevant to show that particular conduct of the host State contradicted agreements or
understandings reached at the time of the entry of the investment, it is still necessary to
prove that this conduct was a breach of the substantive standards embodied in Article

1105. Showing that it was a breach of contract is not enough.”

74. The Claimant alleged that the circumstances outlined above disclosed a
breach by the Respondent of its duties to United States investors under NAFTA Article
1110 or alternatively under Article 1105(1). It put its damages at more than
US$36,000,000. In addition it sought to recover its demobilization costs resulting from
the revocation of the Concession Agreement, which were estimated at US$630,000. It

also sought an award of legal costs.

75. The Respondent did not deny that for the purposes of Chapter 11 of
NAFTA the conduct of the City of Acapulco and the State of Guerrero was attributable to
it. More difficult issues arise with respect to the conduct of Banobras, which is a
development bank partly-owned and substantially controlled by Mexican government

agencies. Banobras’ general objective, in the words of the regional director of Banobras

a See further Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case

No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment, (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 340, 365-7 (paras. 95-101), cited with approval by the
Tribunal in SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/13),
decision of 6 August 2003, (2003) 18 JCSID Rev.-FILJ 307, 352-6 (paras. 147-8). See also Azinian, Davitian & Baca v.
United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2), (1998) 5 ICSID Reports 269, 286 (paras. 81, 83).

-25-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

in Guerrero, is “to promote and finance activities carried out by the Federal, State, and
Municipal Governments of the Country”.2! From the material available to the Tribunal it
is doubtful whether Banobras is an organ of the Mexican State within the meaning of
Article 4 of the ILC’s Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful
Acts.” Shares in Banobras were divided between the public and private sector, with the
former holding a minimum of 66%. The mere fact that a separate entity is majority-owned
or substantially controlled by the state does not make it ipso facto an organ of the state.
Nor is it clear that in its dealings with the City and the State in terms of the Line of Credit
it was exercising governmental authority within the meaning of Article 5 of those
Articles.> The Organic Law of 1986 regulating Banobras’ activity confers on it a variety
of functions, some clearly public, others less so. A further possibility is that Banobras,
though not an organ of Mexico, was acting “under the direction or control of” Guerrero or
of the City in refusing to pay Acaverde under the Agreement: again, it is far from clear
from the evidence that this was so.”> For the purposes of the present Award, however, it
will be assumed that one way or another the conduct of Banobras was attributable to

Mexico for NAFTA purposes.

76. Mexico’s legal defence involved three strands. First, it denied that the
Claimant had the status of an investor for the purposes of Chapter 11 on the grounds that
the Claimant did not have a direct interest in the investment in Mexico, because
Acaverde’s direct shareholder was a company registered in the Cayman Islands, not a
NAFTA Party. Secondly, while not denying that there may have been breaches of the
Concession Agreement by the City, Mexico denied that these breaches, individually or
collectively, rose to the level of conduct in violation of NAFTA Article 1105. Thirdly, it
denied that there had been any expropriation, direct or indirect, of the investment, i.e., of

Acaverde’s business, contrary to NAFTA Article 1110. The Tribunal will discuss the

 

Statement of Mr. Mario Alcaraz Alarcon, para. 3.
~ Annexed to GA Res. 56/83, 12 December 2001.

The ILC’s commentary describes the notion of a “para-statal” entity as a narrow category: the essential
requirement is that the entity must be “empowered by the law of the State to exercise functions of a public character
normally exercised by State organs, and the conduct of the entity [which is the subject of the complaint] relates to the
exercise of the governmental authority concerned”: Commentary to Article 5, paras. 2 and 7, reproduced in J Crawford,
The International Law Commission's Articles on State Responsibility (Cambridge, 2002) 100, 102.

 

 

ad ILC Articles, Art. 8; see the commentary, esp. para. 6, in Crawford, 112-113

See below, paras. 103, 139 for the Tribunal’s findings on this point.

-26-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

legal issues in turn, dealing with the facts (and with any factual disputes) as far as

necessary for the purpose.

(2) The status of the Claimant as an “investor”

77. At the time it was incorporated, Acaverde was owned, through a holding
company called AcaVerde Holdings Ltd, by Sun Investment Co., a Cayman Islands
company. AcaVerde Holdings Ltd., also a Cayman Islands company, was purchased by
Sanifill Inc., a U.S. company (“Sanifill”), at about the time the City initially approved the
concession. The sale agreement of 21 December 1994 was contingent upon conclusion of
the Concession Agreement and the Line of Credit Agreement. In fact the sale was
completed on 27 June 1995. The price paid, in instalments, was US$5 million, plus the
right to certain royalties based on Acaverde’s operations. Subsequently, in August 1996,
Sanifill merged with USA Waste Services Inc.; the merged company later adopted the

name Waste Management Inc.

78. A number of witnesses presented by the Respondent asserted that the City
was not aware at the time the Concession Agreement was negotiated that Acaverde was
not owned by Sanifill. The Claimant’s witnesses asserted that they had informed the City
of this fact. The Tribunal does not need to resolve the discrepancy. Although the City
may not have been aware of the specific financial arrangements between Sun Investments
and Sanifill, it was certainly aware that United States interests were involved in the
proposed arrangement,” as was reported in the local press at the time.?”. The Concession
Agreement was signed by Mr. Proto, a senior employee of Sanifill, under a power of
attorney granted by Acaverde. As noted, the actual purchase of Acaverde’s stock was
contingent upon the conclusion of the Line of Credit Agreement, without which the
project would not have gone ahead. By the time Acaverde commenced operations on 15
August 1995, almost all its shares were owned, through Cayman Islands companies, by

Sanifill.*

26 Mr. Walton, transcript, 7 April 2003, 233.
Novedades (Acapulco), 30 October 1994, identifying Sanifill Inc. as the prospective concessionaire.

On 30 November 1995, a merger agreement left Sanifill de Mexico, S.A. de C.V., a Mexican company, as the
sole successor of the various intermediate holding companies of Aceverde, the ultimate controlling interest of which was

 

-27-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

79. In any event there is no general requirement of mens rea or intent in
Section A of Chapter 11. The standards are in principle objective: if an investor suffers
loss or damage by reason of conduct which amounts to a breach of Articles 1105 or 1110,
it is no defence for the Respondent State to argue that it was not aware of the investor’s
identity or national character. The only question is whether the various requirements of
Chapter 11 in this regard are satisfied.

80. Chapter 11 of NAFTA spells out in detail and with evident care the
conditions for commencing arbitrations under its provisions. In particular it distinguishes
between claims brought by an investor of another Party in its own right and claims
brought by an investor on behalf of a local enterprise. The relevant provisions cover the
full range of possibilities, including direct and indirect control and ownership. They deal
with possible “protection shopping”, i.e. with situations where the substantial control or
ownership of an enterprise of a Party lies with an investor of a non-party and the enterprise
“has no substantial business activities in the territory of the Party under whose law it is
constituted or organized”.?” In other words NAFTA addresses situations where the
investor is simply an intermediary for interests substantially foreign, and it allows NAFTA
protections to be withdrawn in such cases (subject to prior notification and consultation).
There is no hint of any concern that investments are held through companies or enterprises
of non-NAFTA States, if the beneficial ownership at relevant times is with a NAFTA

investor.

81. The scope of protection, and the care with which the relevant provisions
were drafted, can be seen from the definitions in Articles 201 and 1139. In accordance
with Article 201:

“enterprise means any entity constituted or organized under applicable

law, whether or not for profit, and whether privately-owned or

governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust, partnership, sole
proprietorship, joint venture or other association;

enterprise of a Party means an enterprise constituted or organized under
the law of a Party;”.
Plainly the term “enterprise” includes corporations established under the law of a third

State.

 

~ NAFTA, Article 1113(2).

-28-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

82. Then under Article 1139, which defines certain terms for the purposes of

Chapter 11, further definitions are relevant:

“investment means:

(a) an enterprise;

(e) an interest in an enterprise that entitles the owner to share in
income or profits of the enterprise;

investment of an investor of a Party means an investment owned or
controlled directly or indirectly by an investor of such Party”.

83. Of course these are only definitions, but they are used consistently in the
substantive provisions of Section A of Chapter 11 and in the remedial provisions of
Section B. Article 1101 specifies the scope and coverage of Chapter 11:
“1, This Chapter applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party
relating to:
(a) investors of another Party;

(b) investments of investors of another Party in the territory of
the Party; and

(c) with respect to Articles 1106 and 1114, all investments in the
territory of the Party.”
Thus when Article 1105 specifies the treatment to be accorded to investments of investors
of another Party, there is no trace of a requirement that the investment itself have the
nationality of that Party either at the time it was acquired or at the time the conduct
complained of occurs. Similarly under Article 1110 dealing with expropriation, the
protected quantity is “an investment of an investor of another Party” in the territory of the
expropriating State. The nationality of the investment (as opposed to that of the investor)
is irrelevant. The same is true in respect of claims by investors on their own behalf under
Article 1116: it is sufficient that the investor has the nationality of a Party and has suffered
loss or damage as a result of action in breach of one of the specified obligations, including
Articles 1105 and 1110. The extent of that loss or damage is a matter of quantum, not

jurisdiction.

84. Article 1117 deals with the special situation of claims brought by investors

on behalf of enterprises established in the host State. But it still allows such claims where

-29-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

the enterprise is owned or controlled “directly or indirectly”, i.e., through an intermediate

holding company which has the nationality of a third State.

85. Where a treaty spells out in detail and with precision the requirements for
maintaining a claim, there is no room for implying into the treaty additional requirements,
whether based on alleged requirements of general international law in the field of
diplomatic protection or otherwise. If the NAFTA Parties had wished to limit their
obligations of conduct to enterprises or investments having the nationality of one of the
other Parties they could have done so. Similarly they could have restricted claims of loss
or damage by reference to the nationality of the corporation which itself suffered direct
injury. No such restrictions appear in the text. It is not disputed that at the time the
actions said to amount to a breach of NAFTA occurred, Acaverde was an enterprise
owned or controlled indirectly by the Claimant, an investor of the United States. The
nationality of any intermediate holding companies is irrelevant to the present claim. Thus

the first of the Respondent’s arguments must be rejected.

(3) The claim for breach of NAFTA Article 1105

86. The Tribunal turns to the claim for breach of Article 1105(1). This was not
the primary basis of claim. Rather the Claimant argued that Article 1105 “provides an
alternative and overlapping basis for recovery by Waste Management”, alongside its claim
for expropriation under Article 1110.°° Nonetheless it was an autonomous basis of claim,

and it is convenient to deal with it first, before turning to Article 1110.

87. According to the Claimant, the investment was subject to arbitrary acts by
the City, Guerrero and Banobras which were capricious, lacking in due process of law and
which rendered the investment valueless.*' Furthermore Acaverde was subjected to a
denial of justice at the hands of the City, Guerrero and Banobras, which conspired to
obstruct its access to judicial and arbitral forums to resolve claims under the concession:

more specifically, these entities “funnelled” the litigation by raising procedural issues to

30 Memorial, para. 5.43.

a Reply, paras. 4.32-4.33.

-30-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

delay the merits claims and deny Acaverde the opportunity to obtain timely payment from

Banobras, aggravating its bad financial position.”

88. In assessing these arguments it is necessary to consider first the
interpretation to be given to Article 1105(1), then its application to the facts of the present

case.

(i) The scope and interpretation of Article 1105(1)

89. Article 1105 is entitled “Minimum Standard of Treatment”. The relevant
provision here is paragraph 1, which provides as follows:
“(1) Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party

treatment in accordance with international law, including fair and equitable
treatment and full protection and security.”

90. On 31 July 2001, the Free Trade Commission, acting under NAFTA Article
1131, issued the following interpretation of Article 1105(1):

“B. Minimum Standard of Treatment in Accordance with
International Law

1. Article 1105(1) prescribes the customary international law
minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the minimum standard of
treatment to be afforded to investments of investors of another Party.

2. The concepts of ‘fair and equitable treatment’ and ‘full protection
and security’ do not require treatment in addition to or beyond that which is
required by the customary international law minimum standard of treatment
of aliens.

3. A determination that there has been a breach of another provision of
the NAFTA, or of a separate international agreement, does not establish
that there has been a breach of Article 1105(1).”

91. The FTC’s interpretation has been extensively discussed in subsequent
decisions, in particular the Mondev® and ADF cases.** The Mondev tribunal found that

the FTC interpretation:

2 Reply, paras. 4.32, 4.39-4.40.
8 Mondev International Limited v. United States of America, Award of 11 October 2002, 6 ICSID Reports 192.

ADF Group Inc. v. United States of America, Award of 9 January 2003, 6 ICSID Reports 470.

-31-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

e resolves any dispute about whether there was such a thing as a minimum
standard of treatment of investment in international law in the affirmative;*>

e makes clear that the standard of treatment is to be found by reference to
international law;*°

e clarifies that Article 1105 refers to a standard existing under customary law,
not standards under other treaties of the NAFTA Parties or other provisions
within NAFTA;

e clarifies that the terms “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and
security” are references to existing elements of customary international law and
are not “additive”, that is, they do not add novel elements to that standard;**
and

© incorporates current international customary law, at least as it stood at the time
that NAFTA came into force in 1994, rather than any earlier version of the

standard of treatment.”

92. This last point was expanded by the tribunal in ADF: it recorded the view
of the United States, accepted by Canada and Mexico, that the customary international law
in Article 1105(1) is not static and that the minimum standard of treatment does evolve,
going onto say that “both customary international law and the minimum standard of

treatment of aliens it incorporates, are constantly in a process of development.”

93. Both the Mondev and ADF tribunals rejected any suggestion that the
standard of treatment of a foreign investment set by NAFTA is confined to the kind of
outrageous treatment referred to in the Neer case, i.e. to treatment amounting to an

“outrage, to bad faith, to wilful neglect of duty, or to an in insufficiency of governmental

6 Mondev International Limited v. United States of America, Award of 11 October 2002, 6 ICSID Reports 192,
216 (para. 98), 223 (para. 120). See also ADF, 527 (para. 178).
36 Mondev International Limited v. United States of America, 216 (para. 98).

7 Ibid., 223 (para. 121).

38 Ibid., 223 (para. 122).

” Ibid., 224 (para. 125).

o ADF Group Inc. v. United States of America, Award of 9 January 2003, 6 ICSID Reports 470, 527-8 (para.
179).

-32-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States

action so far short of international standards that every reasonable and impartial man

would readily recognize its insufficiency”.

94.

before the FTC interpretation, may also be noted. The tribunal considered that a breach of

41

The discussion of Article 1105 by the tribunal in S.D. Myers, even though

Article 1105 occurs

95.

the Mondeyv tribunal formulated the test of the applicable “customary international law

“only when it is shown that an investor has been treated in such an unjust
or arbitrary manner that the treatment rises to the level that is unacceptable
from the international perspective. That determination must be made in the
light of the high measure of deference that international law generally
extends to the right of domestic authorities to regulate matters within their
own borders. The determination must also take into account any specific
rules of international law that are applicable to the case.””

In the context of denial of justice arising from decisions of domestic courts,

minimum standard” under Article 1105(1) in the following terms:

96.

“The test is not whether a particular result is surprising, but whether the
shock or surprise occasioned to an impartial tribunal leads, on reflection, to
justified concerns as to the judicial propriety of the outcome, bearing in
mind on the one hand that international tribunals are not courts of appeal,
and on the other hand that Chapter 11 of NAFTA (like other treaties for the
protection of investments) is intended to provide a real measure of
protection. In the end the question is whether, at an international level and
having regard to generally accepted standards of the administration of
justice, a tribunal can conclude in the light of all the available facts that the
impugned decision was clearly improper and discreditable, with the result
that the investment has been subjected to unfair and inequitable
treatment."

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

The ADF tribunal, citing Mondev v. United States, said of Article 1105 as

interpreted by the FTC“ that “any general requirement to accord ‘fair and equitable

treatment’ and ‘full protection and security’ must be disciplined by being based on State

4

a

USA (L.F. Neer) v. United Mexican States, 1927, AJIL 555, at 556, cited in Mondev, 221 (para. 114).

S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, Partial Award, 13 November 2000, para. 263. The majority

(Arbitrator Chiasson dissenting) considered that the facts which supported a finding of breach of Article 1102 also
established a breach of Article 1105, para. 266.

43

44

Mondev v. United States, 225-6 (para. 127).

Tbid., 528-31 (paras. 180, 183-4).

-33-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

practice and judicial or arbitral caselaw or other sources of customary or general

international law.

45 Considering the “general customary international law standard of

treatment”, the Tribunal found that:

the argument that the government procurement provisions were unfair was
unconvincing. Performance requirements in governmental procurement were
common to all three NAFTA Parties as well as to other States. Thus “the US
measures cannot be characterized as idiosyncratic or aberrant and arbitrary”; *°

the actions of a government authority in refusing to follow and apply earlier case-
law was not in the circumstances of the case “grossly unfair or unreasonable”, nor
were ADF’s assumptions about the applicability of that case-law induced by the
misrepresentations by authorised officials of government;*”

the government agency in question had not acted ultra vires, but, in any case,
showing an act is ultra vires under the internal law of a state “by itself does not
necessarily render the measures grossly unfair or inequitable under the customary
international law standard of treatment embodied in Article 1105(1)... something
more than simple illegality or lack of authority under the domestic law of a State is
necessary”;**

the investor’s claim that the United States had breached its duty under customary
international law to perform its obligations in good faith in breach of Article 1105
added “only negligible assistance in the task of determining or giving content to a
standard of fair and equitable treatment.”*? However the Tribunal noted in this
respect that the investor had not tried to show government actions refusing the
request for a waiver of the procurement requirements were “flawed by
arbitrariness”. There was no evidence that other companies had been granted the
same waivers. The investor did not allege that the contract specifications were
tailored so that only a specific US company could comply; nor did the investor
show that extraordinary costs or other burdens had been imposed that were not also

imposed on other contractors involved in the same project.

Tbid., 531 (para. 184).
Tbid., 531 (para. 188).
Tbid., 531-2 (para. 189).
Tbid., 532-3 (para. 190).

Ibid., 533 (para. 191).

-34-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

97. The content of Article 1105 in light of the FTC interpretation was also
discussed in Loewen vy. United States in the specific context of denial of justice.’ The
tribunal said:
“Neither State practice, the decisions of international tribunals nor the
opinion of commentators support the view that bad faith or malicious
intention is an essential element of unfair and inequitable treatment or
denial of justice amounting to a breach of international justice. Manifest
injustice in the sense of a lack of due process leading to an outcome which
offends a sense of judicial propriety is enough, even if one applies the
Interpretation according to its terms.”*!
The Loewen Tribunal also noted that discriminatory violations of municipal law would
amount to a manifest injustice according to international law.*” However, the tribunal held
that, where the minimum standards of international law in question in a particular case are
raised in respect of a claim of judicial action—that is, a denial of justice—what matters is
the system of justice and not any individual decision in the course of proceedings. The
system must be tried and have failed, and thus in this context the notion of exhaustion of
local remedies is incorporated into the substantive standard and is not only a procedural

prerequisite to an international claim. For this reason, although the Loewen tribunal

found that the first instance trial and its verdict were “clearly improper and discreditable”
and a breach of the minimum standards of fair and equitable treatment, that did not

dispose of the case.

98. The search here is for the Article 1105 standard of review, and it is not
necessary to consider the specific results reached in the cases discussed above. But as this
survey shows, despite certain differences of emphasis a general standard for Article 1105
is emerging. Taken together, the S.D. Myers, Mondev, ADF and Loewen cases suggest
that the minimum standard of treatment of fair and equitable treatment is infringed by
conduct attributable to the State and harmful to the claimant if the conduct is arbitrary,
50

The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of America, Award of 26 June 2003 (Case
No. ARB(AF)/98/3). For the Tribunal’s discussion of the Article 1105 and the FTC interpretation see ibid., paras. 124-
8

5 Ibid., para. 132.
3 Ibid., para. 135.
8 Ibid., para. 168.
4 Ibid., para. 137.

-35-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

grossly unfair, unjust or idiosyncratic, is discriminatory and exposes the claimant to
sectional or racial prejudice, or involves a lack of due process leading to an outcome
which offends judicial propriety—as might be the case with a manifest failure of natural
justice in judicial proceedings or a complete lack of transparency and candour in an
administrative process. In applying this standard it is relevant that the treatment is in
breach of representations made by the host State which were reasonably relied on by the

claimant.

99. Evidently the standard is to some extent a flexible one which must be
adapted to the circumstances of each case. Accordingly it is to the facts of the present

case that the Tribunal turns.

(ii) The allegations of breach of Article 1105(1)

100. The Claimant asserted that the failure of Acaverde’s enterprise arose from a
combination of conduct of local, provincial and federal authorities, together with the
failure of Mexican courts and tribunals to provide it any relief. In the first place the
Tribunal will consider separately the conduct of each of the various Mexican authorities
concerned. Subsequently it will deal with the claim that there was collusion or conspiracy

between these authorities.

101. Before turning to the specific facts, the Tribunal notes that an important
part of the background to the case was the Mexican financial crisis, which started in
December 1994 with a substantial devaluation of the currency and continued for several
years. During that period the value of the peso was approximately halved, the rate of
inflation reached 38%, and federal revenues to the States and municipalities were greatly
affected.°° The effects on the City were numerous: tourist numbers declined, its financial
obligations under the Concession Agreement (which were indexed to inflation) were

substantially increased” and the federal revenues it received were substantially reduced.

5s See William A. Lovett, “Lessons from the Recent Peso Crisis in Mexico”, (1996) 4 Tulane JICL 143

56 The monthly fee increased from NPI million to NP1.6 million in January 1996.

-36-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

(a) The conduct of Banobras

102. The only executive entity at federal level of whose conduct Waste
Management complained was the development bank, Banobras.*” Assuming, for the sake
of argument, that Banobras’ conduct was attributable to Mexico for NAFTA purposes (see
above, paragraph 75), nonetheless the Tribunal finds that it did not constitute a breach of
Article 1105. Prior to the conclusion of the Line of Credit Agreement in June 1995,
Banobras, which had not been a party to the initial negotiations for the Concession
Agreement, was in no way obliged to grant the line of credit. Its regional director
explained that “lines of credit... guaranteed by the share of the States and Municipalities
in federal tax revenue” were not common; in Guerrero, this was the only example and
would not be repeated.** When it was approached by the City to grant the line of credit,
Banobras insisted on various changes to the Concession Agreement. It was within its
rights to do so, and the changes were accepted, albeit reluctantly, by Acaverde as a
condition of its investment. Whatever hopes Acaverde may have entertained of having a
significant part of its income guaranteed by the federal development bank, the fact is that
the eventual guarantee was a more limited one, expressed to cover “temporary liquidity
problems which the City of Acapulco might experience”. On its face it “was not an
alternative source [or] mechanism... for the regular payment, to Acaverde, of monthly
payments for its services”. It was also limited in amount to NP6 million. In other
words, it does not appear that Banobras had any obligation to make payments to Acaverde
beyond that figure, unless the line of credit was replenished by the City or Banobras was

able to divert federal funds in Guerrero’s hands in order to replenish the line of credit.

103. It is not necessary for the Tribunal to determine whether, after the Line of
Credit Agreement had been concluded, Banobras in all respects complied with its terms.
The Agreement provided its own mechanism for determining that question. But it is clear
that Banobras did comply at least to some extent, making payments to Acaverde totalling
nearly NP5 million. It appears that this amount had not been reimbursed to Banobras by
the City at the time Acaverde withdrew from providing services in October 1997. At the

same time Banobras discussed with the parties possible changes to their arrangements

 

See e.g., Claimant’s Memorial, para. 1.1.
Statement of Mr. Mario Alcaraz Alarcén, para. 4.

° Ibid., para. 7.

-37-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

which might be sustainable given the sharp drop in federal revenues to Guerrero and the
City and the underlying crisis in public finances. Its role here was that of a concerned

intermediary, and the failure of those discussions was not its fault.©°

104. For these reasons, the Tribunal rejects the claim that Mexico was in breach

of Article 1105(1) by reason of the conduct of Banobras.

105. There is a separate issue whether the Mexican courts denied justice to the
Claimant through their decisions in the cases brought against Banobras. This is discussed

in paragraphs 118-132 below.

(b) The conduct of Guerrero

106. Representatives of the State of Guerrero attended a number of meetings
discussing a settlement of the problem, for example in June 1996. According to one
witness, State officials offered help with payments to avoid drawing on the line of credit.
But the City was unable to pay the share envisaged by these proposals, and the discussions

did not reach any conclusion."!

107. Although the Claimant asserted that representatives of Guerrero were
implicated in the continuing breach of the Concession Agreement, Guerrero was neither a
party to the Agreement nor a guarantor. This situation was not affected by the legal
requirement that the legislature of Guerrero approve the Concession Agreement, which it
did on 15 December 1994. Overall the Tribunal has not been provided with any evidence

that supports any specific charge against Guerrero in terms of Article 1105(1) of NAFTA.

(c) The conduct of the City

108. The position with respect to the City is more complex, and there is certainly

a case to answer with respect to Article 1105(1).

 

o See e.g. the letter from the State Representative, Mr. Alcaraz Alarc6n to his superior in the Banobras head

office, 10 October 1996.

el Second Statement of Mr. Alcaraz Alarc6n, paras. 4-5.

-38-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

109. On the information before the Tribunal it is clear that the City failed in a
number of respects to fulfil its contractual obligations to Claimant under the Concession
Agreement. It did so, most obviously, with respect to the monthly payments, which
immediately fell into arrears. In addition Acaverde credibly alleged breaches of the
agreement, for example with respect to inadequate enforcement of the 1995 Ordinance and

the provision of land for the proposed permanent waste disposal site.

110. On the other hand there are a number of countervailing factors. The City
did make at least some attempts to enforce the 1995 Ordinance. It defended proceedings
brought against it by local residents challenging the Concession Agreement and the 1995
Ordinance. It made at least some attempts to encourage local residents and business
groups to contract with Acaverde. Contrary to the Claimant’s allegations, it did bring at
least some proceedings against the “pirates” and even against its own employees caught
moonlighting in the concession area. It made at least some attempts, through the
deployment of inspectors, to enforce the Cleaning Services Ordinance. And some steps
were taken, in conjunction with Acaverde, to identify a location for the permanent waste
disposal site and to obtain secure title over it. For example, the City brought non-
contentious proceedings before an Agrarian Court in Guerrero to give an agreement made
with the holders of customary title over the land the status of an order of the Court; on 8

April 1996 the Court granted the order accordingly.

111. Against this background of breaches of contract and allegations of non-
performance, two facts are evident. The first is that the Concession Agreement was
unpopular with a significant proportion of the residents of the concession area, many of
whom were not permanently resident in Acapulco but maintained holiday apartments
there. Even the permanent residents were not used to paying separately for waste disposal
services. Moreover this problem—acknowledged as a potential difficulty by the Claimant
from the outset—was exacerbated by the initial, rather heavy-handed approach of the
Claimant in issuing immediate invoices to all area residents, accompanied by threats of
legal action in the event of non-payment. As the Tribunal has noted (see paragraph 44
above), the obligation to pay for waste collection services was contingent upon the

conclusion of a service agreement, and did not arise under the Cleaning Services

 

The land in question was ¢jido land (a form of customary or communal title). The agreement of 5 August 1995
conferred rights of exclusive use of 56 hectares of land for 25 years for use as a sanitary landfill by Acaverde.

-39-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

Ordinance itself. The Claimant’s apparent assumption to the contrary at the early stages of
the introduction of the Concession stirred up substantial opposition, leading to public
protests and a series of amparo actions against the City by residents and business groups.
The City defended these actions, not always successfully; for example, confiscated
vehicles belonging to several “pirate” collectors had to be released. At least some of the
cases of non-compliance with the Concession Agreement of which Claimant complains

were the result of these cases and of interim or final orders obtained against the City.

112. The second fact is that the financial plans of the City, and thus of the
Claimant, were severely affected by the Mexican financial crisis, which lasted well into
1996 and severely affected the City’s capacity to perform its obligations. The City was
reduced to offering certain land holdings either to Acaverde in lieu of payment or to

6s Understandably, neither of them

Banobras as security for extension of the line of credit.
was prepared to accept this, but it is further evidence of the reality of severe financial

difficulties.

113. The Tribunal notes that Acaverde itself responded to these early setbacks.
It sought to persuade its potential customers to enter into contracts, so that by the end of
the period of operations rather more than 50% of residents and enterprises had done so,
although in many cases it was necessary to offer substantial discounts (up to 40-50%) on
the published rates. It addressed operational complaints and difficulties. It showed
flexibility in discussions with the City on a range of matters.“ It took the initiative in
creating a temporary land-fill which appears to have complied with applicable standards,
unlike the two existing land-fills.° But the fact remains that the weaknesses of the

original business plan could not be overcome at a time of financial stringency.

114. The Tribunal does not suggest that financial stringency or public resistance
are, as such, excuses for breaches of contractual commitments on the part of a
municipality. But NAFTA Chapter 11 is not a forum for the resolution of contractual

disputes, and as investment tribunals have repeatedly said, “Investment Treaties are not

 

See Mayor Almazin’s letter to Banobras, 26 August 1996 and the reply of 4 September 1996.
E.g., letter of Mr. Proto to the Secretary-General of the City, 24 April 1996.

Statement of Mr. D. Harich, paras. 4, 10.

-40-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

insurance policies against bad business judgments”.°° The question is whether, having

regard to the conduct of the parties concerned and the general circumstances, losses were
caused to Waste Management by the City in circumstances amounting to a breach of the
minimum standard of treatment embodied in Article 1105, a standard which the Tribunal

has summarised in paragraph 98 above.

115. In the Tribunal’s view the evidence before it does not support the
conclusion that the City acted in a wholly arbitrary way or in a way that was grossly
unfair. It performed part of its contractual obligations, but it was in a situation of genuine
difficulty, for the reasons explained above. It sought alternative solutions to the problems
both parties faced, without finding them. The most important default was its failure to
pay; the Tribunal will discuss in a subsequent section whether such failure, persisted in,
could have amounted to a breach of NAFTA Article 1110 because it was tantamount to
expropriation, either of the enterprise as a whole or at least of the sums remaining
unpaid.” For present purposes it is sufficient to say that even the persistent non-payment
of debts by a municipality is not to be equated with a violation of Article 1105, provided
that it does not amount to an outright and unjustified repudiation of the transaction and
provided that some remedy is open to the creditor to address the problem. In the present
case the failure to pay can be explained, albeit not excused, by the financial crisis which
meant that at key points the City could hardly pay its own payroll. There is no evidence

that it was motivated by sectoral or local prejudice.

116. The importance of a remedy, agreed on between the parties, for breaches of
the Concession Agreement bears emphasis. It is true that in a general sense the
exhaustion of local remedies is a procedural prerequisite for the bringing of an
international claim, one which is dispensed with by NAFTA Chapter 11. But the
availability of local remedies to an investor faced with contractual breaches is nonetheless
relevant to the question whether a standard such as Article 1105(1) have been complied

with by the State. Were it not so, Chapter 11 would become a mechanism of equal resort

“6 Maffezini v. Spain, Award, 13 November 2000, 5 ICSID Reports 419, 432 (para. 64), cited in para. 29 of CMS
Gas Transmission Company v. Argentina, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, 17 July 2003, 42 ILM
788 (2003). See also Eudoro A. Olguin v. Republic of Paraguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/5, Award, 26 July 2001, 6
ICSID Reports 164, paras. 72-75

ov See below, paras. 155-176.

es For the terms of Article 17 of the Concession Agreement see para. 53 above.

-41-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

for debt collection and analogous purposes in respect of all public (including municipal)

contracts, which does not seem to be its purpose.

117. For these reasons the Tribunal is not satisfied that the City’s breaches of
contract rose to the level of breaches of Article 1105(1) of NAFTA.

(d) The Mexican legal proceedings

118. But even if the conduct of the City or Banobras in itself did not violate the
Article 1105 standard, the question remains whether the situation presented by their
conduct was adequately responded to by the Mexican courts. Both the Concession
Agreement and the Line of Credit Agreement made provision for dispute settlement,
referring to local arbitration and proceedings before the federal courts of Mexico City
respectively. The Claimant tried both avenues, eventually discontinuing the arbitration
proceedings and failing in the federal court. It is thus necessary to ask to what extent the
decisions of the federal courts or of CANACO either compounded the situation, or

constituted a distinct denial of justice, so as to entail a breach of Article 1105(1).”

119. Before turning to the relevant legal principles, the course of the three

proceedings needs to be described in more detail.

The arbitration proceedings

120. By notice of 3 December 1997, Acaverde notified the City that it was
commencing arbitration proceedings under Article 17 of the Concession Agreement. On 9
January 1998 the Permanent Commission of Commercial Arbitration of the National
Chamber of Commerce (CANACO) was notified. On 4 March 1998 the City objected to
the Claimant’s notice on procedural grounds, but it subsequently appointed its arbitrator
after CANACO had threatened to make a default appointment if it did not. The two party-
appointed arbitrators having failed to agree, on 8 September 1998 CANACO was
requested to appoint a Chairman of the Tribunal, which it did. On 25 November 1998 the
City objected to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the ground, inter alia, that the

Concession Agreement was an administrative act governed by public law and therefore

° Cf. Azinian, Davitian & Baca v. United Mexican States, Award of | November 1999, 5 ICSID Reports 269,

289 (para. 97).

-42-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

necessarily subject to the jurisdiction of the contentious administrative courts; it also

denied the Claimant’s case on the merits.

121. Subsequently the City commenced court proceedings seeking to block the

arbitration, using the same arguments.

122. In the light of the City’s resistance to the arbitration, CANACO requested
an advance of payment of NP2.5 million from each party as a condition of continuing the
arbitration. (At then-current exchange rates this was equivalent to approximately
US$275,000.) The City refused to pay this amount, and thus if the arbitration was to
proceed it would have had to be wholly funded by Acaverde. On 7 July 1999, counsel for
Acaverde wrote to CANACO stating that unspecified “actions of the said Permanent
Commission of Arbitration in the above mentioned arbitration trial, as well as the position
taken by the Municipality of Acapulco, State of Guerrero, have prevented the continuation

of such arbitration procedure”. The file was duly returned on 14 September 1999.

123. CANACO is not a State organ, and in any event its sole role was to
facilitate the arbitration. Evidence of collusion between CANACO and the City with
respect to the conduct of the arbitration or of discrimination against Acaverde on account
of its foreign ownership would have been very material, but there is no such evidence

17

before the Tribunal.” Although the deposit sought was very large by local standards, the

claim was large and the case threatened to be complex. On the evidence presented to the
Tribunal, CANACO apparently behaved in a proper and impartial way. For example it
rejected a preliminary jurisdictional submission made by the City’s lawyers on the

7!

grounds that the question of jurisdiction was a matter for the tribunal Proceedings

before the Mexican courts to resolve the issue of arbitrability were never concluded, but it
may be inferred from the decisions both of the federal and State courts that they would

have enforced the arbitration clause against the City: at any rate the Claimant has not

” The Claimant asserts that CANACO imposed the requirement for deposit of costs “because it was concerned

about its own liability in the nullification lawsuit if the arbitration continued”. Whether or not its concerns were
justified, they were still those of CANACO as a private entity, and there is no sufficient evidence that the judicial

process was dilatory or gave unfair advantages to state entities in seeking to avoid domestic arbitration clauses to which
they had agreed.

 

 

7 Order of Permanent Arbitration Commission, National Chamber of Commerce of Mexico City, 18 June 1998.

-43-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

demonstrated the contrary. In the circumstances the Tribunal finds that the discontinuance
of the arbitration, a decision made by the Claimant on financial grounds, did not implicate

the Respondent in any internationally wrongful act.

The federal court proceedings

124. In addition, in January 1997 Acaverde brought proceedings in the Mexican
federal court against Banobras under the Line of Credit Agreement in respect of the
unpaid invoices of 1996. Subsequently, in July 1998 it brought further proceedings
against Banobras in respect of the 1997 invoices. Although Acaverde was not a party to
the Line of Credit Agreement, under Mexican law it was entitled to sue as a beneficiary of

that Agreement, and its standing to do so was upheld by the courts.

125. In the first proceeding against Banobras, Acaverde claimed more than
NP15 million by way of principal plus damages and costs.” Guerrero and the City
intervened as third parties at Banobras’ suit, even though Acaverde made no affirmative
claim against them in the proceedings. A challenge to Acaverde’s standing having failed,
the Tribunal dismissed Acaverde’s claim on the ground that it had not proved it had
strictly complied with the requirements of the Line of Credit Agreement in terms of
demands for payment made on Banobras.”> Acaverde appealed from this decision. On 11
March 1999, the Federal Tribunal dismissed the appeal, in part relying on the grounds
given by the trial court, in part because, at the time the demand was made, Banobras had
received from the City notice of a dispute about provision of services by Acaverde.”
According to the appeal court this was “enough to prove that non-payment of the invoices
presented was due to non-performance by Claimant, who is now dissatisfied, and not due
to the Municipality’s lack of liquidity”.”> An application for amparo”® (a constitutional
action) failed on the basis that although the lower court had misinterpreted the Line of

Credit Agreement Acaverde had failed to prove the indebtedness.”

H. Juzgado Primero de Distrito en Materia Civil en el Distrito Federal. Juicio Ordinario Mercantil, expediente
12/97, Acaverde, S. A. de C. V. v. Banco Nacional de Obral y Servicios Ptiblicos, Sociedad Nacional de Crédito.

Decision of the First Civil District Court of the Federal District, 7 January 1999.

™ H. Segundo Tribunal Unitario del Primer Circuito. Toca Civil 16/99-IL

5 Decision of 11 March 1999.

H. Sexto Tribunal Colegiado en Materia Civil del Primer Circuito. Amparo Directo D. C. 5026/99.

Decision of 6 October 1999.

-44-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

® in which Acaverde claimed NP22 million owing in

126. The second action,”
respect of the January-October 1997 invoices, was dismissed on the basis that Banobras,
having been notified of the dispute between Acaverde and the City, was entitled not to pay
under the Line of Credit until that dispute was resolved.” Acaverde’s appeal.*° was
dismissed on procedural grounds, on the basis that the dispute related to the Concession
Agreement and that Acaverde should first have arbitrated its dispute with the City under
Article 17 of the Concession Agreement. The dismissal was stated to be without prejudice
to the rights of the Claimant in the proper forum.*! Again Acaverde brought a
constitutional action by way of amparo in respect of this decision.” It argued that the
lower court, in applying the provisions of a 1996 amendment to the Code of Civil
Procedure and the Code of Commerce, violated Articles 14 and 16 of the Mexican
Constitution which prohibit the retrospective application of laws. The Line of Credit
Agreement having been concluded in 1995, Acaverde argued, the 1996 amendment should
not have been applied to it. The amparo application was rejected by a decision of 20 May
1999. The Court did not accept the City’s argument that the application was inadmissible,
but it denied the amparo claim on the basis that Acaverde had commenced the
proceedings relying on the provisions of the law then in force, including the 1996
amendment. The Claimant having failed to challenge a ruling of the lower court to that
affect had thereby consented to it: “if... Appellant submitted to the application of
legislation currently in force and voluntarily consented to continuing the proceedings
thereunder, it is not legally possible to change that on the grounds of that constituting a
retroactive application of the Law where the application thereof was consented to from the

beginning”.

127. The proceedings in the two cases are summarised in Table 1 on the

following page.

* H. Juzgado Segundo de Distrito en Materia Civil en el Distrito Federal. Juicio Ordinario Mercantil, expediente

88/98. Acaverde, S. A. de C. V. v. Banco Nacional de Obras y Servicios Ptiblicos, Sociedad Nacional de Crédito.
Institucién de Banca de Desarrollo.
” Decision of 12 January 1999.

* H. Primer Tribunal Unitario del Primer Circuito. Toca Civil 24/99-1.
Interlocutory Decision, 18 February 1999.

H. Séptimo Tribunal Colegiado en Materia Civil del Primer Circuito. Amparo Directo D. C. 2870/99.

-45-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States

Table 1

ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

Mexican Judicial Proceedings brought by Acaverde against Banobras

 

 

 

 

 

 

First Proceed Second Proceedi
Commenced | 31 January 1997 11 August 1998

Subject May-December 1996 invoices January-October 1997 invoices
matter

Amount Approx NP1S5 million Approx NP22 million

claimed

 

First instance

File 12/97, 7 January 1999

File 89/98, 12 January 1999

 

 

 

 

 

 

decision Claimant’s standing upheld but claim | Interlocutory order dismissing claim on the
dismissed on the grounds that: (a) the | basis that the dispute related to the Concession
Claimant did not prove that the City’s non- | Agreement and Acaverde should first have
payment was due to Council’s lack of | arbitrated its dispute with the City under
liquidity; (b) the invoices were not | Article 17 of the Concession Agreement. Case
submitted in the form required by Line of | Dismissed without prejudice to the rights of
Credit Agreement, demonstrating the City’s | the Claimant in the proper forum.
acceptance thereof.
Appeal Appeal file 16/99-II, 11 March 1999 Appeal file 24/99-I, 18 February 1999
Rejected: Rejected on the ground that it was incorrectly
(a) the Line of Credit can only be used in | filed.
Thaaidine of the debtor's lack Of | eal for reversal rejected on 25 February
. . . «| 1999 on the basis that Acaverde had not
(b) Claimant had failed to prove City’s | | ;
: Prove ¢ invoked the correct remedy of a motion for
receipt and acceptance of invoices; . .
(c) on 13 September 1996 Banobras | "consideration.
received formal notice of a dispute
between City and Acaverde,
establishing that non-payment was due
to a dispute about performance, not to
City’s lack of liquidity
Amparo Amparo file 5026/99, 6 October 1999 Amparo file DC 2870/99, 20 May 1999
Rejected: Although the lower court erred in | Rejected: The Claimant was entitled to invoke
interpreting the Line of Credit Agreement, | Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution
Acaverde did not prove City’s receipt and | concerning non-retroactivity of the law in
acceptance of invoices, its tender of | relation to the procedural reforms of 1996
unstamped photocopies not being sufficient | (after the Line of Credit Agreement was
for this purpose, in accordance with prior | concluded), but the Claimant had accepted the
case-law. relevant provisions by conduct in
commencing and continuing the suit.
(ec) | Was there a denial of justice?
128. In asking whether these proceedings involved a denial of justice in terms of

Article 1105, two points are fundamental. First, these proceedings were against Banobras

-46-

 

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

yet the underlying dispute was between the parties to the Concession Agreement,
Acaverde and the City. That dispute could not be settled in federal proceedings against a
federal agency unless Banobras was a guarantor of the whole of the City’s indebtedness
under the Concession Agreement. But—and this is the second point—such was not the
case. Banobras had quite properly insisted on limiting its obligations under the Line of
Credit and Acaverde had accepted that limitation. It is true that Banobras could have
sought replenishment of the Line of Credit by diverting federal revenues destined for the
City which were in the hands of Guerrero. But in the context of the Mexican financial
crisis this was hardly a realistic option, and in any event, it does not appear that Acaverde
had any right under the Line of Credit that this be done. Thus the federal proceedings

were in any event incapable of resolving Acaverde’s most important grievances.

129. Turning to the actual reasons given by the federal courts, the Tribunal
would observe that it is not a further court of appeal, nor is Chapter 11 of NAFTA a novel
form of amparo in respect of the decisions of the federal courts of NAFTA parties.
Certain of the decisions appear to have been founded on rather technical grounds, but the
notion that the third party beneficiary of a line of credit or guarantee should strictly prove
its entitlement is not a parochial or unusual one. Nor was it unreasonable, given the
limitations of the Line of Credit Agreement, for the court in the second proceedings to
insist that Acaverde comply with the dispute settlement procedure contained in the

Concession Agreement, notice of the dispute with the City having been given to Banobras.
130. In any event, and however these cases might have been decided in different

legal systems, the Tribunal does not discern in the decisions of the federal courts any

denial of justice as that concept has been explained by NAFTA tribunals, notably in the

8 See above, para. 51

-47-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

Azinian,“ Mondev,®= ADF® and Loewen cases.*’ The Mexican court decisions were not,

either ex facie or on closer examination, evidently arbitrary, unjust or idiosyncratic. There
is no trace of discrimination on account of the foreign ownership of Acaverde, and no
evident failure of due process. The decisions were reasoned and were promptly arrived at.
Acaverde won on key procedural points, and the dismissal in the second proceedings, in

particular, was without prejudice to Acaverde’s rights in the appropriate forum.

131. The Claimant argues that litigation strategy adopted by the City itself
amounted to a denial of justice and hence a breach of Article 1105. But the City was a
litigant, and there is no evidence that it was acting in collusion either with CANACO or
the federal courts. It is not unusual for litigants to be difficult and obstructive, and there is
nothing here comparable to the abusive remarks of counsel in the Loewen case which were
tolerated and even condoned by the trial judge, producing a denial of justice.** The point
is that a /itigant cannot commit a denial of justice unless its improper strategies are
endorsed and acted on by the court, or unless the law gives it some extraordinary privilege
which leads to a lack of due process. There is no evidence of either circumstance in the

present case.

84

 

In Azinian the tribunal also addressed whether the Claimants could have successfully pursued a denial of
justice claim. It said: “A denial of justice could be pleaded if the relevant courts refuse to entertain a suit, if they subject
it to undue delay, or if they administer justice in a seriously inadequate way.... There is a fourth type of denial of justice,
pplication of the law [which] ... overlaps with the notion of ‘pretence of form’ to

a violation of international law.” However, in the view of the tribunal, the findings of the Mexican courts could
not “possibly be said” to be in any way a denial of justice, Azinian, Davitian & Baca v. United Mexican States, Award of
1 November 1999, 5 ICSID Reports 269, 290 (paras. 102-103).

 

 

 
 

8s Mondev International Limited v. United States of America, Award of 11 October 2002, 6 ICSID Reports 192.

  

The ADF Tribunal, rejecting the investor’s subm
in its interpretation of the measures in question, the Tribunal said,

.even had the investor made out a prima facie basis for its claim, the Tribunal has no authority to review the legal
valiaiey and standing of the US measures... under US internal administrative law. We do not sit as a court with
appellate jurisdiction.... The Tribunal would emphasize, too, that even if the US measures were somehow shown or
admitted to be ultra vires under the internal law of the United States, that by itself does not necessarily render the
measures grossly unfair or inequitable under the customary international law standard of treatment embodied in Article
1105(1).... [SJomething more than simple illegality or lack of authority under the domestic law of a State is necessary to
render and act or measure inconsistent with the customary international law requirements of Article 1105(1)...”, ADF
Group Inc. v. United States of America, Award of 9 January 2003, (para. 190).Nor was the authority’s refusal to follow
prior rulings “grossly unfair or unreasonable” on the facts presented by the investor.

n that a federal administrative body had acted ultra vires

 

 

 

    

"7 The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of America, Award of 26 June 2003, (ICSID
Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3). For the Tribunal’s discussion of Article 1105 and the FTC interpretation see ibid., paras. 124-
128.

 

ss Ibid., paras. 119-123.

-48-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

132. Of course, as the Loewen tribunal said, it is

“the responsibility of the State under international law and, consequently,

of the courts of a State, to provide a fair trial of a case to which a foreign

investor is a party. It is the responsibility of the courts of a State to ensure

that litigation is free from discrimination against a foreign litigant and that

the foreign litigant should not become the victim of sectional or local

prejudice.”
But neither the decisions themselves nor other evidence before the Tribunal suggest that
these proceedings involved discrimination, bias on grounds of sectional or local prejudice,
or a clear failure of due process. The CANACO arbitration, which alone held the prospect
of complete relief for Acaverde in respect of its claims against the City, was not pursued,
and the Tribunal has already held that this fact did not of itself entail a breach of Article
1105. As to the Banobras litigation, Acaverde did exhaust its remedies, but it was not a
denial of justice for the federal courts to insist on prior action against the City. This aspect

of the claim under Article 1105(1) accordingly fails.

(f) The termination phase

133, On the other hand the relief sought in the Mexican domestic proceedings
did not cover the full scope of Claimant’s grievances against the City. Chapter 11 of
NAFTA does not require that a party should exhaust local remedies before bringing an
international claim: rather it requires a waiver of remaining remedies. There thus remains
a question whether conduct attributable to the Respondent, and going beyond the scope of
the legal proceedings brought by Acaverde, might constitute a breach of the standard
embodied in Article 1105 of NAFTA.

134. Two specific complaints require discussion here. The first concerns the
City’s dealings with Setasa, which the Claimant alleged involved a breach of its exclusive
rights under the Concession Agreement, if not outright collusion.” There is little doubt
that Setasa, having been initially involved in discussions with the Claimant,’' was
“waiting in the wings” later that year to take over the operation on a different basis. But
there is no evidence that it did so before Acaverde’s withdrawal from the Agreement, and

a Loewen, para. 123.

0 See Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 3.74-3.76.

A 60 day letter of intent was concluded between Sanifill & Setasa on 27 February 1997: see above, para. 66.

-49-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

in any event whatever civil wrongs may have been committed during the denouement of
the project, they did not in the Tribunal’s opinion either cause or trigger its failure, nor did

they independently amount to a breach of the Article 1105 standard.

135, A second and more serious complaint concerns the subsequent attempt by
the City to enforce the performance bond given by Acaverde in the amount of NP6
million. This attempt was problematic, especially given the City’s own record of non-
performance of its obligations under the Concession Agreement. But in fact the City’s
attempt to collect this money failed, the bond-holder rejecting the claim,” and it is not

alleged by the Claimant that it suffered any specific losses as a result of this episode.

136. Looking at the matter more generally, the position in this terminal phase
can be compared with that in the ELS/ case, where improper conduct of the local Italian
authorities seems to have precipitated the collapse of a failing enterprise, leading to a fire-
sale of assets and consequent losses to the investor. A Chamber of the Court held that
such conduct did not amount to a breach of the applicable FCN treaty;®> whether it would
have amounted to a breach of NAFTA the Tribunal does not need to inquire. For the key
difference here is that there was no actual requisition or any equivalent act triggering the
departure of Acaverde. The Claimant was not prevented (as the parent company in the
ELSI case was arguably prevented) from seeking to conduct an orderly withdrawal from
Acapulco. Attempts at a financial settlement or sale of the enterprise failed, but this was

not a result of any internationally wrongful act of the Respondent State.

(g) The allegation of conspiracy
137. Thus far the Tribunal has considered the various items of conduct
complained of by the Claimant separately and serially. But the Claimant also, in effect,
alleged that the various Mexican agencies conspired together to frustrate the concession,
and that the sum of this conduct was greater than its various component parts in terms of

causing a violation of Article 1105."

See Statement of J. Herrera, para. 21
* Case Concerning Elettronica Sicula S.P.A. (ELSI) (United States of America v. Italy), 1989 ICJ Reports 15.

See e.g., Claimant’s Memorial, para. 3.65.

-50-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

138. The Tribunal has no doubt that a deliberate conspiracy—that is to say, a
conscious combination of various agencies of government without justification to defeat
the purposes of an investment agreement—would constitute a breach of Article 1105(1).
A basic obligation of the State under Article 1105(1) is to act in good faith and form, and

not deliberately to set out to destroy or frustrate the investment by improper means.

139, But such an allegation needs to be proved, and the Claimant has not proved
it. For example, the State Delegate of Banobras was said to be responsible for soliciting
the City’s letter of 11 September 1996 with a view to avoiding payment to Acaverde. He
denied this in evidence before the Tribunal,”® and the Tribunal accepts his denial. But in
any event, as already noted, Banobras had no obligation to Acaverde to garnishee funds
payable to the City in order to replenish the line of credit. There was a substantial
reduction in federal funds being channelled through Guerrero, and in the absence of
replenishment the line of credit was nearly exhausted. As the Tribunal has already found,
the refusal of Banobras to go further, whether or not it was a breach of contract, was not in
itself a breach of Article 1105(1), nor was it converted into such a breach by the federal
court decisions. More generally, there are sufficient reasons to explain the collapse of the
concession—attributable far more to the City than to Banobras—and there is no need to
resort to conspiracy theories, unsupported by solid evidence. A marginal financial plan,
predicated on a much more substantial federal guarantee than was eventually agreed,
foundered on the rocks of a deteriorating financial climate and a combination of little and

large local difficulties. That is not enough to cross the Article 1105(1) threshold.

(iii) Conclusions as to Article 1105(1)

140. For these reasons the Tribunal concludes that the claim under Article

1105(1) must fail.

(4) The claim for expropriation: NAFTA Article 1110

141. As noted, the Claimant’s principal contention was founded not on Article

1105 but on Article 1110. The Claimant argued that Acaverde’s entire enterprise in

° Statement of Mr. Mario Alcaraz Alarcon, para. 22 (“Nobody at Banobras had anything to do with the sending
of this letter.”); Second Declaration of Mr. Mario Alcarez Alarc6n, paras. 7-8 (“I deny that there was any type of
coordinati the actions taken by the City Council and those taken by the Bank... Neither I nor the personnel of the
Banobras office for which I was responsible took part in any discussion of [the cancellation of the concession].”).

  
 

-51-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

Acapulco was expropriated by the City, or at any rate by the combined conduct of the
City, Guerrero and Banobras, and that this was a breach of Article 1110 of NAFTA.
Although the Claimant did not put it in these terms, it could also be argued that the
persistent failure of the City to pay the amounts due under the Concession Agreement was
tantamount to an expropriation at least of the amount unpaid. In the Tribunal’s view the
latter claim is encompassed within the former, and is infra petita. It is open to the
Tribunal to find a breach of Article 1110 in a case where certain facts are relied on to
show the wholesale expropriation of an enterprise but the facts establish the expropriation
of certain assets only. Accordingly the Tribunal will consider first the standard set by
Article 1110, in particular for conduct tantamount to an expropriation, then whether the
enterprise as a whole was subjected to conduct in breach of Article 1110, and finally
whether (even if there was no wholesale expropriation of the enterprise as such) the facts

establish a partial expropriation.

(i) The Article 1110 standard

142. So far as relevant, Article 1110 provides that:

“1, No Party may directly or indirectly nationalize or expropriate an
investment of an investor of another Party in its territory or take a measure
tantamount to nationalization or expropriation of such an investment
(‘expropriation’), except:

(a) for a public purpose;
(b) — ona non-discriminatory basis;

(c) in accordance with due process of law and Article 1105(1);
and

(d) on payment of compensation in accordance with paragraphs
2 through 6.

7. This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses
granted in relation to intellectual property rights, or to the revocation,
limitation or creation of intellectual property rights, to the extent that such
issuance, revocation, limitation or creation is consistent with Chapter
Seventeen (Intellectual Property).

8. For purposes of this Article and for greater certainty, a non-
discriminatory measure of general application shall not be considered a
measure tantamount to an expropriation of a debt security or loan covered
by this Chapter solely on the ground that the measure imposes costs on the
debtor that cause it to default on the debt.”

-52-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

143. It may be noted that Article 1110(1) distinguishes between direct or indirect
expropriation on the one hand and measures tantamount to an expropriation on the other.
An indirect expropriation is still a taking of property. By contrast where a measure
tantamount to an expropriation is alleged, there may have been no actual transfer, taking
or loss of property by any person or entity, but rather an effect on property which makes
formal distinctions of ownership irrelevant. This is of particular significance in the

present case, at least as concerns the enterprise of Acaverde as a whole.

144. Evidently the phrase “take a measure tantamount to nationalization or
expropriation of such an investment” in Article 1110(1) was intended to add to the
meaning of the prohibition, over and above the reference to indirect expropriation. Indeed
there is some indication that it was intended to have a broad meaning, otherwise it is
difficult to see why Article 1110(8) was necessary. As a matter of international law a
“non-discriminatory measure of general application” in relation to a debt security or loan
which imposed costs on the debtor causing it to default would not be considered
expropriatory or even potentially so. It is true that paragraph (8) is stated to be “for
greater certainty”, but if it was necessary even for certainty’s sake to deal with such a case
this suggests that the drafters entertained a broad view of what might be “tantamount to an

expropriation”.

145. Thus there is some textual basis for the Claimant’s submission that “the
modern definition of ‘expropriation’ must be broad enough to encompass every course of
sovereign conduct that unfairly destroys a foreign investor’s contractual rights as an
asset”.”° The Claimant relied on a number of decisions in support of this proposition, and

a review of these is first called for.

146. LETCO y. Liberia’ concerned a 1970 concession agreement between
LETCO and the Liberian government which gave LETCO, a Liberian company owned by
French nationals, the exclusive right to harvest, process, transport and market forest
products and to conduct other timber operations within an exclusive exploitation area, in

6 Reply, para. 4.23.

7 Liberian Eastern Timber Corporation [LETCO] v. Government of the Republic of Liberia (1986) 2 ICSID
Reports 343.

-53-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

return for certain payments and the performance of other contractual obligations.”
Following an attempt to renegotiate the agreement, the Liberian Forest Development
Authority by a letter of 18 February 1980 reduced the concession area by more than half
with immediate effect on the grounds of breaches of the concession agreement by LETCO.
After unsuccessfully protesting the actions of the Authority, LETCO suspended its
operations in March 1983 and commenced ICSID arbitration proceedings under the
agreement. Subsequently Liberia annulled the concession agreement, again citing
breaches of the agreement by LETCO. The tribunal found that the Authority’s letter of
February 1980 communicating the withdrawal of over half the concession area was an
effective revocation of the agreement which rendered the concession useless to LETCO,
and that the revocation was carried out in breach of the notice and cure provisions of the
concession agreement.” The tribunal examined LETCO’s alleged breaches of the
agreement (as set out by Liberia in its correspondence with LETCO), and found the
alleged breaches were not supported by the facts before it. Before turning to the
assessment of compensation due to LETCO for Liberia’s breach of contract, the tribunal
considered whether Liberia’s actions in reducing the concession area could be justified as
an act of nationalisation. It found that any such defence would have failed because the
confiscation of the concession area was not for a bona fide public purpose, was
discriminatory and was not accompanied by appropriate compensation.'” It should be
stressed that LETCO did not base its claim on expropriation or unfair treatment, nor did
the tribunal find Liberia responsible under international law for breach of the concession.
The tribunal’s discussion of expropriation was in the context of addressing a potential
defence by Liberia (which did not appear in the proceedings) to the finding of breach of

contract. The award of damages was based on the Liberian law of contract.

147. Sapphire International Petroleums Ltd. v. National Iranian Oil Company‘
concerned alleged breaches leading to the unlawful termination of an agreement between
the claimant and the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) under which the parties would

form a joint venture to prospect for and exploit oil in a specified geographical area. The

* Ibid., 359.
” Ibid., 363.
i Ibid., 366-7.

ol Arbitral Award, 15 March 1963, 35 ILR 136 (1967). The decision was later set aside by an Iranian court: see 9

ILM 1118 (1970).

-54-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

relationship between the parties broke down after a only a few months. Sapphire
repudiated the agreement on the grounds of NIOC’s actions which, it concluded, showed
that NIOC did not intend to perform its obligations under the agreement, and commenced
arbitration proceedings. As in the LETCO case, the arbitration took place pursuant to an
arbitration clause in the agreement between the parties. The arbitrator held that NIOC had
breached the terms of the concession agreement in a manner which entitled Sapphire to

terminate the contract and claim damages.'°”

148. The Claimant argues that the “Sapphire decision exemplifies State
responsibility for undermining the investor-to-government relations on which a long-term
economic development agreement is based” and that “the decision holds a State
responsible for such conduct even where neither the State nor any State organ terminates
the agreement outright”.'°> While the arbitrator in Sapphire discussed in some depth the
relevance of the nature of the contract to his finding as to the substantive law applicable to

104

the dispute," the award rests on a finding of breaches of contract by NIOC, a separate

agency which was party to the contract and the defendant in the arbitration.

149. Thus both LETCO and Sapphire were awards for breach of contract, given
by tribunals constituted under the arbitration provisions of those contracts. By contrast the
present case concerns a claim that Mexico has breached Article 1110(1) by actions
tantamount to expropriation. There is no suggestion that the contracts in the present case
were “internationalized”. They were contracts between Mexican persons or entities
governed by Mexican law and including Mexican dispute settlement provisions. The
Claimant relied on statements in the two decisions for the proposition that breach of
contract can be characterised as an expropriation. But the two cases are of limited
assistance: the statements to that effect, such as they are,!°> were not relevant to the awards

of these tribunals.

102 35 ILR 136, 185.

105 Memorial, para. 5.30.

i 35 ILR 136, 170-6. Arbitrator Calvin found that the law of the contract was the rules of law “common to
civilized nations” on the basis that the parties had not specified the applicable law in the contract, and the contract was
fundamentally different from the ordinary commercial contract envisaged by the rules of private international law
because of its long-term and quasi-international character.

105 The term “expropriation” was not used by the arbitrator in Sapphire.

-55-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

150. Turning to NAFTA itself, the meaning of Article 1110 has been discussed

ina series of decisions by NAFTA tribunals.

151. Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Government of Canada concerned an alleged
regulatory expropriation in terms of the right of access to the United States market. The
tribunal held that this right was protected by Article 1105 as part of the “business” in
question, but that the Canadian measure was not sufficiently restrictive to amount to a

“taking”.!°°

152. The S.D. Myers case was also concerned with the distinction between
regulation and expropriation, and to that extent is not relevant here. The tribunal defined
creeping expropriation as “a lasting removal of the ability of an owner to make use of its

economic rights...”.'°7

The tribunal accepted that “in legal theory, rights other than
property rights may be ‘expropriated’ and that international law makes it appropriate for
tribunals to examine the purpose and effect of governmental measures”.'°* The tribunal
held that the temporary closure of the border to PCB transports could not be characterised
as a measure tantamount to expropriation, rejecting what it characterised as an attempt by
the claimant to use the word “tantamount” to extend the meaning of the word
“expropriation” beyond the “customary scope of the term... under international law”.'” It
noted that:

“The primary meaning of the word ‘tantamount’ given by the Oxford

English Dictionary is ‘equivalent’. Both words require a tribunal to look at

the substance of what has occurred and not only at form...”"!°
The tribunal considered that the drafters of the NAFTA intended the phrase “tantamount to

expropriation” to cover the concept of “creeping expropriation”.''' Canada’s actions were

 

106 Interim Award of 26 June 2000, 122 ILR 293, 334-337.
107 S.D. Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, Partial Award, 13 November 2000, para. 283, cited in Claimant’s
Reply, fn 184: see http:/Avww.dfait-maeci,ge.ca/tna-nac/disp/SDM_archive-en,asp. This was an arbitration conducted
under the UNCITRAL Rules.

 

108 Ibid., paras. 280-1.
109 Ibid., para. 285.
110

Ibid., paras. 285-6, citing Pope & Talbot, Inc. v. Canada, Interim Award, 26 June 2000, para. 104.

nm S.D. Myers, para. 286.

-56-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

not measures “tantamount to expropriation” because Canada realised no benefit from the

measure and there was no evidence of a transfer of property or benefit directly to others.'!?

153. Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States was a claim arising from
another municipal concession contract which met fierce local resistance.''* The claimant
alleged that Mexico, through the governments of the State of San Luis Potosi and
municipality of Guadalcazar, had breached Articles 1105 and 1110 of the NAFTA by
interference in the development and operation of a hazardous waste landfill. Summarising
the scope of Article 1110, the tribunal said,
“expropriation under NAFTA includes not only open, deliberate and
acknowledged takings of property, such as outright seizure or formal or
obligatory transfer of title in favor of the host State, but also covert or
incidental interference with the use of property which has the effect of
depriving the owner, in whole or in significant part, of the use or
reasonably-to-be-expected economic benefit of property even if not
necessarily to the obvious benefit of the host State.”!'
The tribunal held that Mexico, by tolerating and acquiescing in the actions of the
municipal authorities which prevented the operation of the fully constructed landfill,
notwithstanding the approval and endorsement of the federal authorities, was responsible
for a measure tantamount to expropriation of Metalclad’s investment in breach of Article
1110. Further, it held, the denial by the municipal authority of a construction permit on
grounds which were not open to it and which contradicted earlier federal commitments,''°
and the absence of a timely, orderly and substantiated basis for the denial of the municipal

° The tribunal also considered that the

permit amounted to an indirect expropriation.'!
Ecological Decree, setting aside the area as a reserve and thus preventing the land from
being used as provided for in the agreement, was an act tantamount to expropriation and a

further ground for finding a breach of Article 1110.!!7

m2 Ibid., para. 287.
ns Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, Award, 30 August 2000, 5 ICSID Reports 209.
4 Ibid., 230 (para. 103).

The tribunal found that under federal law the municipal authority had the power to issue or refuse construction
permits on construction grounds only, and its denial of the permit on ecological grounds was ultra vires: ibid., 228 and
230 (pi 92, 106).

 

16 Ibid., 230 (paras. 106-7)

7 Ibid., 231 (paras. 109, 111).

-57-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

154. Mexico sought judicial review of the Metalclad award in the Supreme
Court of British Columbia on various grounds.''* The Supreme Court upheld Mexico’s
argument that the tribunal’s finding under Article 1105 was in excess of jurisdiction
because the tribunal used NAFTA’s transparency provisions (extraneous to Chapter 11) as
a basis for the interpretation and application of Article 1105.''? As the tribunal had also
based its Article 1110 finding of expropriation, at least in part, on Mexico’s failure to act
in a transparent manner, this finding was also outside the scope of the submission to

arbitration.'?°

However, the Supreme Court found that the tribunal’s decision that the
Ecological Decree was an expropriation was within jurisdiction and not patently
unreasonable and that there were no grounds to set it aside.'”_ Tysoe J. commented that
the tribunal’s definition of expropriation for the purposes of Article 1110 was “extremely
broad”, but held that this was not a reviewable issue under the relevant Canadian

legislation.'

155. In the present case, for reasons that will appear, the Tribunal does not need
to reach final conclusions on the meaning of the phrase “measures tantamount to...
expropriation” in Article 1110. Each case has to be looked at it in light of the factual
situation and the basis for the measures in question. There is no issue in the present case
of “regulatory taking”; rather the question is whether the combined conduct of Mexican
public entities had an effect equivalent to the taking of the enterprise, in whole or
substantial part. In considering this question it is necessary to distinguish between the
measures affecting Acaverde as a whole and those concerning particular contractual rights

under the Concession Agreement.

us United Mexican States v. Metalclad Corporation, decision of 2 May 2001, 2001 BCSC 664, 5 ICSID Reports
236.

19 Ibid., 5 ICSID Reports 236, 253 (para. 66).

120 Ibid., 255 (paras. 78-9).

na Ibid., 259-60 (paras. 100, 105).

2 Ibid., 259 (para. 99)

-58-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

(ii) The Article 1110 standard applied to the enterprise

156. Turning to the impact of the Mexican measures on Acaverde as a whole,
the first point is that in the present case there was at no stage any expropriation of physical
assets. The assets of Acaverde were sold off in an apparently orderly way at about the

time it withdrew from operations under the Concession Agreement. |?

157. Nor was there any direct or indirect expropriation of the enterprise,
Acaverde, as such. As the Tribunal has already held, the reason Waste Management
withdrew from Acapulco was not because the enterprise had been seized, or because its
activity as a whole had been blocked, for example by the seizure of key items of its
property, but because—as a result of contractual defaults, changes of circumstances and

the fragility of the underlying business plan—the operation was persistently uneconomic.

158. Thus for present purposes the question is whether there was any conduct
tantamount to an expropriation which might trigger NAFTA Article 1110. The Claimant
contends that the City’s refusal to pay on approved invoices and Banobras’ refusal to
make payments under the Line of Credit Agreement were confiscatory in effect, and that
Acaverde’s rights under the concession were rendered valueless by the combination of (a)
the City’s failure to enforce the exclusivity provisions of the Concession, (b) its frustrating
the construction, building and operation of the landfill, and (c) its campaign of obstruction
(in cahoots with Guerrero and Banobras) in the face of Acaverde’s attempts to resolve the
dispute. In short the Claimant argues that these actions and refusals to acts by the City,
Guerrero and Banobras taken together resulted in a “creeping” expropriation of the

Claimant’s investment, in breach of Article 1110.'24

159. In answering this question it is not necessary for the present Tribunal to
resolve the differences in interpretation which arose in the Metalclad case as between the
NAFTA tribunal and the British Columbia Supreme Court.' Leaving aside any question
of the breadth of the definition of expropriation given by the Metalclad tribunal (at least

when considered in isolation from the facts of that case), the present Tribunal does not

3 Mr. Rodney Proto, transcript, 7 April 2003, 194.
ad Memorial, para. 5.8; Reply, para. 4.23.

See paragraphs 153-154 above.

-59-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

regard the conduct of Mexico in the present case as tantamount to expropriation of the
enterprise as such, within the meaning attributed to that term in Metalclad. Acaverde at all
times had the control and use of its property. It was able to service its customers and earn
collection fees from them. It is true that the City failed to make available the promised
land for the disposal site—but a failure by a State to provide its own land to an enterprise
for some purpose is not converted into an expropriation of the enterprise just because the
failure involves a breach of contract. It is also true that the City’s breaches (not remedied
by Guerrero and remedied only to a limited extent by Banobras) had the effect of
depriving Acaverde of “the reasonably-to-be-expected economic benefit” of the project so
far as the monthly fees due from the City were concerned. But that will be true of any
serious breach of contract: the loss of benefits or expectations is not a sufficient criterion

for an expropriation, even if it is a necessary one.

160. In the Tribunal’s view, an enterprise is not expropriated just because its
debts are not paid or other contractual obligations towards it are breached. There was no
outright repudiation of the transaction in the present case, and if the City entered into the
Concession Agreement on the basis of an over-optimistic assessment of the possibilities,
so did Acaverde. It is not the function of Article 1110 to compensate for failed business
ventures, absent arbitrary intervention by the State amounting to a virtual taking or

sterilising of the enterprise.

161. The nearest the Claimant came to showing an outright repudiation of the
enterprise by Mexico was the Mayor’s statement, shortly after the Concession Agreement
came into force, to the effect that “the obligation to contract Acaverde’s services will be
eliminated in order to remove what was previously interpreted as an imposition”.'”° This
of course related only to one aspect of the concession arrangements, although an important
aspect. But even if a unilateral and unjustified change in the exclusivity obligation could
have amounted to an expropriation, no legislative change was in fact made. The Claimant
argued that this statement “effectively repealed the law” but the Tribunal does not agree.
The Mayor was not purporting to exercise legislative authority or unilaterally to vary the
contract. He was not intervening by taking some extra-legal action, as the Mayor of

Palermo did when he intervened in the ELS/ case. He was saying what ought to be done,

 

126 See paragraph 56 above for the statement and its context.

-60-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

in his view, to allay public concerns, concerns which did in fact exist at the time.
Individual statements of this kind made by local political figures in the heat of public
debate may or may not be wise or appropriate, but they are not tantamount to
expropriation unless they are acted on in such a way as to negate the rights concerned
without any remedy. In fact no action was taken of the kind threatened at the time or later.
Even if it had been taken, the Claimant had remedies available to it, under the Concession

Agreement and otherwise.

162. For these reasons the Tribunal does not accept that there was an
expropriation of Acaverde in this case, or any measure tantamount to the expropriation of

Acaverde as an enterprise.

(iii) Was there conduct tantamount to an expropriation of Acaverde’s

contractual rights?

163. This conclusion does not however exhaust the Claimant’s case, for the
reasons given in paragraph 141 above. Even if the enterprise of Acaverde was not
subjected to conduct in breach of Article 1110 when considered as a whole, it is arguable
that the persistent refusal or inability of the City to pay sums due under the Concession
Agreement involved an expropriation, or at least measures tantamount to an expropriation,
of the sums due. As another NAFTA tribunal confirmed in the Mondev case, “the
protection afforded by the prohibition against expropriation or equivalent treatment in
Article 1110 can extend to intangible property interests”.'*” The Claimant alleged that the
City’s failure to pay, persisted in over many months, was a virtual expropriation of its

contractual rights amounting to a breach of Article 1110.

164. This issue was raised but not resolved in the Azinian case.'** There the
claimants argued that the fundamental non-performance by the city council of a waste
management contract with its Mexican subsidiary was a violation of Article 1110, relying

on a “wealth of authority treating the repudiation of concession agreements as an

 

127

Mondev International Limited v. United States of America, Award of 11 October 2002, 6 ICSID Reports 192,
216 (para. 98).

ps Azinian, Davitian & Baca v. United Mexican States, Award of 1 November 1998, 5 ICSID Reports 269.

-61-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

expropriation of contractual rights”.'”? The tribunal, having emphasised that proof of a
breach of contract did not equate to a breach of NAFTA Chapter 11, responded to this
argument in the following terms:
“Labelling is... no substitute for analysis. The words ‘confiscatory,’
‘destroy contractual rights as an asset,’ or ‘repudiation’ may serve as a way
to describe breaches which are to be treated as extraordinary, and therefore
as acts of expropriation, but they certainly do not indicate on what basis the
critical distinction between expropriation and an ordinary breach of
contract is to be made. The egregiousness of any breach is in the eye of the
beholder—and that is not satisfactory for present purposes.”'*°
The Tribunal noted however that the repudiation by the council in that case took the form
of the actual rescission of the contract for cause, which cause was upheld by the Mexican
courts in proceedings not alleged to involve a denial of justice. In the absence of a denial
of justice, the Mexican contract had no further existence as a source of rights.'"!_ That
being so, the issue of breach of contract as conduct tantamount to expropriation did not
arise: it was “unnecessary to consider issues relating to performance of the Concession

Contract”.'*?

165. In the present case, by contrast, the City at no stage purported to invalidate
or terminate the Concession Agreement. As the Tribunal has held, it did attempt to
perform its obligations in a number of respects. At the same time it is undeniable (and the
Respondent hardly sought to deny) that the City was in breach of the Agreement for much
of its duration, especially as concerns its failure to pay the monthly fee due. Thus the
present case does raise the question whether a persistent and serious breach of a contract
by a State organ can constitute expropriation of the right in question, or at least conduct

tantamount to expropriation of that right, for the purposes of Article 1110.

 

129 Ibid., 288 (para. 89).
130 Ibid., 288 (para. 90).
BI The tribunal stressed that the claimants’ failure to plead denial of justice in respect of the decisions of the

  

Mexican courts was fatal: “if there is no complaint against a determination by a competent court that a contract governed
by Mexican law was invalid under Mexican law, there is by definition no contract to be expropriated”: ibid., 290 (para.
100).

me Ibid.

-62-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

166. The Claimant relied on several earlier cases as authority for the proposition
that contractual non-performance, and in particular the refusal to pay a debt, can constitute

an expropriation.

167. George W. Cook v. United Mexican States'® was a decision of the United
States-Mexican Claims Commission established under the Convention of 8 September
1923." This was a claim for postal money orders issued in 1913 and 1914 which were
not paid by the Mexican postal authorities on presentation. The Commission found for the
claimant, dismissing Mexico’s submission that the action was time-barred because the
right to collect on money orders expired two years after issue. Cook had presented the
orders for payment within the two year period, the authorities had refused to pay them,
contrary to the governing provisions of Mexican law, and now Mexico could not rely on
its own default as a defence to the claim. Commissioner Nielsen, in a statement with
which the other two commissioners concurred, said that: “[b]y the failure of the Mexican
authorities to pay the money orders in question in conformity with the existing Mexican
law when payment was due... Cook was wrongfully deprived at the time of property in the
amount [of the postal orders].”'** It may be noted that the Commission had jurisdiction
over the whole class of claims by nationals of one State against the Government of the
other State, to be decided “in accordance with the principles of international law, justice
and equity”. According to Article V of the Convention:

“The High Contracting Parties, being desirous of effecting an equitable

settlement of the claims of their respective citizens, thereby affording them

just and adequate compensation for their losses or damages, agree that no

claim shall be disallowed or rejected by the Commission by the application

of the general principle of international law that the legal remedies must be

exhausted as a condition precedent to the validity or allowance of any

claim.”
Thus the Commission’s jurisdiction was not dependent upon the qualification of the

conduct as expropriatory; nonetheless the Commission did characterise it in those terms.

135 George W. Cook v. United Mexican States, Opinion of 3 June 1927, 22 AJIL 189. See also A.H. Feller, The
Mexican Claims Commissions 1923-1934 (New York, Macmillan, 1935) 179-80.

Be United States Treaty Series, No. 678; 118 British & Foreign State Papers 1103

Bs 22 AJIL 189, 191.

-63-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

168. In the Tribunal’s view, the outright refusal by a State to honour a money
order or similar instrument payable under its own law may well constitute either an actual
expropriation or at least a measure tantamount to an expropriation of the value of the
order. There was no suggestion that Cook as the beneficiary of the money order was not
entitled to be paid. Like other instruments of similar character the money order was not
just an ordinary contract; it was an instrument representing a certain value which the State

was ex facie committed to pay under its own law.

169. The Cook case was, however, relied on in Singer Sewing Machine Co. v.
The Republic of Turkey'* for the broader proposition that a government’s failure to pay a
debt due under a contract is an expropriation of the amount owed—and correspondingly
the Singer case was relied on by the Claimant before this Tribunal. In that case the
American-Turkish Claims Committee held that the Turkish Government’s failure to pay
for sewing machines it had agreed to purchase could be viewed as either a confiscation of
the purchase price of the commodities or the destruction or confiscation of property rights
ina contract. According to Neilsen’s report, the Committee stated that:

“Tt cannot be said that the law of nations embraces any ‘Law of Contracts’

such as is found in the domestic jurisprudence of nations. International law

does not prescribe rules relative to the forms and legal effect of contracts,

but that law may be considered to be concerned with the action authorities

of a government may take with respect to contractual rights. It is believed

that in the ultimate determination of responsibility under international law,

application can properly be given to principles of law with respect to

confiscation, and that the confiscation of the property of an alien is

violative of international law. If a government agrees to pay money for

commodities and fails to make payment, the view may be taken that the

purchase price of the commodities has been confiscated, or that the

commodities have been confiscated, or that property rights in a contract
have been destroyed or confiscated.”'*”

170. The United States-Turkish Exchange of Notes of 24 December 1923,
pursuant to which the decision was made, was not limited to claims for expropriation, or
indeed to claims for breaches of international law in any sense. The Exchange of Notes

provided only that the Committee...

136 Reported in F.K. Neilsen, ed., The American-Turkish Claims Settlement Commission. Opinions and Report

(Washington, Government Printing Office, 1937), 490, cited in Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 5.46-5.47.

BT Nielsen, 491.

-64-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

“will proceed, with a view to determining the solutions which should be
given them, to the examination of the claims presented by either
Government within a period of six months from its constitution. The
dossiers of the claims must contain the documents establishing the nature,
the origin, and the justification of each claim.”'**
Thus the Committee’s dictum quoted above was not necessary for the purposes of its
decision. Moreover it was, in the present Tribunal’s view, far too wide. Taken literally
that dictum would appear to eliminate the distinction between breach of contract and

breach of treaty entirely.

171. Subsequent authorities have sought to make a distinction between mere
failure or refusal to comply with a contract, on the one hand, and conduct which crosses
the threshold of taking or expropriation, on the other hand. The Tribunal is sympathetic to
the view expressed in Azinian that such a distinction is not adequately made by the

8° But some

addition of adjectives (“egregious”, “gross”, “flagrant” or whatever).
distinction must be made: if certain cases of contractual non-performance may amount to
expropriation, it must be possible to say, in principle, which ones, otherwise the

distinction between contractual and treaty claims disappears.

172. On analysis it appears that the cases fall into a number of groups. First and
perhaps best known are the cases where a whole enterprise is terminated or frustrated
because its functioning is simply halted by decree or executive act, usually accompanied
by other conduct.'*° This was so in many of the oil cases;'*! and in many cases before the

Iran-United States Claims Tribunal.'*

173. Secondly, there are cases where there has been an acknowledged taking of
property, and associated contractual rights are affected in consequence. In such cases the

bundle of rights requiring to be compensated includes all the associated contractual and

Be Text in CI Bevans, Treaties and other International Agreements of the United States of America 1776-1949

(1974) vol. 11, 1105.

Be See above, para. 164.

140 Thus in the Rudloff case, the council unilaterally terminated the contract and destroyed the building the
Claimant was constructing on the land in question: (1905) 9 RIAA

 

iM E.g., Libyan American Oil Company v. Government of the Libyan Arab Republic, (1977) 62 ILR 141, 189-90.

See also Revere Copper & Brass, Inc. v. Overseas Private Investment Corporation (1978) 56 ILR 258.
sad See the cases reviewed by GH Aldrich, The Jurisprudence of the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal (Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1996) ch. 5.

-65-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

other incorporeal rights,'* unless these are severable and retain their value in the hands of

the claimant notwithstanding the seizure of the related property.

174. Thirdly, there is the much smaller group of cases where the only right
affected is incorporeal; these come closest to the present claim of contractual non-
performance. Cook was such a case, and (if it is properly classified as an instance of
expropriation, which is doubtful) so was Singer Sewing Machine Co. v. The Republic of
Turkey. In such cases, simply to assert that “property rights are created under and by

virtue of a contract” is not sufficient.’

The mere non-performance of a contractual
obligation is not to be equated with a taking of property, nor (unless accompanied by other
elements) is it tantamount to expropriation. Any private party can fail to perform its
contracts, whereas nationalization and expropriation are inherently governmental acts, as
is envisaged by the use of the term “measure” in Article 1110(1). It is true that, having

regard to the inclusive definition of “measure”,'**

one could envisage conduct tantamount
to an expropriation which consisted of acts and omissions not specifically or exclusively
governmental. All the same, the normal response by an investor faced with a breach of
contract by its governmental counter-party (the breach not taking the form of an exercise
of governmental prerogative, such as a legislative decree) is to sue in the appropriate court
to remedy the breach. It is only where such access is legally or practically foreclosed that
the breach could amount to an definitive denial of the right (i.e., the effective taking of the

chose in action) and the protection of Article 1110 be called into play.

175. The Tribunal concludes that it is one thing to expropriate a right under a
contract and another to fail to comply with the contract. Non-compliance by a government
with contractual obligations is not the same thing as, or equivalent or tantamount to, an
expropriation. In the present case the Claimant did not lose its contractual rights, which it
was free to pursue before the contractually chosen forum. The law of breach of contract is

not secreted in the interstices of Article 1110 of NAFTA. Rather it is necessary to show

145 See, e.g., Starrett Housing Corporation v. Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran (1987) 16 Iran-US CTR

112, 230-1 (paras. 361-2).

Me See Shufeldt Claim, (1930) 2 RIAA 1083, 1097. This was a case of legislative invalidation of a concession
agreement 6 years after its inception.

Ms Article 201 defines “measure” as including “any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or practice”.

-66-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

 

an effective repudiation of the right, unredressed by any remedies available to the

Claimant, which has the effect of preventing its exercise entirely or to a substantial extent.

176. In the present case, in the Tribunal’s view, this has not been shown. The
question here is not one of final refusal to pay (combined with effective obstruction and
denial of legal remedies); it is one of neglect and failure at the contractual level in the
context of a marginal enterprise. That does not pass the test for an expropriatory taking of

contractual rights as it emerges from the decisions analysed above.

(iv) — Conclusion as to Article 1110

177. In the Tribunal’s view, it is not the function of the international law of
expropriation as reflected in Article 1110 to eliminate the normal commercial risks of a

foreign investor,'*°

or to place on Mexico the burden of compensating for the failure of a
business plan which was, in the circumstances, founded on too narrow a client base and
dependent for its success on unsustainable assumptions about customer uptake and
contractual performance. A failing enterprise is not expropriated just because debts are
not paid or other contractual obligations are not fulfilled. The position may be different if
the available legal avenues for redress are blocked or are evidently futile in the face of
governmental intransigence. But this was not the case here. The Claimant’s decision not
to proceed with the CANACO arbitration may have been understandable, but taking into
account all the circumstances it did not implicate Mexico in a breach of Article 1110 any

more than of Article 1105.'4”

178. For all these reasons, in the Tribunal’s view, there was nothing which could
be properly described as an expropriation by Mexico of Waste Management’s property,
assets or investment, or a measure tantamount to such expropriation, within the meaning

of NAFTA Article 1110. The Claimant’s case on Article 1110, like that on Article 1105,

must fail.

M46 Cf. Marvin Feldman v. Mexico, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1, Award of 16 December 2002, para. 111.

See above, para. 118-132 for an analysis of the remedies sought by Acaverde in the context of Article 1105.

-67-

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

D. THE ISSUE OF COSTS

179. Turning to the question of the costs and expenses of the proceeding, no
question arises as to the costs of the first proceeding, which were dealt with by the first

Tribunal.'*

180. In its decision of 26 June 2002, this Tribunal reserved the question of costs

on Mexico’s preliminary objection, as to which the Claimant was successful.

181. As is now unfortunately common, there were a significant number of

interlocutory issues raised by both parties during the proceedings.

182. As to the merits, in the Tribunal’s view the proceedings were expeditiously

and efficiently conducted by the representatives of both parties.

183. There is no rule in international arbitration that costs follow the event.
Equally, however, the Tribunal does not accept that there is any practice in investment
arbitration (as there may be, at least de facto, in the International Court and in interstate
arbitration) that each party should pay its own costs. In the end the question of costs is a
matter within the discretion of the Tribunal, having regard both to the outcome of the

proceedings and to other relevant factors.

184. In circumstances where the conduct of the City is by no means beyond
criticism, the Tribunal concludes that a fair outcome would be an order that each party
bear its own legal costs and expenses, and that the costs and expenses of the Tribunal be

borne equally between them.

Mas Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, Award, 2 June 2000, 5 ICSID Reports 443, 461-2.

- 68 -

Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/ 00/3

AWARD

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal unanimously DECIDES:

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

That the claim is admissible under Chapter 11 of NAFTA;

That the conduct of the Respondent which is the subject of the claim did not
involve any breach of Article 1105 or 1110 of NAFTA;

That Waste Management’s claim is accordingly dismissed in its entirety;

That each Party shall bear its own costs and half of the costs and expenses of these

proceedings.

Done at Washington, D.C. in English and Spanish, both versions being equally
authoritative.

Professor James Crawford
President of the Tribunal

Mr. Benjamin R. Civiletti Mr. Eduardo Magallon Gomez
Member Member

-69-

