INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE

SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

 

Waste Management, Inc.

United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3)

 

DECISION ON VENUE OF THE ARBITRATION
Introduction

1. On 27 September 2000, the Secretary-General of ICSID regis-
tered a notice for the initiation of arbitration proceedings, lodged by Waste
Management Inc. (“Claimant”) pursuant to Article 2 of the ICSID Arbi-
tration (Additional Facility) Rules, in relation to a claim against the United
Mexican States (“Respondent”). The claim arises out of a dispute concerning
the provision of waste management services under a concession granted by
the Municipality of Acapulco de Juarez in the Mexican State of Guerrero.
Claimant alleges that certain conduct of Mexican organs or entities,
including the Municipality and the State, was a violation of NAFTA Arti-
cles 1105 and 1110.

2. This was the second occasion on which Claimant had brought
proceedings in respect of its claim. On the first occasion a Tribunal
(consisting of Mr. Bernardo Cremades, President; Messrs. Keith Highet
and Eduardo Siqueiros T.) held by majority that it lacked jurisdiction to
judge the issue in dispute.! The reason was a breach by the Claimant of a
requirement laid down by NAFTA Article 1121 (2) (b); viz. the waiver of
certain local remedies with respect to the measure of the disputing Party

1 40 ILM 56 (2001).

2 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

that is alleged to be in breach of NAFTA, which waiver has to be included
in the submission of the claim to arbitration. The Tribunal held that the
waiver deposited with the first request did not satisfy Article 1121 and that
this defect could not be made good by subsequent action on the part of the
Claimant.

3. In these second proceedings (as we will call them), the Claimant's
submission was accompanied by an unequivocal waiver in terms of Article
1121. The Respondent now argues that the effect of the first proceedings
is to debar Claimant from bringing any further NAFTA claim with respect
to the same cause of action. At the initial procedural hearing of the second
proceedings, held at the seat of the World Bank in Washington, D.C. on
8 June 2001, the parties acknowledged that the present Tribunal had been
duly constituted pursuant to Article 1120 of NAFTA and in accordance
with the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules. An exchange of
views took place on the venue of the arbitration and on the procedure for
dealing with the Respondent's objections to jurisdiction based on the
previous proceedings, and in particular on the decision of the previous
Tribunal. The Tribunal laid down timetables for written observations on
the question of venue and on the preliminary objection. This order deals
with the question of venue.

Applicable Provisions with Respect to the Place of Arbitration
4. Article 1120 of NAFTA provides that:

“1. Except as provided in Annex 1120.1, and provided that
six months have elapsed since the events giving rise to
a claim, a disputing investor may submit the claim to
arbitration under:

(a) the ICSID Convention, provided that both the
disputing Party and the Party of the investor are
parties to the Convention;

(b) the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules of
ICSID, provided that either the disputing Party or
the Party of the investor, but not both, is a party
to the ICSID Convention; or

(c) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

DECISION ON VENUE OF THE ARBITRATION 3

2. The applicable arbitration rules shall govern the arbitration
except to the extent modified by this Section.”

Article 1130 further provides that:

“Unless the disputing parties agree otherwise, a Tribunal
shall hold an arbitration in the territory of a Party that is a
Party to the New York Convention, selected in accordance
with:

(a) the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules if
the arbitration is under those Rules or the ICSID
Convention;

(b) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules if the arbitration is
under those Rules.”

In the present case, the United States (the party of the investor) is a party to
the ICSID Convention but Mexico is not. Accordingly the claim was
submitted under the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules, which the
parties agree are applicable to the question of venue.

5. Chapter IV of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules deals
with the place of arbitration. Article 20 provides that arbitration proceed-
ings “shall be held only in States that are parties to the 1958 UN Conven-
tion on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards.”
All three NAFTA States are parties to the 1958 Convention. Article 21,
entitled, “Determination of Place of Arbitration,” provides:

“(1) Subject to Article 20 of these Rules the place of arbi-
tration shall be determined by the Arbitral Tribunal after
consultation with the parties and the Secretariat.

(2) The Arbitral Tribunal may meet at any place it deems
appropriate for the inspection of goods, other property or
documents. It may also visit any place connected with the
dispute or conduct inquiries there. The parties shall be given
sufficient notice to enable them to be present at such inspec-
tion or visit.

(3) The award shall be made at the place of arbitration.”

4 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

Unlike arbitration under the ICSID Convention, arbitration under the Arbi-
tration (Additional Facility) Rules is not quarantined from legal supervision
under the law of the place of arbitration. The possible requirements of that
law are specifically referred to in the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules
(see Articles 1, 53 (3), (4)). Thus the determination of the place of an Addi-
tional Facility arbitration can have important consequences in terms of the
applicability of the arbitration law of that place.

The Views of the Parties as to Venue

6. In accordance with the directions of the Tribunal, both parties
made written observations on the question of venue.

7. The Claimant argued for Washington, D.C., on three grounds:
(a) neutrality; (b) the clarity and adequacy of United States law on inter-
national arbitration, and (c) the balance of convenience. On the question
of neutrality, which it regarded as of dominant importance, it noted that
the Government of Canada had intervened in the first proceedings in
favour of the Mexican position; that Government had also intervened in
the proceedings before the British Columbia Supreme Court in the Metal-
clad case, supporting Mexico’s challenge to a decision in a NAFTA arbitra-
tion held under the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules. For its part the
Government of the United States had not intervened in the first proceed-
ings. The Claimant further argued that following the British Columbia
Supreme Court’s ruling of 2 May 2001,” there was substantial uncertainty
about the extent and standard of review of Additional Facility decisions in
Canada. Although there had not yet been a challenge before a United States
court to an Additional Facility award, there was substantial United States
experience with international arbitration, and the Federal Arbitration Act
clearly embodied the standards of the New York Convention.>

8. The Respondent agreed that neutrality was a dominant consider-
ation, but argued that this favoured Canada rather than the United States
since “the courts that might be called upon to exercise curial review of the
award should be those of the NAFTA Party that is neither the disputing
Party nor the Party of the disputing investor.” It stressed that the Govern-

2 United Mexican States v. Metalelad Corporation, 2001 BCSC 664.
3 Claimant's submission of 18 June 2001.

DECISION ON VENUE OF THE ARBITRATION 5

ment of Canada’s intervention in the first proceedings on an issue of
NAFTA interpretation in no way bound the Canadian courts, which would
decide the legal issues on their merits, as they had done in Metalclad. It
observed that legal issues would arise under United States’ law analogous
to those which arose in the Metalclad case before the British Columbia
Supreme Court, and that in the absence of specific precedents the standard
of review in the United States was also unclear. It noted that the essential
issue was which courts would be competent to review any eventual award;
where the Tribunal was actually to sit was “an entirely separate issue.”4

9. Upon further consideration of the issues, it appeared to the
Tribunal that a question might arise as to whether the provisions of the
New York Convention would be relevant in a United States court if the
United States was selected as the place of arbitration. It was at least argu-
able that the provisions of the Inter-American Convention on Interna-
tional Commercial Arbitration of 1975 (the Panama Convention)? would
apply, pursuant to section 305 of the Federal Arbitration Act, to the exclu-
sion of the New York Convention.® Having regard to certain differences
between the two Conventions and to the apparent intention of the drafters
of NAFTA that the New York Convention be applicable to Chapter 11
arbitrations, this raised the question whether one or other party might have

4 Respondent's submission of 18 June 2001.
5 14 ILM 336 (1975); 1438 UNTS 248.
© Section 305 of the Federal Arbitration Act provides as follows:

“Relationship between the Inter-American Convention and the Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards of June 10, 1958

When the requirements for application of both the Inter-American Convention
and the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral
Awards of June 10, 1958, are met, determination as to which Convention
applies shall, unless otherwise expressly agreed, be made as follows:

1. Ifa majority of the parties to the arbitration agreement are citizens of a
State or States that have ratified or acceded to the Inter-American Conven-
tion and are member States of the Organization of American States, the
Inter-American Convention shall apply.

2, Inall other cases the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of
Foreign Arbitral Awards of June 10, 1958, shall apply.”

This is not well adapted to dealing with a case where one of the parties is the State itself,
but neither party in the present case argued that Mexico should be treated other than as a
citizen of a State party for the purposes of section 305.

6 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

a legitimate juridical advantage in the selection of a Canadian venue.
Canada is not a party to the Panama Convention and the question of the
relationship between the two would not arise there. The Tribunal invited
the parties to comment on that question and both did so.

10. In its response, the Claimant agreed that, pursuant to section
305 of the Federal Arbitration Act, a United States court called to deal with
an issue arising in the present proceedings would apply the Panama
Convention rather than the New York Convention. But it argued that there
was no material difference between the two. This was true in particular as
far as the present proceedings are concerned; these are already commenced
and the rules of procedure are already established. As to the standards for
enforcement of awards under the two Conventions, it saw these as “nearly
identical.” In the event that Mexico preferred the application of the New
York Convention, it expressly offered to agree to that course, as permitted
by section 305.”

11. The Respondent likewise agreed that “if the place of arbitration
were Mexico or the United States, the Panama Convention would apply to
the recognition and enforcement of the award”, whereas if Canada were
selected, the New York Convention would apply. It saw the potential
uncertainties as to the application of the Panama Convention in the United
States as a further reason for the choice of a Canadian venue.®

Assessment of the Relevant Considerations

12. Turning to the Tribunal’s own view of the matter, it is relevant to
note, at the outset, that the place at which the first arbitration proceedings
were held was Washington, D.C. Indeed this does not seem to have been
an issue before the first Tribunal.” This factor appears to the Tribunal to
have a certain relevance, especially since a major preliminary issue in the
present proceedings is the legal effect of the conduct of the Claimant in the
first proceedings. Prima facie it would seem desirable that the same curial

7 Claimant's further submission of 27 August 2001.

5 Respondent's further submission of 27 August 2001.

° See the first Tribunal’s Award of 2 June 2000, §3, where it is simply stated that the juris-
dictional hearing took place in Washington, D.C. The question was decided at the initial proce-
dural hearing on 16 July 1999, apparently without controversy.

DECISION ON VENUE OF THE ARBITRATION 7

law be applicable to both proceedings, involving as they do the same
dispute and the same cause of action.

13. Asa pure matter of convenience, Washington, D.C. was and is
an appropriate place for the arbitration. The representation of both parties
includes lawyers from firms based in Washington, D.C. ICSID facilities are
available there at little or no cost to the parties. Were the arbitration to be
held, for example, in Toronto there would be additional expenses in the
travel of the members of the Tribunal, the Secretariat and the representa-
tives of the parties, as well as in the hiring of a venue and associated
services. Should the Tribunal reach the merits of the dispute, it is possible
that an evidentiary hearing might more conveniently and economically be
held in Mexico, where the dispute arose. But provision is made for this
eventuality in Article 21 (2) of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules,
without prejudice to the actual place of the arbitration, and in fact neither
party finally argued that the place of the arbitration should be in Mexico.

14. The Respondent's arguments for a Canadian venue are essentially
ones of principle. If they are valid, they could well prevail over consider-
ations of convenience and cost. Essentially, two issues are raised: (a) the
adequacy and clarity of the applicable law, and (b) the neutrality, actual or
perceived, of the place of arbitration. As noted, the parties are sharply
divided on each of these issues.

The Adequacy of the Proper Law of the Arbitration

15. An initial question concerns the relevance of the Panama
Convention of 1975. Both parties agree that by virtue of section 305 of the
Federal Arbitration Act, a court dealing with the present proceedings in the
United States would apply the Panama Convention rather than the New
York Convention. The question is whether this conclusion (assuming it is
correct) provides a reason for selecting a Canadian venue, it being clear that
in a Canadian court the Panama Convention would be irrelevant.

16. Evidently the drafters of NAFTA had the 1958 Convention in
mind, since they required the proceedings to be held in a State party to that
Convention.!° At the same time they were aware of the potential inter-

10 NAFTA, Art. 1130, cited in paragraph 4 above. To the same effect Arbitration (Addi-
tional Facility) Rules, Are. 20, cited in paragraph 5 above.

8 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

action of the New York and Panama Conventions, as indicated by NAFTA
Article 1122, which provides that:

“1. Each Party consents to the submission of a claim to
arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out in
this Agreement.

2. The consent given by paragraph 1 and the submission
by a disputing investor of a claim to arbitration shall
satisfy the requirement of:

(a) Chapter 11 of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdic-
tion of the Centre) and the Arbitration (Addi-
tional Facility) Rules for written consent of the
parties;

(b) Article I of the Inter-American Convention for an
agreement.” i

In these circumstances the Tribunal concludes that the application of the
Panama Convention rather than the New York Convention to a NAFTA
Chapter 11 arbitration raises no question of principle, unless it is possible to
point to some specific disadvantage which one party or another may suffer
from the application of the former rather than the latter.

17. The question of the relationship between the Panama and New
York Conventions has been the subject of some discussion in the literature.
For example van den Berg concludes that the two Conventions are gener-
ally compatible, but he notes that “the Panama Convention does not
contain provisions regarding its field of application, the referral by a court
to arbitration, and the conditions to be satisfied by the party seeking
enforcement of the award.”!? Unlike the New York Convention, the
Panama Convention also provides for its own residual set of arbitral rules,
where no other arbitral rules are agreed between the parties.

1 See also NAFTA Art. 1136 (6) & (7).

12 AJ. van den Berg, “The New York Convention 1958 and Panama Convention 1975:
Redundancy or Compatibility?” 5 Arbitration International 214 (1989) at 229. See also J.
Jackson, “The 1975 Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration:
Scope, Application and Problems” 8 Jnl of Intl Arb 91 (1991); J.R. Bowman, “The Panama
Convention and its Implementation under the Federal Arbitration Act,” 11 American Review of
International Arbitration 116 (2000).

DECISION ON VENUE OF THE ARBITRATION 9

18. In the present case, having regard to the stage which the proceed-
ings have reached, most of the differences between the two Conventions
are irrelevant. Of the matters referred to by van den Berg, only the question
of enforcement might possibly arise as an issue. Neither party has however
raised any difficulty on that score. In this case it was primarily for the
Claimant to do so, but it is evidently content to accept that the Panama
Convention should apply to any issue of recognition or enforcement
arising in a United States court. If this presents any difficulty for the
Respondent, it is still open for it to accept the Claimant's offer to apply the
New York Convention instead of the Panama Convention, a course specif-
ically permitted by section 305 of the Federal Arbitration Act. For these
reasons the Tribunal does not believe that the potential application of the
Panama Convention, if Washington, D.C. be chosen as the venue, should
be treated as determinative.

19. The Tribunal turns to the other issues concerning the applicable
law which were debated by the parties. It is no doubt the case that more
international arbitrations occur in the United States than Mexico or
Canada, and that there is a body of jurisprudence on the Federal Arbitra-
tion Act and the New York Convention which indicates a generally
supportive attitude on the part of the United States courts to international
arbitration. On the other hand the specific issue of the applicable law and
the standard of review in NAFTA arbitration has arisen in Canada while it
has not (yet) arisen in the United States. The Tribunal is inclined to agree
with the Respondent that legal issues of the same general order as those
which arose in Metalclad would arise in the United States courts in the
event of a challenge to a Chapter 11 arbitration held in the United States.
What answers would be given remain to be seen, but commentators do not
regard all questions as closed in the United States. Nor, in these early days
of Chapter 11 arbitration, could they be. It would be invidious, and is
unnecessary, to compare the actual or hypothetical performance of United
States and Canadian courts in such cases. It is sufficient on this point to
say that the Tribunal cannot identify any particular issue on which there is
likely to be a significant difference of approach by the courts of the two
NAFTA states.

The Neutrality of the Place of Arbitration

20. As noted already, both parties regarded the question of neutrality
as the dominant one for present purposes, though they disagreed as to

10 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

which forum would be neutral. Earlier decisions, both under the Arbitra-
tion (Additional Facility) Rules and the UNCITRAL Rules, have likewise
treated neutrality as a relevant factor.!? It has certainly been treated as rele-
vant in the context of international commercial arbitration generally. On
the other hand, in the specific context of NAFTA Chapter 11 arbitration
it is perhaps of lesser importance. The three NAFTA parties are associated
in a wide ranging agreement aimed, inter alia, at free trade and protection
of investments. There is as yet no indication that NAFTA arbitrators are
likely to suffer attacks on their integrity, or their nerves, from sitting in one
of the States parties as compared with another. There was evidently no
difficulty in the first tribunal sitting in Washington, D.C., and feeling able
to decide in that city in favour of the Respondent. The present Tribunal,
for its part, does not apprehend that its independence or capacity to decide
is likely to be affected by the question where it is to sit.

21. There are only three parties to NAFTA. If the principle of
neutrality were treated as dominant in relation to NAFTA Chapter 11 arbi-
tration, it would produce a rule that the tribunal would always sit in the
state party other than that of the claimant and respondent. The drafters of
NAFTA laid down no such rule;!4 rather they left the matter for each
tribunal to decide, having regard to relevant factors. It may be accepted
that neutrality could be one of these—although it is specifically not
mentioned in the UNCITRAL Notes which provide a guide to choice of
forum in cases under the UNCITRAL Rules.!° But the NAFTA parties
themselves do not seem to have treated it as decisive.

22. One difficulty with “neutrality” as a criterion is that it can tend
to lead to a confusion between the position taken by the executive govern-

13 See, e.g. Ethyl Corporation v. Government of Canada, decision on venue of 28
November 1997; Methanex Corporation v. United States of America, decision on venue of 7
September 2000. These were both arbitrations held under the UNCITRAL Rules, but the ques-
tion has also arisen in Additional Facility cases.

14 This contrasts with the rule laid down for interstate arbitration under NAFTA Chapter
20. In accordance with Rule 22 of the Model Rules of Procedure, a Chapter 20 tribunal is to sit
on the territory of the respondent State party. Normally a strong rule of neutrality is applied to
interstate arbitration, with interstate tribunals invariably sitting in a third state. This is a further
indication that the parties to NAFTA do not regard the neutrality of an arbitral venue as the
overriding consideration. See also Ethyl Corporation v. Government of Canada, decision on venue
of 28 November 1997, pp. 4-5.

15 C£ Ethyl Corporation v. Government of Canada, decision on venue of 28 November
1997, p. 10 note 12.

DECISION ON VENUE OF THE ARBITRATION 11

ment of a NAFTA party on the one hand and that taken by its courts on
the other. Under the principles of the separation of judicial power consti-
tutionally guaranteed in all three states parties, it is for the courts to decide
on issues concerning the functioning of arbitral tribunals and the recogni-
tion and enforcement of their awards and to do so in accordance with the
law. If there were any indication that the courts of a state party were defer-
ring to executive pronouncements on these issues, that would be highly
relevant to the choice of venue. It is almost needless to say that there is no
evidence or suggestion of this.

23. By parity of reasoning the Tribunal is not persuaded that the
intervention of Canada to present its views in the previous proceedings,
still less its intervention before the British Columbia Supreme Court in
Metalclad, entails that Canada is somehow unneutral in the present case. In
taking these steps the Government of Canada was merely exercising proce-
dural rights which it had, respectively, under Article 1128 of NAFTA and
under Canadian law. In each case it was a matter for the tribunal or court
to take into account as it saw fit the comments made.

Conclusion

24. In the Tribunal’s view the dominant consideration in this case is
that the very same claim has already been presented between the same
parties in proceedings held, without apparent objection or difficulty, in
Washington, D.C. The claim failed on procedural grounds, and the legal
implications of that failure are a key issue, indeed the first substantive
issue, for the present Tribunal to decide. In these circumstances it would
be, to say the least, unfortunate if the arbitral law should now be different
as a result of a different decision as to the venue of the second arbitration.
No compelling reason has been presented for such a decision in any event,
having regard to what has been said above, and especially to the marginal
balance of convenience in favour of Washington, p.c.!¢

25. For these reasons the Tribunal decides unanimously that the
venue of the arbitration shall be Washington, D.C. Unless otherwise agreed
or decided, hearings will be held at the ICSID facilities within the World
Bank building.

16 See paragraph 13 above.

12 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

As at Washington, D.C., 26 September 2001:

James Crawford
Chairman

Guillermo Aguilar Alvarez Benjamin R Civiletti

