INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
1818 H STREET, NW | WASHINGTON, DC 20433 | USA

TELEPHONE +1 (202) 458 1534 | FACSIMILE +1 (202) 522 2615
WWW.WORLDBANK.ORG/ICSID

CERTIFICATE

WATKINS HOLDING S.A.R.L, WATKINS (NED) B.V., WATKINS SPAIN S.L.,
REDPIER S.L., NORTHSEA SPAIN S. L, PARQUE EOLICO MARMELLAR S.L., AND
PARQUE EOLICOLA BOGAS.L.
ve.

THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN

(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/44)

I hereby certify that the attached document is a true copy of the English version of the
Tribunal’s Decision on Spain’s Request for Rectification of the Award dated 13 July 2020, which
was issued in the English and Spanish languages.

Meg Kinnear}
ecretary-General

 

Washington, D.C., 13 July 2020

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between

WATKINS HOLDING S.A.R.L, WATKINS (NED) B.V., WATKINS SPAIN S.L.,
REDPIER S.L., NORTHSEA SPAIN S. L, PARQUE EOLICO MARMELLAR S.L., AND
PARQUE EOLICO LA BOGA S.L.

(Claimants)

THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN
(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB/15/44

 

DECISION ON SPAIN’S REQUEST FOR
RECTIFICATION OF THE AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Tan Sri Dato’ Cecil W.M. Abraham, President of the Tribunal
Dr. Michael C. Pryles AO PBM, Arbitrator
Prof. Dr. Héléne Ruiz Fabri, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Catherine Kettlewell

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 13 July 2020

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Watkins Holding S.A.R.L,
Watkins (NED) B.V., Watkins Spain S.L.,
Redpier S.L., Northsea Spain S. L, Parque
Eélico Marmellar S.L., And Parque E6lico
La Boga S.L.:

Ms. Marie Stoyanov

Mr. Antonio Vazquez-Guillén
Mr. David Ingle

Ms. Agustina Alvarez

Mr. Pablo Torres

Mr. Alexandre Fichaux

Mr. Tomasz Hara

Mr. Valentin Bourgeois

Ms. Carmen De La Hera

Allen & Overy LLP
Pedro de Valdivia 10
28006, Madrid
Spain

Representing the Kingdom of Spain:

Mr.

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Ms.

Ab
Dp’

. José Manuel Gutiérrez Delgado
Pablo Elena Abad

Rafael Gil Nievas

Alberto Torré Molés

Elena Ofioro Sainz

Mariano Rojo Pérez

Gloria Maria de la Guardia Limeres
Juan Antonio Quesada Navarro
Ana Maria Rodriguez Esquivias
Javier Comer6n Herrero
Eugenia Cediel Bruno

Luis Vacas Chalfoun

Francisco de la Torre Diaz
Socorro Garrido Moreno
Estibaliz Hernandez Marquinez

jogacia General del Estado
to. Arbitrajes Internacionales

c/ Marqués de la Ensenada, 14-16, 2* planta
28004, Madrid
Spain

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
INTRODUCTION. 2
THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS. 3
A. RESPONDENT’S REQUEST. 3
B. CLAIMANTS’ RESPONSE 6
THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS .......ccscsssssssssessssessssessssessssessssesssssssssessssessssessssessssessseees 10
A. TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON RESPONDENT’ S REQUEST FOR RECTIFICATION «...-..000++ 10
B. TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON RESPONDENT’ S REQUEST FOR STAY OF ENFORCEMENT
20
Cc. TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON COSTS .....scssssssssesssseseesssneesesssnneseessnneesessnnneseesnnneseessnees 24

DISPOSITION OF THE RESPONDENT?’S APPLICATION ......ccssssssssessessesseeseeenees 27

L

an

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 21 January 2020, an Arbitral Tribunal comprising of Tan Sri Dato’ Cecil W.M.
Abraham, Dr. Michael C. Pryles AO PBM, and Prof. Dr. Héléne Ruiz Fabri rendered
an award and attached to the award, the dissenting opinion by Prof. Dr. Héléne Ruiz
Fabri in Watkins Holdings S.a r.l. and others v. Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No.
ARB/15/44) (the “Award”).

On 6 March 2020, the Kingdom of Spain (“Spain” or “Respondent”) submitted a
Request for Rectification of the Award rendered by the Tribunal on 21 January 2020,
together with Annexes | and 2 (the “Request”) and a request for stay of enforcement

pending the decision on the Request.

The Request was submitted to the Secretary-General of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) pursuant to Article 49(2) of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States (“ICSID Convention”) and Rule 49 of the Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules”). In accordance with Rule
49(1)(d) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Request was accompanied by the required
lodging fee.

On 11 March 2020, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request and notified
the Parties and the Tribunal of its registration pursuant to Rule 49(2) of the ICSID

Arbitration Rules.

On 12 March 2020, pursuant to Rule 49(3) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal

established the following timetable:

1. The Claimants may submit a response to the Request by Monday, 13 April
2020;

. The Respondent may then, if it chooses, submit a reply to the Claimants’
response no later than Wednesday, 13 May 2020;

. In the event that the Respondent avail itself of the opportunity to submit a
reply under paragraph 2 above, the Claimants may submit a rejoinder not
later than 14 calendar days from the date of submission of the Respondent’s
reply.

N

w

IL.

4. Any filings submitted pursuant to paragraphs 2 to 3 will be subject to a strict
length limit of 10 pages.
On 13 April 2020, Watkins Holdings S.a r.l. and others (the “Claimants”) submitted
their response to the Request, together with Appendix | and legal authorities CL-0179
through CL-0191 (“Claimants’ Response’).

On 29 April 2020, the Tribunal invited the Parties to submit their respective submissions

on costs.

On 13 May 2020, the Respondent filed a reply to the Claimants’ Response, together
with Annexes 3 to 6 (“Respondent’s Reply”). As invited by the Tribunal, the

Respondent also filed its submission on costs.

On 27 May 2020, the Claimants filed a rejoinder to Respondent’s Reply, together with
legal authorities CL-192 and CL-193 (“Claimants’ Rejoinder”). The Claimants also

filed its submission on costs together with legal authority CL-194.

In accordance with Rule 49(3) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the members of the
Tribunal have agreed that it would not be necessary for them to meet in order to consider
the Request. The present Decision has been deliberated through exchanges of written

communications among the members of the Tribunal.

The present Decision constitutes an integral part of the Award in accordance with

Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention.

INTRODUCTION

The Respondent submitted the Request with the purpose of rectifying as soon as possible
“two very specific and obvious clerical errors in the Award’s compensation

determination.”

On 21 January 2020, the Tribunal rendered its Award in this case. The Tribunal granted

Ill.

the following relief:!

(a) Unanimously, the Tribunal has jurisdiction under the ECT and the
ICSID Convention over the Claimants’ claim;

(b) Unanimously, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction under the ECT and
the ICSID Convention with regard to the claim that the
Respondent’s tax measures namely the 7% tax on the value of
electrical energy production created by Law 15/2012 violates the
ECT;

(c) By Majority, the Respondent has breached Article 10(1) of the ECT
by failing to accord fair and equitable treatment to the Claimants;

(d) By Majority, in the light of the Tribunal’s decision in (c), the
Tribunal for purposes of judicial economy, does not need to
determine the Claimants’ claim with regard to the violation of the
Umbrella Clause;

(e) By Majority, the Claimants are awarded damages in the sum of € 77
million for violation of the ECT;

(f) By Majority, the Respondent shall pay interest on the sum awarded
in (e) from 20 June 2014 to the date of this Award at 1.16% per
annum compounded monthly;

(g) By Majority, the Respondent shall pay post-award interest at the rate
of 2.16% per annum compounded monthly from the date of the
Award to the date of payment;

(h) Unanimously, the Claimants’ claim for gross-up tax is dismissed;

(i) By Majority, the Respondent shall pay the Claimants 75% of the
Claimants’ cost of the proceedings;

(Gj) Any claim, request or defence of the parties that has not been
expressly accepted in this section X is hereby dismissed.

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

A. Respondent’s Request

15.

4.

Pursuant to Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention, the Respondent requests the
Tribunal to rectify two clerical errors contained in the Award that amount to EUR 62.4
million and to reduce the Tribunal’s determination of the compensation awarded to the

Claimants to this amount.”

First, the Respondent argues that the Tribunal did not rely on the proper figure in the

! Watkins Holdings S.a r.l. and others v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No. ARB/15/44, Award, 21 January 2020, para. 775.
2 Request, para. 41(c).

determination of damages. The Tribunal mistakenly used the amount of EUR 77 million
in Table 13 of the Second Brattle Quantum Report which only contemplated future
damage (i.e. from 20 June 2014 onwards).? The Respondent states that the Tribunal did
not take into account the damages prior to 20 June 2014. According to the Respondent,
the correct amount is EUR 97.7 million, which is the first clerical error that should be

corrected in the Award.

In its Reply, the Respondent noted that this correction was requested for reasons of
honesty and in good faith as it was in favor of Claimants. In this regard, the Respondent
noted that it had nothing to add and clarified that this requested correction was separate

from the second.*

Second, the Respondent alleges that the Tribunal, after deciding that it had no
jurisdiction to decide the Claimants’ TVPEE claim, failed to neutralize the damages
attributed to the TVPEE.° To calculate the amount, the Respondent says, the Tribunal
may use the Second Brattle Quantum Report, Table O - Updated Financial Model, Table
18. The Respondent explains that by running the sensitivity of the amount provided by
Bridgepoint under 25-year plant lifetime, the adjusted amount for the “Tax sensitivity”

would total an amount of EUR 62.4 million.°

The Respondent concludes that the amount to be deducted as the result of the exclusion
of the TVPEE amounts to EUR 35.3 million (difference between EUR 97.7 million and
EUR 62.4 million).’ Therefore, Spain requests that the Tribunal make the necessary
calculations to deduct from the damages awarded the amount of EUR 14.6 million and
to declare the final damages with these rectifications to be EUR 62.4 million instead of

EUR 77 million.®

In its Reply, the Respondent argued that the type of correction is within the scope of

Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention as the provision covers errors that favor

3 Request, paras. 16, 21.

+ Respondent's Reply, paras. 2-4.
5 Request, paras. 12, 23.

© Request, para. 26.

7 Request, para. 27.

® Request, para. 30.

claimants as well as respondent.” The Respondent says that it is not seeking to reargue
or reopen the merits of the arbitration but rather to rectify the damages calculation such
that it is applied consistently with the Tribunal’s decision on jurisdiction and the
merits.'° In response to the Claimants’ argument regarding whether this request is
outside of the scope of Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention, the Respondent argues,
citing other tribunals, that damages awards have been rectified'! and that the error is

clearly identifiable in the Award. '?

20. The Respondent states again in its Reply that when the Tribunal decided that it did not
have jurisdiction over the TVPEE claim, it should have deducted, or neutralized, the
effect when calculating the damages.'? For Spain, “once [the TVPEE was] found to be
outside of the scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, the adequate implementation of this
tax in the but-for scenario should go [sic] from the date it came into application
(pursuant to the enactment of Law 15/2012) until the end of the lifespan of the
Claimant’s plants.” '* Respondent argues that the calculation in the Award actually
“limits the effects of the tax to the period between the date it came into force and the
valuation date (June 20" 2014).”!> The Respondent also argues that it is not proposing
a recalculation but rather that the evidence has already been presented by the Parties to

the Tribunal during the proceeding.

21. As part of Respondent’s argument to separate the first clerical correction from the
present one, in its Reply the Respondent requests “to make the necessary rectification
of this Award as indicated above, in order to correct the damages awarded in amount of

EUR 28.6 million, and to declare the final damages with this correction to be EUR 48.4

° Respondent's Reply, par:
°° Respondent's Reply, para. 7.
4 Respondent's Reply, paras. 9-11, citing Gold Reserve Inc. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/09/1, Decision Regarding Claimant's and Respondent's Requests for corrections, 15 December 2014, Annex-005,
and Marco Gavazzi and Stefano Gavazzi v. Romania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/12/25, Decision on Rectification, 13 July 2017,
Annex-006 and Exhibit CL-186.
2 Respondent's Reply, para. 13.
5 Respondent's Reply, paras. 14, 22.
4 Respondent's Reply, para. 15.

s Reply, para 15.
°6 Respondent's Reply, paras. 16-20.

   

  

 

    

  

million instead of EUR 77 million.”!”

22. The Respondent also requests that the Tribunal stay the enforcement of the Award
pending the decision on the rectification pursuant to Articles 44 to 47 of the
Convention.!* Spain further argues that “ICSID [Arbitration] Rule 54, pertaining to stay
of enforcement of the award in the context of annulment proceedings, has been
interpreted in a flexible manner, including for instance requests for supplementary
decisions and rectification after conclusion of an annulment, even if not referred to
specifically in the ICSID [Arbitration] Rules.”!? In its Reply, Spain provides further
support to its argument by saying that the stay of enforcement is regulated in the same
section devoted to the award itself and the decision on rectification is regarded as part

of the Award.”°

23. The Respondent argues that the Tribunal has full powers granted by the ICSID
Convention to decide all issues that may arise under exceptional circumstances.”! In its
request, the Respondent notes that a stay of enforcement is required as an exceptional
circumstance pending Spain’s notification of the Award to the European Union (“EU”)
Commission in compliance with EU law.”? The EU Commission would then decide

pursuant to Article 108 of the TFEU whether Spain can comply with the Award.”>
B. Claimants’ Response

24. The Claimants argue that Spain is in effect requesting a reconsideration of the Tribunal’s

reasoning and evaluation of evidence, which falls outside of the scope of Article 49(2).*4

 

"7 Respondent’s Reply, par: The figure that the Respondent refers to in para
different from the Respondent's figure in paragraph 30 of its Request.

18 Request, paras. 31-40. See also Respondent’s Reply, para. 25.

' Request, para 34, citing Victor Pey Casado and Foundation Presidente Allende v. Republic of Chile, \CSID Case No.
ARB/98/2, Annulment Proceeding - Supplementary Decision, Decision on the Republic of Chile’s Request for a Stay of
Enforcement of the unannulled portion of the award, 16 May 2013, para. 32, Annex 002 and Ex! CL-184.

2 Respondent’s Reply, para. 26. The Respondent further argues on the “systematic of the ICSID Convention (sic)” that “if in
the post award remedies forseen (sic) in articles 50, 51 and 52 of the ICSID Convention the ility of stay of enforcement
is admitted, a fortiori it should be admitted in the rectification of awards, due to the fact that it is regulated in the same Section
devoted to the award itself.”

21 Request, para 40.

>? Request, para. 35, citing Directive 2001/77/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, 27 September 2001, Exhibit.
RL-0015.

2 Request, para. 39.

24 Claimants’ Response, para. 3, citing /gkale insaat Ltd. Sirketi v Turkmenistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/24, Decision on
Claimant's Request for Supplementary Decision and Rectification of the Award, 4 October 2016, para. 143, Ex! CL-179.

6

raph 23 of the Respondent's Reply, is

 

 

 

 

   

Therefore, the Claimants conclude, the Tribunal should dismiss the Respondent’s

Request in its entirety.

25. The Claimants argue that a request for rectification pursuant to Article 49(2) of the

ICSID Convention has a limited scope and is designed to rectify inadvertent omissions

 

and minor technical errors. The Claimants say that their position is supported by practice
of ICSID tribunals and the leading commentary of the ICSID Convention.” In its
Rejoinder, the Claimants distinguish the rectification request in this case from the cases
cited by Spain by identifying that the Tribunal’s decision is not an error but rather a

9926

“deliberate and considered decision”~° and indicating that Spain’s request does not

contain any obvious error.?”

26. In other words, the Claimants note, the rectification process “in no way consists of
means of appealing or otherwise revising the merits of a decision.”** The Claimants
contend that Rule 49 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules does not provide for a threshold,
contrary to Spain’s approach saying that this Rule contains a broad scope to apply to

“any error in the award which the requesting party seeks to have rectified.””

27. The Claimants’ case is that they have shown that the Tribunal’s finding of damages in
the Award was consistent with its findings of liability and jurisdiction. In particular, the
Claimants say, they have explained how the “Tribunal’s damages adjustments were
consistent with the findings that (a) only the ‘wholesale dismantlement’ of the Original

Regime by the new Regime constituted a breach of the ECT; (b) Spain’s breach of the

25 Claimants’ Response, para. 5, citing Iekale Insaat Ltd. Sirketi v Turkmenistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/24, Decision on

Claimant's Request for Supplementary Decision and Rectification of the Award, 4 October 2016, para. 103, Exhibit CL-179,

see also Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 7, citing C. Scheuer et al., The ICSID Convention: a Commentary (2nd edition, OUP),

2009, p. 849, Exhibit CL-192 and Dong, W., Module 2.8 ICSID: Post-Award Remedies and Procedures, Course on Dispute

Settlement in International Trade, Investment and Intellectual Property, UNCTAD, New York and Geneva, 2003, p. 7, Exhibit
180.

Cc

   

26 Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 8-9, differentiating Gold Reserve Inc. v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/09/1, Decision Regarding Claimant's and Respondent's Requests for corrections, 15 December 2014, para. 42,
Annex-005.

7 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 10, citing Railroad Development Corporation v Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/23, Decision on Claimant Request for Supplementation and Rectification of the Award, 18 January 2013, paras. 43,
47, Annex 007 and Exhibit CL-185; and Marco Gavazzi and Stefano Gavazzi v Romania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/12/25,
Decision on Rectification, 13 July 2017, para. 63, Annex-006 and Exhibit CL-186.

28 Claimants’ Response, para. 8, citing Vivendi v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Request for Supplementation and Rectification of its Decision Concerning Annulment of the Award, 28
May 2003, para. 11, Exhibit CL-189; see also Claimants’ Rejoinder, paras. 3, 7-10.

2° Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 6, see also Respondent's Reply, para. 9.

7

 

  

28.

29.

30.

ECT crystallised on 20 June 2014; (c) the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction over the
7% Levy, and (d) the operating life of the Claimants’ wind installations is 25 years.”*°
Consequently, the Claimants add, the Tribunal made the corresponding adjustments in

the damages calculations that were intentional and consistent with these findings.

First, the Claimants note that Spain’s reading of the Award is wrong and that the
Tribunal did reject the claim for past damages.*! Thus, the Claimants say, the first of
the clerical errors identified by Spain is not an error. The Claimants point that the
Tribunal’s decision to take EUR 77 million from Table 13 rather than EUR 97.7 million
“was intentional and the obvious consequence of the Tribunal’s findings that only the
‘wholesale dismantlement’ of the Original Regime as from 20 June 2014 constituted a
breach of the ECT.”*? The Claimants point out that Spain “appears to withdraw its first
request for rectification” and, therefore, do not address this first request in the

Claimants’ Rejoinder.**

Second, the Claimants counter Spain’s argument regarding the TVPEE by noting that
the Tribunal purposefully removed the impact of the TVPEE when it rejected the
Claimants’ claim for damages before 20 June 2014.*4 In its Rejoinder, the Claimants
say that “(a) the request is nothing more than a thinly veiled attempt to appeal the
Tribunal’s damages assessment; and (b) implementing Spain’s request involves a
‘complex exercise to retrace or clarify the parties’ arguments and evidence on the text
to be rectified.’”*> The Claimants further argue that the Tribunal’s decision was even
consistent with Spain’s position that “the New Regime ‘neutralised’ the effect of the

[TVPEE] by ‘enable[ing] them to recover the TVPEE.””*°

Additionally, the Claimants note that Spain’s allegation that the adjustments proposed
in its Request were raised by Accuracy is inaccurate and is now seeking to introduce

new calculations and change its quantum case which is beyond the Tribunal’s power in

9 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 13 (citations omitted).

3 Award, para. 688.
* Claimants’
% Claiman

 

para. 18.
* Rejoinder, para. 14.
* Response, pat
s’ Rejoinder, para. 15.

 

 

9

3.
5.

  

3 Claimants’ Response, para. 25, citing Respondent's Counter-Memorial, para 662.

8

a rectification pursuant to Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention.*” According to the
Claimants, this would involve reviewing evidence and figures filed by the Claimants’
experts and adjusting financial models and not by the sole application of simple
arithmetic. As such, it involves changes in the Tribunal’s determinations in the Award
through a complex exercise. The Claimants conclude by citing the Marco Gavazzi case
that says that “the rectification must not affect the merits of the decision, and must not
lead to a complex exercise to retrace or clarify the parties’ arguments and evidence on
the text to be rectified.”** In its Rejoinder, the Claimants point out that Spain has failed

to explain the new calculations to reach the EUR 48.4 million figure.”

31. Finally, regarding the stay of enforcement, the Claimants respond to Spain’s argument
by saying that neither the ICSID Convention nor the ICSID Rules grant the Tribunal the
power to stay the enforcement in a rectification proceeding. The stay of enforcement is
addressed in Article 54 of the ICSID Convention in reference to a stay in an application
for interpretation, revision or annulment of the award but not for a request for
rectification under Article 49 and even leading commentary on the ICSID Convention
explains it in that form.*? The Claimants find support for their argument in a decision
taken by the tribunal in the Masdar case.*! In its Rejoinder, the Claimants further this
argument indicating that it was precisely the arguments that Spain raised before the
Masdar tribunal that were rejected because they were wholly unsupported by law and

“for those reasons, those arguments should also fail here.””??

32. | Spain’s argument maintaining that Article 44 and 46 of the ICSID Convention gives
power to the Tribunal in regard to the stay of enforcement is countered by the Claimants
by saying that Spain failed to point to a single ‘question of procedure’ that would not be
governed by Section 3 of the ICSID Convention or the Arbitration Rules and that it is

Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules “that expressly governs the stay of

 

¥7 Claimants’ Response, para 26.

38 Claimants’ Response, para. 27, citing Marco Gavazzi and Stefano Gavazzi v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/25,
Decision on Rectification, 13 July 2017, para. 67, Annex-006 and Exhibit CL-186.

% Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 19.

“© Claimants’ Rejoinder, para 27.

“! Claimants’ Response, para. 30, citing Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No.
ARB/14/1, Decision on the Respondent's Application to Stay Enforcement of the Award, 24 August 2018, para. 1, E:
CL-191.

2 Claimants’ Rejoinder, para. 26.

 

 

enforcement question.”*? The Claimants say that this rule unambiguously provides that
stay of enforcement is applicable for interpretation, revision or annulment of an award.
No such provision is warranted under Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention.* In
addressing Spain’s argument on the “systemic of the ICSID Convention (sic)” supports
having stay of enforcement also in the rectification, the Claimants say that the reference
is misplaced because Article 49(2) does not provide for a stay of enforcement.*° The
Claimants responded to Spain’s argument that Articles 50 and 52 grant the Tribunal
power to stay the enforcement by saying that they “fail[ed] to understand why the
position of Article 49(2) within Section 4 of the ICSID Convention would allow

derogating from the plain meaning out of that provision.”*”

33. The Claimants conclude that the Tribunal manifestly lacks the authority to grant
Respondent’s requested relief related to the stay of enforcement. **® As per this

conclusion, the Claimants do not address the other grounds alleged by Spain.*?

IV. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

A. Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent’s Request for Rectification

34. This analysis represents the majority view of the Tribunal and the reference to the word

“Tribunal” in the analysis is the majority view.*°
i. Applicable Legal Standard

35. — Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention governs an application for rectification of errors

in an Award. Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention reads as follows:

The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45 days after the date

” Rejoinder, paras. 31-32.
” Rejoinder, para. 3:

” Rejoinder, paras. 32-33.

Rejoinder, paras. 40-42.

” Rejoinder, para 43.

” Response, para. 33.

#9 Claimants’ Response, para. 33.

*° Consistently with her disagreement with the reasoning on the merits and the way the method of calculation chosen by the
majority was implemented in the Award, Professor Dr. Héléne Ruiz Fabri cannot support the present Decision.

10

   
  

on which the award was rendered may after notice to the other party decide
any question which it had omitted to decide in the award, and shall rectify
any clerical, arithmetical or similar error in the award. Its decision shall
become part of the award and shall be notified to the parties in the same
manner as the award. The periods of time provided for under paragraph (2)
of Article 51 and paragraph (2) of Article 52 shall run from the date on
which the decision was rendered.

36. The procedure which governs the submission, receipt and processing of a request for
rectification of an award is relevantly set out in Rule 49 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules

which reads as follows:

(1) Within 45 days of the date on which the award was rendered, either party
may request, pursuant to Article 49(2) of the Convention, a supplementary
decision on, or rectification of, the award. Such a request shall be addressed
in writing to the Secretary-General. The request shall:

(a) identify the award to which it relates;
(b) indicate the date of the request;
(c) state in detail:
(i) any question which, in the opinion of the requesting party, the
Tribunal omitted to decide in the award; and
(ii) any error in the award which the requesting party seeks to have
rectified; and
(d) be accompanied by a fee for lodging the request.

(2) Upon receipt of the request and of the lodging fee, the Secretary-General
shall forthwith:

(a) register the request;

(b) notify the parties of the registration;

(c) transmit to the other party a copy of the request and of any
accompanying documentation; and

(d) transmit to each member of the Tribunal a copy of the notice of
registration, together with a copy of the request and of any
accompanying documentation.

(3) The President of the Tribunal shall consult the members on whether it is
necessary for the Tribunal to meet in order to consider the request. The
Tribunal shall fix a time limit for the parties to file their observations on the
request and shall determine the procedure for its consideration.

(4) Rule 46-48 shall apply mutatis mutandis, to any decision for the Tribunal
pursuant to this Rule.

11

(5) If a request is received by the Secretary-General more than 45 days after
the award was rendered, he shall refuse to register the request and so inform
forthwith the requesting party.

37. The scope of Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention is limited in that the power of the

Tribunal is to “rectify any clerical, arithmetical or similar error in the award.” The

 

request for rectification is intended to be utilized to correct “inadvertent omissions and
minor technical errors”>! but “[iJt is not designed to afford a substantive review or
reconsideration of the decision.” Its purpose is to “enable the tribunal to correct mistakes
that may have occurred in the award’s drafting in a non-bureaucratic and expeditious

152
manner.

38. The request for rectification is not an appeal and is merely a correction of clerical or
arithmetical errors and this is exemplified in the decision of the ad hoc Committee in

Vivendi v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, which held as follows:

In this regard, it is important to state that that procedure, and any
supplementary decision or rectification as may result, in no way consists of
a means of appealing or otherwise revising the merits of the decision subject
to supplementation or rectification.»

 

And also:

A review of pertinent arbitral awards illustrates that the availability of the
rectification remedy afforded by Article 49(2) depends upon the existence
of two factual conditions. First, a clerical, arithmetical or similar error in an
award or decision must be found to exist. Second, the requested rectification
must concern an aspect of the impugned award or decision that is purely
accessory to its merits. Simply stated (and contrary to Respondent’s
assertion at paragraph 26 of its Request), Article 49(2) does not permit the
“rectification” of substantive findings made by a tribunal or committee or
of the weight or credence accorded by the tribunal or committee to the

5! Dong, W., Module 2.8 ICSID: Post-Award Remedies and Procedures, Course on Dispute Settlement in International Trade,
Investment and Intellectual Property, UNCTAD, New York and Geneva, 2003, p. 7, Exhibit CL-180 (“[T]his remedy is
designed for inadvertent omissions and minor technical errors. It is not designed for a substantive review of the decision.
Rather, it enables the tribunal to correct mistakes that may have occurred in the award’s drafting in a simple way”).

®2 Christoph Schreuer, with Loretta Malintoppi, August Reinisch and Anthony Sinclair, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A.
COMMENTARY (Cambridge University Press, 2d ed. 2009), pp.849-850.

53 Vivendi v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Request for
Supplementation and Rectification of its Decision Concerning Annulment of the Award, 28 May 2003, para. 11, Exhibit CL-
189, citing Christoph Schreuer, with Loretta Malintoppi, August Reinisch and Anthony Sinclair, THE ICSID CONVENTION:
A COMMENTARY (Cambridge University Press, 2d ed. 2009), Art. 49, para. 47.

12

   

z

   

   

 

claims, arguments and evidence presented by the parties. The sole purpose
of a rectification is to correct clerical, arithmetical or similar errors, not to
reconsider the merits of issues already decided.**

39. The Tribunal is of the view that a request for rectification is not intended to address
complex errors. The Tribunal relies on the decision in Victor Pey Casado v. Chile, which
states as follows: “It follows that, as is already implicit in the notion of ‘rectification’,
the procedure does not encompass any alleged mistake of law by the tribunal or any
factual determination or discretionary assessment by it. The procedure is not an appeal,
and this in turn illuminates why Article 49 of the Convention makes the rectification of

any duly established ‘clerical, arithmetical or similar error’ into a duty of the tribunal.”°>

40. The Tribunal also refers to the decision in RDC v. Guatemala, where the ICSID tribunal
held “that the powers of the tribunal to rectify the award is limited and that the threshold
question is whether the rectification requested falls within the parameters of Article

49(2) of the ICSID Convention.”*°

41. ICSID tribunals have, for instance, rectified errors which contain a mathematical
miscalculation which is based on an evident error in the application of a discount rate*’

or recalculating a damages award where the tribunal failed to account for a sum that it

obviously intended to include.**

42. — The Tribunal is of the view that, pursuant to Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention, the
request for rectification is not intended to change the methodological approach in the

calculation of quantum as opposed to amending a pure mathematical calculation.

43. The Tribunal, in the light of the ICSID jurisprudence that has been referred to above,

4 Vivendi v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Request for
Supplementation and Rectification of its Decision Concerning Annulment of the Award, 28 May 2003, para. 25, footnotes
omitted, Exhibit CL-189.

55 Victor Pey Casado and Foundation “Presidente Allende” v. the Republic of Chile, CSID Case No. ARB/98/2, De
on Rectification of the Award, 6 October 2017, para. 49, footnotes omitted, Annex 002 and Exhibit CL-184.

56 Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O7/23, Decision on Claimant's
Request for Supplementation and Rectification of Award, 18 January 2013, Ex. CA-4, para. 46, Annex 007 and Exhibit CL-
185.

57 Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/23, Decision on Claimant Request
for Supplementation and Rectification of the Award, 18 January 2013, para. 43, Annex 007 and Exhibit CL-185.

58 Marco Gavazzi and Stefano Ga . Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/25, Decision on Rectification, 13 July 2017,
paras. 61-62, Annex-006 and Exhibit CL-186.

 

 

 

 

13

44,

45.

46.

47.

will now address the two issues which are raised by the Respondent.

First Issue: The Tribunal erred in its assessment of damages by failing to take into
account, damages caused to the Claimants prior to the date of valuation, namely, 20

June 2014.

Second Issue: The Tribunal erred in not excluding an impact of the 7% levy over which

the Tribunal had declined jurisdiction.
ii. First Issue

The first issue is the Respondent’s request to correct the Tribunal’s award of damages

to reflect “lost historical cash flows.”

Spain contends that the Tribunal made a mistake when it applied the adjustment for the
operational life to Brattle’s DCF valuation* in setting out damages at EUR 77 million
as at 20 June 2014. Spain contends that the Tribunal relied on Table 13 of the Second
Brattle Report to determine the quantum of compensation due to the Claimants. The

Respondent contends, inter alia, that:

(a) _ the Tribunal did not rely on the proper figure in Table 13 of the Second Brattle
Report. The Respondent contends that the figure of EUR 77 million was taken
from Appendix B to the Second Brattle Report and in so doing the Tribunal made

a mistake in relying on this figure;

(b) _ the Tribunal did not reject the request for past damages and that the correct figure
that should have been taken from Table 13 is EUR 97.7 million and hence this
is a clerical error which should be corrected. Table 13, according to the
Respondent, was a sensitivity analysis, allowing adjustments to the damages

calculation which were presented by the Claimants; °! and

(c) _ the Tribunal had failed to consider the damages that were caused prior to the date

5° Award, para. 744.
© Request, para. 16.
©! Request, para. 22.

48.

49.

50.

51.

of valuation, namely, the “lost historical cash flows.”

The Claimants in reply contend that the “lost historical cash flows” comprised of the
Claimants’ damages calculations, which was the difference from the following dates,

namely, 27 December 2012 to June 2014, which comprised the following:

(a) the Wind Farm’s cash flows that would have accrued “But for” the measures;
and

(b) the Wind Farm’s “Actual” cash flows.

The Claimants also contend that these were the losses that had accrued from the day
when the first Disputed Measure, Law 15/2012 creating the 7% Levy, was enacted, to
the Government publication of the June 2014 Order, setting out the specific economic

parameters which implemented the New Regime and fixing the date of Spain’s

“drreversible deprivation.”*

The Tribunal refers to the Majority Award, in particular to paragraphs 687 and 688,
which read as follows:

687. As discussed above at paragraph 642a, the Claimants claim the lost
historical cash flows of the Claimants’ investments resulting from the
Disputed Measures from December 2012 to June 2015 by comparing the
Actual cash flows with the But-For scenario cash flows assuming the
Disputed Measures were never implemented.

688. Similar to the tribunal in Antin, this Tribunal has found that Spain
violated the ECT by its wholesale dismantlement of the Original Regime
but not from modifying certain of the elements of the regime. As the course
of conduct constituting the breach of the ECT reached “watershed” on
20 June 2014 as set out in paragraph 570 above, the Tribunal rejects
the Claimants’ claim for losses prior to the breach.

The Tribunal is of the view that paragraph 642 of the Majority Award which deals with

Brattle’s three-step damage valuation is relevant. The said paragraph reads as follows:

© Request, para. 21.

 

© Award, paras. 687. 688, omitted citations (emphasis added).

15

52.

53.

Brattle conducts a three-step damage valuation.

a. First, Brattle measures the lost historical cash flows of the Claimants’
investments resulting from the Disputed Measures by comparing the cash
flows from 27 December 2012 (the commencement of the Disputed
Measures) to June 2014 (the Valuation Date) under two scenarios: “Actual”
based on the actual historical financial data for the Claimants’ investments;
and “But-for” calculated on the assumption that the Disputed Measures
were never implemented.

b. Secondly, Brattle estimates the loss in the fair market value of the
Claimants’ investments as at June 2014 under the But-for and Actual
scenarios using a DCF method. Brattle develops two versions of DCF
model. The Actual model which calculates the projected future cash flows
in the Actual scenario. The But-for model, which is identical to the Actual
model save for two differences: (i) it assumes the continued application of
FITs as specified under RD 661/2007 starting in January 2013; and (ii) it
assumes less regulatory risk than exists under the Actual scenario. For each
DCF model, Brattle projects future cash flows and then discounts those cash
flows to reflect risk.

c. Thirdly, Brattle calculates the pre-award interest owing from June 2014

to the notional award date of November 2018 and the tax gross-up.©
The Tribunal is of the view that in the light of the aforesaid paragraph and paragraph
688 of the Majority Award, it is manifestly clear that the Respondent’s contention is
without merit as the Tribunal did reject the claim for past damages. The Tribunal also
found that the breach of the ECT reached a watershed on 20 June 2014 and hence
expressly rejected the Claimants’ claim for losses prior to the breach. In the Tribunal’s
view, there was no error. Nor could the purported error be categorized as clerical,
arithmetical or similar error in the Award. The Tribunal is of the view that the decision
to award EUR 77 million rather than EUR 97.7 million was a deliberate decision of the
majority, in its construction of Table 13, especially in the light of the majority’s finding
that there was a “wholesale dismantlement of the Original Regime from 20 June 2014

which constituted a breach of the ECT.”°”

The Tribunal is therefore of the view that it decided this issue on the evidence, the

pleadings, the expert reports and the extensive submissions of the Parties and it is of the

© Award, para. 642, citing First Brattle Quantum Report, paras. 15-17, 23-24.

© Award, para. 688.

16

54.

55.

56.

57.

view that there is no clerical, arithmetical or similar error in the quantification of the

damages in the Majority Award which requires rectification.

The Respondent contends that it drew the alleged correction with regard to past
damages, for the sake of honesty and good faith. The Respondent concedes that
paragraph 688 of the Award did reject the claim for past damages and is of the view that
if the Claimants consider the Respondent to be wrong, then the Respondent has nothing
further to add. This concession on the part of the Respondent is only with regard to the
first request for rectification. This, in the Tribunal’s view, supports its view that the first
request has no merit and hence the Respondent’s request for rectification of this

purported error is misconceived and must be rejected.

iii, Second Issue

The Respondent’s contention with respect of the second issue is that “[dJespite having
established the Tribunal’s lack of jurisdiction” in respect of the 7% Levy, “the impact
of this tax has not been neutralized when calculating the damages.”®* The Respondent
further alleges that certain adjustments should have been made to the financial model

submitted by the Claimants’ experts.”

The Tribunal is of the view that the adjustments that are proposed by the Respondent
with regard to the second issue, are novel. The Tribunal is of the view that this issue
was not raised in the pleadings and in the submissions of the Respondent. The
Respondent contends that if the TVPEE amounts were deducted out as a result of the
exclusion of the TVPEE, the quantum of damages would be reduced to EUR 62.4

million in accordance with the First Brattle Report.

The Tribunal, in the Majority Award, in its analysis of quantum, took the view that the
Claimants were not entitled to past damages and this is provided for in paragraph 688
of the Majority Award; that having held that Spain had violated the ECT with effect

from 20 June 2014, rejected the claim for damages claimed by the Claimants, prior to

© Request, para. 24.
© Request, paras 25-26.

58.

59.

60.

61.

7 Claimants’ Response, para. 24, citing Respondent's Counter-Memoria

20 June 2014 and awarded compensation in the sum of EUR 77 million. The Tribunal
notes that the 7% Levy was introduced by Spain on 27 December 2012 and hence the
Tribunal in the Majority Award in its analysis pertaining to the issue of damages, rightly

excluded the 7% Levy.

As cited by the Claimants, the Tribunal refers to Spain’s arguments which are contained

in its Counter-Memorial with regard to the 7% Levy, which reads as follows:

[t]he impact of the TVPEE on renewable producers such as those subject to
this arbitration has been neutralized, given that the TVPEE is one of the
costs remunerated to those producers through the specific remuneration
they receive, as analysed in this Counter-Memorial when examining the
current remuneration regime of renewable energy producers. In other
words, the specific remuneration received by renewable producers enables
them to recover certain costs that, unlike conventional technologies, cannot
be recovered in the market, and, also, to obtain a reasonable return. Among
those costs is precisely the TVPEE.”°
The Tribunal notes that it was the Respondent’s own case that the 7% Levy did not
cause any harm to the Claimants after the implementation of the New Regime. The

Respondent’s argument was referred to and addressed in paragraph 115 of the Award.

The Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent’s proposed correction is not just a
simple mathematical operation, as it requires the Tribunal accepting an argument of the
Respondent, which was not specifically pleaded, nor was it raised in the Respondent’s
submissions or evidence. This, in the context of a rectification request, is

“impermissible”.”!

The Respondent contends that the Tribunal “refers to several adjustment raised by
Accuracy.” 7? However, none of the adjustments raised by Accuracy includes the
adjustment that the Respondent is now proposing with regard to the 7% Levy.” There
was no submission by Accuracy of any calculations with regard to the economic impact

of the 7% Levy. The Respondent is now attempting in this application for rectification,

 

para. 662.

7! Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, 1CSID Case No. ARB/07/23, Decision on Claimant Request
for Supplementation and Rectification, 18 January 2013, para. 47, Annex 007 and Exhibit CL-185.
15,

  

a.

73 Award, para. 743.

62.

63.

64.

to raise novel arguments regarding the proposed adjustments, which, in the Tribunal’s

view, is not permissible.

The Tribunal is of the view that Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention does not enable
the Respondent to introduce new calculations so that the quantum which has been
assessed by the Tribunal can be reviewed and adjusted. This is beyond the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal in an application for rectification. The Tribunal refers to the tribunal’s
decision in LG&E Energy Corp. et al. v. Argentina and relies on the passage which
adopts the passage of Professor Schreuer, which was quoted in the ad hoc Committee’s

decision in Vivendi v. Argentina, which reads as follows:

In addition, the Claimants misconceive the function of the recourse to a
supplementary decision by asserting that it allows Argentina to respond to
their new arguments and evidence. The supplementation process is not a
mechanism by which parties can continue proceedings on the merits or seek
a remedy that calls into question the validity of the Tribunal’s decision.
Referring to Professor Schreuer, the ad hoc Committee in the Vivendi case
noted:

[...] it is important to state that that procedure [by which
ICSID awards and decisions may be supplemented and
rectified], and any supplementary decision or rectification as
may result, in no way consist of a means of appealing or
otherwise revising the merits of the decision subject to
supplementation or rectification.

The Tribunal refers and relies on the tribunal’s decision in Marco Gavazzi and Stefano
Gavazzi v. Romania, which held that, “the rectification must not affect the merits of the
[d]ecision, and must not lead to a complex exercise to retrace or clarify the parties’

arguments and evidence on the text to be rectified.””>

The Tribunal is of the view that if the Respondent’s proposed correction is adhered to,
it would involve a review of the evidence, the submissions and the expert reports that

have been filed in the arbitration proceedings. The Tribunal is of the view that this is

74 LG&E Energy Corp. et al. v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Claimants’ Request for Supplementary

Decision, 8 July 2008, para. 16, footnotes omitted, Exhibit CL-188.

 

and Stefano Gavazzi v. Romania, 1CSID Case No. ARB/12/25, Decision on Rectification, 13 July 2017,

 

para. 56, Annex 006 and Exhibit CL-186.

19

not permissible in an application for rectification.

65. The Tribunal wishes to reiterate that with regard to the second issue in respect of
quantification of damages, which also relates to the Majority Award, the Tribunal had
considered all the evidence, the pleadings, the expert reports and the extensive
submissions of the parties and finds that there is no clerical, arithmetical or similar error
that needs to be corrected and therefore, for the reasons set out above, the request for

rectification by the Respondent has no merit and is therefore, rejected.

B. Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent’s Request for Stay of Enforcement

66. The Respondent makes an application for stay of enforcement pending rectification and

relies on Articles 44 to 47 of the ICSID Convention, which read as follows:

Article 44
Any arbitration proceeding shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of this Section and, except as the parties otherwise agree, in
accordance with the Arbitration Rules in effect on the date on which the
parties consented to arbitration. If any question of procedure arises which is
not covered by this Section or the Arbitration Rules or any rules agreed by
the parties, the Tribunal shall decide the question.

Article 45
(1) Failure of a party to appear or to present his case shall not be deemed an
admission of the other party’s assertions.

(2) If a party fails to appear or to present his case at any stage of the
proceedings the other party may request the Tribunal to deal with the
questions submitted to it and to render an award. Before rendering an award,
the Tribunal shall notify, and grant a period of grace to, the party failing to
appear or to present its case, unless it is satisfied that that party does not
intend to do so.
Article 46

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal shall, if requested by a
party, determine any incidental or additional claims or counterclaims arising
directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute provided that they are within
the scope of the consent of the parties and are otherwise within the
jurisdiction of the Centre.

20

Article 47
Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that
the circumstances so require, recommend any provisional measures which
should be taken to preserve the respectively rights of either party.”

and contends that the Tribunal has the power to grant a stay on the grounds that it has
power to decide on any issue which is not decided by the applicable rules to the

proceedings. ”°

 

67. | The Respondent also relies on Article 51(2) and Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention
and contends that the rectification decision may become part of the award and hence a
stay should be granted so that the Award will not be complete until the Decision
regarding the request for rectification is rendered.”

68. The Respondent also contends that Rule 54 which relates to interpretation, revision or
annulment of an award, should be interpreted in a flexible manner. ”®

69. The request for stay by the Respondent is predicated on, inter alia, the following
grounds:

(a) that the Respondent is compelled to notify the Award to the EU Commission in
compliance with the decision of the European Union Commission on the S.A.
40348(2015/NN) procedure. The Respondent contends that the binding nature of
the EU Commission decision is established in Article 107, 108 and 288 of the
TFEU;”

(b) that the ECT recognizes that member States of the EU are legally bound by
decisions of EU institutions;®°

(c) reliance on the Electrabel decision;*!

7 Request, 31.

Request, para. 33.
® Request, 34.
Request, 35.

  
 

36.
317, citing Electrabel
para. 4.142, Exhibit

. v. The Republic of Hungary, 1CSID Case No. ARB/07/19, Jurisdiction Award, 25
-0048.

 

  

21

70.

71.

(d) _ that the decision of the EU Commission of November 2017 is binding on Arbitral
Tribunals when they apply the EU Law and that the exclusive forum of

challenging its validity are the European Courts;*? and

(e) the Respondent therefore contends that in the light of the above it must notify the
Award to the EU Commission in compliance with EU Law and until the EU
Commission makes a decision pursuant to Article 108 of the TFEU, the

Respondent cannot comply with the Award as it would be a breach of EU Law.*?

The Tribunal has considered Articles 44 to 47 of the ICSID Convention and is of the
view that these provisions of the ICSID Convention do not confer jurisdiction on the
Tribunal to grant a stay of enforcement of the Award. Stay of enforcement of an award
is addressed in Article 50 of the ICSID Convention and not in a request for rectification

under Article 49(2). Article 50 of the ICSID Convention reads as follows: -

(1) If any dispute shall arise between the parties as to the meaning or scope
of an award, either party may request interpretation of the award by an
application in writing addressed to the Secretary-General.

(2) The requests shall, if possible, be submitted to the Tribunal which
rendered the award. If this shall not be possible a new Tribunal shall be
constituted in accordance with Section 2 of this Chapter. The Tribunal may,
if it considers that the circumstances so require, stay enforcement of the
award pending its decision.**
The Tribunal refers to the decision in Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v.
Kingdom of Spain® where Spain sought to stay enforcement of the award on the

following grounds:

(a) that the tribunal had the power to issue a stay of enforcement “by operation of

Articles 44 to 47 of the ICSID Convention”;

(b) a stay was appropriate because the respondent was “compelled to notify the

® Request, para. 38.

® Request, para. 39.
* ICSID Convention, Article 50.
“SMasdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Case No. ARB/14/1, Decision on the Respondent's

Application to Stay Enforcement of the Award, 24 August 2018, Exhibi

 

CL-191,

22

72.

73.

74,

Masdar Award to the EU Commission”; and

(c) under Article 49(2), the “periods of time provided for under” Articles 51(2) and

52(2) “run from the date on which the requested decision is rendered”. *°

The Masdar tribunal held that it did not have “the power to order a stay of enforcement
in connection with a request for [a rectification] decision made pursuant to Article 49(2)
of the ICSID Convention.”*’ The said tribunal held it lacked that authority because
“Tt]he post-award remedies which allow an ICSID Tribunal to order a stay of
enforcement are regulated by Articles 50 to 52 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rules 50 to 55.”** Accordingly, it held that ‘a stay of enforcement is not
contemplated for supplementation and rectification of an award” under Article 49(2).°°

This conclusion was “confirmed by many leading commentators.”””

The Tribunal relies on the persuasive decision of the Masdar tribunal and is therefore
of the view that Articles 44 to 47 of the ICSID Convention do not confer jurisdiction on
the Tribunal to issue a stay of enforcement of an award especially in view of the wording

of Rule 54(1) of the Arbitration Rules, which reads as follows:

(1) The party applying for the interpretation, revision or annulment of an
award may in its application, and either party may at any time before the
final disposition of the application, request a stay in the enforcement of part
or all of the award to which the application relates. The tribunal or
committee shall give priority to the consideration of such a request.”!

The Tribunal by majority, holds that it does not have jurisdiction to grant the Respondent

a stay of enforcement of the Award.

8 Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1, Decision on the Respondent’s

Application to Stay Enforcement of the Award, 24 August 2018, paras. 6-8, Exhibit CL-191.

®7 Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A.
Application to Stay Enforcement of the Award, 24 August 2018, para. 17, Ex
88 Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A.
Application to Stay Enforcement of the Award, 24 August 2018, para. 23, EXxhil
® Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A.
Application to Stay Enforcement of the Award, 24 August 2018, para. 23, Ex
% Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v.

 

Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Case No. ARB/14/1, Decision on the Respondent's
ibit CL-191.
Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Case No. ARB/14/1, Decision on the Respondent's
it CL-191
Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Case No. ARB/14/1, Decision on the Respondent's
ibit CL-191.
s¢ No. ARB/14/1, Decision on the Respondent’s

 

 

 

 

 

Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Cas

    

Application to Stay Enforcement of the Award, 24 August 2018, para. 17, Exhibit CL-191.
9°! ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(1).

23

C. Tribunal’s Decision on Costs

75. The Respondent submitted that the Request for Rectification derived from causes
beyond the conduct of the parties and, thus, should not be attributable to the conduct of
either of them. Therefore, the Respondent argues that each party should bear its own
costs and expenses and both of them should share equally the cost of the rectification
proceeding.*? The Respondent indicates that the Tribunal has the authority to apportion
the costs of the arbitration between the parties pursuant to Article 61(2) of the ICSID

Convention. The Respondent summarized its costs as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Category Amount
ICSID fees EUR 9,227.78
ICSID Advance payments EUR 46,556.62
Editing services EUR 66.24
Courier services EUR 30.71
TOTAL EUR 55,881.35

 

 

 

 

76. The Claimants contend that both Parties agree that the applicable standard for the
allocation of costs is Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention.** The Claimants differ
from the Respondent on whether the cost allocation is not result of the conduct of the
parties and request that the Tribunal “predominantly consider the ‘costs follow the
event’ principle when exerting its discretion to allocate costs.”®> The Claimants sustain
that other tribunals have adopted the “cost follow the event” when allocating costs on

rectification proceedings.*° The Claimants request that in the event that the Tribunal

°2 Respondent’s Cost Submission, 13 May 2020, p. 1.
° Respondent’s Cost Submission, 13 May 2020, p. 3.

: . 27 May 2020, para. 10.
27 May 2020, para. 1
27 May 2020, para. 15, citing Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v.
Republic of Chile 1, ICSID Case No. ARDEP, Annulment Proceeding - Supplementary Decision, Decision on Respondent
Request for Supplementation of the Annulment Decision, 11 September 2013, paras. 56-58, Annex 002 and Exhibit CL-184;
Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/23, Decision on Claimant Request
for Supplementation and Rectification, 18 January 2013, para. 51, Annex 007 and Exhibit CL-185; Philip Morris Brand Sarl
(Switzerland), Philip Morris Products S.A. (Switzerland) and Abal Hermanos S.A. (Uruguay) v. Oriental Republic of Uruguay,
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/7, Decision on the Rectification, 26 September 2016, para. 43, Exhibit CL-183; and Alex Genin,
Eastern Credit Limited, Inc. and A.S. Baltoil v. The Republic of Estonia, \CSID Case No. ARB/99/2, Decision on Claimant's
Request for Supplementary Decisions and Rectification, 4 April 2002, paras. 19-20, Exhibit CL-194.

24

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

rejects the Request that the Tribunal order Respondent to pay in full the Claimants’

share of ICSID administrative costs, Tribunal expenses and the Claimants’ legal costs.

Alternatively, the Claimants request that the Tribunal allocate costs between the Parties

reflecting the Parties’ relative success in the rectification proceeding. The Claimants’

total amount of arbitration and legal costs is USD 50,000.00 and EUR 63,293.39,

respectively, distributed as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Allen & Overy Legal Fees EUR USD

Legal fees — Time-costs up to and including 27 May 2020

Legal Fees (13 April 2020 to 27 May 2020) € 25,753.14

Total legal fees € 25,753.14 $0

Expert fees and disbursements EUR USD

The Brattle Group fees - € € 37,540.25

Total € 37,540.25 $0

Claimants’ payment to ICSID EUR USD

Lodging fee” $50,000

Total €0 $50,000

Grand total EUR USD
€ 63,293.39 $50,000

 

 

77. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the parties
otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in connection
with the proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom those expenses,
the fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for
the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form

part of the award.

°7 The Claimants actually were referring to the advance payment requested by ICSID by letter of 13 March 2020.

25

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

Rules 47(1)(j) and 49(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules read as follows:

Rule 47(1)(j): “any decision of the Tribunal regarding the cost of the
proceeding.”

Rule 49(4): “Rules 46-48 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to any decision of

the Tribunal pursuant to this Rule.”
The Respondent contends that each party should bear its own costs and expenses and
both of them should share equally the costs of this rectification proceedings. The

Claimants contend that costs should follow the event.

As decided in section IV of this Decision, the Tribunal has found no merit to the
Respondent’s application for rectification and no jurisdiction with respect to the
Respondent's request for stay of enforcement of the award.°* In exercising its discretion
as provided in Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, and for purposes of Rules 47(1)(j)
and 49(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal decides that costs incurred in
relation to Respondent’s application for rectification and stay of enforcement, should

1.29

follow the event Therefore, the Claimants’ legal costs and the costs of rectification

proceedings shall be borne by the Respondent.

The Claimants’ legal costs and other expenses as stated above amount to

EUR 63,293.39.

The costs of the rectification proceeding which include the Tribunal’s fees and expenses

and ICSID’s administrative fees and expenses amount to (in USD):

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses

Tan Sri Dato’ Cecil W.M. Abraham 12,012.50

Dr. Michael C. Pryles 12,656.25

Prof. Dr. Héléne Ruiz Fabri 3,637.50
ICSID’s administrative fees 42,000
Direct expenses (estimated) 3,238.00

°8 See paras. 54, 65 and 74 supra.

” The Tribunal also relies on the decision in Genin v Estonia, where the tribunal rejected the Claimant’s request for

tion and ordered that the costs of rectification “shall follow the result. See Alex Genin, Eastern Credit Limited, Inc.

and A.S. Baltoil v The Republic of Estonia, (CSID Case No. ARB/99/2, Decision on Claimant’s Request for Supplementary
Decision and Rectification, 4 April 2002, paras. 19 and 20, Exhibit CL-194.

26

83.

84.

85.

Total (estimated) 73,544.25

The costs of the rectification proceeding have been paid out of the advances of the

parties.!°

Each Party’s share of the costs of the rectification amount to USD 36,772.13.
Accordingly, the Tribunal orders the Respondent to pay to the Claimants the costs of
the rectification proceeding that amount to USD 36,772.13 which is the expended

portion of the Claimants’ advance in connection with the Respondent’s Request.

DISPOSITION OF THE RESPONDENT’S APPLICATION

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal by majority, makes the following orders:

1) The Request of the Respondent for rectification of the Award is denied and

dismissed.

2) The Respondent’s application for stay of enforcement of the Award is denied and

dismissed.

3) The Respondent shall pay the Claimants USD 36,772.13 for the costs of the
rectification and EUR 63,293.39 for the Claimants’ legal costs.

100 The remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Parties in proportion to the payments that they advanced to ICSID. Once
the case account balance is final, the ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed financial statement; any
remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Parties in equal shares.

27

 

Dr. Michael|C. Pryles AO PBM Prof. Dr. Héléne Ruiz Fabri

Arbitrator Arbitrator
(Subject to the dissent in paragraph 34 and
Date: 3] 07 [2020 footnote 50)
Date:

Tan Sri Dato’ Cecil W.M. Abraham
President of the Tribunal

Date:

28

I Joes Wee

 

Dr. Michael C. Pryles AO PBM. ae iz Fabri
Arbitrator tae
(Subject to the dissent in paragraph 34 and
Date: footnote 50)

Date: 4 3 jo 8s G5 85\-

Tan Sri Dato’ Cecil W.M. Abraham
President of the Tribunal

Date:

29

 

Dr. Michael C. Pryles AO PBM Prof. Dr. Héléne Ruiz Fabri

Arbitrator Arbitrator
(Subject to the dissent in paragraph 34 and
Date: footnote 50)
Date:

 

Tay Cecil W.M. Abraham.
President of the Tribunal

Date: iat <a GH A0-

30

