IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION IN GENEVA, SWITZERLAND
AND UNDER THE TREATY BETWEEN THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF
GERMANY AND THE KINGDOM OF THAILAND MADE ON 24 JUNE

2002 CONCERNING THE ENCOURAGEMENT AND RECIPROCAL
TREATMENT OF INVESTMENTS AND UNDER THE UNCITRAL
ARBITRATION RULES 1976

BETWEEN

WALTER BAU AG (IN LIQUIDATION)
CLAIMANT

AND

THE KINGDOM OF THAILAND
RESPONDENT

 

AWARD

DATED 1 JULY 2009

 

Tribunal: The Hon. Sir Ian Barker, Q.C. (Chair) (New Zealand)
The Hon. Marc Lalonde, P.C., O.C., Q.C. (Canada)
Mr. Jayavadh Bunnag (Thailand)

Secretary to the Tribunal: Ms. Anja Borchardt (New Zealand)

Counsel: Mr. Robert Hunter, Dr. Mariel Dimsey, Prof. James Crawford
SC for Claimant
Mr. Michael Polkinghorne, Ms. Elizabeth Lefebvre-Gross, Mr.
Paul Brumpton for Respondent

Lawyers: Lovells LLP (Frankfurt) for Claimant
White & Case LLP (Paris) for Respondent

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

1. INTRODUCTION AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY .

2. EVENTS 1984 TO CONCESSION AGREEMENT. ......cssseseeeeeeeseeseeee 23
3. EVENTS POST-CONCESSION AGREEMENT...

4. EVENTS PRECEDING MOA2.,.....cccccsseeeeseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeesseeeeeeeseneseeee 38
5. EVENTS POST-MOA2.,....cccccceeceseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeaeesnesaneeeaes 48
6. THE EVENTS OF DECEMBER 2004 AND BEYOND. .......ccsseeeseeseeee 67
7. THE EFFECT OF CLAUSE 25 OF CONCESSION AGREEMENT....... 73
8. THE EFFECT OF MOA2.,......cccccsecnesseeeeeeeeeeeeseeeseeeeeessaeneeeeeseneseneee 79
9 JURISDICTION RATIONE TEMPORIS ......ccctcseesseeesseeeeeeeeeeneeeeeee 87
10. “CREEPING EXPROPRIATION”......cccccecceeseeseeeeeeesseeeeeeeeeenesenes 117
11. FAIR AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT STANDARD (“FET”) ....... 121
12. CLAIMANT’S LEGITIMATE EXPECTATIONG.......cssecsseeeeeeeneneees 126
13. DAMAGES - GENERAL .......cccsceceseesseeeeseeeeeaeeeeeeeenseaeeeeeeenneseaes 141

14. DAMAGES - ASSESSMENT... 145

 

15. COSTS wescssssescsnssssnssnssssnnnnssseenansssenaesssonnssssananssenanasssonansesananneses 161

16. INTEREST...

 

17. FORMAL AWARD... ...ccccscceeseeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeneeaeeneeesenseaeeeeesenneseaes 163

1.

INTRODUCTION AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

11

On 13 December 1961, a Treaty was signed between the
Respondent, the Kingdom of Thailand and the Federal
Republic of Germany. That Treaty came into force on 10
April 1965. One principal aim of the Treaty was: “The
promotion and reciprocal protection of investments”. The
Claimant, as a German national with an “investment” in
Thailand, alleges that it is entitled to seek relief from the
Respondent by virtue of provisions in a similar Treaty
between the same parties, signed on 24 June 2002 and
which came into force on 20 October 2004. The first
Treaty will be referred to as “the 1961 Treaty” and the
second Treaty as “the 2002 Treaty”.

By notice dated 21 September 2005, requesting
submission of a dispute to arbitration, the Claimant
asserted that the 2002 Treaty, under which it brought its
claim for arbitration, applied to “approved investments”
made in Thailand prior to the entry into force of that
Treaty and that it had an investment approved in terms of
the 1961 Treaty.

The Claimant alleges that its “approved investment” was
as a shareholder in the company which became the
Concessionaire under a tollway concession granted by the
Respondent in its territory and that the Respondent had
breached its obligations to it as a shareholder of the
concessionaire. It made its claim for relief in terms of the
2002 Treaty as an “investor”, as defined in the 2002
Treaty.

The provision in the 2002 Treaty under which the Claimant
brought its claim for arbitration is Article 10 which reads as

follows:

1.5

“Settlement of Disputes between a Contracting
Party and an Investor

(1) Disputes concerning investments between a
Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party should as far as possible be settled
amicably between the parties in dispute.

(2) If the dispute cannot be settled within six months
from the date on which it has been raised by one of
the parties to the dispute, it shall, at the request of
either party to the dispute be submitted for
arbitration. Unless the parties to the dispute have
agreed otherwise, the provisions of Article 9(3) to (5)
shall be applied mutatis mutandis on condition that
the appointment of the members of the arbitral
tribunal in accordance with Article 9(3) is effected by
the parties to the dispute and that, insofar as the
period specified in Article 9(3) are (sic) not observed,
either party to the dispute may, in the absence of
other arrangements, invite the President of the Court
of International Arbitration of the International
Chamber of Commerce in Paris to make the required
appointments. The award shall be enforced in
accordance with domestic law.

(3) During arbitration proceedings or the enforcement
of an award, the Contracting Party involved in the
dispute shall not raise the objection that the investor
of the other Contracting Party has_ received
compensation under an insurance contract in respect
of all or part of the damage.

(4) In the event of both Contracting Parties having
become Contracting States of the Convention of 18
March 1965 on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States,
disputes under this Article between the parties to
dispute shall be submitted for arbitration under the
aforementioned Convention, unless the parties in
dispute agree otherwise; each Contracting Party
herewith declares its acceptance of such procedure.”

The provisions in Article 9(3) to (5) of the 2002 Treaty,
referred to in Article 10 above, in summary require each
party to appoint a member of an arbitral Tribunal. The two
members so appointed should nominate a national of a
third state to be Chair of the arbitral tribunal within three
months from the date when the Claimant gave notice that
it intended to submit the dispute to an arbitral Tribunal
(i.e. 21 September 2005). In default of the co-arbitrators

agreeing on a Chairman, the nomination of a Chairman is
to be made by the President of the Court of International
Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce,
Paris (the “ICC Court”). Article 9 of the 2002 Treaty deals
with state-state arbitration in the event of a dispute

concerning interpretation or application of the Treaty.

Procedural Background

1.6

1.10

1.11

The Claimant is Walter Bau AG (In Liquidation)
(“Claimant” or “Walter Bau”), a company incorporated
under the laws of the Federal Republic of Germany which is
acting through its insolvency administrator, Herrn Werner

Schneider.

The Claimant is represented by Mr. Robert Hunter of
Lovells LLP, Frankfurt, Germany.

The Respondent is the Kingdom of _ Thailand
(“Respondent”). Like all governments, the Respondent
operates through a variety of agencies. Many of these will
appear in the narrative, notably the Department of
Highways (“DoH”).

The Respondent is represented by Mr. Michael
Polkinghorne of White & Case LLP, Paris, France.

The Claimant, through its insolvency administrator served
its Request for Arbitration on 21 September 2005 pursuant
to Article 10(2) of the Treaty. In this document, the
Claimant appointed the Honourable Marc Lalonde, P.C.,

O.C., Q.C. of Montréal, Québec, Canada as a co-arbitrator.

The Respondent did not immediately respond to the
Request for Arbitration. However, on 30 November 2005,
the Respondent appointed Dr. Suvarn Valaisathien of

Bangkok, Thailand as a co-arbitrator.

1.12

1.13

1.14

1.15

1.16

1.17

The co-arbitrators were unable to agree on the
appointment of a Chairman as envisaged by Articles 9(3)
and 10(2) of the 2002 Treaty. By letter dated 25 January
2006, the Claimant submitted a Request for Appointment
of Chair to the President of the ICC Court pursuant to
Articles 9(4) and 10(2) of the 2002 Treaty.

In the interim, the Claimant wrote to the ICC Court on 10
February 2006 expressing concerns regarding Dr. Suvarn’s

impartiality.

The Claimant noted in that letter to the ICC Court that,
although the Treaty did not provide a mechanism for the
resolution of concerns of lack of impartiality against an
arbitrator, the Claimant nevertheless wished to reserve its
position on this point. However, the Claimant never took

any formal step to challenge Dr. Suvarn’s appointment.

On 27 February 2006, the President of the ICC Court
confirmed the appointment of the Honourable Sir Ian
Barker QC of Auckland, New Zealand as the Chairman of
the Arbitral Tribunal (“the Tribunal”).

A preliminary telephone conference was convened by the
Chairman on 15 March 2006 between Counsel for the
parties and the full Tribunal. The participants discussed
various administrative matters, including a potential venue
and date for a procedural conference to settle Terms of
Reference and Terms of Appointment of the Arbitral

Tribunal.

In accordance with arrangements reached at the telephone
conference, a procedural conference was held on 8 June
2006 in Montréal, Québec, Canada. The Tribunal, counsel
for the parties and representatives of the parties attended.
At this conference, there emerged general agreement on

the Terms of Reference for the arbitration and on the

1.18

1.19

1.20

1.21

Terms of Appointment of the Tribunal (collectively called
“Terms of Reference”). A draft Procedural Timetable

was also discussed.

The Respondent indicated at the procedural conference
that it wished to contest the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to
consider the Claimant’s claim for Treaty protection and
that it would seek bifurcation of the proceedings in order to
have jurisdictional objections disposed of at an early stage.
The parties agreed that the language of the arbitration was

to be English.

On 20 July 2006, the Chairman, on behalf of the Tribunal,
settled the form of a final agreed version of the Terms of
Reference and a Procedural Timetable and sent them to
the parties for signature. Pursuant to paragraph 13 of the
Terms of Reference, the parties were each required to
deposit their share of the advance on costs. An expense
account and a fees account were established. Funds were
to be held and supervised by the London Court of
International Arbitration (“LCIA”) as the stakeholder
approved by the parties. The LCIA was to disburse funds
in accordance with directions from the Chairman given in

accordance with the Terms of Reference.

On 24 July 2006, the Claimant confirmed to the Tribunal
that it would sign the Terms of Reference and that it was
arranging to make the necessary payments to the LCIA.
On 28 July 2006, the Respondent advised that it was also
arranging payment of its share. It still had a few minor
reservations about the Terms of Reference which had yet
to receive the Thai Cabinet’s approval which was expected
on 16 August 2006.

In light of the Respondent's letter, the Chairman extended

the time period for obtaining the Thai Cabinet’s approval to

1.22

1.23

1.24

1.25

the Terms of Reference until 16 August 2006 and
emphasised that the extension should not be interpreted
as permitting either party to veto the Terms of Reference.
The Chairman reminded the parties that the Tribunal had
the authority to issue the Terms of Reference without the
parties’ approval and asked that the parties proceed on the

basis that the Terms of Reference were fixed.

The Claimant signed the Terms of Reference and sent its
signed copy to the members of the Tribunal on 10 August
2006. On 11 August 2006, it forwarded a signed copy of
the Procedural Timetable to the Chairman and advised that
the Claimant’s share of the advance on costs had been
paid to the LCIA.

On 18 August 2006 the Respondent indicated that it had
been unable to meet the 16 August 2006 deadline referred
to in para 1.21 above. The Chairman granted the
Respondent until 4 September 2006 as a final deadline for
obtaining the Thai Cabinet’s approval to the Terms of

Reference.

On 1 September 2006, the Respondent deposited its share
of the advance on costs with the LCIA. On 4 September
2006, it forwarded a signed copy of the Terms of

Reference and the Procedural Timetable to the Tribunal.

Under the Terms of Reference, the juridical seat of the
arbitration is Geneva, Switzerland. The applicable law for

the arbitration is :

“public international law. Subject to this, where
discrete issues of national law arise, the law to be
applied or considered shall ordinarily be the law of
the Kingdom of Thailand although German law
issues may also arise. The Tribunal shall determine
the appropriate law or laws to be applied.”

1.26

1.27

1.28

1.29

Under the Terms of Reference, the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules (“the UNCITRAL Rules”) (except as excluded,
supplemented or varied by agreement of the parties), the
relevant provisions (if any) of the Treaty and/or such
specific orders or instructions of the Tribunal are to be the

applicable procedural rules.

Under the Terms of Reference, the Tribunal is not to be
bound by strict rules of evidence. However, as
appropriate, the Tribunal may have regard to the 1999
Rules on the Taking of Evidence in _ International
Commercial Arbitration adopted by the International Bar
Association (“the IBA Rules”).

Under the Terms of Reference, the Chairman was
empowered to make procedural rulings alone, subject to

the provisions of Clause 14(c) which states:

“The Tribunal and the Parties agree that the
Presiding Arbitrator may make procedural rulings
alone provided that:

(i) all correspondence is copied to the co-
arbitrators;

(ii) the Presiding Arbitrator shall be free to consult,
in his discretion, with the other arbitrators or to
refer significant or difficult matters to the full
Tribunal for decisions; and

(iii) the full Tribunal shall hear and determine any

procedural matter if requested by either Party.”
After the signing of the Terms of Reference, the Tribunal
appointed Ms. Lauren Lindsay, Barrister, of Auckland, New
Zealand as Administrative Secretary to the Tribunal. Ms.
Lindsay resigned and was replaced in this role by Ms. Anja
Borchardt, Barrister, of Auckland, New Zealand on 1 July
2008. Appointment of an Administrative Secretary was

authorised by the Terms of Reference.

1.30

1.31

1.32

On 2 October 2006, the Respondent submitted a Memorial
on Jurisdiction and a Request for Bifurcation. It also
sought an order for security for costs against the Claimant.
Both parties made various applications for discovery. A
further telephone conference was held on 21 December
2006 (Auckland time) to discuss these applications and the
timing of a jurisdictional hearing, should the decision be
made to bifurcate the proceedings. The telephone
conference was attended by all members of the Tribunal

and counsel for the parties.

After consideration by members of the Tribunal of the
discussion at the telephone conference, the Chairman, on
behalf of the Tribunal, issued an order on 21 December
2006 which granted the Respondent’s application to
bifurcate the proceedings. He ordered that discrete
jurisdictional questions in a form to be agreed between the
parties would be considered by the Tribunal at a
jurisdictional hearing which was fixed for 20-21 March
2007 in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, a venue acceptable to the

parties.

Whilst certain discovery orders were made, the Tribunal
refused to make an order for security for costs in respect
of the jurisdictional hearing. It made no decision in the
meantime on the Respondent’s application that the
Claimant give security for the Respondent’s costs of the
substantive arbitration. The Tribunal sought the following

information from the Claimant:

“(a) the insolvency administrator’s current estimate
of the amount that would be available after
payment of secured creditors and the costs of
the insolvency;

(b) whether, out of this sum, it is possible to ‘ring-
fence’ a discrete amount which would earn
interest for the insolvency but which could be
available for security for costs. Such sum

1.33

1.34

1.35

1.36

could only be disbursed on the order of the
Tribunal.”
The Tribunal considered that, if the Respondent’s
jurisdictional challenge were successful, there would be no
need to consider any application for security for the costs
of a substantive hearing. The parties could not agree on
discovery issues and were in dispute over the scope the

Tribunal’s 21 December 2006 Discovery Order.

The Claimant objected to the reception as evidence of a
letter from Dr. Reinhard Zimmer attached to the
Respondent’s rejoinder on jurisdiction. The Claimant
argued that the letter, as a witness statement (expert or
otherwise) was incomplete and that Dr. Zimmer should
appear at the hearing in Kuala Lumpur for cross-

examination if reliance were to be placed on his statement.

The Chairman, on behalf of the Tribunal, issued Procedural
Order No. 1 on 6 March 2007 to dispose of the issues
relating to Dr. Zimmer’s evidence. He ruled that, should
the Respondent wish to rely on Dr. Zimmer's evidence at
the hearing, it would have to submit a witness statement
from him that complied with the IBA Rules and to arrange
for Dr. Zimmer to attend the hearing. The disclosure issue
was to be argued at the hearing. (In the event, Dr.
Zimmer did not attend either the substantial or

jurisdictional hearings in Hong Kong).

On 16 March 2007, when M. Lalonde was already on his
way from Montréal to Kuala Lumpur for the hearing and
the Chairman was about to leave New Zealand for the
hearing, the Respondent emailed the Tribunal challenging
the continued service on the Tribunal of its own party-
appointed arbitrator, Dr. Suvarn Valaisathien. This letter

was seemingly in response to an earlier letter from the

1.37

1.38

Claimant to the Respondent dated 4 March 2007 where it
advised that:

“It [had] come to [its] attention during the course of
preparing for the March hearing that, many years
ago, Dr. Suvarn Valaisathien provided some advice
and temporarily held a nominal shareholding in a
company connected with this project. The
circumstances [were] as_ follows. In 1984,
Dyckerhoff & Widmann AG (Dywidag”) and a local
Thai engineering company Delta Engineering
Construction Company Limited (“Delta”) established
a Thai company named Dywithai Company Limited
(“Dywithai”). For compliance reasons, Dr.
Valaisathien held a 2% interest in Dywithai. Under
its new name of Dywidag (Thailand) Company
Limited (“Dywidag Thailand”), this company was
part of the consortium which contracted with DMT
for the design and construction of the Don Muang
Tollway. Dywidag ceased to have an interest in the
company in 1997. Dr. Valaisathien also provided
legal advice to Dywidag and Delta on Thai corporate
and tax law in connection with Dywidag’s and Delta’s
establishment and incorporation of DMT in 1988 and
1989.”

In their email to the Tribunal, the Respondent’s lawyers
noted that Dr. Suvarn’s appointment had been made by
the previous Thai government and before the engagement
of their firm, White & Case. Following receipt of the
Claimant’s 4 March 2007 letter, they had obtained lists of
shareholders from Thailand’s Ministry of Commerce which
confirmed that between 1984 and 2001, Dr. Suvarn had
had an equity interest in Dywidag.

The Respondent therefore challenged Dr. Suvarn pursuant
to Article 10 of the UNCITRAL Rules, which permits an
arbitrator to be challenged by the party appointing him, if
circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to
the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence, as long as the
challenging party becomes aware of those circumstances
following the appointment. In the Respondent’s

submission, the circumstances did give rise to justifiable

1.39

1.40

doubts as to Dr. Suvarn’s impartiality and independence in
that:

“Dr. Suvarn has a close relationship not only with
Claimant but also with an entity closely connected
with Claimant by virtue of the facts that: (i) he
provided legal advice to Claimant’s predecessor,
Dyckerhoff & Widmann; and (ii) Dr. Suvarn held a
long-term interest in a company that partnered with
Claimant’s predecessor to construct the very project
that is at issue in this arbitration.

The matter is all the more sensitive given the nature

and importance of this dispute to the Kingdom of

Thailand and the need for all parties, and the Thai

people, to have the utmost confidence in the

decisions of this Tribunal.”
The Respondent submitted that the challenge was timely
under Article 11 of the UNCITRAL Rules since it was made
within 15 days of the 4 March 2007 letter notifying if of the
relevant circumstances. The Respondent invited Dr.
Suvarn to withdraw as an arbitrator and, in the event that
he did not willingly do so, the Respondent intimated that it
would pursue its challenge with the President of the ICC
Court. The Respondent requested that the hearing on

jurisdiction be adjourned.

In an email of 16 March 2007 to the Tribunal, the Claimant
categorised Dr. Suvarn’s involvement with the project as
tangential. It submitted that the fact that he had given
certain advice a considerable time ago was not a ground
for impugning his impartiality. In addition, the Respondent
had, at the time it signed the Terms of Reference,
knowledge of Dr. Suvarn’s questioned involvement.
Accordingly, the challenge was excluded under paragraph
3(e) of the Terms of Reference under which the parties
waived any possible objections to the appointment of the
arbitrators on the grounds of potential conflict of interest

and/or lack of independence or impartiality in respect of

1.41

1.42

1.43

matters known to them at the date of signature of the

Terms of Reference.
In the interests of efficiency, the Claimant suggested that:

“the hearing should go ahead ... and the evidence
be taken, with a direction by the tribunal -
preferably with the consent of the parties - that
there shall be no rehearing if the challenge is
upheld. The challenge could then follow that with a
minimum impact on procedure. ... Should the
challenge succeed, the new arbitrator could be
appointed and the tribunal could then determine the
issue upon the basis of the transcript and written
submissions.”

Following this exchange of emails, Dr. Suvarn immediately
resigned as a_ co-arbitrator without protest. The
Respondent refused to agree to proceeding with the
hearing without a third member of the Arbitral Tribunal on
the basis suggested by the Claimant. The Chairman
therefore felt obliged to adjourn the hearing. The hearing
was, accordingly, adjourned, at great inconvenience to the
remaining members of the Tribunal, the parties, counsel

and witnesses.

The Chairman held a telephone conference with Counsel
for the parties on 20 March 2007 to discuss a timetable for
the appointment of a new co-arbitrator. Following the
conference, the Chairman on behalf of the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 2 on 22 March 2007 stipulating as

follows:

“1. The Respondent is to have a new arbitrator
appointed and his/her appointment advised to
the Tribunal and the Claimant by 6 pm 20 April
2007 (French time).

2. The new arbitrator should make a declaration
of impartiality and independence and accept
the existing Terms of Reference and Terms of
Appointment, subject to any _ necessary
adjustment to the terms relating to the
remuneration of the Tribunal.

1.44

1.45

1.46

3. The new arbitrator must be available to
consider the jurisdictional challenge in late
July/early August 2007 and conduct the
substantive hearing (if any) in March/April
2008. Any consequential amendments to the
TOR should be considered at the [next]
telephone conference ...”

On 11 May 2007, the Respondent advised the Claimant
and the Tribunal of the appointment of its replacement co-
arbitrator, Mr. Jayavadh Bunnag of International Legal
Counsellors Thailand Ltd, Bangkok. However, although his
appointment had been made, Mr. Bunnag did not receive
an official letter of confirmation for a further few days after
this date.

Mr. Bunnag signed and forwarded a Statement of
Independence and Impartiality to the administrative
secretary of the arbitration on 18 May 2007. Mr. Bunnag
signified his acceptance to the Terms of Reference on 25
May 2007. After discussions between Counsel and the
Tribunal, a jurisdictional hearing was directed to take place
in Hong Kong on 31 July - 1 August 2007. The
Respondent wished the venue for the hearing to be in Asia.
The Claimant preferred a venue in London or Paris but

ultimately agreed to Hong Kong.

On 19 June 2007, the Respondent revived the issues of Dr.
Zimmer and document production. The Respondent
advised that because the German Government did not
consent to Dr. Zimmer's participation at the hearing, Dr.
Zimmer would not be attending as a witness. The
Respondent also objected to the Claimant’s assertions of
privilege in relation to the disclosure of those documents
that fell within paragraph 8(b) of the Tribunal’s Order for
Directions No. 1. The Claimant provided its response on
13 July 2007.

1.47

1.48

1.49

1.50

1.51

1.52

The Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 on Document
Disclosure on 18 July 2007 and reiterated its views on Dr.
Zimmer. It ruled that the Claimant had already complied
with the Respondent’s request for broader disclosure by
stating that it had no documents in its possession or power

falling within the scope of the request.

The hearing on the challenge to jurisdiction ratione
materiae and ratione personae took place at the Hong
Kong International Arbitration Centre on 31 July and 1
August 2007. The Claimant was represented by Mr. Robert
Hunter and Dr. Mariel Dimsey of Counsel and the
Respondent by Mr. Michael Polkinghorne and Ms. Sarah
Cohen of Counsel. Representatives of both parties

attended the hearing.

Prepared briefs of the evidence-in-chief of the Expert
witnesses - one for each side - had been provided in
advance. Each witness was cross-examined and re-
examined. A verbatim transcript was taken of the whole
hearing and made available to the Tribunal and the parties.
The parties had already filed extensive memorials on the
jurisdictional issues before the order for bifurcation had

been made.

Written submissions were forwarded by both counsel to the
Tribunal on or about 10 August 2007.

An Award on Jurisdiction was issued on 5 October 2007.
The Tribunal determined that the claim should proceed to a
hearing on the merits and on some other jurisdictional
objections which the Respondent proposed to raise at the

substantive hearing.

Until the Respondent's initial jurisdictional objections had
been determined, there had been no need for the Tribunal

to have considered the Respondent’s application for

1.53

1.54

1.55

1.56

1.57

1.58

security for costs in respect of the substantive hearing of

the arbitration.

On 15 January 2008, the Tribunal made a Ruling on
Security for Costs, deciding that no amount for security for
the costs of the arbitration be paid by the Claimant to the

Respondent.

A Variation of Terms of Reference to Arbitration and Terms
of Appointment of Arbitral Tribunal (‘Amended Terms of
Reference”) were agreed to by the parties to accommodate
the changes, inter alia, resulting from the increase in the
size of the claim and the amended constitution of the
Tribunal. Those Amended Terms of Reference were signed
by the Claimant on 25 February 2008 and by the
Respondent on or about 16 September 2008.

On 11 March 2008, a procedural conference was held via
telephone between the Chairman and counsel and the

Tribunal subsequently issued a timetable order.

A number of interlocutory steps were taken and a further
procedural conference via telephone was held on 19
August 2008 between the Chairman and counsel in

preparation for the substantive hearing in Hong Kong.

The hearing on the merits and on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
ratione temporis took place from 6 October to 17 October
2008 over 11 sitting days. It was held at the Hong Kong

International Arbitration Centre.

The Claimant was represented by Mr. Robert Hunter, Dr.
Mariel Dimsey and Professor James Crawford S.C. of
counsel. The Respondent was represented by Mr. Michael
Polkinghorne, Ms. Elizabeth Lefebvre-Gross and Mr. Paul
Brumpton of counsel. Various representatives of the

parties and support staff from the lawyers attended the

1.59

1.60

1.61

1.62

1.63

hearing, as well as the Administrative Secretary to the

Tribunal, Ms. Anja Borchardt.

Briefs of Evidence of the evidence-in-chief of the witnesses
of fact and of the expert witnesses had been provided to
the Tribunal in accordance with the procedural timetable.
Statements in reply had been filed in advance. Witnesses
were cross-examined by opposing counsel and questioned
by members of the Tribunal. A verbatim transcript was
taken of the whole hearing and was made available to the

Tribunal and the parties.

The parties had already filed extensive memorials as
follows: the Claimant’s Principal Memorial on or about 30
November 2007; the Respondent’s Defence Memorial on or
about 1 April 2008; the Claimant’s Reply Memorial on or
about 27 May 2008 and the Respondent’s Reply Memorial
on or about 21 July 2008.

Written legal submissions were forwarded by both counsel
to the Tribunal on or about 15 September 2008. Each
party had provided a Skeleton Argument to the Tribunal on
or about 29 August 2008.

On 6 October 2008, the Tribunal heard the opening
submissions by the Claimant, followed by those of the

Respondent.

The following factual witnesses were called by the Claimant
on 7 October 2008, Mr. Albert Hacker, former head of the
Finance Department of Dywidag and later Walter Bau, Mr.
Franz-Josef Brinkschulte, former Claim Manager for
Dywidag and Mr. Rainer Trapp, former Chief Financial
Officer of Dywidag. Mr. Trapp’s evidence was continued on

the following day.

1.64

1.65

1.66

1.67

1.68

1.69

On 8 and 9 October 2008 the Respondent called its factual
witnesses, i.e. Dr. Vongchai Jarernswan, former principal
adviser at the Ministry of Transport and Communications of
Thailand and Mr. Prasit Siripakorn, a member of the
Selection Committee of the DoH which had negotiated

various agreements between the parties.

On 9 October 2008, Mr. Philip Bates of Steer Davis Gleave,
London, was called as the Claimant’s expert witness on

traffic issues.

On 10 October 2008, Mr. James Bamford formerly of
Halcrow, London and Bangkok (now an_ independent
consultant), was called as the traffic expert for the
Respondent. To accommodate the witnesses’ travel plans,
the Tribunal sat on Saturday, 11 October 2008, and Mr.
Bamford’s evidence was concluded on that day. Both
experts jointly considered questions from the Tribunal at

the conclusion of Mr. Bamford’s evidence.

On 13 October 2008 the Tribunal heard the evidence of Mr.
Robert Boulton of LECG Limited, London, United Kingdom,
as valuation expert for the Claimant. He was followed by
Mr. Brent Kaczmarek of Navigant Consulting, Washington
DC, United States of America, valuation expert for the

Respondent.

On 14 October 2008, after the evidence of Mr. Kaczmarek
had concluded, Mr. Boulton and Mr. Kaczmarek answered

questions from the Tribunal in a “hot tub” situation.

On 15 October 2008, the experts on Thai law, Prof.
Sompong Sucharitkul for the Claimant and Dr. Bhokin

Bhalakula for the Respondent gave evidence.

1.70

1.71

1.72

1.73

1.74

1.75

On 16 and 17 October 2008, the Tribunal heard the closing
submissions and legal argument from counsel for both

parties.

On 17 October 2008, the Tribunal heard from counsel for
the Claimant in reply to the Respondent’s submissions.
Afterwards the Tribunal held a dialogue with all counsel.
The hearing adjourned at 11:51am on 17 October 2008.

Written post-hearing submissions were forwarded to the
Tribunal on or about 14 November 2008. The Tribunal is
grateful to all counsel for their assistance before and
during the hearing and for the high quality of their

submissions.

On 24 April 2009, the Chairman of the Tribunal received a
letter from Weerawong, Chinnavat & Peangpanor Limited
(“W C & P”) a firm of lawyers in Bangkok who purported
to write on behalf of the Respondent. W C & P had been a
part of White & Case LLP until separation from that firm on
1 January 2009 and establishment as a separate legal firm
under the W C & P name.

The letter advised that Mr. Sombath Phanichewa
(“Sombath”) and his son, Mr. Tarnin Phanichewa
(“‘Tarnin”) had commenced an ICC arbitration against the
insolvency administrator of the Claimant on 15 October
2008. Their claim in this arbitration was based on alleged
breaches of the agreement dated 3 December 2006 for the
sale by the administrator to Sombath & Tarnin of the

Claimant's shareholding in DMT.

A copy of this agreement was attached to the letter from
W C & P who alleged that the Claimant had not disclosed
the document to the Tribunal, even when requested to do

so by the Respondent.

1.76

1.77

1.78

The letter stated that the Respondent believed that the
Claimant had proceeded with the arbitration hearing in bad
faith, had violated its obligations under the said agreement
and had increased its claim after the date of the
agreement, also in violation of the agreement. The
claimants in the ICC arbitration were seeking an order
from the ICC Tribunal to instruct the administrator to
withdraw from the present arbitration. The W C & P letter
concluded: “Accordingly, the Kingdom of Thailand would
like to formally notify the Tribunal of this information and
the fact that the SP and TP arbitration is being considered
by another tribunal. The Kingdom of Thailand strongly
believes that it would be fair and equitable that the
Tribunal take into consideration the above information,

including the outcome of the SP and TP arbitration.”

The Chairman, by email on 25 April 2009, acknowledged
receipt of W C & P's letter but pointed out that the Tribunal
had received no advice from White & Case LLP and its
leading counsel, Mr. M. Polkinghorne, that White & Case
LLP was no longer acting for the Respondent in this
arbitration. The Chairman went on to advise that the
Tribunal was due to confer in London on 4 and 5 May 2009
and that the time for receiving further evidence had long
since passed. The Chairman opined that W C & P’s letter
came nowhere close to a proper application to admit
further evidence. He invited counsel on the record for both

parties to file submissions.

On 25 April 2009, W C & P advised the Chairman that they
would send a copy of their earlier letter to M. Lalonde and
Mr. Bunnag. For some unexplained reason, they had not
done so originally. They stated, inter alia:

“(a) After 1 January 2009 White & Case LLP

continue to represent the Respondent with W
C & P acting as local counsel; and

1.79

1.80

1.81

1.82

(b) W C & P has no involvement in the ICC
arbitration.”
Sombath and Tarnin are represented in the ICC arbitration
by a firm of Swiss lawyers. An arbitral tribunal has been
appointed by the ICC. Under the relevant agreement,
Swiss law applies to the arbitration and the seat of the

arbitration is Singapore.

On 28 April 2009, the Claimant provided detailed comment

of W C & P's letter and advised inter alia :

(a) Contrary to W C & P's letter, the relevant agreement
had been before the Tribunal at the principal hearing.
It bore the reference number R139 and was included

the agreed volumes of documents.

(b) The Respondent had a copy of this document some
five days before it applied to the Tribunal during the
jurisdictional hearing on 1 August 2007 for the
production of this document. This fact could be

deduced from the facsimile identification notification.

(c) The Respondent produced the document R139 with
its defence on 1 April 2008.

The Claimant offered argument as to the merits of the
Respondent’s bad faith claim against the Claimant’s
insolvency administrator. The Tribunal does not consider it
necessary to explore these allegations in view of its clear
conclusion that the W C & P letter should be ignored by the

Tribunal.

The Claimant refuted the suggestion in W C & P’s letter
that the administrator had increased the Claimant’s claim
in violation of the agreement. The Claimant pointed out
that it had indicated at the procedural conference in

Montreal in June 2006 that once detailed reports on

20

1.83

1.84

1.85

damages had been received, the amount stated in the
original claim could well be increased. On 31 July 2007, at
the jurisdictional hearing in Hong Kong, the Claimant
advised that the claim was to be in the region of €120
million. That figure was used as a basis for calculating the

Tribunal’s remuneration.

On 30 April 2009, the Respondent, through White & Case
LLP, advised that there would be no comment on W C & P’s
letter. White & Case said that it had not been possible to
set up a meeting of the Respondent’s relevant Executive

Committee.

On 1 May 2009, W C & P again communicated with the
Tribunal essentially repeating the claims made in the first
letter. They stated that the Respondent’s Emergency
Committee had met to consider the Claimant's letter of 27
April 2009. They stated that the Respondent believed that
the information regarding the ICC arbitration “is important
and relevant to the BIT arbitration and that the Tribunal

should take such information into consideration”.

The Tribunal does not propose to take any action on WC &
P’s letters and will ignore them when considering its

Award. Its reasons can be summarised as follows:

(a) The letters have not come from the lawyers on the
record as representing the Respondent. In all
correspondence and appearances, the Tribunal has
had no indication that the mandate of those

lawyers has been terminated.

(b) Contrary to W C & P's assertion, the document
which W C & P claimed should affect the Tribunal’s
determination was one of the many documents
before the Tribunal at the substantive hearing. No

reference was made to the document during the

21

(c)

(4)

(e)

hearing. The Tribunal was not asked to examine its
terms and no submissions were made about those
terms which are now said to be material. There
were literally thousands of documents placed before
the Tribunal. If any one document had been of
significance then the Tribunal considers that
counsel would have referred to it either at the

hearing or in post-hearing submissions.

The ICC arbitration is res inter alios acta. This
Tribunal is not in any position to comment on the
issues that will fall to be considered by the ICC

arbitrators.

Mr. Sombath, as the leading shareholder in DMT,
must have known of this present arbitration.
Indeed, the Respondent requested at the
jurisdictional hearing, that Mr. Sombath give
evidence about the share purchase transaction.
Clearly, if his evidence had been considered
material for the substantive hearing, the

Respondent should have tried to call him.

The hearing of evidence in the arbitration closed on
17 October 2008, save for the Tribunal receiving
written submissions and some agreed further
information from the traffic experts. Very strong
grounds would be needed for the Tribunal even to
consider, let alone grant, an application to call
further evidence at a stage when the issue of an
award is imminent. This is especially so when the
evidence sought to be addressed was before the
Tribunal at the time of the substantive hearing.
Moreover, when the allegedly crucial document,
which was before the Tribunal, had not been made

the subject of any comment or submission.

22

1.86

1.87

1.88

Accordingly, the Tribunal proceeds to consider the claim on

the merits untrammelled by the letter from W C & P.

The members of the Tribunal met to confer over
preparation of this Award in London, United Kingdom on 4
May 2009. As a result of these deliberations, they issued a
request for further information and calculations to be
supplied by the accounting experts for each party. The
experts supplied an agreed report to the Tribunal on 13
May 2009.

The Tribunal will now give a summary of relevant facts. Of
necessity, this summary does not set out many matters in
huge detail but endeavours to note everything of
significance to the issues which the Tribunal has to
address. The volume of evidence, submissions and
exhibits was such that would make detailed canvassing of
every nuance of factual material impracticable in any

award of tolerable length.

EVENTS 1984 TO CONCESSION AGREEMENT

2.1

2.2

2.3

In 1984, Dyckerhoff & Widmann AG (“Dywidag”), a
German construction company with international
experience, incorporated under the laws of Germany,

commenced construction activities in Thailand.

In 2000, Dywidag’s International Operations Division was
transferred to a separate legal entity, Dywidag International
GmbH (“Dywidag International”) which was fully owned by
Dywidag.

On 16 August 2001, Dywidag was merged with Walter Bau
AG (“Walter Bau”), a public limited company incorporated

under the laws of Germany.

2.4

2.5

2.6

2.7

2.8

On 1 April 2005, Walter Bau became insolvent. Its
remaining business has continued to be operated by
Dywidag International in co-ordination with Walter Bau’s
insolvency administrator, Herrn Werner Schneider. As
noted earlier, this present claim is being brought by the

insolvency administrator.

It will be convenient in this Award to refer to the Claimant

in all its various guises as “the Claimant”.

During the late 1980s, the Kingdom of Thailand was
experiencing rapid population growth which involved a
consequential need to develop public infrastructure. In
particular, there had been a rapid growth of traffic flowing
between Bangkok to the north of the country which had led
to a level of congestion on the existing road to the north
which was also the route to Don Muang International
Airport, some 20 kms from the centre of Bangkok. This
road to the north was known as the Vibhavadi-Rangsit
Highway (the “VRR”).

In a study made in 1986 by DoH (the “1986 Report”) it

was noted that:

(a) upgrading the VRR would require a large investment
and there would be difficulty in obtaining the

necessary funds from government sources;

(b) the private sector should be allowed to participate in
investment on this highway or any other highway in

the form of tolls.

The 1986 Report pointed out that, in order to attract

private investment, it would be necessary to create benefits

and incentives for private investors. It further stated:
“Based on the principle that it should bring benefits

to all the parties concerned, the private party would
be granted concession right to construct and operate

24

2.9

2.10

2.11

2.12

a toll road along the existing route..”. “This
alternative would ease the burden on the budget
fund, eliminate the difficulties of the users, as well
as create additional jobs in the construction
industry.”

The DoH followed up this Report with a further document in
1987 called “Guidelines for Proposals for a Concession
Highway” (“the 1987 Guidelines”). This document
recorded that “Concessionaire has the right to collect toll
fees for elevated road users at justifiable rates to recover

investment”.

Having heard at an early stage about the 1986 Report, the
Claimant saw a profitable investment in the Tollway project
suggested in the Report. It combined forces with a joint
venture partner, a Thai company, Delta Engineering
Construction Co. Limited (“Delta”).

The Joint Venture submitted a bid to DoH on 20 January
1988 seeking to be considered as the constructor and
operator of the proposed Tollway. This original bid
proposed a general toll of THB 10 for the first 10 years of
operation. The bid was the result of an invitation from DoH
to the Joint Venture to apply to tender for the Tollway
Concession. The concession required the Concessionaire to
construct the Tollway and to operate it once it had been
built for the period of the concession. At the end of the
concession period, the Tollway would be handed over to the
Respondent without compensation. The Concessionaire
was to recover the costs of construction and operation, plus
a return on its investment from the tolls payable by

motorists using the Tollway over the life of the concession.

On 9 March 1988, the Claimant and Delta were informed by
the DoH that the Joint Venture’s proposal had been selected

for negotiation.

25

2.13

2.14

2.15

2.16

2.17

The Tollway was to be what was described at the hearing
by the Claimant’s traffic expert as a “congestion-buster”
tollway, as distinct from a tollway which either provided a
road where none had existed before or which provided an

alternative to an otherwise lengthy or inconvenient journey.

The Joint Venture’s bid was based on the 1986 Report and
the 1987 Guidelines plus a one-page sketch of the average
daily traffic volumes on the VRR recorded in January 1988.
The basic assumption was that through-traffic and higher-
speed traffic would travel on the elevated  triple-
carriageway express lanes of the Tollway whilst the ten
lanes of the VRR would cater for local and lower-speed

traffic.

As part of the bid, the Claimant considered that four
existing longitudinal flyovers on the VRR would have to be
demolished. The benefit in doing this was that the bulk of
north-south traffic would be induced to use the Tollway and
that east-west through-traffic would use newly-constructed

east-west flyovers.

On 9 May 1988, the Thai Council of Economic Ministers
rejected the Joint Venture’s technical proposals. The
Council decided to maintain the status quo of the VRR
rather than accept the turning of four flyovers. Despite this
rejection, the Respondent maintained the status of the Joint

Venture as preferred bidder for the Tollway.

In mid June 1988, the Claimant was informed by Delta that
the Respondent might accept the technical concept with two
flyovers being turned and two flyovers staying as they
were. Consequently, a supplementary proposal from the
Joint Venture (which by now had become an incorporated
company, Don Muang Tollway Co. Limited (“DMT”)) was
submitted on 5 August 1988 to DoH and to the Chairman of

26

2.18

2.19

2.20

the “Committee of Highways Construction Project by
Concession Highway No. 31”. The shareholding in DMT at
this stage was 51% for Delta and 49% for the Claimant.

DMT’s supplementary proposal offered two alternatives.
The first was that all the existing flyovers stay as they
were, with an increase in tolls of THB 5 and an extension of

the Tollway concession period from 24 to 30 years.
The second alternative involved:
(a) the turning of two of the four flyovers;

(b) — maintaining the original proposed toll for 4-wheeled
vehicles (20 THB for the whole journey) but with 5
THB toll increases in the 9th and 14th year

respectively;

(c) an extension of the concession period from 24 to 30

years;

(d) equal treatment with already-agreed Concession

Agreements concerning other private toll roads; and

(e) the award of Board of Investment (“BoI”) privileges
to DMT.

According to the evidence of Mr. Trapp (who was Dywidag’s
Commercial Project Manager at the time and effectively
driving the bid), the Claimant’s investment strategy at the
time of submission of DMT’s supplementary offer was for
the Claimant to invest a minimum of DM 17 million which
corresponded to a 20% shareholding in DMT’s total equity
of DM 85 million, which in turn corresponded to 20% of the
total necessary capital investment for the Tollway of
DM 425 million (a debt-equity ratio of 1:4).

27

2.21

2.22

2.23

2.24

2.25

The Claimant viewed this as a long-term investment. It
saw the possibility of its investment being realised following
completion of the Tollway by means of listing, selling or
maintaining its shares in DMT as a portfolio investment so
that the main proposal showed an IRRE of 16.9% after 24
years in the Claimant’s assessment. Alternative 2 showed
an IRRE of 15.9% after 25 years, in the Claimant’s

assessment.

On 20 September 1988, the Thai Cabinet approved
Alternative 2 of the Claimant’s Supplementary Proposal, but
with a 25 rather than a 30 year concession term. Nothing
was said about Bol privileges or equal treatment with other

concessions.

The Claimant then proceeded to obtain external evaluations
of feasibility and funding and to seek a third construction
partner. It prepared a report internally on 10 October 1998
which stated that, on a worst case analysis, the average
return of the invested equity should reach about 18% p.a.

by the end of the concession period.

On 19 October 1988, DMT appointed Wardley Capital
Limited (“Wardley”) as its financial adviser, engaged
Dorsch Consultant Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH (“Dorsch”)
as an independent technical and traffic expert and
Slaughter & May as its legal adviser. Dorsch provided a
report on the viability of the Tollway from a traffic

engineering standpoint.

In March 1989, Wardley prepared an_ information
memorandum on the financing of the project which was
supplemented by a progress report in July 1989 to account
for amendments to the project costs and other changes
since its first memorandum. Wardley, which is associated

with the Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corporation relied

28

2.26

2.27

2.28

2.29

on the traffic predictions prepared by Dorsch when making

its financial projections.

The Dorsch report was criticised in the evidence of Mr.
Bamford and endorsed in the evidence of Mr. Bates. The
Dorsch Report does not fall to be discussed in this section
of the Award.

As a result of Wardley’s information, further investors were
attracted to DMT, including a number of local Thai
investors. A French company, GTMI, became a joint
venture construction partner and a fellow investor in the
equity capital of DMT. The relationships amongst the
shareholders of DMT were set out in a Shareholders’
Agreement dated 17 August 1989.

GTMI was a French construction company which was
involved the construction and operation of toll motorways in
France. It offered useful international experience and
technical knowhow. This company was later to be known
as VINCI.

In broad terms, Wardley’s financial projections anticipated
that the key milestones in DMT’s financial performance

would be as follows:

(a) DMT’s equity investors (including the Claimant as
investor) would inject certain sums of capital each
year from 1989 to 1993 on specific dates. In
parallel, DMT would draw down on its loans. The
joint proceeds of the debt and equity sources of

finance would be used to construct the toll road.

(b) The toll road would commence partial operation in
late 1992 (in the 1989 projections) or early 1993 (in
the 1990 projections), generating revenues from

then onwards. Following the full opening of the toll

29

2.30

2.31

road in 1993, revenues were projected to climb
steeply, realising an operating profit for DMT from

the date of the full opening of the toll road;

(c) DMT would begin repaying its debt in 1995 and
would continue to do so for the next eight or ten

years;

(d) Once net profits had been earned for two years or so
and its legal reserve built up, DMT would have
positive retained earnings and would begin to pay
dividends to shareholders, from about 1996 or 1997;

(e) Following the repayment of its loans to the banks,
DMT would pay significantly higher dividends to
shareholders, from around 2004 to 2010;

(f) From 2010 to 2014, dividends to shareholders would
be reduced by the introduction of some revenue

sharing with the Respondent.

The minimum expected return) on equity for
shareholders/investors in DMT according to Wardley was
14.67%, but all of the projections termed “base case”
suggested considerably higher rates of a return up to
20.61%. These returns constituted an equity risk premium
of 4% to 8% over interbank rates. The risk-free rate, the
Bank of Thailand’s lending rate, was 8% in February 1989
when the first Wardley projection was made, and 9.5% in
mid-1990 at the time of the Wardley 1990 projections. The
IRRE of the 1990 Wardley Bol Base Case was 15.86%,

towards the lower end of that range.

Some local banks which were contemplating financing the
Tollway project engaged the Transport Research Unit of the
Chulalongkorn University Faculty of Engineering to conduct

an independent “review” of the Dorsch report. This review

2.32

2.33

2.34

endorsed the Dorsch report, but it, too, was criticised in the
Respondent’s evidence as lacking in depth and critical

analysis.

DMT was able to attract new equity investors before it had
secured the overall financing of the project. The Claimant’s
eventual equity participation in DMT was 18% at the time
of the Concession. It increased its equity investment to
DM 23.58 million, which is more than the DM 17 million

originally envisaged.

A construction contract was signed on 17 August 1989
between DMT as “the employer” and Don Muang Tollway
Constructions (“DMC”) described in the Agreement as a
joint venture between Dywidag, Delta and Dywidag
(Thailand) Company Limited (“the contractor”). The latter

company was to provide design services.

The construction contract was a “lump sum” contract
subject to limited adjustments as appeared in the detailed
conditions. It stated in its preamble that the employer

proposed to enter into a Concession Agreement with DoH.

The Concession Agreement

2.35

2.36

The Concession Agreement was signed on 21 August 1989.
The parties were DoH (acting with the approval of the
Council of Ministers) and DMT represented by Mr. Uthai and
Mr. P.M. Kramer, the General Manager of DMT, who was
also Regional South East Asian Director of Dywidag’s

International Division.

Under this agreement, DMT was responsible for the
financing, design, construction, operation and maintenance
of the Tollway for the entire concession period of 25 years.
At the end of the concession period, the Tollway was to be

handed back to the Respondent in good condition and at no

2.37

2.38

2.39

cost. Consequently, DMT’s sole source of income was only
ever to be the tolls from the Tollway over the life of the
concession period. For the Claimant in its role as an
investor in DMT, as distinct from its role as constructor, it
could only expect a return on its shareholding from any
excess of toll income over DMT’s investment and operating

costs.

Clause 20 of the Concession Agreement set out agreed toll
rates which were to be increased on stated occasions over
the duration of the concession. Toll increases had to be
approved and implemented by the Respondent. DMT had
to invoke clause 25 (to be discussed later) whenever it

were to seek a toll increase.

Under Clause 29, the Respondent could assume ownership
of the Tollway earlier than at the end of the Concession. In
that event, it had to pay compensation which was
“considering” invested equity capital plus a return thereon —
a return comparable to one which could be expected from
this type of project taking into account the sums involved,
plus a sum equal to all outstanding loans and early
repayment fees, plus other outstanding obligations of DMT,
plus loss of profit for the remainder of the concession

period.

Other provisions in the Concession Agreement (apart from
clause 25 which will be discussed separately) which should

be noted are:

(a) Clause 31 which required disputes to be settled
amicably within 60 days or within any agreed
extension of that time. Failing that, there was
provision for arbitration in Bangkok under the Thai

Arbitration Act with two party-appointed arbitrators

2.40

and a third appointed by the Thai Chamber of

Commerce;
(b) | Clause 34 which was a “complete agreement” clause;

(c) Clause 35.3 which permitted amendment to the
Concession Agreement only by further written

agreement;

(d) Clause 35.5 which provided for Thai law as the law
governing the interpretation and execution of the

contract;

(e) Dywidag and Delta agreed to hold together not less
than 30% of the shares in DMT for the term of the

construction period;

(f) there was some profit-sharing with the Respondent

should profits exceed a stated level.

DoH was to be responsible for inspection, supervision and
control of the Concession. DoH was to exercise its powers
under statute, and to support and co-ordinate the
Concessionaire’s activities with “the Authorities, public
utility organisation owners of adjacent land, users of the

VRR and crossing roads...” It also was to support and co-

ordinate DoH’s requirements for permits, approvals and

licences “...a/l within time schedule for engineering and

construction of the Tollway”.

3. EVENTS POST-CONCESSION AGREEMENT

3.1

It took a year from August 1989 to November 1990 for
DMT’s financing agreements to be completed. Originally,
heavy borrowing in Thai Baht (“THB”) had been envisaged.
If revenues and expenditures were expressed solely in THB,
there could be no exchange fluctuations as there would be

if a mix of currencies were used. According to the Claimant

w
o

3.2

3.3

3.4

3.5

3.6

(there being no relevant documents to counter the
assertion produced by the Respondent), a “decree” or
instruction was issued by the Respondent’s Ministry of
Finance at the end of 1989/beginning of 1990 requiring
that, for large scale projects involving foreign investors
(such as the Tollway), a considerable part of the project

must be financed by loans in foreign currency.

Eventually, loan arrangements were concluded between
DMT and a consortium of banks led by Commerzbank, a
German bank which acted as facility agent for an offshore

banking syndicate.

A loan period of 10 years, including construction time, was
set. Obligations were imposed on promoter/shareholders
such as the Claimant in that the shares of the
promoter/shareholders in DMT had to be pledged to the
banks. They had also to provide a junior-ranking loan of

approximately THB 500 million.

DMT managed to gain Bol approval, in principle, on 29
October 1990. In order to receive these privileges, it had
to agree to an extended profit-sharing arrangement with
the Respondent over and above the benefits agreed to in

the Concession Agreement.

Loan documentation was signed on 16 November 1990.
Wardley’s final banker’s computer runs in November 1990
showed expected IRREs between 14.67% and 20.61%. A
supplemental Shareholders’ Agreement was signed on 21
November 1990.

Shortly after the financial closure, DMT instructed DMC to
commence full construction of the Tollway. The first loan
was drawn down in early 1991 and_ construction
commenced on 29 June 1991. Design activities had already

been implemented since September 1989.  An_ initial

3.7

3.8

Promotional Certificate was issued by Bol to DMT on 16
May 1991.

The construction phase did not proceed smoothly for a
number of reasons which are not necessary to be explored
in detail because, in the Tribunal’s view, any problems
occurring under this heading were resolved by the

conclusion of MoA2.

The various problems encountered by the Claimant over the
years until 1996 can be summarised under a number of

headings as follows.

Initial Delay

3.9

3.10

The Claimant led evidence from one of its construction
team, Mr. Brinkschulte, to the effect that DoH and/or DMT
delayed design approvals and that these delays caused
costly overruns. The contractual arrangements for the
construction of the Tollway were inherently inefficient
because, in addition to the normal constructor/principal
relationship, approval and input from a third party, the
DoH, were required in respect of the construction and
design of the Tollway. However, the Tribunal does not need
to scrutinise the detail of the Claimant’s complaints in this
area against both DoH and DMT or the Respondent’s
allegations of inefficiency against the Claimant because of
the Tribunal’s view of the effect of MoA2.

Suffice to say, there seems to have _ been
miscommunications amongst all three of the parties
concerned, DoH, DMT and DMC (in which the Claimant was

the major player).

The Hopewell Project

3.11

3.12

3.13

In November 1990, just after the signing of the DMT loan
agreements, the Claimant and DMT were surprised to learn
that the Respondent’s Minister of Transport (DoH being a
constituent part of the Ministry of Transport) had signed a
Concession Agreement with a Hong Kong company known
as “Hopewell”. The concession envisaged the construction
of a 60km long, elevated toll-road which was to run in
parallel to the Don Muang Tollway for a length of 12km,

some 50 metres to its west.

It was said that the Hopewell concession caused political
scandal and led to the enactment of a statute in 1992
concerning private persons participating in or undertaking
activities of the State. The Hopewell project sought to
utilise land owned by the Thai State Railways which, like
DoH, were also under the aegis of the Minister of Transport.
The Claimant maintained that its interests and those of
DMT were severely affected by the Hopewell Project.
Again, because of the Tribunal’s view of MoA2, it is not
necessary to investigate or record the detail of the

Claimant's grievances.

The Hopewell Project failed in 1998, leaving a number of
upright girders in situ, in silent witness to the ill-conceived
project. It is significant that one of the witnesses for the
Respondent, Mr. Prasit Siripakorn, in response to a question
from the Tribunal, virtually acknowledged that an investor
in the situation of DMT would have been unlikely to have
signed the Concession Agreement for the Tollway had it
been known at the time that the Hopewell Concession was

to be granted nearby.

Turning the Flyovers

3.14

3.15

The requirement for turning the flyovers on the VRR had
been agreed between DMT and DoH when the Respondent
had accepted DMT’s alternative proposal which involved
turning two out of four flyovers. However, political
considerations had intervened to prevent the turning
happening. Public opinion was strongly against the turning
of the flyovers. Demonstrations occurred. Cabinet
Resolutions on 3 and 10 March 1992 required the Minister
of Transport to enter into negotiations with DMT to amend
the Concession Agreement by not requiring the turning the
flyovers in exchange for DMT receiving benefits from the
Northern Extension of the Tollway. The proposal for the

Northern Extension was not eventually made until 1995.

It is unnecessary to relate all the numerous iterations
between the parties and the political happenings concerning
the turning of the flyovers. The obligation for them to have
been turned was clearly part of the Concession Agreement.
It is clear that the Respondent did obstruct (for whatever
reason) the turning of the flyovers until such time as MoA2
had been finally concluded. However, the Tribunal does not
need to assess either liability or damages caused by this

failure for the reason that MoA2 settled any such claims.

Failing to Make Land Available

3.16

DMT had been unable to obtain land required for the
Tollway which land was owned by Kasetsart University. Nor
could it obtain a right-of-way over the Hopewell land. The
Respondent had assumed obligations to provide the land
necessary for the Tollway. Even if the turning of the
flyovers had been approved, there was nowhere for them to
go. Again, for the same reason as above, the Tribunal finds

it unnecessary to explore this complaint of the Claimant.

VAT Imposition

3.17

3.18

3.19

MoA1

3.20

The Respondent imposed a general VAT tax after the
signing of the Concession Agreement. It applied to the tolls
charged. The Respondent would not allow any toll increase
to compensate DMT. Again, this contention is not explored

for the same reason.

Throughout the period under review, DMT pressed for toll
increases to be authorised by the Respondent - but to no

avail.

As is described in the next section of the Award, the various
delays and other problems undermined the confidence of
the offshore bankers and caused pressure to be put on
DMT.

The Concession Agreement was varied in writing by DoH
and DMT on 27 April 1995 by what has been called MoA1.
DMT agreed not to request a toll adjustment under clause
25 of the Concession Agreement except on the occurrence
of changes in the Basic Economic Factors which are greater
than those taken into account at the time the Bol approved
the granting of investment promotion to the Tollway
project. DMT agreed to further profit-sharing arrangements
with DoH as set out in MoA1.

4. EVENTS PRECEDING MOA2

4.1

The Tollway was partially opened, without the turned
flyovers, on 14 December 1994. The turned flyovers were
opened to traffic only on 7 July 1996. According to the
Claimant, this consequential delay was due entirely to the
Respondent’s attitude in agreeing initially to the turning of

the flyovers and then refusing, for political reasons, to allow

4.2

4.3

4.4

4.5

4.6

the exercise to take place. During the period the flyovers
were being turned (from 21 April to 7 July 1996), the
Respondent suspended the collection of tolls, during which
time DMT is said to have lost THB 2.34 million per day. The
Respondent acknowledged that it had been at fault over the
failure to turn the flyovers but claimed that it had “done its

best” in a difficult political situation.

Furthermore, as noted earlier, there had been delays by the
Respondent in obtaining the necessary land for the two
intersections as it was asserted by the Claimant that the
delays were in part the result of the conflict caused by the
proximity of the Tollway to the ill-fated Hopewell project

described earlier.

The consortium of overseas banks financing the Tollway
project was becoming more-and-more concerned at these
delays: so much so, that, in mid-1993, it froze credit lines,
placing DMT (and consequentially DCT as constructor)
under grave financial stress. Mr. Trapp stated in evidence
that these banks had been unwilling to “take a haircut” -

meaning they had not been willing to take any loss.

The Claimant’s own liability increased when it signed an
agreement with DMT, granting DMT interim financing whilst

the refinancing by DMT’s lenders was pending.

A supplemental agreement was signed at the end of 1993
between the Claimant, DMT and the investing banks. This
had the effect of making the Claimant directly responsible
for further delays and cost overruns. The final restructuring
of financing was agreed on 27 May 1994. On 29 December
1994, Commerzbank (the lead financier) forced DMT into a

situation of potential default.

The investor banks put pressure on DMT to assert against

the DoH breaches of the Concession Agreement in an

4.7

4.8

4.9

4.10

attempt to force the Respondent to remedy the problems

with the flyovers and the consequential loss of revenue.

The Claimant’s witnesses claimed in evidence that the
Hopewell project by the Respondent had been the “final
straw” so far as the offshore financiers were concerned.
Pressure from them increased significantly during the
second half of 1995, especially when Commerzbank
requested the Claimant to consider becoming a party to a
“standstill agreement” whereby it waived the right to any
outstanding payments owed to it by DMT until an

agreement had been reached with DMT and the banks.

The Respondent decided that a Northern Extension to the
Tollway should be constructed and that it would neither be
sensible nor viable financially to use any other
concessionaire than DMT and any other constructor than

the Claimant and its associates.

Mr. Kramer, who appears to have had day-to-day control of
DMT, wrote a memorandum to the DMT executive board on
16 January 1995, noting that “The northern extension is an
absolute must for the company” and “The company is
facing a number of significant difficulties which are all
intended to be remedied in one go, together with the

northern extension".

DMT submitted a proposal for construction of the Northern
Extension on 17 May 1995. It had initially refused to
construct the Northern Extension unless it was made part of
“a more comprehensive approach thereby solving all
pending matters in one go.” DMT suggested the building of
an extension to the Rangsit interchange. On 15 September
1995, DMT gave notice of its intention to terminate the

Concession Agreement and on 18 December 1995, it sent

40

4.11

4.12

4.13

another letter stating its intention to request arbitration

under clause 31 of that Agreement.

DMT submitted a seven-point proposal on 26 December
1995 to DoH requiring that, amongst other things, the
Respondent grant DMT a “soft loan” of THB 500 million at
an interest rate of 3% with a two-year grace period, an
extension of the term of the Concession Agreement, the
right to construct and operate the Northern Extension and
an increase in tolls. It was made clear in this proposal that
DMT would be prepared to “waive all of its claims because
of the breaches of contract by the government” in return

for the Respondent's “assistance”.

The 17 May 1995 letter from DMT included the following
paragraph:
“Such more comprehensive approach would certainly
also create the opportunity to at the same time deal
with the issue of compensations due to DMT having
suffered damages caused by the actions or omission
of the government or the pending appearance of
competing roadways causing vehicle loss to DMT, i.e.
by agreeing on appropriate conditions for a
concession covering the existing tollway, plus the

extensions thereto and thereby solving all pending
matters in one go.”

After a personal approach by DMT on the same day, DMT’s
proposal of 26 December 1995 was presented by the
Ministry of Transport to the Thai Cabinet for approval on 11
January 1996. On 13 March 1996, DMT advised the Deputy
Prime Minister that “the requisite soft loan is not a loan in
ordinary case, but rather it is a part of the compensation
for the damages incurred to DMT as a result of a breach of
contract on the part of the government.” A compilation of
DMT’s damages allegedly caused by the Respondent’s
actions, was communicated to the Ministry of Finance by
DMT on 29 March 1996. The amount claimed was
THB 9773.6 million. The calculation was on the basis that

4l

4.14

4.15

4.16

4.17

4.18

4.19

DMT would be compensated for loss of tolls caused by the
“Retention of Competing Freeflow Traffic Conditions” on the

VRR for the lifetime of the Concession.

On 13 May 1996, DMT submitted, at the request of the
Respondent, a revised proposal to that of 26 December
1995. This revised offer was made on the basis that the
Respondent had informed DMT it would not be able to offer
a soft loan on the conditions originally requested and would
not approve an exemption from having to pay VAT on toll

revenues collected by DMT.

On 22 May 1996, the Minister of Finance wrote to the
Chairman of a Committee established by the Respondent
for “finding solutions of the problems with the
implementation of the connection or extension project of

the Tollway” (“the Solutions Committee”).

The letter noted “The problems have been lingered [sic] on
for more than 6 years due to DOoH’s inability to fulfil its
contractual obligations”. It was a condition that an
acceptance of one of the alternatives suggested involved

DMT bringing no other claims for compensation.

The Minister of Finance also wrote as follows: “The private
sector concessionaire can also continue to proceed with his
business and achieve a reasonable rate of return on his
investment of 14%". Two alternatives of those suggested
by DMT were approved in principle by the Cabinet on 11
June 1996.

A letter dated 17 June 1996, confirming the Cabinet
resolution, stated that the Ministry of Finance was to

consider the terms and conditions and sources of loans.

DMT received a formal request on 26 July 1996 from DoH

to make a proposal in respect of the Northern Extension.

42

4.20

4.21

4.22

4.23

A further letter from DMT dated 23 August 1996 indicated
that DMT was only prepared to grant a waiver of its right to
claim for the Respondent’s breaches if the Respondent
granted it the benefit approved in resolution of 11 June
1996. It said: “Under the condition that DMT will be
granted additional benefits as stipulated in the Council of
Ministers’ resolution of 11 June 1996, DMT is prepared to
waive its claims for damages suffered as a result of the
government actions as forwarded to DoH with letter
DMT/PNK 96297 on 29 March 1996 or events directly
related to the matters listed.” Mr. Trapp in evidence
described his strategy of not abandoning rights of

arbitration until “the very last moment”.

Negotiations took place between the date of the Cabinet
approval on 11 June 1996 and the date of the signing of
MoA2 on 29 November 1996. A more detailed iteration of
the negotiations is not required in view of the Tribunal’s
findings about the effect of MoA2. DMT was successful in
some negotiations, e.g. an extension of the period during
which the soft loan would be charged at the lowest rate of

10% from 5 years to 7 years.

The Claimant (in those days still Dywidag) seemed fully
aware of the state of DMT’s negotiations. This must be so
because of the heavy involvement of Mr. Kramer, who wore
‘two hats’ - one for DMT and one for the Claimant. The
Claimant prepared a memorandum dated 7 October 1996 to
DMT saying that DMT must “refrain to ask [sic] for any
additional concessions which require a new Cabinet
approval and must hurry to get all agreements officially
signed before 17 November 1996.”

The Claimant agreed to finance a further investment in
1996 but, during the latter part of 1996, the offshore banks

continued to agitate and demanded that their loans be

4.24

4.25

MoA2

4.26

repaid in full. They were also placing pressure on the
Claimant to bear part of the burden of restructuring in a
letter of 14 October 1996. There would have been concern
by the Claimant if MoA2 were not to be concluded, since it

was owed construction payments by DMT.

The final drafts of MoA2 were submitted to the Claimant
before being formally submitted to the Cabinet “tomorrow,
5 November 1996”. This draft contained a number of
amendments to what had earlier been the subject of
Cabinet approval. DMT objected to these amendments,
including a reduction of the toll fee, a penalty clause for
construction overruns and the provision that diversion of
traffic in any manner on the VRR was excluded from the
scope of compensation. The toll fees were set to increase

on 1 October 1997 without the completion of four “u-turns”.

The Cabinet approved the draft on 12 November 1996 but
the office of the Attorney-General included a number of
last-minute amendments which had the effect of raising the
toll fees dependent on an event fully out of DMT’s control,
namely, the approval of Ramp 4, the positioning of which
was to be decided by the Airport Authority of Thailand
(“AAT”) and which required Cabinet approval.
Nevertheless, DMT signed the MoA2 document.

MoA2 was signed on 29 November 1996 between the DoH
and DMT, represented by Mr. Sombath (the leader of the
Thai joint venturers) and Mr. Kramer (a representative of
the Claimant on the DMT Board and the General Manager in
Bangkok at all material times). MoA2 amended the
Concession Agreement of 21 August 1989 and MoA1 of 27
August 1995.

44

4.27

4.28

4.29

The Claimant, however, contends that its own claim against
the Respondent in international law, based on the BIT, was
not extinguished by MoA2 because it had not been a party
to MoA2. It was merely a minority shareholder in DMT.
Alternatively, the Claimant submits that the MoA2 was
entered into under duress exerted on DMT by the
Respondent. Consequently, the waiver clause is

inoperative.

MoA2 states in its Preamble that DMT had incurred adverse
financial conditions as a result “of the government’s
inability to comply with terms and conditions stipulated in
the Tollway Concessions Agreement”. MoA2 also records
that DMT had submitted a proposal to receive a concession
for the Northern Extension of the Tollway, which had been
accepted by the Respondent through DoH and that a special
committee had been set up by the then Deputy Prime

Minister to propose measures to the Council of Ministers.

A summary of MoA2 provisions is as follows, taken from the
Claimant's Principal Memorial, paragraphs 124 and 125. Its

accuracy was not questioned by the Respondent.

“124 MoA2 adapted Clause 25 and Appendix D of
the original Concession Agreement by the
inclusion of Appendix F, which contained
traffic and revenue forecasts on the basis of a
particular model created by IFCT in May 1996.
These forecasts and model had been based
upon assumptions agreed between DMT and
the Government, including as to:

4.5 the pattern of current and future tolls; and

4.6 the traffic structures and systems in Bangkok
as a whole and the role of the Tollway in
them.

On their face, the principal commercial provisions of
MoA2 were to:

(a) Extend the Tollway by the addition of the
Northern Extension, the purpose of which (and
of a further extension to be constructed by the

45

(b)

DoH itself as a continuation of the Tollway) was
to solve traffic congestion on the VRR in the
area of Don Muang Airport (the “airport
bottleneck”) to provide better access to the
airport and to the North of Bangkok. This latter
factor was a particular priority for the
Respondent in view of the impending Asian
Games, which were to be held in Bangkok in
December 1998. The cost of this was to be
funded by an injection of Baht 3 billion new
share capital by the Respondent plus Baht
700,000 cash from operations (clauses 1.2.1,
17.2); and

Solve DMT’s “adverse financial condition as a
result of the Government's inability to comply
with the terms and conditions stipulated in this
Tollway Concession Agreement”. The principal
measures agreed in this respect were:

(i) the arrangement by the Respondent
(through its Ministry of Finance) of a “soft”
loan of Baht 8,500 million (clause 17.1);

(ii) the injection of Baht 1.5226 billion new
share capital by private shareholders to
pay outstanding loan principal and interest
(clause 17.1);

(iii) restarting the Concession Period (which
remained 25 years long) by amending the
definition of the “Effective Date” to be the
date of MoA2 (29 November 1996); and

(iv) increasing the toll rates from those set out
in clause 20 of the Concession Agreement
to those set out in clause 12 of MoA2 as
follows:

(1) there was to be a new additional 15
Baht toll for the Northern
Extension;

(2) the agreed toll fees for the original
Tollway were to be increased by 10
Baht upon:

(i) completion by DoH (and not
DMT) of the DoH U-turns and
then again upon

(ii) completion of the Northern
Extension; and

(3) all toll fees for the original Tollway
would be increased by 10 Baht
every five years (as opposed to
increases each of five Baht just on
the ninth and fourteenth
anniversaries under the original
Concession Agreement) and for the

46

4.30

4.31

4.32

4.33

Northern Extension by five Baht
every five years.”

The capital investment by the Respondent referred to on
MoA2 was to be discharged in terms of clause 2.5.2 “only
for payment of the costs of works under contracts related to
the construction of the Concession Highway under the MoA”
(i.e. the Northern Extension). The increased shareholding
in DMT by the Respondent meant a dilution of the

Claimant’s shareholding.

Mr. Trapp acknowledged in cross-examination that at the
date when MoA2 was signed, the Claimant and DMT knew
that the “soft loan” referred to in the 11 June 1996
document could not be achieved and that it had never been
unconditionally approved by the Respondent. The actual

loan on offer was a mixed USD and THB loan.
The waiver clauses in MoA2 read as follows:

“14.1 All claims arising under the existing Tollway
Concession Agreement before the date of
signature hereof, whether or not the
Concessionaire has lodged such a claim against
the government are hereby extinguished
whereby the concessionaire shall not have any
further claim whatsoever.

14.2 Any change in the use of the Bangkok airport,
the construction of u-turns on the Viphavadi-
Rangsit Road, the management of traffic in any
manner by Rangsit Road shall not be regarded
as an act in competition with the Concession
highway according to clause 25.2(d) of the
existing Tollway Concession Agreement or an
act of the government which causes vehicle
loss.”

Clause 14.2 above is highly relevant when the Tribunal has
later to consider the Claimant’s legitimate expectations and

the Respondent’s actions.

47

5.

EVENTS POST-MOA2

5.1

5.2

5.3

The Tribunal now gives an account of events following the
execution of MoA2 in December 1996. Because of the claim
that the Respondent committed ongoing breaches which
crystallised as a dispute after the coming into force of the
2002 Treaty in October 2004, the Tribunal considers it
appropriate to set out the salient narrative to enable the

submissions on this claim to be assessed.

The Tribunal’s narrative of events prior to the signing of
MoA2 is not in the same detail because of the conclusion
which the Tribunal reaches in section 8 of this Award,
namely that MoA2 effectively settled any claims that the
Claimant might have had against the Respondent for all

events occurring prior to the date of signing MoA2.

The Claimant alleges that it had a reasonable expectation
that the Respondent would carry out the obligations
imposed upon the Respondent by the provisions of MoA2.
Hence the need for an account of the major events between
MoA2 and October 2004. Even so, the Tribunal
concentrates on the significant events over this period.
Narration of every iteration between the parties would

render this award of inordinate length.

Soft Loan

5.4

The Tribunal notes that the Respondent did not provide the
requirement for the “soft” loan in THB to the Claimant in
the terms referred to in MoA2. The Claimant had seen such
a loan as important because, if the loan were able to be
denominated only in THB, then the Claimant’s obligations
would not be affected by currency fluctuations such as
occurred when the “Asian Crisis” hit - not long after MoA2

had been concluded.

48

5.5

5.6

5.7

5.8

5.9

It was acknowledged in cross-examination by Mr. Trapp
that the Claimant knew at the time it signed MoA2 that it
was not going to receive a soft loan denominated solely in
THB.

On 27 December 1996, a Memorandum of Understanding
was signed between DMT and the onshore lenders, setting
out the terms of a mixed currency loan which DMT was
about to take up. A further Memorandum of Understanding
between Commerzbank (as the offshore facilities’ agent)
and DMT on 30 January 1997, ensured that DMT would
repay all amounts outstanding to the original offshore

lenders. This repayment occurred eventually in July 1997.

Instead of entering into the loan arrangements referred to
in MoA2, on 19 June 1997, DMT entered into a THB and
foreign currency facility agreement with various financiers.
This facility provided for a loan of THB4,000 million at
interest rates from 10% to 12.5% for 15 years plus a
THB2,000 million guarantee facility in favour of the
Government Savings Bank (“GSB”) by all but one bank.
The foreign currency amount provided for a loan of
US$140 million at SIBLR plus 2.5% and THB1,040 million at
MLR plus 0.5% for 12 years. The foreign currency
agreement also provided for a deferred payment facility for

payment of the Claimant.

When, as a result of this refinancing, the offshore lenders’
debts to DMT were eventually repaid, a comment from
Commerzbank as leader of the lenders was: “It became
very obvious there was only one solution left for the banks
while taking into account the Government’s continuous

tampering with the concession of DMT".

Whatever the rights and wrongs of the Respondent’s

alleged failure to provide a soft loan and DMT’s reluctant

49

acceptance of an alternative funding arrangement, the
Claimant was fully aware that a soft loan would not be
available and there would have to be further negotiations
leading to an eventual financing arrangement. Any failure
to provide the soft loan is, therefore, not something which
can be considered as giving rise to a claim under the 2002

Treaty.

Refinancing

5.10

5.11

5.12

On 10 May 1997, a share purchase agreement was
concluded between the MoF, DMT and the 29 then existing
shareholders in DMT. This agreement provided that the
Respondent would subscribe for 3,000 million shares in
DMT and that a further 1.5225 million shares would be
made available for private party subscription. This
agreement made it clear that the Respondent’s investment
was to be used solely to fund the Northern Extension. The
private shareholders and DMT were required to see that the
Respondent’s equity contributions were used only for the

Northern Extension.

In July 1997, the Claimant (then Dywidag) made a capital
contribution of THB 199,066,670 by way of subscribing for
an additional shareholding in DMT. Its percentage
shareholding in DMT was reduced to 9.87% as a result of

the increased shareholding by the Respondent.

Around this time, the Asian Economic Crisis hit the Thai
economy with several dramatic consequences, including
closure of financial institutions, a loss of foreign reserves,
increased inflation, reduced investment from the private
sector, reduction in the Government’s budget, an increase
in unemployment and a major weakening of the Thai

currency.

50

5.13

As at 31 December 1997, the THB had lost value from
THB25 to the USD to THB43.44 to the USD. This meant for
DMT that the THB equivalent of its USD140 million loan
facility had almost doubled its total debt. In addition, the
revenues from daily toll income decreased from
THB3.5 million to THB2 million. Moreover, construction

costs for the Northern Extension increased.

DMT’s Requests for Toll Increases

5.14

5.15

5.16

5.17

As a result of changes made at the last minute to MoA2 by
the Office of the Attorney General, as noted earlier in
paragraph 4.25 of this Award, the first toll increase to be
made under MoA2 was scheduled for 1 October 1997,
although the date previously approved by the Cabinet had
been 12 November 1996. The agreed increase was to
occur on completion by DoH of the U-turns referred to
earlier. As at the date of signing MoA2, DoH had
committed to completing the U-turns by 1 October 1997.
DoH did not complete the U-turns until 2 December 1998.

In December 1997, DMT had proposed a THB10 increase in
tolls to come into effect on 1 March 1998 - invoking clause
25 of the Concession Agreement. Appendix D of the
Concession Agreement refers to "basic economic factors to
be used as a benchmark for considering requests of toll

adjustment”.

On 25 February 1988, DMT confirmed to Bol that it waived
its rights under the Investment Protection Act 1992. Bol

issued a further Promotional Certificate on 6 March 1998.

On 12 March 1998, DMT wrote to DoH requesting “fair
treatment” on the basis of clause 25 of the Concession

Agreement because of the effect of the economic crisis on

Sl

5.18

5.19

5.20

5.21

DMT’s financial position and asking for an extraordinary toll
increase of THB10.

On 20 April 1998 at a meeting between the Committee for
Solving Problems of the Implementation of the Connection
and Extensions Project of the Din-Dang-Don Muang Tollway
(‘the Problem Solving Committee”), the Committee
approved an increase of THB10, in order to remedy DMT’s
losses incurred as a result of the Economic Crisis, the
diminished number of Tollway users and an increase in VAT
on tolls from 7% to 10%. This approval was given on the
basis of clause 25 of the Concession Agreement. The
resolution had no binding effect at DoH level and no

positive action ensued.

On 10 July 1998, DoH requested IFCT, a bank that had
undertaken a feasibility study for the Ministry of Finance
(“MoF”) during the MoA2 negotiations, to study how much
the toll fee needed to be increased in order to be fair to
DMT and to restore its financial position in accordance with

the Respondent’s obligations under clause 25.

The IFCT findings in August 1998 suggested an increase of
toll to THB16.50 per vehicle to bring the forecast IRRE back
to the level of IRRE forecast at the time of the original
investment. This increase was to be in addition to the
contractual increase of THB20 per vehicle when the U-turns
and the Northern Extension were to be completed. The
findings were stated to be a way by which to ease DMT’s
troubled financial situation and to yield a return on equity
at a rate nearer to that shown in Appendix F of MoA2, i.e.

13.35% per year.

On 6 October 1998, DMT made another request to DoH for
a toll increase. When the request was unanswered, DMT

sent a letter to DoH, noting that the Northern Extension

52

5.22

would be completed on time and asking that the opening
Toll for the Northern Extension be THB15. DMT also asked
for tolls to increase by THB10 on the main Tollway, because

of the 14 months’ delay in DoH’s completion of the U-turns.

DMT made further requests for assistance to DoH. Like

those referred to above, they were ignored.

Northern Extension

5.23

5.24

On 3 December 1998, the main Tollway to the Northern
Extension was completed, except for some ramp structures
and a direct access ramp to the international airport
terminal. Completion of the construction was achieved on
schedule by the Claimant with no dissatisfaction about its

construction work expressed by either DoH and DMT.

The Respondent made complaints in its submissions about
design delays and faults relating to the Northern Extension.
Mr. Trapp for the Claimant pointed to the Northern
Extension having been completed on time and stated that
DMT had let the design element for the Northern Extension
to a local company with no connection to the Claimant. The

Tribunal does not consider these submissions relevant.

Changes to Roading

5.25

At around the same time, another contractor to DoH

completed the following improvements to the VRR:
(a) four U-turns;

(b) anew four-lane local road 50 metres west of the VRR

road; and

(c) | atemporary detour road in place during the
construction of the Northern Extension was converted

to permanent use.

5.26

5.27

5.28

5.29

5.30

The U-turns on the VRR were finally completed and open to
traffic from 28 November 1998.

At the same time, the new local road, 50 metres west of
the VRR was opened to traffic. The construction of this
local road had been authorised by a Cabinet resolution of 3
March 1998. The Cabinet had requested in this resolution
that the MoT take into account the legal aspects and
conditions of the contract of the Hopewell project and other
projects in the nearby area before implementing the
project. Clearly, the main Tollway must have been one of

these.

The construction of the temporary detour road in the area
of the airport bottleneck was a special request of DoH to
DMT during construction of the Northern Extension - a
contingency which had not been foreseen. DoH had
available to it land formerly belonging to the State Railways

after the Hopewell debacle had come to an end.

On 18 January 1999, at a DMT directors’ meeting, Mr.
Kramer had recorded in the official minutes his concern that
the construction of competing toll-free roadways under the
pretext of public interest was to the detriment of the
Concessionaire and had caused the Concessionaire (DMT)
to be in danger of defaulting on its bank loans. It should be
noted in this context that the effect of MoA2 was to give the
Respondent an almost 40% shareholding - the largest in
DMT.

Included in the Northern Extension project was the
construction of an exit link from the elevated apron in front
of the international airport terminals to the south-bound
lanes of the northern extension of the Tollway. This was
known as Ramp 4. AAT was required to adjust plans and

locations of additional traffic structures inside the area of

54

5.31

5.32

5.33

5.34

the airport. It proved impossible for AAT to locate the
exact construction site for Ramp 4 because its budget had
not been finalised. A postponement of Ramp 4 was
approved by AAT on 29 May 1998.

On 21 April 1999, Mr. Kramer and Mr. Sombath wrote to
DoH regarding DoH’s intentions regarding charging tolls on
the Northern Extension. They noted the current toll of 30
THB for the original Tollway, and 13 THB for the Northern
Extension. They concluded that a rise in tolls to the
planned contractual level, let alone an extra 10 THB for
compensation for THB devaluation was not feasible -
“Because of an automatic further reduction of the usage of
the tollway associated with any further toll fee increases, no

matter where in the system”.

By 16 June 1999, DMT had completed all works on the
Northern Extension but was still unable to obtain from AAT

an exact location for Ramp 4.

The minutes of the DMT Board meeting of 23 June 1999,

record the following conclusion:

“With Government actions being as unpredictable as
they are and completely beyond the control of
private investors into Government infrastructure,
private investors have little choice other than to
place their trust onto that the Government would
eventually treat them fairly in cases where the
Government deemed it necessary to change
conditions negatively affecting the private investment
company.

And DMT is prepared to enter into negotiations with
the Government for proper remedy of its financial
position in relation to the respective provision in its
Concession Agreement and the Cashflow Analysis
previously prepared by IFCT on instruction of the
Ministry of Finance and appended to the MoA of 29
November 1996.”

On 24 June 1999, as a result of the discussion at the DMT

Board meeting, DMT wrote to the Minister of Finance and

55

5.35

5.36

5.37

5.38

the Minister of Transport, proposing a temporary toll

reduction.

DMT requested a meeting with the relevant Ministers, which
took place on 30 July 1999. The purpose of the meetings,
arranged with the help of the German Ambassador, was to
confront the Respondent’s Ministers with DMT’s inadequate
financial position, which, in DMT’s view, had been created
solely by the Respondent’s actions. Despite Mr. Trapp’s
impression that the Ministers appeared to have accepted
that there was a genuine problem, nothing concrete arose

from this meeting.

On 16 September 1999, DMT wrote to DoH requesting a
postponement of Ramp 4. Part of the letter stated:

“DMT is on purpose’ currently requesting
postponement of construction and not a deletion of
the said Exit Ramp in an effort to avoid that because
of this relatively minor issue an agreement of Cabinet
must be sought.

Since DMT must in the near future enter into
negotiations with the Government (DoH) in respect
of the fundamental issue of how to remedy its
impaired financial position, and this will invariably
lead to the necessity to request the Cabinet for
approval of corresponding amendments to DMT’s
Concession Agreement any submission to the Cabinet
in respect of the said Exit Ramp is recommended to
be made on the same occasion.”

The Claimant submitted that DMT’s letter of 15 September
1999 was a “pragmatic solution” on the part of DMT to
avoid the wait for a Cabinet decision in relation to what it
saw as a minor administrative item. The Claimant also
points out that the AAT was part of the MoT, the same
ministry as controlled DoH. The Respondent submitted that

the Claimant was acting ambivalently.

During 1999, the Claimant (then still Dywidag) decided to

make its own representations to the Respondent to make

56

5.39

5.40

5.41

5.42

up for the alleged unwillingness of DMT to fight for its rights

under the Concession Agreement and MoA2.

Also on 16 September 1999, DMT submitted a formal letter
to DoH requesting negotiations on the basis of clause 25 of
the Concession Agreement. The letter focused on the
phrase in clause 25 “or any other measure deemed
appropriate”. It proposed a huge construction operation
involving connecting the Don Muang Tollway via a new
elevated toll road with two existing DoH toll roads to
provide a complete combined tollway system for some 183
km. This proposal was made in the belief that additional
income from outside sources would help restore DMT’s

position.

DMT undertook engineering and design studies at its own
expense to present this scheme to the Respondent but, by
early 2000, it considered that its proposals were not being

taken seriously.

On 25 January 2000, a second formal letter to DoH was
submitted by DMT, referring to the first one but with no
reference to clause 25. The letter stated that inhouse
studies had shown that DMT would need additional income
of THB 15,100 million or (discounted with 11.5%)
THB 9.468 million in order to provide an IRRE of 13.38% as
per Appendix F of MoA2.

On 28 February 2000, the Committee to Oversee and
Follow up on the Concession Agreement on Highway No. 31
Viphavadi Rangsit Rd, Din Daeng - Don Muang (the
“Follow-up Committee”) held a meeting chaired by DoH’s
Director-General at which Mr. Kramer of the Claimant was
present. Mr. Kramer proposed deletion of Ramp 4 because
it could no longer be justified. He was supported in this

view by a representative of the office of the Attorney-

s7

5.43

5.44

5.45

5.46

5.47

General. The meeting resolved that the construction of
Ramp 4 be cancelled and that DoH propose this decision to

the Council of the Ministers for approval in principle.

However, DoH did not propose such a resolution and, at the
meeting of the Follow-Up Committee on 28 February 2000,
the representatives of the office of the Attorney-General
stated that the request to have the Ramp deleted was
“reasonable” but that the toll rate adjustments could not be

made without Cabinet resolution.

By mid-1999, there was immediate need to restructure
DMT’s finances, both short and _ long-term. On
21 December 1999, DMT wrote to the Minister of Finance

requesting assistance in DMT’s negotiation with its lenders.

On 15 February 2000, the representative of DMT’s main
Thai shareholder, Mr. Sombath, had been unofficially
advised by DMT’s lenders that they would resort to
bankruptcy action unless DMT could agree to a
restructuring proposal before end of March 2000. This
stance was taken because DMT had been unable to pay
about 50% of its interest debt. DMT eventually concluded a
Refinancing Agreement with its lenders on 14 July 2000.

On 28 February 2000, DMT’s main lender - GSB - orally
requested DMT to call an extraordinary shareholders’
meeting to agree to the lender’s proposals to restructure.
This meeting was held on 15 March 2000 and resolved to
accept the lender’s proposal. The idea behind this
resolution was to prevent any lender from _ officially

declaring default and starting legal proceedings.

On 13 March 2000, a DoH subcommittee appointed
according to the resolutions of the Follow-up Committee

meeting of 28 February 2000, requested DMT to submit a

58

5.48

5.49

5.50

5.51

5.52

full damage report on the basis of clause 25 of the

Concession Agreement.

At the DMT board meeting of 18 May 2000, the damage
report was stated to have not been concluded but that
provisional figures indicated a substantial sum for damages.
It was decided that DMT should, instead of requesting cash
compensation or the buy-back of privately-held shares,
should aim at receiving additional benefits from the

Respondent such as operating other toll roads.

On 31 May 2000, DMT officially submitted to DoH a
financial damage assessment report, as requested by the
subcommittee of the Follow-Up Committee. The amount of
damage was assessed at THB 34541 million or USD 933
million. The damage report also focussed on compensation
by the acquisition of additional benefits. Although there
had been some response from the Respondent, nothing

concrete had emerged from the Report.

The Follow-Up Committee met on 24 January 2001, with no
result. On 12 March 2001, DMT proposed to the Director-
General of DoH, that high-level, inter-governmental
committees should negotiate with DMT. This approach was

not successful either.

DMT’s shareholders considered there was no compensation
element available within the provisions of MoA2. On 28
June 2000, a DMT Directors’ meeting was called to accept a
final lenders’ proposal for restructuring. Mr. Kramer, as the
Claimant’s-appointed director, did not agree. There was
still no sign of any assistance for DMT from the various

agencies of the Respondent.

Since February 2000, DMT’s problems had continued to be
discussed with the Follow-Up Committee but without result.
On 19 July 2002, DMT requested from DoH toll increases

59

5.53

5.54

5.55

5.56

5.57

5.58

from 30 to 40 THB for the original Tollway and from 13 to
15 THB for the Northern Extension. There was a reminder
of DMT’s letter to DoH of 12 December 2001.

On 23 August 2001, the DMT Board appointed as members
of a working group, the Chairman (General Pang), the CEO
(Mr. Sombath) and Mr. Kramer. There was an ability for

the Thai interests to out-vote Mr. Kramer.

Dywidag and its French Joint Venture partner (VINCI) in
2001, decided to lobby at both political and diplomatic
levels to solve the DMT problems. The German
Ambassador had an audience with the then Thai Prime
Minister. On 29 October 2001, the Ambassador handed a
memorandum to the Prime Minister prepared by the

Claimant.

Following the Ambassador’s visit to the Prime Minister, a
letter was written (on 9 November 2001) by the Deputy
Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to
the Permanent Secretary of MoT mentioning the Claimant’s

proposal and the possibility of arbitration.

On 23 November 2001, the Deputy Secretary-General to
the Prime Minister for Political Affairs wrote to the Minister
of Finance giving the Prime Minister’s direction to take
appropriate steps and to report the outcome to the Prime

Minister on the first occasion.

On 19 February 2002, the Thai Ministry of Foreign Affairs
was preparing for a visit of its Minister to Germany and
wanted to be informed by the DoH on the “/oss problem
with the Don Muang tollway project”. The visit did not take

place.

On 8 November 2002, DMT submitted an updated damage
report to Minister of Transport. The letter spelt out DMT’s

60

5.59

5.60

5.61

5.62

5.63

frustration at the lack of progress at remedying its impaired
financial position, ending with the phrase “If nothing were
done for DMT’s shareholders would mean an eventual
expropriation of their investment, without compensation,

without any fault on their part”.

In December 2002, the Minister of Transport gave a press
interview saying that he did not pay attention to DMT’s
proposal and asked a creditor, IFCT, to negotiate for a
reduction of toll fees for a period of one year. He also
mentioned his interest to buy back the concession, but only

if the price were low.

On 11 December 2002, the Claimant asked the Minister of
Transport to meet the top executives of both the German
and French minority shareholders. It is not clear whether

this meeting eventuated or not.

On 13 January 2003, Mr. Trapp wrote to Mr. Sombath (the
CEO of DMT and the representative of the Thai private
shareholders), asking them to refrain from negotiations
over lowering the toll fees. He suggested the only way to
solve the problem would be for the government to take
back the concession and compensate the investors and that
any policy not to negotiate about remedies had to be seen
in the context of the recently improved BIT (signed but not

yet in force).

On 26 February 2003, at a DMT Board meeting, Mr. Trapp
maintained that the Board could not compromise the basic
interests of DMT, despite the fact that there were some
members of the Board who preferred to follow the

Minister’s recommendation.

On 31 March 2003, the German Minister of Economic Affairs
and representatives of the Claimant, presented the

Claimant’s investment case to representatives of the

61

5.64

5.65

5.66

5.67

5.68

5.69

Respondent. The Deputy Prime Minister assured the
German side in public that his government which had
inherited, but not created “the Walter Bau problem”, would

resolve it in fairness.

At a meeting of the DMT Board on 3 April 2003, a traffic
consultant’s study was produced, analysing the Minister’s
toll reduction proposals and suggesting that DMT’s toll
revenue losses would be of the magnitude of THB 9.0 Billion
for DMT.

On 14 April 2003, Mr. Trapp and the Claimant’s executive
board signed four identical letters to various Thai Ministers
requesting a re-purchase of privately-held shares in DMT.
The Claimant had also attempted several times to meet

with the Minister of Transport.

On 27 June 2003, DMT again sent a letter to DoH

requesting the contractual toll increases.

On 2 July 2003, the DMT Board discussed whether a more
aggressive tactic should be initiated against the
Respondent. Mr. Trapp proposed legal action but the Board
resolved to postpone this issue till the next meeting in a
month’s time, saying that the toll increase was “a sensitive
issue as it is bound to contradict the policy of the Transport

Minister who wishes to reduce the toll fees”.

On 27 August 2003, the DMT Board proposed a more
proactive strategy pending a forthcoming meeting with the

Minister of Transport to solve the Ramp 4 problem.

On 5 October 2003, a meeting took place between the
Minister of Transport and some high-level public servants
with representatives of the Claimant. At this meeting, the
Minister promised to submit a proposal to buy back the

Claimant’s shares by mid-November and also to liaise with

62

5.70

5.71

5.72

5.73

5.74

the Minister of Finance. Even though a proposal had not
been reached, on 18 November 2003, the office of Traffic
Transport Planning Division replied to the Permanent
Secretary of the MoT proposing to buy back the project
from DMT and to engage a financial consultant to advise on

terms and conditions.

On 26 November 2003, DMT once more requested DoH to

allow a toll increase, as required by MoA2.

On 12 January 2004, Mr. Sombath (President of DMT), at a
Board meeting of DMT, tried to gain approval for an
alternative plan that DMT accept a permanent reduction of
toll fees in lieu of an extended concession period and a
government-supported “hair cut” of DMT’s existing loan.
This proposal was heavily attacked by Mr. Kramer and Mr.
Trapp because it involved DMT giving up contractual rights
in return for something unclear which gave a much lower
return for shareholders compared to that provided for in
Appendix F of MoA2.

Alarmed by Mr. Sombath’s actions, the Claimant wrote to
the Minister of Finance, saying that, if the Respondent as
shareholder in DMT would support such plans, he would
view such report as constituting an act of the government
against private shareholders in conflict with earlier

assurances.

On 16 January 2004, DoH, in reply to DMT’s letter of 26
November 2003, asking for an adjustment of the toll rates
as per contract, maintained that the tolls could only be
adjusted once the Cabinet had approved the deletion of

Ramp 4 which was still “under the process”.

On 21 January 2004, an extraordinary shareholders’
meeting of DMT voted to accept Mr. Sombath’s plan with a
majority vote of 81.67%, including that of MoF as

5.75

5.76

5.77

5.78

5.79

representing the Respondent as shareholder. 15.31% of
the shareholders (Walter Bau and VINCI) voted against the

motion. 3.02% abstained.

On the same day, the DMT Board meeting instructed its
management to follow up the shareholder-approved plan in

negotiations with the Respondent.

Shortly after these two meetings, Mr. Sombath modified the
plan as approved by the Board of DMT and submitted
changes for approval at the next DMT board meeting to be
held in two weeks’ time. Mr. Trapp strongly protested and
again warned of the consequences of such a plan but the
board resolved to follow Mr. Sombath’s modified plan. On
19 February 2004, DMT’s proposals were submitted to the
Minister of Transport without Mr. Kramer’s signature as

General Manager.

In January 2004, in anticipation of a meeting between the
Minister of Transport and the German Ambassador to
Thailand in February 2004, the Claimant again raised the
idea of a share buy-back, which had first been raised

through diplomatic channels in October 2001.

On 13 February 2004, the Thai Minister of Transport
confirmed to the Ambassador that the Respondent was
willing to buy the private shares - perhaps only the foreign
ones - but that the par price was too high and that a price

of 8 THB per share might be achievable.

On 16 March 2004, Mr. Sombath told the DMT Board
meeting that his proposal to the Minister of Transport might
not receive a positive result. The Board decided that a
legal letter regarding the persistent non-approval for

adjustment of the toll rate should now be written to DoH.

64

5.80

5.81

5.82

5.83

5.84

On 17 March 2004, DMT gave notice to DoH of a dispute in
accordance with clause 31 of the Concession Agreement.

The Respondent still took no action to increase the toll.

Negotiations proceeded concerning the sale of the
Claimant’s shares to the Respondent, resulting in a letter of
4 June 2004 from DMT to the Minister of Transport saying
that the shareholders would not accept a share price below
10 THB per share. Therefore, negotiations, as per clause

25 of the Concession Agreement, were requested by DMT.

On 16 June 2004, the management of DMT requested the
Board of DMT to approve the commencement of arbitration
Proceedings but a decision was postponed. DMT and the
Claimant made several more political attempts to achieve
resolution of the share-purchase proposal. On 30 July
2004, at a meeting between the Ministry of Finance and the
Minister of Transport, it was resolved that the Respondent
enter negotiations to buy back all foreign shares in DMT
and to allow DMT to engage consultants to value the
shares. Once valuations were known, a committee would
be set up to enter into negotiations to buy back the shares

from the foreign shareholders.

Mr. Sombath, on 5 August 2004, wrote a letter to the
Permanent Secretary requesting the same treatment for the
private Thai shareholders as for the foreign shareholders.
Eventually, on 3 September 2004, DMT’s Board resolved to
request its management to initiate arbitration proceedings
against the Thai government. The four government
directors on the Board abstained from voting for reasons of

conflict of interest.

Consultants were selected for the share valuation.
Turnaround for DMT and Intelvision for MoF. There was

agreement on terms of reference for the consultants.

65

5.85

5.86

5.87

5.88

5.89

On 17 November 2004, the German Minister of Economic
Affairs paid visits to the Prime Minister and the Minister of
Finance. The Claimant’s case was mentioned and both
sides were reassured that a “fair solution” was under way
and nobody should worry any more. One of those
attending the meeting was a Dr. Fischer, a member of the

Claimant's executive Board.

When the Northern Extension had been opened for traffic in
December 1998, DoH had disallowed the toll of 15 THB
agreed to in MoA2, instead allowing only 13 THB, citing the

non-completion of Ramp 4 as the reason for the reduction.

The deletion of Ramp 4 (which amounted to 0.89% of the
construction cost) was approved by the Follow-Up
Committee on 28 February 2000. At the same meeting, it
was stated that the Northern Extension toll increases could
not be implemented pending Cabinet approval. As will be
seen later, the toll increases did not take place until 2007

when MoA3 was signed.

The cancellation of Ramp 4 was finally approved only as
part of MoA3 on 12 September 2007, some nine years after
the Northern Extension had opened to the traffic. DoH’s
own assessment when recommending MoA3 to the
Attorney-General in August 2006 was: “The non-
construction of Ramp No. 4 will cause DMT to lose toll
revenues for the concession period pursuant to MoA2 1996
in the amount of approximately THB756 million while in
comparison construction costs would only have amounted
to THB 32.5 million.”

The Respondent argued that the Northern Extension was
delayed because of conflicts between the Claimant and
DMT. However, the Northern Extension and the direct

access ramp to the airport were completed on 2 December

66

1998 (four months before the contractual completion date).
With regard to Ramp 4, the Respondent claims that DMT
requested that the construction of Ramp 4 be postponed by
the letter from DMT to DoH of 16 September 1999 referred
to in Para. 7.32.

6. THE EVENTS OF DECEMBER 2004 AND BEYOND

6.1

6.2

6.3

6.4

The Board of DMT had called its last board meeting of the
year for 15 December 2004. Mr. Trapp had decided not to
attend what he considered to be a routine meeting but after
he had received (on 14 December 2004) a call from Mr.
Kramer urging his attendance, Mr. Trapp flew to Bangkok
from Germany arriving on the morning of 15 December
2004.

On arrival, he was advised that Mr. Sombath had been told

by the Minister of Transport to request DMT to consider:

(a) reducing the toll fees for the original Tollway from
30 THB to 20 THB;

(b) not imposing a toll at all on the Northern Extension
(at that time the toll was 13 THB).

Such measures would be for a trial period of three months.
If and when the forthcoming parliamentary elections
scheduled for February were completed, DMT would be

compensated for the reductions.

At the meeting, the eight Thai directors (four of them
government-appointed) voted for the reduction of the toll
fees “Because they were of the opinion that the
experimental reduction of toll fees in this instance will
become a favourable opportunity for DMT to be able to
negotiate in a more serious manner with the governmental

sectors in resolving DMT’s financial problems on a long term

67

6.5

6.6

6.7

6.8

basis." Mr. Kramer and Mr. Trapp voted against the
resolution, stating that such a reduction without the
lenders’ consent would be a breach of DMT’s obligations to
its lenders. This aspect was considered particularly serious,
given DMT’s extreme difficulties in the past with its

financiers.

Mr. Kramer expressed vehement opposition to the reduction
Proposal at the meeting. He was confused at the attitude
of the Board in contemplating a toll reduction when such
had been unanimously rejected by it in 2003. The Board
had resolved to commence arbitration proceedings because
of the refusal of the Respondent to allow a toll increase and
had expressed scepticism about whether any compensation

would be achieved.

The agenda for the meeting acknowledged that there had
not been time to seek approval to the toll reduction from
the lenders. That agenda shows that the DMT directors
who voted for the toll reduction (including the Respondent’s
representatives) saw fit to ignore this precaution. It is
highly doubtful, in the Tribunal’s view, that the lenders

would have agreed to any toll reduction.

Shortly after the close of the Board meeting at about 4pm,
the directors were invited to attend a press conference held
by the Prime Minister and the Minister of Transport, Mr.
Suriya, which was about to be held on the toll plaza some
200 metres adjacent to DMT’s office where the Board
meeting had been held. Both ministers announced to many
TV and other media reporters that the tolls on the Don
Muang Tollway would be lowered with immediate effect for
the benefit of the public.

On 17 December 2004, the Minister of Transport submitted

a request to the Cabinet for approval of the measures

68

6.9

6.10

6.11

6.12

agreed to by the Board. Approval was given on 21
December 2004.

In early January 2005, Mr. Trapp considered that DMT
would never be able to receive the dividend expectations
envisaged in the original Concession Agreement or in MoA2.
Hence, arbitration proceedings should be commenced
immediately under the 2002 Treaty which had come into
force three months previously. The necessary “cooling off”
letter was sent to the Prime Minister by the Claimant on 9
March 2005.

Throughout 2005-2006, whenever a 3-month “trial period”
had elapsed, DoH would request another extension of the
“trial period” from DMT. On each occasion, the request was
granted by the DMT Board over the objections of the

Claimant-appointed directors.

At the annual meeting of shareholders of DMT on 27 April
2005, Dr. Fischer and Mr. Trapp, on behalf of the Claimant,
stated both orally and in writing that the management of
DMT should undertake all necessary measures to achieve
the financial targets of MoA2. They considered the
Respondent’s past and present actions as tantamount to
expropriation. They strongly protested against what they
saw as DMT’s strategy of wishing to make shareholders, as
well as DMT’s lenders, responsible for absorbing the
financial damages caused to DMT by the Respondents’

actions.

On 27 April 2005, Dr. Fischer and Mr. Trapp visited the
Permanent Secretary of MoF requesting the implementation
of the strategy to buy the Claimant’s shares in DMT. No
results were achieved at that meeting and, on 13 May

2005, a written proposal was sent to the Ministry of Finance

69

6.13

6.14

6.15

6.16

6.17

(“MoF”) in which the Claimant repeated its former requests
that the Respondent buy the shares back at 10 THB.

On 18 May 2005, a letter to DoH, signed by Mr. Sombath
on behalf of DMT, stated that the foreign shareholders
persisted with their objection to extend the toll reduction
period. DMT sought to receive the assistance measures

promised in the Cabinet resolution of 21 December 2004.

At DMT’s Board meeting of 18 June 2005, Mr. Trapp again
appealed to the other directors to stop any further

extension of the toll-free and toll-reduction periods.

In June 2005, the Claimant investigated a new diplomatic
approach through the Thai Ambassador in Germany.
Consequently, Mr. Trapp talked to the Thai Minister of
Finance at the Thai Embassy in Berlin on 2 August 2005,

with delegates of the German Ministry of Economic Affairs.

On 21 June 2005, a meeting of DMT’s lenders and DMT was
held with representatives of the MoF and MoT. DMT,
represented by Mr. Sombath, asked for a loan at
preferential interest rates in order to be able to buy the
foreigners’ shares and Mr. Sombath offered his own shares

as pledge. The meeting did not accept this proposal.

At a DMT extraordinary shareholders’ meeting on 14 July
2005, Mr. Sombath, together with DMT’s Financial Adviser,
Turnaround, presented two plans (a debt restructuring plan
and a proposal to the Respondent to extend the concession
period and agree on a certain toll-free scheme). These
plans were opposed orally and in writing by the Claimant’s
representatives but the motion was passed with the
Claimant and VINCI dissenting.

70

6.18

6.19

6.20

6.21

6.22

6.23

On 16 August 2005, the majority of directors of DMT,
against the vote of Mr. Kramer, resolved to designate Mr.

Sombath as its sole negotiator with the Respondent.

A last attempt to obtain relief was made by the Claimant in
letters to the MoF of 12 August and 25 August 2005. A
letter from the German Minister, Mr. Clement, to the former
Deputy Prime Minister remained unanswered, as did the

Claimant's letters.

On the occasion of DMT’s Board meeting on 16 November
2005, Mr. Sombath presented to the Board a memorandum
which outlined an agreement which Mr. Sombath had
achieved in private negotiations with the Director General
of DoH. This memorandum ultimately became MoA3 but
was approved by the Cabinet on 12 September 2007

(almost two years later).

On 28 December 2005, the DMT shareholders in a general
meeting approved the wording for what was to become
MoA3 against the votes of the Claimant’s representatives.
The position paper annexed to the official minutes claimed
that, whereas MoA2 would have resulted in an IRRE of
9.15% with repayment of the investment in 2012, even on
paper MoA3, would result in an IRRE of 5.98% with

repayment of the investment in 2022.

Some tolls were re-introduced on the Tollway in April 2006,
although not to the level existing at the time of the

December 2004 reduction of tolls.

A new flyover was built at the Ladprao Intersection of the
VRR, increasing the capacity for through traffic at the
location. Another similar flyover with similar consequences

was built at Sutchisan Intersection in May 2004.

71

6.24

MoA3

6.25

6.26

6.27

In December 2006, the Claimant agreed to sell its shares in
DMT to Mr. Sombath and his son for the price of €10
million. The shares were acquired by an Australian
investor, Babcock & Brown Ltd, in October 2007 for €13.7

million.

Although the Claimant had sold its shares before MoA3 was
signed on 12 September 2007, it is important to summarise
the effects of that agreement. Simply put, MoA3 extends
the concession period by 12 years to 2034 and provides a
new schedule of agreed toll rates over the lifetime of the
concession. DMT is entitled to increase the tolls unilaterally
in accordance with the toll schedule so there is no danger of
the Respondent being able to interfere with the
contractually-agreed toll rates. The next increase will occur
on 22 December 2009.

The recital to MoA3 records that DMT was represented by
Mr. Sombath and Mr. Kramer (still a director of DMT), as
duly authorised to bind DMT. The recitals including:

“Whereas the Council of Ministers passed resolutions
on April 11, 2006 to acknowledge the agreement on
a solution to the loss problem of the Concessionaire
between the DoH and the Concessionaire as
proposed by the Ministry of Transport, and consigned
the principle to the Ministry of Transport to enter into
another negotiation with the Concessionaire again for
amending of the Tollway Concession Agreement so
as to ensure appropriateness and clarity as well as
more mutual benefits, which would then be proposed
to the Council of Ministers for further consideration,
as per the details in Appendix B attached hereto.”

In MoA3, DMT agreed to cancel:

“all. claims, law suits filed with courts and/or
submissions of disputes to arbitration which have
arisen or which may arise from any of the following
causes: 6.1 Construction of the Local Road, 6.2
disapproval of increases and toll fees in the past, 6.3
failure to arrange a soft loan at the agreed terms in

72

6.28

the past, 6.4 construction of detour lines on the VRR,
6.5 delayed returns of various performance bonds,
6.6 construction of flyovers at the land for Phrao
intersection on VRR which is a project of Bangkok
Metropolitan Administration, 6.8 relocation of the
Bangkok International Airport to Suvarnaphumi
Airport and 6.9 Construction of the Exit link from the
international passenger terminals of the Don Muang
International Airport towards the south (Bangkok
inbound) or southbound Exit Ramp (Ramp No.4)”.

The significant achievements of MoA3 included the
cancellation of Appendix F of MoA2, the deletion of Ramp 4
without compensation for cancellation of this and other

named works, a new regime for tolls and an extension of

the life of the concession.

7. THE EFFECT OF CLAUSE 25 OF CONCESSION AGREEMENT

7.1

7.2

Clause 25 of the Concession Agreement will now be
discussed. It provided a mechanism whereby DMT can
request the approval of toll increases. The Tribunal’s views
on the interpretation of Clause 25 will have later relevance
when assessment of the Claimant’s alleged legitimate

expectations is made.
The relevant parts of Clause 25 provide:

justment of Toll Rates and Concession
id

 
 

25.1 The Company may request the DOH to adjust
the toll rates being in force at the time so that
the toll rates are fair to the Company in light
of changes to the economic situation.

The Basic Economic Factors as listed in
Appendix D have been used for the original
financial planning and deviations of
comparable economic factors from those listed
in Appendix D shall be taken into account by
the DOH in _ considering the requested
adjustment to the toll rates. The purpose of
such adjustment shall be to restore the
financial position of the Company otherwise
affected.

7.3

7.4

25.2 At the request of the Company the DOH shall
agree to enter into negotiations with the
Company to remedy negative effects on the
Company’s financial position by means of toll
rate adjustment or extension of the
Concession Period or the delay of the start of
remuneration payable to the DOH according to
Clause 26.1 or any other measure deemed
appropriate by the parties due to: [...]

The Claimant’s contention is that clause 25.1 allows DMT to
request adjustment of toll rates when changes to the
economic situation occur. This clause makes reference to
the Basic Economic Factors in Appendix D of the Concession
Agreement which are to be used as a benchmark for

considering requests for toll adjustment.
Appendix D provides as follows:

“Basic Economic Factors

The below listed Basic Economic Factors have served
as a basis for the computation of the Initial Toll Rates
and the schedule increases thereof in the ninth and
fourteenth year of the Concession Period,
respectively, with the objective to always keep the
Company in the position to fulfil all its financial
obligations entered into for the sole purpose of
constructing, operating and maintaining the Tollway.

The Basic Economic Factors consist of:

-— Average Daily Traffic (ADT) and estimated growth
thereof

— Interest rate for Baht denominated loans

- Escalation of construction, operation,
maintenance and repair cost

— xtra of average longtime change of value of Thai
Baht to Deutschmark

— Taxes
For certain Basic Economic Factors assumptions in
regard to possible changes in time have been made

in order to arrive at a realistic forecast of the
operational results.

1. Average Daily Traffic and Estimated Traffic
Growth Thereof

For the purpose of reference the Average Daily
Traffic in accordance with a study made by the

74

Department of Highways for 1988 (Estimated ADT
1988) and the Growth of the Traffic as listed in
Section 5.1.2 of the Report on Viphavadi - Rangsit
Toll Road Project by the Working Group on Toll
Highways, Department of Highways, October 1986
have been selected.

2. Interest Rate for Thai Baht Denominated
Loans

For the financial forecasts during the
Concession interest rates for loans raised on the
Thai capital market have been assumed as
follows:

Bank of Thailand (BOT) interest rate for interbank
overnight borrowings : 8% p.a.

Additional fixed charge on top of this BOT
interbank loan rate for longterm loans to private
parties 14% p.a.
Total interest rate for longterm financing: 12% p.a.

(The official overnight interbank loan rate of the Bank
of Thailand is daily published in the papers and
therefore taken as reference rate.)

3. Escalation of Construction, Operation,
Maintenance and Repair Cost

The escalation of the construction, operation,
maintenance and repair costs has been estimated to
rise in conformity with the officially published
“Consumer Price Index” and for the purpose of the
financial forecasts during the Concession has been
assumed to amount to 3% p.a.

4. Change of Exchange Rate
Deutschmark/Baht

For the purpose of the financial forecasts during the
Concession an average long time annual loss of value
of the Thai Baht against the Deutschmark has been
assumed to amount to 3.0% p.a.

5. Taxes

For the purposes of the financial forecast during the
Concession fixed tax rates have been assumed as
follows :

— Service Tax plus Municipal Tax on

amount of Construction Contracts 13.3%
— Company Income Tax on Taxable Income:35.0%
- Dividend Tax on Dividends to Foreign
— Shareholders : 16.0%

75

7.5

7.6

7.7

7.8

7.9

No property tax for and Tollway for any
service/business tax on the toll revenues has been
considered.”

Clause 25.2 sets out more extensive remedies which can be
requested by DMT upon the occurrence of certain events

set out in paragraphs (a) to (d) of the clause.

It was the Claimant’s contention that, under Thai law, both
limbs of Clause 25 would be interpreted and applied so as
to create an effective obligation on the Respondent which
could sound in damages for non-performance of a suitable

adjustment to the terms of the Concession.

The Respondent disagreed with the  Claimant’s
interpretation of Clause 25, maintaining that the
mechanism did not provide for strong and unambiguous
rights that DMT could use to require DoH to provide
compensation in the event of a breach. Clause 25 is
drafted in weak language, referring to rights to “request”
and rights to “negotiate”, rather than in strong language
which mandated a right to compensation and a stronger

requirement to effectuate a toll increase.

As regards Clause 25.1, Dr. Sompong Sucharitkul, the
expert witness on Thai law introduced by the Claimant was

of the opinion that:

“DMT is legally entitled to have the toll rates adjusted
in accordance with the measurable deviation from
the listed factors used to determine the initial rates
and scheduled increases. Upon receipt of notification
by DMT of such changes, the DoH is under an
obligation to give effect to the requested adjustment
of the toll rates in order to restore the financial
position of DMT to its original viable status.”

Concerning Clause 25.2, Dr. Sompong opined:

“At the request of DMT, the DoH is under an explicit
contractual obligation to negotiate in good faith with
the DMT in order to adopt one of the remedial
measures available, including fair toll rate

76

adjustments or extension of the Concession period or
the delay of the start of the remuneration payable to
the DoH, or any other appropriate measure mutually
agreed upon between DMT and the DoH.”

7.10 Dr. Bhokin Balakula, the expert witness on Thai law called
by the Respondent was of the opinion that:
“Clause 25.1 states that DMT ‘may request the DoH
to adjust the toll rates being in force at the time so
that the toll rates are fair to the Company in the light
of changes to the economic situation’. This
contractual provision provides DMT, not with a right
to compensation, but a right for fair consideration by

DoH of any request for adjustment falling under this
clause.”

7.11 With respect to Clause 25.2, Dr. Bhokin was of the opinion
that:
“Under the terms of Clause 25.2, DoH must, at DMT’s
request, “agree to enter into negotiations with the
Company to remedy negative effects on the
Company’s financial position by means of toll rate
adjustment or extension of the Concession Period or
the delay of the start of remuneration payable to the

DoH according to Clause 26.1 or any other measure
deemed appropriate by the parties due to [...]”

7.12. Dr. Bhokin agreed that Clause 25.2 requires good faith
negotiations, but that DoH had no obligation to agree to any
particular measure to ensure that DMT’s income remained in

line with any particular projections or values.

The Tribunal’s Interpretation of Clause 25

7.13 Clause 35.7, paragraph two, of the Concession Agreement

reads in part:

“This Concession Agreement is executed in Thai and
English languages in duplicate with identical wording
and the Thai version shall govern in the event of
discrepancies.”
7.14 The Tribunal, with the help of its Thai member, determines
that the Thai and English versions of Clause 25 do not differ

in essence. The event that would trigger Clause 25.1 is

77

7.15

7.16

7.17

“changes to the economic situation”. Therefore, it is
incumbent upon DMT, as the party requesting the toll
adjustment, to submit to the Respondent that there have
been changes to the economic situation. Assuming that the
Respondent agrees that there have been changes to the
economic situation, the next step is for the parties to
discuss whether, and if so, how, the changes cause
deviations of the economic factors listed in Appendix D of
the Concession Agreement in order to arrive at a toll
adjustment that would “restore the financial position of the

Company otherwise affected”.

Clause 25.1 only entitles DMT to request the Respondent to
consider adjusting the tolls within the parameters contained
in that clause. The Tribunal agrees with Dr. Bhokin’s
remarks that: “Should DoH act unreasonably in considering
DMT's request for compensation under 25.1 or opt not to do
anything, DMT has a right to go to arbitration under Clause
31."

By the same token, Clause 25.2 (with its clearer language)
merely entitles DMT to request the DoH to enter into
negotiations with DMT to remedy negative effects on DMT’s
financial position by means of toll rate adjustment or
extension of the Concession Period or the delay of the start
of remuneration payable to the DoH according to clause
26.1 of the Concession Agreement, or any other measure
deemed appropriate by the parties due to causes specified
in subparagraphs (a) to (d) of that clause. In requesting
negotiations under clause 25.2, DMT must establish that its
financial position has been negatively affected by the causes

outlined in subparagraphs (a) to (d) of this clause.

It must be noted that although clause 25.2 provides for the
means to remedy DMT’s financial position, e.g. by toll rate

adjustment, extension of the Concession Period, etc., unlike

78

7.18

7.19

clause 25.1, it does not provide for an economic benchmark

for the redress.

In support of its request under clause 25.1 or 25.2, DMT
must furnish to DoH relevant details and justifications and

the DoH must give due consideration to DMT’s request’.

The Tribunal will take the above assessment of the effect of
Clause 25 into account when assessing the Claimant’s
alleged legitimate expectations. However, the general
provisions of Clause 25 would be superseded by any
express requirements regarding toll increases as were found
in MoA2.

8. THE EFFECT OF MOA2

Parties’ Submissions

8.1

8.2

Against the factual background detailed earlier, the
Claimant submitted that, whether or not there was duress
vitiating the Agreement so far as DMT is concerned, the
Claimant is not bound by MoA2. It was a minority
shareholder in DMT and as “an investor” under the BIT, it
had a claim in international law quite separate from any
claim that DMT might have had, were it not for MoA2. The

Claimant did not waive any claim in international law.

The Respondent argued that the Respondent’s settlement
negotiations with DMT were hard-fought. The Claimant,
through Mr. Kramer and Mr. Trapp, had been closely
involved with and fully aware of the negotiations at all
times. In fact, DMT had been quite enthusiastic about a
settlement, as was demonstrated by Mr. Kramer’s

memorandum of 16 January 1995 - which spoke of an

Concession Agreement, clause 25.3.

79

2

8.3

8.4

8.5

“absolute must for the company”. Moreover, the Claimant
stood to gain by acquiring the contract for the construction
of the Northern Extension. It was optimally placed as the
only feasible contractor in a position to construct the
extension. It was already on site, had constructed the
original Tollway and had made a profit from construction as

the Respondent emphasised many times in its submissions.

The Claimant submitted that the position under international
law is that an investor is entitled to waive or settle Treaty
claims only after it has elevated these claims to the
international level. Where this has not yet occurred, the
conduct of the parties in relation to domestic waiver
arrangements is relevant in determining whether or not
there has been a breach of the fair and equitable treatment

standard.

The Claimant relied on an arbitral tribunal decision in Eureko
B.V. v Poland’, which concerned the sale of a Polish
insurance company to a Dutch purchaser. After the dispute
arose, the purchaser gave notice of its intention to pursue a
claim under the Netherlands/Poland BIT which permitted
investor-state claims. A purchase agreement was later
concluded under Polish law which included an express
waiver of all claims which had been lodged by the purchaser
which included a Treaty claim made by the Claimant as an
investor under the BIT. Relying on the doctrine of non-
performance, the Claimant submitted that the waiver was
ineffective because Poland had not complied with the

remaining provisions of an addendum to the agreement.

The Eureko tribunal held that the waiver had not been
conditional upon subsequent performance of other
obligations. If it had been, it would have been drafted in a

different way. It considered that the exception of non-

Eureko v Poland, Partial Award and Dissenting Opinion of 19 August 2005.

80

8.6

8.7

8.8

performance relates to the simultaneous performance of
particular obligations and that both parties have to perform
simultaneously, which they did in that case. Consequently,
all contracts and other claims were terminated and not

suspended.

The Respondent submitted that, on the basis of this
decision, the Claimant cannot say that its waiver of claims
was dependent on the performance of some but not other

parts of MoA2 by the Respondent.

The Respondent submitted that the Claimant’s reference to
the Eureko case was misplaced in that the Respondent’s
position is not that MoA2 waived the  Claimant’s
international law rights but rather, insofar as those rights
were derived from its own legitimate expectations, those
expectations must have been changed by MoA2. Hence, the
content of the Claimant’s international law rights must also
have changed to reflect the reality of MoA2. In other words,
the Claimant’s expectation at the time it made its
investment, including injecting the further capital required
by MoA2. encompassed the expectation that the value of its
investment would be dependent on the results of further
negotiations between DMT and the Respondent pursuant to
clause 25 of the Concession Agreement which remained

operative but in an amended form.

The Tribunal’s view is that, as at the date of MoA2, the
Claimant did not have any claim in international law to
waive other than its rather theoretical right to have
persuaded the German government to bring a claim on its
behalf against Thailand under the state-to-state arbitration
provisions of the 1961 Treaty. At the time of the signing of
MoA2, the 1961 BIT was in force, which did not give an
investor the right to make a claim, as did the BIT under

consideration in Eureko. Moreover, the investor in Eureko

81

8.9

8.10

8.11

had actually made a treaty claim. Although the Eureko case
allows a claim which has been made by an investor against
a state to be settled, the case is not authority for the
proposition that an investor can settle a claim which had not
yet arisen at the international level, let alone a claim which

the investor personally did not have at the time.

The Tribunal holds in a later part of this Award that the
Claimant was not entitled to claim for pre-2004 breaches.
Therefore, it had no claim which could have been settled by
MoA2.

Moreover, it is quite inequitable that the Claimant be
allowed to disregard a waiver agreement to which it was
privy and in respect of which there were no grounds for
setting aside on the ground of duress (to be discussed

shortly).

The Tribunal’s reasons for the above view can be

summarised as follows:

(a) The evidence clearly shows that Mr. Kramer, the
Claimant’s representative in Bangkok was closely
involved with and was principal spokesman for DMT

in negotiating MoA2.

(b) MoA2, whilst possibly not ideal from the point of view
of either DMT or the Claimant, included benefits for
both DMT and the Claimant, as was acknowledged by

Mr. Kramer at the time.

(c) The 1961 Treaty, in force at the time of MoA2, dealt
with expropriation but had no reference to “Fair and
Equitable Treatment” from which requirement the
concept of legitimate expectations is derived. Any
“legitimate expectations” the Claimant might have

had changed after MoA2. The Claimant’s “/egitimate

82

expectations” thereafter were that MoA2 would be
fulfilled.

(d) The Claimant received valuable benefits by having an
“easy ride” into the contract to construct the

Northern Extension for which it was paid.

8.12 In any event, the Tribunal considers that the waiver in MoA2
was not dependent on the fulfilment by the Respondent of
its MoA2 obligations. The Eureko case is apposite in this
context. Whilst acknowledging that the Respondent, as a
sovereign state, was in a strong bargaining position, the
Tribunal does not consider there was duress exercised on

DMT by the Respondent of such a nature as to vitiate MoA2.

8.13. The arbitration decision relied on by the Claimant does not
help its argument. Desert Line Projects LLC v The Republic
of Yemen’, contains a number of statements by a
distinguished Tribunal to the effect that the fact that a party
is under financial pressure, does not necessarily mean that
any settlement agreement reached by such party is
vulnerable to invalidation for duress. Paragraphs 151-155
of the decision are helpful and encapsulate the present

Tribunal’s thinking.

“151 The first general observation is that the fact
that a party is objectively under financial
pressure does not necessarily mean that any
agreement reached with such a party is
vulnerable to invalidation for duress. Such a
notion might in fact compound the vulnerability
of such a party by making it difficult if not
impossible for it to make reliable commercial
arrangements. A contractual excuse of duress
requires some element of abuse by the other
contracting party. The commentary to the well-
known Harvard Draft of 1961, L. SOHN & R.
BAXTER, CONVENTION ON THE
INTERNATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY OF STATES
FOR INJURIES TO ALIENS, p. 191, contains a

3 Desert Line Projects LLC v The Republic of Yemen ICSID Case No. ARB/05/17 Award of

6 February 2008.

83

152

153

154

155

passage which well describes the assessment
Arbitral Tribunal must make:

Since economic duress of a sort may be present
in virtually any settlement, it must rest with
judicial decision to draw the line between, on
the one hand, economic compulsion exercised
by the respondent State over the claimant in
order to force him to settle, and on the other
hand, the normal operation of economic forces.

The second general observation is that a party
may fail to make payments expected by
another party without necessarily exposing
itself to a claim of duress. Settlement
agreements are routinely concluded by parties
who believe that their co-contractant owes
them more, but nevertheless accept a lesser
amount because they wish, or indeed acutely
need, to receive quicker payment. If all such
agreements were  voidable for duress,
commercial relations would be chaotic.

One party may be able to endure very long
delays of payment of vast sums because of the
abundance of its general resources, while
another may be seriously affected by a
contractual dispute due to weaknesses on other
business fronts which have nothing to do with
the non-paying cocontractant. The claim of
duress requires clear proof.

Counsel for the Respondent observed
reasonably that settlements frequently involve
the relinquishment of a perceived right. One of
the parties may accept such an agreement even
though it has a judgment in its favour. It may
believe that the other party’s obstreperousness
in creating enforcement difficulties, or in
pursuing frustrating appeals, is in bad faith.
Still, such settlement agreements are not
automatically considered susceptible to
annulment by virtue of coercion. To the
contrary, such settlements are routinely not
only upheld, but encouraged.

The difficulty with this argument is that it fails
to perceive the line between the ordinary
economic pressure created by delay in the
payment of debt (which may be acute, and
nevertheless amenable to legally cognizable
settlement), on the one hand, and, on the
other, the kind of compulsion that can be
created by a superior force in a_ hostile
environment, where the scales of justice have
been manifestly compromised. As Professor
Detlev Vagts put it, in “Coercion and Foreign
Investment Rearrangements,” 72 AM. J. INT. L.
17, at 30 (1978):

84

8.14

8.15

8.16

“Fear - like fraud, undue influence, infancy, or
insanity - vitiates the informed, intelligent, and
adult consent which contract theory in_ its
classical forms demanded almost everywhere.
Force is also illegitimate in terms of any theory
that leaves the settling of trade terms to the
operation of a market; violence is the antithesis
of the ordinary market.”

15

a

These words were written in the days before the
advent of modern generation of BITs; but they
could hardly have been more apposite if they
had also described coercion and fear as the
“antithesis” of the promotion and protection of
foreign investment.

The Tribunal in Desert Line, not surprisingly, found that
there had been duress exerted on the claimant in the form
of threats and attacks on the physical integrity of the
claimant and its investment. Agents of the respondent had
besieged the claimant’s construction site and arrested three
managers, including the son of the chairman of the
claimant. There had been failure to provide to the claimant
the protection and security it had requested from the
respondent. The claimant had been subjected to
harassment threats and theft by armed third parties. The
chairman of the claimant had been advised to leave Yemen

because his life was in danger.
At paragraph 186, the Tribunal said:

“Settlement agreements should not be _ lightly
disregarded and the circumstances of this case go
egregiously far beyond the bounds of ordinary
relations, let alone those of “every settlement ever
reached”. The Tribunal finds that the settlement
agreement was imposed on to the Claimant under
physical and financial duress. It is not the result of
fair and sincere negotiation among the parties”.

In the present case, the conduct of the Respondent
complained about by the Claimant (even viewed in its worst
possible light) comes nowhere close to the extreme and

frightening conduct to which the claimant in the Desert Line

case had been subjected. Negotiations for MoA2 were not

85

8.17

8.18

all one-sided. There were advantages in MoA2 for DMT and
the Claimant as it finally emerged. MoA2 may possibly have
been weighted in favour of the Respondent, which made
last-minute changes to agreed drafts, but that conduct
alone would not amount to duress. As was pointed out by
the Tribunal in Desert Line, financial embarrassment by a
claimant is often the reason for a claimant entering into a
settlement agreement. The claimant here was certainly
suffering financial embarrassment. It is notorious that
settlement agreements are rarely ideal from the point of
view of either party. Both parties lose something, but that

is often said to be the hallmark of a good settlement.
Accordingly, the Tribunal is of the view:

(a) The Claimant cannot make a claim based on any
conduct of the Respondent prior to the signing of
MoA2. The Claimant is bound by the settlement
reached by that Agreement by DMT.

(b) MoA2 is not liable to be set aside on the grounds of

duress.

It follows from the Tribunal’s decision in this area that the
Claimant cannot make any claim arising from actions of the
Respondent occurring before the signature of MoA2. Such
of its claims as are admitted to the extent allowable by the
Tribunal’s findings, must be based solely on_ the
Respondent’s conduct after the date of MoA2. As will be
discussed later, there might be claims based on ongoing
infringement by the Respondent of its obligations under
MoA2, crystallising into a breach after the date of entry into
force of the 2002 Treaty. Allegations to this end will be

considered by the Tribunal later in this award.

86

9.

JURISDICTION RATIONE TEMPORIS

9.1

9.2

9.3

9.4

9.5

In its Partial Award of 5 October 2007, the Tribunal found
that it has jurisdiction ratione materiae in this arbitration.
In other words, the Claimant had an “investment” which

was within the coverage of the 2002 Treaty.

The Tribunal’s Partial Award was based on its interpretation
of Article 8 of the 2002 Treaty, which provides:

“Article 8 -

This Treaty shall also apply to approved investments

made prior to its entry into force by investors of

either Contracting Party in the territory of the other

Contracting Party consistent with the latter’s laws

and regulations.”
However, whilst accepting the Tribunal’s ruling on
jurisdiction ratione materiae, the Respondent submitted at
the substantive hearing that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction
ratione temporis in respect of disputes which arose before
the coming into force of the 2002 Treaty on 20 October
2004. Both parties are in agreement that the Tribunal has
jurisdiction in respect of disputes which came into being
after that date.

The arguments on the jurisdiction ratione temporis centre
on the reference in Article 10 of the 2002 Treaty to
“disputes concerning investments between a Contracting
Party” and “an investor of the other Contracting Party”.
Article 10 goes on to define the procedure for appointing an
Arbitral Tribunal in the event of a dispute not being resolved

by prior negotiation.

It is important in the context of the present argument to

note

(a) The 1961 Treaty did not give investors the right to
make investor-state claims but provided only for

state-state claims in its Article 11.

87

(b) Article 14(3) of the 1961 Treaty provides “In respect
of investments made prior to the date of termination
of the present Treaty, the provisions of Articles 1 to
13 shall continue to be effective for a further period
of ten years from the date of termination of the
present Treaty.” The 1961 Treaty was terminated
upon the date of the entry into force of the 2002
Treaty (see Article 11(2) of the 2002 Treaty).

(c) Accordingly, because of (b) above, it is still possible
for a state-state claim to be made under the 1961
Treaty until October 2014.

(d) There is no express restriction in Article 10(1) of the
2002 Treaty against claims which arose before the

date of commencement of the Treaty.

(e) The reference to “disputes” in Article 9 of the 2002
Treaty (which deals with disputes between the
Contracting Parties) is not expressed as broadly as
Article 10 which refers to “disputes concerning
investments”. Article 9 refers to “disputes
concerning the interpretation or application of this

Treaty”.

(f) Article 9 of the 1961 Treaty applies to “approved
investments made prior to its entry into force (i.e. 10
April 1965) but not earlier than 26 October 1960”.
Presumably, the latter date is that when Treaty
negotiations commenced or agreement to the Treaty

had been reached in principle.
9.6 In summary, the Claimant submitted:

(a) There is nothing in the ordinary meaning of the
phrase “Disputes concerning investments” in Article
10(1) of the 2002 Treaty to limit the scope of the

88

Tribunal’s jurisdiction to disputes arising after the
date of commencement of the 2002 Treaty involving
n “investor” qualified as such under Article 8 of that

Treaty.

(b) There is no question of the application of the
principle of non-retroactivity to Article 10, since the
2002 Treaty was in force when the arbitration
process was commenced by the Claimant. Article 10
is to be interpreted in the context of there being

successive BITs.

(c) Article 7(2) of the 2002 Treaty extends investor-
state arbitration within the meaning of Article 10 of
the 2002 Treaty.

(d) Under international law, absent any _ specific
provision to the contrary, the Tribunal has
jurisdiction where wrongful acts giving rise to a
dispute, have their origins in earlier events. They
are within the temporal jurisdiction of the Tribunal if
consummated after the critical date. This proposition
is relevant to allegations of “creeping expropriation”
and to the claim that the Respondent failed to fulfil
the Claimant’s legitimate expectations, thereby
breaching the 2002 Treaty requirement of “fair and

equitable treatment” of the Claimant.

(e) Alternatively, the Tribunal can consider conduct
preceding the date of implementation of the Treaty
in order to establish a factual basis for breaches
after the implementation or to provide evidence of

intent in respect of any such later breach.

9.7 The Claimant went on to submit that the Respondent had
been aware at the relevant time of the necessity to include

a specific exclusionary provision in the Treaty if it had

89

wished to limit jurisdiction ratione temporis. The
Respondent had concluded other BITs which expressly
excluded claims carrying out of disputes, claims and events
which had arisen before the date of the entry into force of

the relevant Treaty.

9.8 The Respondent’s counter-submission, in summary, was
that, under the principle of non-retroactivity enshrined in
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (“Vienna
Convention”), (Article 28), disputes arising before the
coming into force of the 2002 Treaty cannot be entertained
under that Treaty. Further, there can be no relevant
continuing or cumulative breach occurring before the
coming into force of the Treaty which can support a claim.

The onus of proof of retroactivity lies on the Claimant.

9.9 The Respondent invoked Article 31 of the Vienna Convention
which requires a good faith interpretation of “the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose”. The
general rule is that retroactivity has to be expressly stated
or implied. The Respondent cited in this context the official
commentary on Article 28 of the Vienna Convention and the

International Court of Justice (“ICI”) case of Ambatielos*.
Parties’ Detailed Contentions:
(a) Interpretation of Article 10

Claimant

9.10 Central to the Claimant’s argument is the decision of the
Permanent Court of International Justice (“PCIJ”) in the

Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions case, a judgment of 30

4 Ambatielos (Greece v United Kingdom) 1953 |CJ Rep 19.

90

August 1924°. According to the Claimant, that decision laid
down a principle that an unqualified submission of a state to
an arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction occurs with respect to
disputes relating to conduct both before and after the entry
into force of the Treaty in question. Unless expressly
stated, there is no implication of a temporal limitation in a

broad jurisdictional provision.

9.11. In Mavrommatis, the PCIJ was concerned with a grant of
conflicting concessions in Palestine in alleged breach of the
Palestinian Mandate. The relevant jurisdictional clause in
the Mandate referred to “any dispute whatsoever which may
arise” and the dispute had arisen after the Mandate had
come into force. It was argued that the facts giving rise to
the dispute must also have come into existence after the
Mandate had come into force. The PCIJ rejected that
argument, saying:

“The fact of a dispute having arisen at a given
moment between two States is a sufficient basis for
determining whether as regards tests of time
jurisdiction exists, whereas any definition of the
events leading up to a dispute is in many cases
inextricably bound up with the actual merits of the
dispute”.

9.12 In the Claimant’s submission, the Mavrommatis decision
gave rise to the practice of incorporating temporal
limitations and reservations in jurisdictional clauses in BITs.
Many instances of this practice were cited on the part of the
Respondent and of other States. If the Respondent had
inserted such a reservation (as it had done in other BITs),
the Tribunal then would not have had jurisdiction; but there
was no such limitation and, consequently, the Tribunal has

temporal jurisdiction.

Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions Case (Greece v United Kingdom), PClJ, Judgment
of 30 August 1924, Series A, No. 2.

91

6

9.13

9.14

9.15

The Claimant referred in considerable detail to the
Respondent’s own practice of incorporating temporal
limitations in its own BITs which had been accomplished
since 1997. For example, the Thailand/Argentina BIT,
signed in 2000 and in force in 2002, provided:

“This agreement shall apply to all investments

whether made before or after the entry into force of

this agreement. But the provision of this agreement

shall not apply to any dispute or difference which

arose before its entry into force.”
The Claimant referred to what it considered to be a recent
application of the Mavrommatis principle by the ICJ in the
Application of the Convention on Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia-Herzegovina v Serbia-

Montenegro)°®.

The Genocide Convention, like Article 10 of the 2002 Treaty,
did not contain any limitation on the scope of jurisdiction
ratione temporis, nor did the parties make any reservation
to that end. Yugoslavia had submitted that the ICJ could
deal only with events after the date when the Convention
had become applicable between the parties. The Court held

that the Convention “...does not contain any provision, the
object or effect of which is to limit in such manner the scope
of its jurisdiction ratione temporis and nor did the parties
themselves make any reservation to that end.” Accordingly,
the ICJ felt able to find such jurisdiction and held that such
a finding was in accordance with the object and purpose of

the Genocide Convention.

Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina v Serbia and Montenegro) Decision on Jurisdiction,
141 July 1996, (ICU).

92

Respondent

9.16

9.17

9.18

9.19

9.20

In its submissions in opposition, the Respondent placed
heavy emphasis on Article 28 of the Vienna Convention
which provides a presumption against retroactivity on the
following terms: “Unless a different intention appears from
the treaty or is otherwise established, its provisions do not
bind a party in relation to any act or fact which took place or
any situation which ceased to exist before the date of the
entry into force of the treaty with respect to that party”. It
submitted that there is nothing in the 2002 Treaty that
evidences an intention of the parties to depart from the
normal position of prospective treaty application, apart from
Article 8 which extended coverage to _ pre-existing

investments.

The Respondent derived support from the Commentary to
Article 24 of the Final Draft Articles on the Law of Treaties of

the International Law Commission (“ILC”).

The Respondent submitted that the jurisdictional clause of
the 2002 Treaty was attached to the substantive clauses in
the 2002 Treaty as a means of securing their due
application. Therefore, the present case was one of those
cases where the ILC Commentary considered that the
Mavrommatis principle should be displaced and that the
non-retroactivity principle operated to limit ratione temporis

the jurisdictional clause.

As to whether a dispute had arisen before the due date,
counsel for the Respondent pointed out that the German
Ministry of Foreign Affairs had sought, through diplomatic
channels, to have the Claimant’s dispute resolved in 2001 -

well before the 2002 Treaty came into effect.

The thrust of the Respondent’s submission was that the

2002 Treaty looked solely to the future with the exception of

9.21

9.22

admitting “investors” who had attained that status before
the entry date. The preamble emphasises the intention to
create future favourable conditions for investments by
investors of either state in the territory of the other state.
Though the Respondent acknowledged that Article 8 applies
the protection of the Treaty to “investments” made before
the Treaty came into force, there was nothing in Article 8
that pointed to the application of the Treaty to “disputes”

that arose before the Treaty came into force.

The Respondent relied on the decision of an ICSID Tribunal
in Impregilo SpA v Islamic Republic of Pakistan’. The
relevant treaty in that case contained a clause of similar
effect to Article 10 of the 2002 Treaty under consideration
(i.e. “any dispute arising between a Contracting Party and
the investors of the other”. Referring to this language, the
Tribunal decided that "...such language - and the absence of
specific provision for retroactivity - infers that disputes that
may have arisen before the entry into force of the BIT are
not covered”. The Respondent relied also on decisions of
tribunals in Feldman v Mexico® and Mondev International
Ltd v United States®, MCI Power Group LLC and New Turbine
Inc. v Ecuador'®, Generation Ukraine v Ukraine’! and

Kardassopolous v Georgia’.

The Respondent submits that the Claimant (on which the
burden of proving jurisdiction ratione temporis lies) was, in
effect, endeavouring to reverse the presumption contained

in Article 28 of the Vienna Convention.

Impregilo SpA v Islamic Republic of Pakistan ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on

Jurisdiction, 22 April 2005.
Feldman v Mexio \CSID Case ARB (AF) 99/1, 16 December 2002.
Mondev International v United States |CSID Case ARB (AF) 99/2, Award of 11 October

2002.

MCI Power Group LLC and New Turbine Inc v Ecuador ICSID Case ARB/03/6, Award of

31 July 2007.

Generation Ukraine v Ukraine |ICSID Case ARB/00/9, Award of 16 September 2003.
Kardassopoulos v Georgia |\CSID Case ARB/05/18, Award of 6 July 2007.

94

9.23

9.24

9.25

The Respondent also contended that to analyse the Treaty
practice of State parties is not an aid to treaty
interpretation, citing the decision of another ICSID Tribunal
in Aguas Del Tunari SA v Republic of Bolivia’®. There, that
Tribunal considered that the Treaty practice of the parties is
“necessarily of limited probative value to the task of
interpreting the BIT”. The official commentary to the
Vienna Convention supports the Respondent’s view when it
says “the general rule however is that a treaty is not to be
treated as intended to have retroactive effects unless such
an intention is expressed in the treaty or was clearly to be
implied from its term.” This view was endorsed and acted
upon by the International Court of Justice in the Ambatielos

case“,

Counsel for the Respondent referred also to the recent
decision of the tribunal in Société Générale v The Dominican
Republic'*. The Tribunal in that case agreed with the
respondent that the wording of the relevant Treaty had not
established an intention sufficient to rebut the Article 28
Vienna Convention presumption. Counsel emphasised that,
for the basic rule on non-retroactivity not to apply, a clear
intention of the parties to the 2002 Treaty would have had

to have been demonstrated which did not happen.

Counsel for the Respondent submitted that Mavrommatis
had been decided at a time of a “flowering of public
international law” with new tribunals being established. The
PCIJ, conceived in the aftermath of the First World War,
provided an expansive ruling in Mavrommatis whereby it
would accept jurisdiction over cases referred to it after its

establishment unless the state had expressly limited its

Aguas del Tunari S.A. v Republic of Bolivia \CSID Case No. ARB/02/3, Decision on
Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction of 21 October 2005.
Ambatielos, above n 4.
Société Générale v The Dominican Republic UNCITRAL Arbitration, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 18 September 2008.

95

submission ratione temporis. Not surprisingly, this led to a
number of states expressly limiting the temporal

jurisdiction.

Claimant’s Reply

9.26

9.27

9.28

In reply, in oral submissions at the hearing, Professor
Crawford for the Claimant categorised the case law on
temporal jurisdiction as “uneven”, and submitted that the
various arbitral tribunals had been trying to “sort out over a
period of time” the implications of general dispute
settlement clauses. He submitted the trend was in favour of
a broader rather than a narrower reading of jurisdictional

clauses.

In his oral presentation, Professor Crawford did not suggest
that .the substantive provisions of the 2002 Treaty had any
retrospective effect. He cited Article 7(2) of the 2002
Treaty which imposed an obligation “to observe any other
obligation it has assumed with regard to investments of its
territory by investors of the other Contracting Party”. He
submitted that Article 10(1) was a procedural and not a

substantive provision.

Professor Crawford distinguished Impregilo since it had been
a contractual dispute between a Pakistan state-owned
entity and an Italian contractor. The cause of the
contractual dispute occurred entirely before the entry into
force of the only BIT. There were no successive BITs.
When dealing with contractual disputes, a tribunal is stuck
with the State’s own characterisation of the contractual
entity. General international law is irrelevant to questions
of contractual liability. Consequently, the Impregilo
tribunal had held that it had no jurisdiction ratione
personae. It did not have to consider any exclusive

jurisdiction clause because it had no contractual jurisdiction

96

to start with. The Tribunal in the Impregilo case held that it
had jurisdiction only from the date when the Treaty came
into effect. According to Professor Crawford, the case can
be contrasted with the present because of the pre-existing
Treaty, and the fact that the claimant’s contract in
Impregilo was with a third party (albeit a state-owned

enterprise) and not with the state itself.

(b) Successive Treaties
Claimant

9.29 The Claimant next submitted that, should the Tribunal
prefer a narrower or alternative basis for jurisdiction, the
Tribunal should note that there were two successive
Germany/Thailand treaties with similar objects, purposes
and provisions. This circumstance provides a basis to

founding jurisdiction ratione temporis.

9.30 This argument relied heavily on a decision of an ICSID
Tribunal in Tradex Hellas SA v The Republic of Albania*®.

9.31 To the objections that that case can be distinguished from

the present because:

(a) it concerned the relationship of two successive
domestic laws of Albania and not of two successive

treaties; and

(b) there being no Treaty involved, the Vienna
Convention had no application, the Claimant replied

as set out in the next three paragraphs.

9.32 The Claimant submitted that there is nothing in the Tradex

decision to indicate that the Tribunal would have decided

16 Tradex Hellas S.A. v The Republic of Albania \CSID Case No. ARB/94/2, Decision on

Jurisdiction of 24 December 1996.

97

otherwise had it been faced with two BITs made on the
same dates as the domestic laws which the Tribunal had to

consider.

9.33 The Claimant further submitted that it does not matter
whether consent to jurisdiction is established by treaty,
formal law or otherwise howsoever. Tradex, whilst based
on domestic law dealing with foreign investment, was
apposite because it involved the application of public
international law by virtue of Article 42(1) of the ICSID
Convention which was encompassed by the second of the

two successive domestic laws.

9.34 In the Tradex case, Article 2 of the second domestic law
provided for “fair and equitable” treatment of investors by

Albania. This provision was considered to be retrospective.

9.35 In Article 8, a procedural provision was applied to earlier
disputes under the previous legislation. The submission to
jurisdiction provision was not drawn as widely as Article
10(1) of the 2002 Thai/Germany Treaty. The Tribunal
stated at page 191

“The prospective application of Article 2 is easily
reconcilable with the application of Article 8 to earlier
disputes because it occurs frequently that Courts and
Arbitral Tribunals have to apply certain substantive
rules of law which were in force during the relevant
period, though they have been replaced by new rules
as from a certain date. Accepting ICSID jurisdiction
of the present dispute under Article 8 therefore, by
no means implies that the substantive protection
rules and 1993 law would be applicable in the
consideration of the merits of the case.”

9.36 A further decision of relevance, according to the Claimant, is
Jan de Nul v Arab Republic of Egypt'’. The case raised the
relationship between successive BITs, both of which had

contained an investor-state arbitration clause. While the

‘7 Jan de Nul v Arab Republic of Egypt ICSID Case No. ARB/04/13, Decision on
Jurisdiction of 16 June 2006.

98

9.37

9.38

9.39

1977 BIT was in force, a dispute had arisen in relation to
the contract between the claimant and the Suez Canal
Authority (“SCA”). The Claimant had alleged that the SCA
had misrepresented the nature of work to be performed.
The Claimant commenced proceedings in an Egyptian
domestic Court. Subsequent to the Claimant bringing this

domestic claim, the 2002 BIT came into force.

The Jan de Nul tribunal had to decide whether, and to what
extent, it could deal under the 2002 BIT with the alleged
wrongdoings of the Respondent in relation to the domestic
dispute. That Treaty had expressly excluded disputes which
had arisen prior to its entry into force. In its Award on
Jurisdiction, affirmed in its Final Award, the Tribunal held
that it had jurisdiction under the 2002 BIT over the entirety
of the facts on the basis that the facts of the domestic
dispute, though pre-dating the international dispute, would

ultimately lead to the international dispute.

The Jan de Nul Tribunal accepted the distinction that
international law distinguishes between jurisdictional and
applicable law provisions. Accordingly, the provisions of the
2002 BIT were held to apply to decisions of the local
Egyptian courts. The provisions of the 1977 BIT applied to
the respondent’s conduct which had occurred prior to the
entry into force of the 2002 BIT. Though the dispute was
based solely on the 2002 BIT, the substantive provisions of
both treaties were held to apply. The earlier treaty was part

of the applicable law.

The approach of the Jan de Nu! Tribunal accords with the
Claimant’s submission that, while substantive provisions of
treaties do not have retrospective effect, procedural
jurisdictional provisions do have effect with regard to

disputes based on facts occurring before the entry into force

99

of the Treaty - all in accordance with the Mavrommatis

principle.

Respondent

9.40

9.41

9.42

The Respondent submitted that the 1977 BIT, discussed in
the Jan de Nul case, was a modern BIT similar to the 2002
Treaty, whereas the Thailand/Germany 1961 Treaty was
described by Professor Crawford in his oral presentation as
being “in the first wave of the BIT movement”. It did not
contain any express guarantee of fair and equitable
treatment of investors, as did the 2002 Treaty. The
decisive point of differentiation between the 1961
Thailand/Germany Treaty and the treaties considered in Jan
de Nul is that the Jan de Nul treaties both contained an
investor-state arbitration provision. Accordingly, the same
argument about the risk of parallel proceedings arose in Jan
de Nul, just as it did in Tradex. The absence of an investor-
state arbitration clause in the earlier Treaty is just such a
specific circumstance envisaged by the Tribunal in Jan de
Nul, such as would lead the Tribunal not to rely upon the
1961 Treaty in a claim brought under Article 10 in the 2002
Treaty.

The Respondent submitted that Tradex was based on an
interpretation of domestic law, a different creature from
public international law. States may deviate from the
principle of non-retroactivity when enacting domestic law.
Domestic exceptions from the principle should not easily be

transposed into international law.

According to the Respondent, in Tradex, the Tribunal
declined to endorse an interpretation which adopted a
“heterodox” position on non-retroactivity for policy reasons,
namely the prevention of parallel proceedings (i.e.
UNCITRAL under the first domestic statute and ICSID under

100

the second). It also submitted that retroactive operation is
more readily discernible in domestic law situations of the
sort with which the Tradex Tribunal had been dealing.
International law - as embodied in Article 28 of the Vienna
Convention - is less receptive to retroactivity. That

Convention had no application in Tradex.

9.43 The 1993 Albanian law in Tradex provided for ICSID
arbitration while the earlier foreign investment laws of
1990-92 provided for UNCITRAL arbitration. In concluding
that ICSID arbitration should apply also to investments
made under the earlier laws, the tribunal considered that
those changes in legislation created a system of protection
which had evolved and improved over the years, and it was
“..consistent with this evolution that the new dispute
settlement mechanisms, which are more advanced and
efficient ... can be used also in relation to investments made
and for disputes arisen before the entry into force of such
law, the only negative condition being that previous
procedures to settle the dispute have not yet been

operated. ®

9.44 The Tribunal here interpolates a comment on the attempts
by the Respondent to refer in submissions to a letter from a
Dr. Zimmer, formerly of the German Foreign Service. The
situation about his proposed testimony was the subject of
Procedural Orders from the Tribunal on 6 March, 18 July and
9 August 2007. In short, the Tribunal ruled that, should the
Respondent wish to rely on Dr. Zimmer’s evidence at the
jurisdictional hearing, whether as a witness of fact or as an
expert, the Respondent had to produce an amended version
of his brief which complied with Article 4.5 of the IBA Rules
(if he were to be a witness of fact) and with Article 5.2 of
the IBA Rules (should he be called as an expert). Because

‘8 Tradex above n 16, page 192.

101

9.45

(c)

9.46

9.47

9.48

the Claimant required Dr. Zimmer for cross-examination at
the hearing, the Respondent was required to bring Dr
Zimmer to the hearing and have him produce those
documents on which he relied. The Respondent did not
comply with any of these requirements which had been
made for the jurisdictional hearing. It, therefore, could not

rely on his statement for the substantive hearing.

Dr. Zimmer was apparently instructed by the German
Government not to give evidence. The Tribunal, of course,
has no jurisdiction to compel a witness: but, in view of the
non-compliance with the Tribunal’s procedural rulings, the

Tribunal cannot have regard to Dr. Zimmer's statement.

Article 7 of 1961 Treaty

The Claimant next submitted that Article 10 of the 2002
Treaty has no limitation as to when the dispute might have
arisen because the Article has to be read with Article 7 (2)
which requires the Respondent to “observe any other
obligation it has assumed with regard to investments in its

territories by investors of the other Contracting Party”.

The Claimant argued that Article 7 of the 1961 Treaty
extends investor-state arbitration to the 1961 Treaty. The
Parties could have avoided this consequence by enacting an
appropriate exclusionary provision, but chose not to do so.
Various cases under Most Favoured Nation ("“MFN”) clauses
were cited, although the Claimant acknowledged that Article
7 of the 1961 Treaty was not a MFN clause.

Article 7 of the 1961 Treaty provides:

“If the legislation of either Contracting Party or
international obligations existing at present or
established hereafter between the Contracting Parties
in addition to the present Treaty, result in a position
entitling investments by nationals or companies of
the other Contracting Party to a treatment more

102

19

20

9.49

9.50

9.51

9.52

favourable than is provided for by the present Treaty,

such position shall not be affected by the present

Treaty. Each Contracting Party shall observe any

other obligation it may have entered into with regard

to investments within its territory by nationals or

companies of the other Contracting Party.”
The Respondent submitted on this point, in its pre-hearing
submissions on the law that incorporation of a right to
arbitrate is never to be taken lightly, Plama Consortium v
Bulgaria*®. The Claimant’s argument would involve the
Tribunal having to rewrite the provisions of the 1961 Treaty
by extending investor-state arbitration to the 1961 Treaty.
All Article 7 of the 2002 Treaty does is to leave undisturbed

agreements made under the 1961 Treaty.

The Respondent discussed several unsuccessful attempts in
other cases to utilise MFN provisions for dispute resolution,
notably in Plama?’. In no case cited by the Claimant has a
tribunal incorporated a right to arbitrate through the MFN

mechanism where none existed before.

In its post-hearing submissions, the Claimant did not make
reliance on Article 7(2) a separate ground of submissions in
favour of jurisdiction ratione temporis. It merely called
Article 7(2) of the 2002 Treaty in aid of the interpretation it

sought in its submissions on Article 10.

The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent's submission. All
Article 7(2) does is to leave alone any other agreements
concluded between the Contracting Parties and other states.
The fact that in none of the three instances cited by the
Claimant was there a right to investor-state arbitration is

determinative.

Plama Consortium v Bulgaria |CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction of 8

February 2005.
Ibid.

103

at

(d)

9.53

9.54

9.55

Composite Acts
Claimant

The final ground on which the Claimant asserted jurisdiction
as a principle that, where wrongful acts continue and the
ultimate dispute is a result of a succession of wrongful acts
across time, including acts occurring within the clear
temporal jurisdiction of the Tribunal, then the Tribunal has
jurisdiction over the whole series of wrongful acts, although
some occurred before the date of the Treaty coming into

force.

The Tribunal is not at this point in the Award concerned with
analysing whether there have been wrongful acts which had
their origin before the date of the commencement of the
2002 Treaty, but which crystallised into a dispute after that
date. That will be the subject of later analysis. However,
the Tribunal now considers the arguments in the context of
whether it has jurisdiction ratione temporis even to consider

pre-Treaty acts or omissions of the Respondent.

The Claimant claimed that a number of cases showed the
application of the principle. Notably, Tecmed v Mexico”.
The Tribunal there said:

“Conduct, acts or omissions of the Respondent which,
though they happened before the entry into force [of
the BIT] may be considered as constituting part,
concurrent factor or aggravating or mitigating
element of conduct or acts or omissions of the
Respondent which took place after such date do fall
within the scope of this Arbitral Tribunal’s
jurisdiction.

This is so, provided such conduct or acts, upon
consummation or completion of their consummation
after the entry into force of the Agreement constitute
a breach of the Agreement, and particularly if the
conduct, acts or omissions prior to December 18,
1996, could not reasonably have been fully assessed
by the Claimant in their significance and effects when

Tecmed v Mexico ICSID Case ARB (AF) 00/2, Award of 19 May 2003, page 22.

104

22
23

they took place, either because as the Agreement
was not in force they could not be considered within
the framework of a possible claim under its
provisions or because it was not possible to assess
them within the general context of conduct
attributable to the Respondent in connection with the
investment, the key point of which led to violations of
the Agreement following its entry into force..”

9.56 Under this approach, submitted the Claimant, the Tribunal
must consider each individual alleged wrongful act both
discretely and as part of a course of conduct.

9.57 Société Générale v Dominican Republic expresses the
situation in these words:

“The Tribunal accordingly concludes that to the
extent that on the consideration of the merits an act
is proved to have originated before the critical date
but continues as such to be in existence after that
date, amounting to a breach of a Treaty obligation in
force at the time it occurs, it will come within the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. This will also be the case if
the series of acts results in the aggregate that such a
breach of an obligation in force at the time the
accumulation culminates after the critical date.”

9.58 The Claimant pointed also to a decision of the International
Court of Justice concerning legality of the use of the force in
the Balkan Conflict, Yugoslavia v Belgium??. In order to
avoid a temporal restriction, Yugoslavia had claimed that
each air attack constituted a separate wrongful act, giving
rise to a number of separate disputes, some of which arose
after the relevant date. The ICJ rejected Yugoslavia’s
contention that each act constituted a separate dispute and
concluded that each individual air attack could not have
given rise to a separate subsequent dispute.

9.59 In his oral submissions, Professor Crawford observed that

the following Tecmed formulation of the standard of “fair

Société Générale v Dominican Republic, above n 15, para 94.

Yugoslavia v Belgium Order of 2 June 1999, Request for the Indication of Provisional

Measures ICJ Reports (1999) 124, para 29.

105

and equitable treatment” is not beyond criticism, since it is

expressed at a somewhat optimal standard:

“The Arbitral Tribunal considers that this provision of
the Agreement, in light of the good faith principle
established by international law, requires the
Contracting Parties to provide to international
investments treatment that does not affect the basic
expectations that were taken into account by the
foreign investor to make the investment. The foreign
investor expects the host State to act in a consistent
manner, free from ambiguity and __ totally
transparently in its relations with the foreign
investor, so that it may know beforehand any and all
rules and = regulations that will govern _ its
investments, as well as the goals of the relevant
policies and administrative practices or directives, to
be able to plan its investment and comply with such
regulations.(...)” “The Arbitral Tribunal considers that
this provision of the Agreement (the fair and
equitable treatment standard) in light of the good
faith principle established by international law
requires the contracting parties to provide to
international investments treatment that does not
affect the basic expectations that were taken into
account by the foreign investor to make the
investment” **.

9.60 The statement on “fair and equitable treatment” may not
have escaped criticism in the literature, as Professor
Crawford acknowledged in oral submissions. However, the
passage quoted in para 9.55 above seems to have escaped
criticism. Tecmed allowed that, where consummation of the
act occurs after the entry into force of the Treaty, the
Tribunal can assess that act in the light of preceding events.
The statement in Société Générale at para 9.57 confirms

that proposition.

9.61 Counsel submitted that the ‘creeping expropriation’ in this
case over the years before October 2004 was consummated
in the Toll Plaza incident in December 2004 (described
earlier) which made it clear that the Respondent was not
intending to comply with any set of reasonable expectations

in relation to the investment.

24 Tecmed, above n 21, page 61.

106

9.62

9.63

9.64

Respondent

In reply, the Respondent looked again to the ILC
Commentaries to emphasise that the first of the actions or
omissions of a series for the purposes of state responsibility
ratione temporis will be the first action occurring after the
obligation came into existence?®. It relied also on
statements in an article by J. Pauwelyn”®, to similar effect.
Article 15 of the ILC Commentary states:

“In cases where the relevant obligation did not exist

at the beginning of the course of conduct that came

into being thereafter the first of the actions or

omissions of the series for the purpose of the state

responsibility will be the first occurring after the

obligation came into existence.”””
As to Tecmed”®, the Respondent submitted that the
Claimant had neglected to point out that the Tecmed
Tribunal was clear that the conduct in question, before and
after the treaty obligation came into force, belonged to one
and the same course of conduct. The event causing loss
had occurred after the entry into effect of the Treaty, even if
scrutiny of earlier events allowed the Tribunal to

characterise the Respondent's conduct in the way it did.

As to the Société Générale case, the Respondent submitted
that that had not been a case of retroactive application of a
Treaty, but one where the Treaty could only be applied on
the basis of factual background of acts and events that had
preceded the critical date. The emphasis on convergence
confirms the applicability of this principle to an indirect
expropriation that will not apply in a case such as the

present, where the Tribunal is faced with a number of

ILC Commentaries page 144.

J Pauwelyn “The Concept of a “continuing violation” of an international obligation:

selected problems” The British Yearbook of International Law, 1995, p. 446.
Cited in J Pauwelyn, ibid.
Tecmed, above n 21.

107

9.65

9.66

factually distinct allegations of breaches of the “fair and

equitable” standard.

In any event, submitted the Respondent, a close reading of
Tecmed shows that, while the Tribunal may have looked at
events occurring before the entry into force of the relevant
BIT, that is not to say that compensation was payable in
respect of those acts. The Tribunal in Tecmed was
concerned with the non-renewal by the respondent state of
a permit to operate a landfill site. Whilst there had been
events occurring prior to the due date of renewal, the
withdrawal of the permit was the act of dispossession. It
occurred after the Treaty came into effect and gave rise to
the loss. In contrast, in the current case, the breaches are
alleged to have occurred throughout the life of the project.
Hence, there is a fundamental difference between the facts

of Tecmed and those of the current case.

Counsel for the Respondent further pointed out that the
1961 Treaty did not include a “fair and equitable treatment”
obligation - only a prohibition against expropriation.
Counsel acknowledged that the weight of authority was in
favour of the notion that a tribunal may have regard in
appropriate circumstances to actions that may form part of
a composite and continuing act predating entry into effect of
the relevant treaty. But this constituted no licence for the
Tribunal to “add up” actions and say “Cumulatively, they
look like a substantial prejudice. Therefore, we can look at

everything”.

Tribunal’s View on Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis

9.67

Having considered all the arguments, particularly those
relating to the presumption against retroactivity, the
Tribunal is of the view that Article 10 of the 2002 Treaty

does not give the Tribunal jurisdiction ratione temporis to

108

consider disputes which had come into existence before the

date of the coming into force of the Treaty.

9.68 Whilst Article 8 makes it clear that the Treaty applies to
“investments” made before entry into force of the 2002
Treaty, that does not mean that investors can claim
damages retrospectively for matters which had given rise to

disputes prior to that date.

9.69 The Claimant has no basis on which to claim damages
founded on events occurring before 20 October 2004. The
German state could possibly have made a claim (and still
could) on its behalf under the state-state arbitration
provision in the 1961 Treaty. Under Article 10 of the 1961
Treaty, the provisions of the 1961 Treaty enure until
October 2014. There is still a theoretical right, therefore,
for claims to be made on the Claimant’s behalf on the state-
state basis in respect of the Respondent’s conduct prior to
October 2004.

9.70 The Mavrommatis dictum cited earlier in paragraph 1, may
have led to many treaties (including many of the
Respondent’s) containing an express provision against
retrospective temporal operation. However, such practice
can be seen as states acting under an abundance of caution.
The practice is not a helpful guide to interpretation of this
particular Treaty. This is particularly so when the Treaty
replaced had no provision for investor-state claims. As was
said by the Tribunal in MCI Power Group LLC and New
Turbine Inc. v Ecuador’®: “The silence of the text of the BIT
with respect to its scope in relation to disputes prior to its
entry into force does not alter the effects of the principle of
the non-retroactivity of treaties”. The temporal clause in

that case was: "[This Treaty] shall apply to investments

28 MCI Power Group, above n 10, para 6.1.

109

9.71

9.72

9.73

existing at the time of entry into force as well as to

investments made or acquired thereafter”.

Where Article 10 of the 2002 Treaty allows, for the first
time, investor-state claims, this is a substantive and not a
mere procedural provision. The clear intention of the 2002
Treaty was to provide better future protection for investors
in the host country than had previously existed. The
Respondent had assumed liability for expropriation of
investors and their property under the 1961 Treaty. This
obligation was increased to add a requirement of fair and
equitable treatment (“FET”) (of investors under the 2002
Treaty. Another beneficial effect of the 2002 Treaty was to
make it easier for an investor to seek redress for
expropriation and breach of the FET requirement by
providing for investor-state arbitration whilst staying with
state-state arbitration for treaty interpretation disputes.
That provision of investor-state arbitration is a substantive
provision which cannot be seen as or merely procedural
and, therefore, as justifying any reversal of the Article 28

Vienna Convention presumption.

Impregilo (cit supra) is an applicable authority. The
jurisdictional provision was in similar wording to that in
Article 10. Whilst the contract in issue was not with the
state itself (as it is here), but with a legal entity which was a
state-owned enterprise, the dictum from Impregilo quoted
earlier, is of general application. It accords with the ICL
commentaries, and is adopted by this Tribunal. Other
authorities, cited by the Respondent to similar effect,

support that view.

Impregilo was referred to approvingly by the Société
Générale tribunal at para. 79 of its jurisdictional award. In
Société Générale, a BIT which gave jurisdiction - similar to

the present case - to “any dispute relating to investments”

110

30

32

9.74

9.75

9.76

did not give the Tribunal retroactive jurisdiction to consider
disputes arising before the critical date. As will be discussed
later, the Tribunal held that the non-retroactivity principle
does not exclude the consideration of prior acts for
“purposes of understanding the background, the causes, or
scope of the violation of the BIT that occurred after the

entry into force (para. 87).

In Mavrommatis, the PCIJ noted: "The Court does not feel
called to consider whether the provisions of the Mandate,
once they are in force, apply retrospectively to the period
before the Mandate””°. So that case may not be as solid an

authority for the Claimant as appears on first impression.

The ILC article*t quoted by the Respondent suggested
instances where the so-called Mavrommatis principle could
be displaced - in these words which the Tribunal

respectfully adopts:

“When _a_ jurisdictional clause is attached to the
substantive clauses of a treaty as a means of securing
their due application, the non-retroactivity principle
may operate to limit ratione temporis the application of
the jurisdictional clause. Thus in numerous cases
under the European Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedom, the
European Commission of Human Rights has held that it
is incompetent to entertain complaints regarding
alleged violations of human rights said to have
occurred prior to the entry into force of the Convention
with respect to the State in question.”** [emphasis
added]

The Tradex case does not provide a helpful analogy. The
Tribunal in Tradex distinguished the substantive provision of
Albanian domestic law concerning FET which was
prospective and procedural provision which was applicable
to the earlier disputes. On the contrary, the Tribunal

considers in the present case that the introduction in the

Mavrommatis, above n 5, p 36.
Pauwelyn, above n 26.
ILC, Final Draft Articles in the Law of Treaties, Commentary to Article 24.

111

2002 Treaty of investor-state arbitration was a substantive

and not a procedural provision.
9.77 The Tradex tribunal stated:

“Accepting ICSID jurisdiction for the present dispute
under Article 8 therefore, by no means implies that the
substantive protection rules of the 1993 Law would be
applicable in the consideration of the merits of this
case”,

9.78 In Tradex, if the tribunal had adopted Albania’s position, the
claimant would have had to have started two different
parallel arbitrations, one under the UNCITRAL Rules and the
other under ICSID to exercise its rights. The Tribunal
concluded that "(t)he prospective application of Article 2 is
easily reconcilable with the application to earlier dispute,
because it occurs frequently that courts and arbitral
tribunals have to apply certain substantive rules of law
which were in force during the relevant period though they

have been replaced by new rules as from a certain date”**.

9.79 At no time in Tradex, did the tribunal recognize the right of
a claimant to ask for retroactive redress of breaches on the
basis of substantive law which would have entered into
force subsequently to the time of such alleged breaches.
Moreover, the Vienna Convention presumption against

retroactivity did not apply in the Tradex situation.

9.80 In the present case, the Claimant wishes not only to apply
retroactively, procedural provisions of the 2002 Treaty but
also substantive provisions of the 2002 Treaty which did not

exist previously.

9.81 Another point of distinction between the present case and
Tradex is that, in Tradex, foreign investors had been given

the right to claim directly against the State under a previous

88 Tradex, above n 16, p 191.
Ibid.

112

9.82

9.83

9.84

9.85

law. On the contrary, the Claimant here could not directly

bring a case against the Respondent under the 1961 Treaty.

The Jan de Nul case is of no assistance to the Claimant.
There is the crucial distinguishing factor from the present
case that the successive treaties in that case provided for

investor-state arbitration clauses.

The Tribunal now considers whether the Claimant, if able to
prove a series of acts which preceded the date of entry into
the Treaty but which achieved consummation as a Treaty
breach after that date, can call in aid such acts as relevant

to determining liability after the Treaty entry date.

The extract from the Société Générale decision (quoted
earlier at para 9.57) conveniently encapsulates the relevant

principles which this Tribunal considers should be followed.

The following further quotations from the Société Générale

case amplify that tribunal’s thinking:

“87. The Tribunal is persuaded, however, that there
might be situations in which the continuing nature
of the acts and events questioned could result in
a breach as a result of acts commencing before
the critical date but which only become legally
characterized as a wrongful act in violation of an
international obligation when such an obligation
had come into existence after the effective date
of the treaty. The tribunals in MCI, Feldman and
Mondev, while not accepting jurisdiction over acts
and events preceding the date of entry into force
of the treaty, nevertheless did not exclude the
consideration of prior acts for “purposes of
understanding the background, the causes, or
scope of the violations of the BIT that occurred
after the entry into force” or the relevance of
prior events to breaches taking place after the
treaty’s entry into force.”

“90. It follows that the Tribunal must be satisfied that
there could be a breach of obligations under the
Treaty for jurisdiction over treaty violations to be
established, and this again can only happen once
the obligation has come into force. The actual
determination of which acts specifically meet the

113

9.86

continuing requirement is a matter for the merits
because it is only then that it can be decided
which acts amount to breaches and when this
took place. At the jurisdictional stage only the
principle can be identified.”

“91. The same reasoning applies to composite acts.
While normally acts will take place at a given
point in time independently of their continuing
effects, and they might at that point be wrongful
or not, it is conceivable also that there might be
situations in which each act considered in
isolation will not_result in_a breach of a treaty
obligation, but if considered as a part of a series
of acts leading in the same direction they could
result in a breach at the end of the process of
aggregation, when the treaty obligation will have
come into force. This is what normally will
happen in situations in which creeping or indirect
expropriation is found, and could also be the case
with a denial of justice as a result of undue delays
in judging a case by a municipal court. As noted
in Article 15 of the Articles on State
Responsibility, the series of actions or omissions
must be defined in the aggregate as wrongful and
when taken together it “is sufficient to constitute
the wrongful act”. But of course the latter
determination can only be made when the
obligation is in force.” [Emphasis added]

 

 

“92. In situations of this kind, the preceding acts
might be relevant as factual background to the
violation that takes place after the critical date,
and this is the meaning that the cases discussed
above will have in considering that factual
background and its relevance to explain later
breaches. As the Respondent has rightly recalled,
this explains why in Tecmed, while often believed
to have assumed jurisdiction over acts preceding
the treaty, this was only to the effect that such
acts represented “converging action towards the
same result”. In such a situation, the obligations
of the treaty will not be applied retroactively but
only to acts that will be the final result of that
convergence_and_ which take place when the
treaty has come into force.” [Emphasis added]

 

 

The Mavrommatis case already referred to supports this
approach where it is said:

“even supposing that it were admitted as essential that the act
alleged by the Applicant should have taken place at a period when

the Mandate was in force, the Court believes that this condition is
fulfilled in the present case. If the grant of the Rutenberg

114

35

9.87

9.88

9.89

9.90

Concessions, in so far as they may be regarded as incompatible,
at least in part, with those of Mavrommatis, constitutes the
alleged breach of the terms of the Mandate, this breach, no

matter on what date it was first committed, still subsists, and the

provisions of the Mandate are therefore applicable _to_it.’”°

[Emphasis added].

 

Each Party referred extensively to Articles 14-15 of the ILC
Draft Articles on State Responsibility and the Commentary
to those Articles. The Tribunal has paid particular attention
to the citation of the Commentary given by Respondent at
para 359 of its Defence Memorial of 1 April 2008:

“the State must be bound by the international obligation for the
period during which the series of acts making up the breach is
committed. In cases where the relevant obligation did not exist at
the beginning of the course of conduct but came into being
thereafter, the “first” of the actions or omissions of the series for
the purposes of State responsibility will be the first occurring after
the obligation came into existence.” [Emphasis added]

 

In the present case, the Tribunal is considering what the ILC
Draft Articles call “Breach consisting of a composite act” or
what the Claimant alleges to be “the continuing/composite

wrongful acts of the Respondent”.

While actions and omissions of Respondent occurred which
could have constituted breaches of the 2002 Treaty, had it
been in effect between 1996 and 2004, some such
situations were remedied before the entry into force of the
Treaty and have not been taken into consideration by the
Tribunal. The Tribunal refers in particular to claims for
delays in the turning of the flyovers, for delays in issuing
adequate instructions, for increases in the amount of work
to be done, for failure to turn over the land necessary for

the works.

As to the Respondent’s argument that there cannot be a
succession of acts for there to be a breach of legitimate

expections, Tecmed v Mexico and Société Générale v

Mavrommatis, above n 5, page 35.

115

Dominican Republic provide good arguments against that
position, more particularly the following quote from the

latter case:

“[...]to the extent that on the consideration of the merits an act is
proved to have originated before the critical date but continues as
such to be in existence after that date, amounting to a breach of
Treaty obligation in force at the time it occurs, it will come within
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. This will also be the case if a series of
acts results in the aggregate in such breach of an obligati in
force at the time the accumulation culminates after the critical
date.”*° [Emphasis added].

 

9.91 Distinction therefore has to be drawn between breaches
which crystallised before October 2004 (during the period of
the 1961 Treaty) and ongoing conduct before that date
which crystallised into a dispute after that date. Put in the
words of the Société Générale tribunal, the Treaty will apply
only to acts that will be “the final result of converging action

towards the same result”.

9.92 As discussed in 9.46 et seq, Claimant’s argument about
Article 7 of the 1961 Treaty can be shortly addressed. The
Respondent’s submission is unanswerable. The Claimant is
inviting the Tribunal to rewrite the Treaty which cannot be

done.

9.93 Accordingly, whilst holding that the Tribunal has no
jurisdiction to consider disputes arising before October
2004, the Tribunal will consider whether the circumstances
arose which qualify in terms of the dicta quoted above from
the reasoning of the Société Génerale tribunal which

correctly encapsulates the concepts involved.

% Société Générale v Dominican Republic, above n 15, para 94.

116

10.

37

38

“CREEPING EXPROPRIATION”

10.1. The Claimant’s pre-hearing submissions were extensive as
to whether the conduct of the Respondent, viewed
cumulatively over the years, amounted to “creeping”
expropriation of its rights as an investor. Professor
Crawford referred to this topic in oral submissions.
However, in its post-hearing submissions, the Claimant
focussed on establishing that the Respondent had breached
the “fair and equitable treatment” (“FET”) requirements of
the 2002 Treaty, whilst not abandoning the expropriation

argument.

10.2. The 1961 Treaty in Article 3(2) offered protection against
expropriation®’. The 2002 Treaty did likewise, but more
expansively, in Article 4(2)*®. Article 2(3) of the 2002
Treaty promised investments by investors and their returns
“FET” and “full protection”. The 1961 Treaty did not have
any equivalent provision obliging it to accord FET to

investors and/or investments.

Article 3

(2) Nationals or companies of either Contracting Party shall not be subjected to
expropriation of their investments in the territory of the other Contracting Party
except for the public benefit and against just compensation. Such compensation
shall be actually realizable, freely transferable, and shall be made without undue
delay. Adequate provision shall have been made at or prior to the time of the
expropriation for the determination and the giving of such compensation. The legality
of any such expropriation and the amount of compensation shall be subject to review
by due process of law.

Article 4

Protection and Compensation

(2) Investments by investors of either Contracting Party shall not be expropriated,
nationalized or subjected directly or indirectly to any other measure the effects of
which would be tantamount to the expropriation or nationalization in the territory of
the other Contracting Party except for the public benefit and against compensation.
Such compensation shall be equivalent to the value of the expropriated investment
immediately before the date on which the actual or threatened expropriation,
nationalization or comparable measure has become publicly known. The
compensation shall be paid without delay and shall carry interest at the market
lending rate from the date the payment is due until the date of actual payment; it
shall be effectively realizable and freely transferable. Appropriate provision shall be
made at or prior to the time of expropriation, nationalization or comparable measure
for the determination and payment of such compensation. The legality of any
expropriation, nationalization or comparable measure, as well as the compensation
thereof, hall, at the request of the affected investor, be subject to review by due
process of law.

117

10.3

10.4

10.5

10.6

10.7

Given the Tribunal’s decision that there is no jurisdiction
ratione temporis in respect of disputes prior to October
2004, the Tribunal concentrates on examining alleged
breaches under the 2002 Treaty - particularly, the alleged
situations when a series of actions pre-Treaty is said to
have crystallised into a dispute on a date after the Treaty
had come into force. The Tribunal considers it necessary,
nevertheless, first to consider the legal concepts involved in

the concept of “creeping” or “indirect” expropriation.

Counsel cited various formulations of indirect expropriation,
which are all dependent on the circumstances of the
particular case. In Metalclad Corp. v Mexico*®, it was said
that an expropriation occurs where the state’s actions have
“...the effect of depriving the owner in whole or in significant
part of the use or reasonably to be expected economic
benefit of property, even if not necessarily to the obvious
benefit of the host state”.

In Vivendi v Argentina*®, the Tribunal said: “The weight of
authority... appears to draw a distinction between only a
partial deprivation of value (not an expropriation) and a

complete or near complete deprivation (expropriation)”.

In Vivendi, the purpose of a State’s interference was noted
by the tribunal thus: “A state’s purpose in implementing
measures alleged to amount to indirect expropriation is
irrelevant to a finding of whether expropriation has

occurred”.**

In LG & E Energy Corp. v Argentine Republic*”, the tribunal
stated that interference with an investor’s capacity to carry

on business is not sufficient to establish expropriation where

Metalclad v Mexico |\CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award of 30 August 2000.
Vivendi v Argentina |\CSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Award of 20 August 2007.
Ibid.
LG & E Energy Corp v Argentine Republic |CSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on
liability of 3 October 2006.

118

43
44
45

10.8

10.9

10.10

10.11

10.12

the investment continues to operate, even if profits are

diminished.

Professor Crawford for the Claimant in oral submissions
acknowledged that an indirect expropriation requires a
substantial deprivation to have taken place, although such
deprivation does not need to be complete. He likened what
happened to the Claimant here to “death by a thousand

cuts”.

In Generation Ukraine v Ukraine*? the tribunal described
“creeping” expropriation as: “A form’ of indirect
expropriation with a distinctive temporal quality in the sense
that it encapsulates a situation whereby a series of acts
attributable to the state over a period of time culminates in
the expropriatory taking of such property.” There does not
have to be a formal taking of property or rights (see CME
Czech Republic DV v Czech Republic“).

“Creeping” expropriation was described in Parkerings v
Lithuania® as “The negative effect of government measures
on the investors’ property rights which does not involve
transfer of property but a deprivation of the enjoyment of

the property”.

Taking all the above formulations into account - and they all
say much the same thing - the Tribunal finds difficulty in
categorising the conduct of the Respondent post-October
2004 - and its conduct leading up to that date - “creeping

expropriation” of the Claimant’s investment.

Indirect or “creeping” expropriation against the Respondent

has not been proved for the following reasons.

Generation Ukraine, above n 11, para 20.22.
CME Czech Republic DV v Czech Republic Partial Award of 13 September 2001.
Parkerings v Lithuania Award of 11 September 2007, at para 2437.

119

10.13

10.14

10.15

There was no expropriation of the Claimant’s contractual
rights as a shareholder in DMT. The Tollway is still
operating and will continue to operate for many years to
come with DMT as the concessionaire. As in the LG & E
Energy case, the investment continued to operate, even
though profits may have been diminished by the actions or

inaction of the Respondent.

The Respondent did try (maybe not all that effectively) by
means of MoA2, to redress some of the alleged wrongs done
to the Claimant, as it had acknowledged in the Preamble to
that document. It later conducted - albeit painfully slowly -
negotiations which culminated in MoA3 - which, again,
contained in its provisions acknowledgment by the
Respondent’s Council of Ministers of an agreement on a

solution to the loss problem of DMT“®.

Even at the time of the Toll Plaza incident or “Opera” in
December 2004, the then Prime Minister told the Claimant’s
representatives that DMT’s problems would be “solved”.
Although Messrs Trapp and Kramer treated this statement
with scepticism, eventually, MoA3 contained the statement
noted earlier. MoA3 attempted to remedy the negative
effects on DMT’s financial position by means of toll
adjustments and an extension of the concession period. Toll
adjustments no longer needed the Respondent’s approval
obtained through the rather tortuous and uncertain medium
of Clause 25 of the Concession Agreement. By the time the
Claimant sold its shares in DMT, the negotiations which

culminated in MoA3 were on foot.

“[...] Whereas, the Council of Ministers passed resolutions on April 11, 2006 to
acknowledge the agreement on a solution to the loss problem of the Concessionaire
between the DoH and the Concessionaire as proposed by the Ministry of Transport, and
consigned the principle to the Ministry of Transport to enter into another negotiation with
the Concessionaire again for amending of the Tollway Concession Agreement so as to
ensure appropriateness and clarity as well as more mutual benefits, which would then be
proposed to the Council of Ministers for further consideration, as per the details in
Appendix B attached hereto.”

120

11.

7

10.16 Nor was there the deprivation of the investor’s control of the

10.17

10.18

investment to the degree stated in PSEG Global v Turkey
(ICSID ARB/02/5, 19 January 2007), viz.

“There must be some form of deprivation of the
investor in the control of the investment, the
management ___of _day-to-day-operations of the
company, interfering in the administration, impeding
the distribution of dividends, interfering in __the
appointment of officials and managers, or depriving
the company of its property or control in total or in
part.” (Emphasis added)

None of the actions of the Respondent reaches the level
described in PSEG Global above. More than “many things
wrongly handled” is required to justify a finding of
expropriation. A strong interference with contractual rights
needs to be shown - see Sempra Energy International v
Argentina”. Many of the alleged misdeeds of the

Respondent were inaction rather than affirmative action.

Accordingly, the Tribunal cannot find “creeping”
expropriation proved and proceeds to consider alleged
breaches of the FET standard.

FAIR AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT STANDARD (“FET”)

Parties’ Submissions

11.1

2007.

The Claimant submitted vigorously that there had been
breaches of the FET standard as set out in Article 2(3) of
the 2002 Treaty. The Claimant did not in final submissions
pursue the claim that there was a requirement for FET
under the 1961 Treaty. Under the Tribunal’s decision on
jurisdiction ratione temporis, claims under the 2002 Treaty

must be primarily focussed on post-October 2004 conduct.

4” Sempra Energy International v Argentina ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16, 28 September

121

11.2

11.3

11.4

The Tribunal does not need to consider any argument based
on a consideration of Article 1(2) of the 1961 Treaty, taken
together with Article VII(1) of the Thailand/Netherlands
Treaty, Article 5(1) of the Thailand/United Kingdom Treaty
and Article 4(1) of the Thailand/China Treaty which
incorporated FET provisions. The Claimant did not advance
any such argument strongly in its post-hearing submissions.
The Tribunal is of the view that nothing in the 1961 Treaty
addressed breaches of FET standards. As noted earlier, the
1961 Treaty does not provide for FET of investors and/or
investments. More importantly, none of the three treaties
with other countries contains an investor-state arbitration
provision. It is hard to see in these circumstances how the
provisions of these treaties have any relevance to the

present claim.

The Claimant asserted, in general, that the Respondent had
breached the FET standard because it acted in an arbitrary
and unconscionable manner towards the Claimant and its
investment over a long period of time, producing the result
that the investment never delivered any return to the
Claimant right up to the time when the Claimant sold its
shares. Accordingly, the Claimant's legitimate expectations,
both at the time of making its investment in DMT and after

the conclusion of MoA2, were frustrated.

The expectations were categorised thus:

(a) Principle of Reasonable Return on Investment, which

in turn was determined by

(b) Feasibility of the Investment in respect of:
(i) its location;
(ii) its relationship to VRR;
(iii) the surrounding network;

122

11.5 Numerous cases were cited by the parties concerning the
criteria by which breaches of FET, including breach of
legitimate expectation, should be assessed. The following
summary of FET, in the decision in Biwater Gauff v
Tanzania*® (which the Tribunal adopts as relevant to the
present case) includes the protection of legitimate

expectations as a specific component of FET:

“Specific Components of the Standard: The general
standard of “fair and equitable treatment” as set out
above comprises a number of different components,
which have been elaborated and developed in previous
arbitrations in response to specific fact situations.
These have been the subject of detailed consideration
in the parties’ submissions. In so far as they are
relevant to the dispute here, these separate
components may be distilled as follows:

- Protection of legitimate expectations: the purpose
of fair and equitable treatment standard is to
provide to international investments treatment that
does not affect the basic expectations that were
taken into account by the foreign investor to make
the investment, as long as these expectations are
reasonable and legitimate and have been relied
upon by the investor to make the investment.

- Good faith: the standard includes the general
principle recognised in international law that the
contracting parties must act in good faith, although
bad faith on the part of the state is not required for
its violation.

- Transparency, consistency, non-discrimination: the
standard also implies that the conduct of the State
must be transparent, consistent and non-
discriminatory, that is, not based on unjustifiable
distinctions or arbitrary.”

11.6 The Tecmed decision referred to earlier, required that the
State use the legal instruments governing the actions of the
investor in conformity with the formulation “usually applied
to such instruments”. Clearly, the Respondent was required
to act in accordance with the terms of the Concession
Agreement. As noted earlier, clause 25 regarding toll

“8 Biwater Gauff v Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Decision of 24 July 2008, at para

123

11.7

11.8

11.9

increases, is less than helpful from the Claimant’s point of
view. Yet, the Respondent seems to have accepted
seriously obligations - whatever they may have been under
that clause - to implement toll rises. From this perspective,
it may not matter that eventual acceptance of those
obligations may have occurred with less than optimal

diligence or speed.

The Respondent, whilst conceding that FET has been
interpreted by a number of tribunals as including the right
to protection of legitimate expectations, submitted that “the
obligations of the host state towards foreign investors
derive from the terms of the applicable investment treaty
and not from any set of expectations that the investors may
have or claim to have”. The Tribunal considers this as a
rather circular and unacceptable argument. The Treaty
promised FET and “legitimate expectations” come within

FET’s parameters.

The Respondent submitted that, if the Claimant’s
expectations are to be protected, then the whole of the
Claimant’s expectations at the time the investment was
made, modified over time, must be taken into account. In
particular, MoA2 modified the Claimant’s expectations

markedly.

Moreover, the Respondent submitted, the Claimant’s
legitimate expectations as an investor were affected by the

following factors:
(a) The Claimant had only a minority stake in DMT.

(b) The Claimant had no special rights of control over

DMT under the Shareholder’s Agreement.

124

(c) The value of the investment was imperfectly
protected under the Concession Agreement by

clauses 25 and 31.

(d) The Claimant made a profit on the contracts to build

the Tollway and the Northern Extension.

11.10 Professor Crawford argued that the reasonable expectations
of the investor, consistent with contractual and other
proprietary arrangements, have to be considered over and
above domestic law manifestations, because of the principle
of parallel protection of rights under the Treaty. He
submitted that the various dicta (such as those quoted
above) set out a list of administrative practices to which an

investor can legitimately expect a host state to conform.

11.11 The legitimate expectations doctrine has been applied to
protect the substantive expectations of investors where
particular promises have been made - Eureko v Poland (cit
supra) and CMS v Argentina®®. As was noted in an article by
Steven Fietta®®, "...The question of whether or not there has
been a violation of the standard will turn on what legitimate
expectations the investor had in light of the specific
assurances given by the relevant state authorities against
the background of the domestic legal framework that was to

govern the investment”.

11.12 The Respondent referred to Professor Crawford’s 2007
Freshfields Lecture®' which emphasised “In particular, the
doctrine of legitimate expectations should not be used as a

substitute for the actual arrangements agreed between the

“8 CMS v Argentina ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Decision on Annulment of 25 September
2007.

Steven Fietta “Expropriation and the Fair and Equitable Standard: The Developing Role
of Investors Expectations in International Investment Arbitration” Journal of International
Investment Arbitration Vol. 23, No. 5 p 375 and p 388.

Prof James Crawford S.C. “Treaty and Contract in Investment Arbitration” (22"°
Freshfields Lecture) London, 29 November 2007.

125

11.13

parties or as a supervening and overriding source of the

applicable law.”

The Respondent, accordingly, submitted that, whilst it had
made a number of specific representations to DMT in
relation to the Claimant’s investment which were
incorporated within the Concession Agreement as amended,
those undertakings were incapable of engendering

substantive legitimate expectations.

12. CLAIMANT’S LEGITIMATE EXPECTATIONS

12.1

12.2

Legitimate expectations are definitely part of FET to the
extent indicated by the authorities quoted earlier. A
reasonable rate of return on the Claimant’s investment was
clearly part of the understanding between the parties, even
though no particular rate of return was, or could be,

guaranteed.
In summary, the Tribunal finds:

(a) The Respondent decided that it needed to have the
Tollway built as a “congestion buster” but could not

afford to construct it out of its own finances.

(b) The Respondent invited interested investors to

participate in the construction project.

(c) The Respondent could not reasonably have expected
that foreign investors would enter into an
arrangement of the nature proposed, over such a
long period, without being fairly confident of a

reasonable rate of return on investment.

(d) The Respondent conducted various studies, as did
the Claimant, on the financial implications based on

the expected use of the tollway by the travelling

126

public. In particular, when considering the project in
1990-1, the Respondent considered a 15.87% rate
of return as a reasonable basis on which to sign the
Commission Agreement. Both parties entered into
the Concession Agreement in the belief of a
reasonable rate of return, although estimates varied
between 15 and 21%.

There was confirmation after the Tollway had
opened that the Respondent expected there to be a
reasonable return for the Claimant: in particular, in
his letter dated 22 May 1996 to the Solutions
Committee, the Minister of Finance stated that the
various alternatives advanced would allow the
private Concessionaire “to achieve a reasonable rate

on his investment (14%).

MoA2 reduced the expected rate of return because
of the dilution caused by the equity investment of
the Respondent in DMT. However, the overall effect
of MoA2 was designed to give the Claimant a
reasonable return on its investment, despite the

happenings which had given rise to MoA2.

There was no guarantee by the Respondent of any
particular rate of return, although, as noted in
paragraph (d) above, its initial studies may have

indicated a return between 15% and 21%.

Any rate of return was subject to outside influences
and contingencies unknown at the time of the

Concession Agreement such as:
(i) the Asian economic crisis; and

(ii) the extent to which Thai motorists would

or would not prefer to use the Tollway as

127

12.3

12.4

against a toll-free but slower road. The
Dorsch Report did not reveal detailed
studies of the likely habits of potential

users of the Tollway;

(i) There were inherent difficulties for the Claimant as

an investor in the Tollway arising out of:

(i) the Respondent’s requirement that at the
time of the Concession Agreement was
signed, it and Delta should own at least 30%
of the shares in DMT which was a special
venture vehicle in which Thai interests
predominated right from the start. After
MoA2, when the Respondent itself became
the largest individual shareholder the
Claimant’s shareholding in DMT became
diluted to 9.87 per cent;

(ii) the inherent inefficiency caused by the three-
party arrangement for the construction of the

Tollway.

In spite of the fact that there was no guarantee by the
Respondent of an explicit rate of return, the Tribunal
considers that a reasonable rate of return — reasonable in all
the circumstances, including the signing of MoA2 - was part
of the Claimant’s legitimate expectations and the failure to
fulfil such a reasonable expectation was a breach of the

Respondent's FET obligations.

The Tribunal’s reasons for the above view can be
summarised as follows. They arise from the total factual

matrix.

(a) The semi-public nature of the concession rendered it

a much more regulated enterprise than an ordinary

128

12.5

12.6

commercial business. The mechanism for a
reasonable return was contained in the ability to

charge tolls.

The inherent unlikeliness that any investor would
contemplate entering into such a _ long-term
arrangement without a legitimate expectation of
reasonable return. Huge sums of money were
required to be expended on a massive piece of civil
engineering which, even if everything had gone
according to plan, would produce no return on

investment for several years.

The tolls to be received constituted the only way in
which the reasonable return on investment could be
achieved. The Concessionaire had no permanent
interest in the facility constructed which had to
revert to the Respondent’s ownership once the term

of the concession had expired.

There had been extensive consideration of the
economic viability of the concession by many
parties: all envisaged a reasonable return on the
investment. Such consideration by the parties
extended to MoA2, as can be seen from its Appendix
F.

What constituted a reasonable return on the Claimant’s

investment will be addressed by the Tribunal in a later

section of this award.

The Respondent (particularly from Mr. Bamford’s evidence)

suggested that DMT had been reckless to base its decisions,

and hence its investment expectations, to either the traffic

or revenue streams in the Dorsch 1990 forecasts.

129

12.7

12.8

12.9

Hindsight may have rendered the Dorsch pronouncements
somewhat optimistic and Mr. Bamford’s strictures on them

would have greater resonance today than in 1990.
However:

(a) The Respondent itself believed in the feasibility of
the concession. Otherwise, it could never
responsibly have expected any overseas investor to

have contemplated the scheme.

(b) Documents before November 1990 presented by the
Claimant such as feasibility studies, particularly from
a well-respected financial adviser, such as Wardley,
would make it difficult to sustain the Respondent’s
charge of a “reckless” investment based on “hubris”
(the Respondent’s term), made by the Claimant for
the sake of achieving a lucrative construction

contract.

(c) The foreign bankers who played “hard ball” in the
events preceding MoA2 (and who then refused to
“take a haircut”) were unlikely to have agreed
initially to finance a project of this magnitude and
complexity, unless they had been satisfied about its

economic viability.

The Concession Agreement is particularly important when
assessing the Claimant’s legitimate expectations. It was
the legal framework with which the Claimant was stuck.
The Tribunal has given a critique of the Concession
Agreement in an earlier part of this award. Clause 25.1
does not make it clear that an increase in tolls would
automatically be granted by the Respondent if a request
were made. The Concession Agreement did not vest the
power to increase the tolls in the Concessionaire. That

power always remained a government prerogative until

12.10

12.11

12.12

changed by MoA3. However, such a prerogative cannot
entail a total discretion for the Respondent to disregard

reasonable requests for toll increases.

The Respondent submitted that clause 25 provided the
framework for the negotiations between the parties which,
in fact, ended up in the conclusion of MoA2 and MoA3. The
Respondent also submitted that it negotiated with DMT to
solve its financial problems in the spirit of clause 25 which
required both parties to work out a solution which, once

having been achieved, should have satisfied both of them.

The Claimant was a minority shareholder with no special
rights of control under its shareholders’ agreement.
Accordingly, if things went wrong, the value of the
Claimant’s investment would be dependent upon the
outcome of negotiations between DMT and_ the
Government. The Concession Agreement provided for
certain rights between DMT and DoH to be backed up by
arbitration, if necessary. However, any shareholder dispute
between the Claimant and DMT had to fall back on the
rather limited relief available to a minority shareholder
under Thai company law (which is similar to the domestic
company laws of many countries). Once the 2002 Treaty
came into force, the Claimant acquired rights as an

“investor” under that BIT.

The unusual fact of the Tollway being constructed physically
on top of a toll-free road (the VRR) is an important factor
when looking at the Claimant’s legitimate expectations.
The Claimant was entitled to assume that the VRR would
not operate to the detriment of the Tollway, that toll-free
alternatives would not be made too attractive and that the
Tollway would always offer a faster, less-congested and

more attractive alternative to motorists than the VRR.

12.13

12.14

12.15

12.16

MoA2 changed the Claimant’s legitimate expectations
significantly. The Claimant was entitled to expect that
MoA2 would be implemented by the Respondent. The
Claimant’s legitimate expectation of a reasonable return
has to be viewed in that light, bearing in mind particularly
the very substantial waiver of claims that DMT had to grant

in exchange for whatever benefits it was given by MoA2.

In the Tribunal’s view, the Respondent was bound by MoA2
to have allowed toll increases as and when provided by that
document. Its inaction for over ten years despite many
requests for increases, its use of Ramp 4 as a prevaricating
reason for inaction are unjustifiable. Moreover, its actions
concerning the improvements to the VRR went well beyond
what would be normally considered “traffic management” -

the term used in MoA2, as will be discussed later.

When the 2002 Treaty came into effect, the Respondent
was obligated, under the FET clause, to remedy the parlous
situation caused by the lengthy delay in increasing tolls.
After 20 October, 2004, there should have been an
implementation of the toll increases provided for under
MoA2 which were clearly justified under the criteria in the

Concession Agreement.

As to the toll reduction of 2004 - following shortly after the
Prime Minister’s Press Conference on the Tollway itself - the
Respondent argued that that reduction had been a business
decision taken by DMT - a single step. However, taking
into context all the previous actions and omissions by the
Respondent (which was the main shareholder in DMT), this
was just one more action taken by the Respondent in
breach of MoA2 and in disregard of the spirit of clause 25 of
the Concession Agreement. The Claimant’s opposition
expressed at the DMT meeting by Messrs Kramer and Trapp

was doomed to fail. Fortunately for the Claimant, its status

12.17

12.18

12.19

12.20

12.21

12.22

as an “investor” under the 2002 Treaty survived regardless
of DMT’s decision which may have been legitimate under

Thai domestic company law.

The decision of DMT to reduce the tolls may have infringed
DMT’s contract with its lenders. There was an obvious need
for DMT not to decrease DMT’s ability to service its bank
debt - a consideration which seems to have been ignored
by the DMT Board (other than by the Claimant’s two

representatives).

When considering whether MoA2 was implemented, the
“soft loan” in the form stated in MoA2, was known to Mr.
Trapp of the Claimant and DMT not to have been available
at the time the document was signed. No claim can result

from the failure to make the “soft loan”.

DMT suffered a large shortfall in revenue by reason of the
failure of the Respondent to make the necessary toll
increases, as promised by MoA2. Because of this shortfall,

the Claimant, qua investor, in DMT, received no dividends.

The Tribunal finds that the fact that the Claimant may have
made a profit from its construction activities is irrelevant to
considering its claim as an “investor” under the 2002
Treaty. It invested equity capital in DMT - as distinct from

any investment in a construction company.

However, the Claimant, as frequently happens, must have
acted with mixed motives. It supported MoA2 as a way of
being paid for outstanding construction work. It also was
keen to obtain the Northern Extension contract. In strict
law, the two activities of the Claimant should be regarded

as separate.

MoA2 was concluded some eight years before the 2002

Treaty came into effect. The Tribunal has to consider what

w
o

12.23

12.24

part, if any, of the unfulfilled legitimate expectations of the
Claimant over that period as described in the preceding
paragraphs can come within the parameters described in
the Société Génerale case and the Tecmed case referred to

earlier.

The Tribunal sees no reason to differentiate the Société
Générale case from the present on the ground that there
was only one BIT involved here which had provided for an
investor-state claim. In Société Générale, there had been
successive treaties, both giving investor-state rights. In
the present case, the 1961 Treaty could still form the basis,
in theory of a claim on a state-to-state basis, by the
German government on its behalf up until 2014. The 2002
Treaty created a more readily-enforceable right to claim
which is co-existent with the right under the 1961 Treaty.
A case under that Treaty could be taken up by the German

government on the Claimant’s behalf.

Clearly, the question of toll increases had been simmering
away for most of the eight years from 1996 to 2004. The
Northern Extension had been opened for traffic on
3 December 1998. The Respondent refused to levy tolls on
the bases mandated by MoA2. It failed to authorise the
deletion of a ramp and used this failure to justify no
increase in tolls. It did not agree to delete this ramp from
the scope of the Concession because it said that the AAT
lacked Cabinet approval for this deletion. Yet AAT and DoH
both came under the same Minister. The Respondent’s
witness, Mr. Siripakom, agreed in evidence that the toll
could not be increased, as required by MoA2 until the
Cabinet had approved the deletion of Ramp 4 which did not
happen until MoA3 was signed - after the Claimant had sold
its shares in DMT. The Tribunal considers the delay in

authorising the deletion of Ramp 4- and using its non-

12.25

12.26

12.27

12.28

deletion as an excuse for not granting toll increases was

unjustifiable.

The economic evidence, to be discussed later, shows that
the lengthy failure to increase the tolls after MoA2 had a

correlation to depressed toll revenues.

The forced toll reduction on 15 December 2004 -
announced at the Toll Plaza by the Prime Minister - the
occasion which Mr. Trapp described as the “Opera” -
certainly demonstrated in a dramatic way the longstanding
non-fulfillment of the Claimant’s legitimate expectation of a
proper toll regime as a means of rewarding its investment.
In particular, the consequential formal reduction of the tolls
as distinct from the failure to increase them can be seen as
a triggering factor for a dispute. This can be seen as an
addition to the composite acts which had started before but

which continued after the entry into force of the BIT.

The Claimant was entitled to see the incident on the Toll
Plaza, more particularly, the Respondent’s consequential
and prompt changes to the toll structures - as being the
convergence of the various acts of non-feasance by the
Respondent over a long period. In particular, instead of
increasing the tolls as MoA2 had expected eight years

before, there was a reduction of the tolls.

The Claimant was impotent to stop the immediate
reduction, despite the concern of Messrs Trapp & Kramer
about the move being contrary to DMT’s agreement with its
financiers. Messrs Trapp and Kramer did all they could to
prevent DMT approving the Ministry of Transport’s request
to this effect. They were in a minority in DMT and, as such,
had no ready effective remedy under Thai company law.

They also had concerns about an Act passed in 1992 called

12.29

12.30

12.31

The Private Participation Act BE 2535. This Act was passed

after the Hopewell incident.

Possibly the action by the majority of directors of DMT to go
along with the Minister’s request for a toll reduction might
have been susceptible to court action for relief of minority
oppression. The basis for action could have included the
inexplicable nature of the Board resolution in the context of
years of requests by the Board for toll increases and the
possible infringement of both DMT’s obligations to the
lenders and under the 1992 Act. However, the Tribunal
cannot possibly embark on a_ consideration of how
successful such an application could be. The point is
relevant, however, when considering the legal framework in

which the Claimant operated.

However, whatever contractual or company law remedies
DMT or the Claimant may have had are irrelevant in the
present case which is strictly one based on the international
law rights granted to the Claimant as an “investor” by the
2002 Treaty.

It is true, as was stated in the learned commentary noted
in paragraph 11.12, that legitimate expectations cannot be
used to override actual arrangements made between the
parties. However, given the circumstances of this case
where the Respondent has a long history of not performing
its obligation under the Concession Agreement, it would be
unfair for the Respondent to escape liability by simply
availing itself to the protection of domestic law by invoking
majority rule in the company, i.e. that the Claimant must
be bound by DMT’s decision to consent to the toll reduction.
This is not to say that normally the parties’ rights and
obligations under domestic law should not be respected.
However, in this particular case, the Respondent (through

its representatives on the board of DMT) appears to have

12.32

12.33

12.34

12.35

objectives other than its corporate interest in mind when
voting to have the toll reduced. The Claimant, as a
minority shareholder, would had to have been satisfied with
its remedies under domestic company law. There is
nothing inherent in its minority shareholding in DMT to
justify the exclusion of its international law rights - created
in 2004.

The Tribunal has found that the Claimant has status under
the Treaty as an “investor”. The definition of “investment”
includes shares in a special purpose infrastructure company
such as DMT in which the Claimant had a _ minority
shareholding - and was thus able to be outvoted by the
majority shareholders. Such an arrangement is not unusual
as an investment vehicle in BIT situations. The Tribunal
considers that the Claimant should not fail just because of
the type of vehicle used to house its investment which

became protected by the 2002 Treaty.

MoA3 (although concluded after the Claimant’s exit from
DMT) contains the acknowledgment of the Respondent that
the problems with both tolls and deletion of Ramp 4 were

claims of DMT settled by that Agreement.

The Tribunal considers that the Claimant is not bound by
MoA3 for the simple reason that, by the time MoA3 was
signed, it was not a shareholder of DMT and, therefore, not
an “investor” under the 2002 Treaty. The Claimant was
entitled to sell its shares and have its entitlement to
compensation solidified as at the date of sale. The
relevance of MoA3 to the Tribunal’s decision lies in the
Respondent’s acknowledgments on the face of the

document.

Another pointer to the commencement of the 2002 Treaty

being a defining moment of the Claimant’s claim as based

on the Respondent's failure to implement toll increases, is
found in the August 2006 agreement of the Ministers of
Finance and Transport to purchase all foreign shares in
DMT. A German Cabinet Minister had been assured by the
Prime Minister and his Finance Minister 15 December 2004
(after the Toll Plaza incident) that the Walter Bau problems
had been “solved”. Although valuations had been obtained
in 2004, nothing came from this proposal to purchase
shares and there was no solution of the Claimant’s

problems.

12.36 In the Tribunal’s view, the continued refusal of the
Respondent to implement toll increases under MoA2 for
eight years - from the date of signing MoA2 until the Toll
Plaza event in December 2004 - are “omissions” which
come within the Société Générale formulation. The failure
to increase tolls was the culmination of a series of wrongful
acts of the Respondent which converged when the

Respondent decreased the tolls.

12.37 Looking at the cited Société Générale formulation as a
guide and reference point, the refusal to increase tolls
originated long before the crucial date in October 2004; but
it continued in existence after that date, thus amounting to
a breach of a Treaty obligation in force at the time when it
occurred. Even although Société Générale concerned a
claim of expropriation, the same reasoning must apply to

breaches of the FET requirement.
Airport Closure

12.38 The short period during which the airport was totally closed
between September 2006 and March 2007 could also lead
to a claim for damages on the basis of non-fulfilment of
legitimate expectation. Total shut-down of Don Muang

Airport was well beyond a “change of use” of the airport.

The subsequent reopening can be considered encompassed

by the expression “change of use” of the airport.
VRR Traffic Management

12.39 In the period 1997-2006, the Respondent increased the
capacity and service level of the VRR and other toll-free
roads, including detours and building another permanent
road on the former Hopewell land. These actions cause a
loss of toll revenue and could not be considered simply
“management of traffic” which was included in the waiver
on MoA2.

12.40 The term “traffic management” cannot embrace the
creation of a new structure on the VRR. The Tribunal
prefers the evidence of Mr. Bates as to the normal
understanding of this expression in traffic engineering
circles. Appendix F of the Concession Agreement referred
to traffic management of the Tollway as covering closed-
circuit TV systems, patrolling of highway, emergency
telephone, emergency towaway trucks in order to achieve
“smooth uninterrupted traffic flow”. Moreover, in the list of
claims waived in MoA3, there is a reference to the

constructing of competing roads.

12.41 At para 4.3 of MoA2 there is a description of traffic
management issues which concentrates on supervising
traffic on the VRR.°*

4.3 Traffic Management During the Execution of Construction

The Concessionaire shall set up a special work unit, the duties of which shall be to plan,
establish measures, supervise, oversee and follow up the operation in the area of the
convenience and safety of traffic on Viphavadi-Rangsit Road as well as to coordinate
with various agencies, conduct public relation activities and resolve urgent and
immediate problems and obstructions that may arise, for which all costs and expenses
shall be borne by the Concessionaire.

During the construction, the Concessionaire shall, with DOH’s prior approval, make the
traffic lanes available or manage the traffic surfaces such that maximum benefits are

12.42

During the negotiations for MoA2, DMT had objected to the
words “traffic diversion” which were changed to the less all-
encompassing term “traffic management” in MoA2’s final

version.

Decision

12.43

12.44

The Respondent’s argument that “creeping expropriation”
only, and not breaches of FET, can be defined by a series of
acts is not correct. The Tribunal sees no reason why a
breach of a FET obligation cannot be a series of cumulative
acts and omissions. One of these may not on its own be
enough, but taken together, they can constitute a breach of
FET obligations.

Accordingly, the Tribunal considers there was a breach of

FET obligations by the Respondent by reason of the

following:

(a) The lengthy refusal to raise tolls as required by
MoA2;

(b) Those changes to the roading network which went

well beyond what can be considered as “traffic

management";

(c) The short-term total closure of Don Muang Airport.

 

obtained within the existing right-of-way and shall comply with the relevant resolutions of
the Commission for the Management of Road Traffic (CMRT).

Any problems or obstacles with the management or operation concerning the
management of traffic under the first paragraph and the second paragraph hereof arising
from the flaw of the Concessionaire itself shall not be considered as cause for the
extension of the construction period under Clause 9.1 of this Agreement.

140

13.

DAMAGES - GENERAL

13.1

Thus far, the Tribunal has concluded that:

(a)

There is no retrospective application of the 2002
Treaty between the Kingdom of Thailand and the
Federal Republic of Germany to claim for damages
suffered before 20 October 2004, the date of entry

into force of that Treaty.

Any claim which may exist for the period previous to
20 October 2004 would have to be initiated under
the provisions of the 1961 Treaty between those two
countries, whereby each Contracting Party (not
investors) is entitled to request arbitration of such
claim until 2014.

The Concession Agreement of 21 August 1989
remains in effect, subject to the various subsequent
amendments which have been made to it over the

years.

Through its active participation in the negotiation of
MoA2, Claimant waived any right to claim for
damages resulting from any prior breaches under
the 1961 Treaty.

There was no direct or creeping expropriation of

Claimant’s rights under the 2002 Treaty.

While the Claimant is not entitled to compensation
under the 2002 Treaty for breaches occurring
between 29 November 1996 (the signature date of
MoA2) and 20 October 2004 (the date of entry into
force of the 2002 Treaty), the actions or omissions
of Respondent during that period can be taken into

consideration if they have had a continuing impact

141

13.2

13.3

13.4

after 2004 and they were not remedied. Those
damages however could only start to run from 20
October 2004 onwards.

As noted in Section 12, the Tribunal considers that:

(a) the Respondent’s refusal to allow an increase in tolls

on the bases mandated by MoA2,
(b) the reduction of tolls in December 2004,

(c) the continued improvements to the VRR even after
2004 which went well beyond the “traffic

management” exception contained in MoA2, and

(d) the total shut-down of the Don Muang Airport
between September 2006 and March 2007,

were clearly “continuing/ composite wrongful acts” of the
Respondent which constituted breaches of the FET required
under the 2002 Treaty. The first of the above events had
effect the moment the 2002 Treaty came into force, on 20
October 2004, and damages should start to be calculated
from that date.

It remains for the Tribunal to evaluate the damages owing

to Claimant for such breaches.

The Parties have provided the Tribunal with very exhaustive
expert reports on the issues of traffic and damages
valuation. To their credit, the Parties have asked their
experts to address in detail every distinct period covered by
the Concession Agreement and the Tribunal is grateful for
their professionalism and their thoroughness. However, in
light of the conclusion reached by the Tribunal, much of the

expert analysis has become superfluous.

142

13.5

13.6

13.7

13.8

13.9

The parties spent considerable time and effort reviewing
traffic forecasts made over the years and which were used
as important elements in the negotiations of the various
agreements between the Respondent and DMT which took
place between 1990 and 2007. In particular, the Tribunal
received reports from two traffic experts: Mr. Philip Bates
for the Claimant and Mr. James Bamford for the

Respondent.

The main issue in those reports was to determine whether
the forecasts previously made and the assumptions behind
them were robust and reasonable. The experts also
examined the impact on traffic of special events such as the
late turning of the flyovers, the Asian economic crisis of
1997, the U-turns at Laksi and Bangkhen and the change of

use of the Don Muang airport.

The experts arrived at widely divergent conclusions on the
reasonableness and robustness of the various earlier
forecasts. While such ex post facto analyses may be of
interest to see whether earlier forecasts proved in reality to
be accurate for particular periods, they are of little utility to
determine what were the Parties’ legitimate expectations at

the time they entered into MoA2.

The Tribunal however need not go into a detailed analysis of
the different assumptions adopted and conclusions reached
by these two traffic experts, whether it has to do with the
maximum capacity of the Original Tollway and its Northern
Extension, the level of the toll price elasticity (and whether
it should be “constant” or “straight line”) or the impact of

particular events on the revenues of DMT.

In the light of the conclusions of the Tribunal on liability, the
reports prepared by Dorsch and Bramley between 1989 and

1993 are irrelevant for the Tribunal’s purpose as are the

53

13.10

13.11

13.12

other projections prepared subsequently to 1996. The
same applies to the specific impact of subsequent special

events.

What is relevant for the purpose of the Tribunal is the
legitimate expectations of the Claimant at the time of the
signing of MoA2 in 1996. Those legitimate expectations are
found in the DMT Report of 1 June 1996 produced at the
request of DoH®*. Those projections, including those for the
Northern Section, were not challenged by IFCT in its 2 July
1996 Report prepared at the request of the Respondent nor
by the Respondent itself at any time during that period. The
Tribunal has no reason to conclude that those projections
were not robust and reasonable at the time they were

made.
As mentioned in Appendix A of MoA2 (Art. 6):

“The maximum traffic volume forecasted by DMT is
210,000 vpd in the year 2014. It was the original
projection on toll rate of Baht 30 in the year 1998.
Therefore, when the toll rate is adjusted earlier to
Bath 40 in July 1998, new projection will have to be
done which is being carried out by DMT”.

The figure of 210,000 (which was in effect 209,071 in
DMT’s projections but which appears to have been rounded
up by IFCT to 210,000) refers to the maximum capacity on
the original Tollway. Such forecast was used by both sides
in agreeing to MoA2. As to the new projection which was to
be made, the Tribunal has not been made aware that it
effectively took place. In any event, since damages start to
be calculated only from October 2004, such new projection
would have had little, if any, effect upon the calculation of

damages in this case and can therefore be ignored.

DMT'’s traffic projections — at least those relating to the Southern Section — are
reproduced in appendix A of MoA2.

144

14.

13.13. The Tribunal will therefore use the traffic projections

contained in the DMT Report of 1996 for the calculation of

estimated revenues and operating costs of DMT up to 2021.

DAMAGES - ASSESSMENT

14.1

14.2

14.3

14.4

The Tribunal’s task is now to determine the damages
suffered by Claimant from the entry into force of the 2002
Treaty. After a short review of the opinions of the valuation
experts, the Tribunal will provide its own conclusions on the

subject.

Mr. Boulton, the expert for Claimant and Mr. Kaczmarek,
the one for Respondent, have given priority to two different
methodologies for the valuation of damages suffered and
have arrived at wildly divergent totals, depending on the
assumptions they have adopted (as high as 118.3 million
Euros in one case and as low as minus 3.1 million Euros in
another case, with a wide variety of figures in between).
On 6 October 2008, they submitted to the Tribunal a Joint
Statement of Matters Agreed and Disagreed which covered

some 37 pages of text.

The Tribunal does not intend to go through a detailed
examination of the respective views of the experts but it
owes it to them and to the Parties to indicate why it has
decided to choose a somewhat different path than the one

suggested by each of them.

Mr. Boulton favours an Internal Rate of Return on Equity
(“IRRE”) Approach (lost returns), while Mr. Kaczmarek
favours an Amount Invested Approach (return of sums

invested plus pre-award interest). In their Joint

145

Statement™, the experts describe their respective methods

as follows:

(i) Mr. Boulton’s IRRE Approach (lost returns): under
this approach, Mr. Boulton calculates what would
have been the value of Claimant’s historical
capital contributions in DMT as of September
2007 on the basis that Claimant would have
earned the expected IRRE of the DMT project
from the date when the relevant projections were
made to the date of valuing the claim (e.g.,
15.86% from 1989 or 8.45% from 1996). It is
therefore, in essence, a calculation of lost
returns, on the basis that Claimant would have
earned the expected IRRE on its investment but
for the acts and omissions of Respondent.

(ii) Mr. Kaczmarek’s Amounts Invested Approach
(return of sums invested plus pre-award
interest): this approach is mathematically similar
to Mr. Boulton’s IRRE Approach. The main
difference is that it applies a range of what Mr.
Kaczmarek calls “reasonable (non-speculative),
observable rate[s] of return to the date of award”
(BK1: 57) to the actual sums of money invested
between the period when the capital contributions
were made and December 2007, instead of the
expected IRRE of the DMT project. It is therefore,
in essence, a calculation which aims to return the
actual sums of money invested by Claimant plus
pre-award interest.

14.5 Based on the computations submitted, the Tribunal has
come to the conclusion that, although they give different
names to their approaches, Mr. Boulton and Mr. Kaczmarek
apply two different variants of the same approach. This
approach consists of compounding the Claimant’s capital
contributions to DMT up to the chosen valuation date. The
difference between the two variants is the compounding
rate retained: a “riskless” or very low risk interest rate in

Mr. Kaczmarek’s case, the IRRE in Mr. Boulton’s case.

14.6 As to Mr. Boulton’s IRRE Approach, the Tribunal notes, first
of all, that it has not enjoyed the favour of financial

management textbooks or arbitral tribunals, concerned with

‘4 Joint Statement of Matters Agreed and Disagreed by Damages Experts, 6 October 2008,

pp 2-3.

146

the valuation of damages. It is generally not considered a
“clean” economic metric. Mr. Kaczmarek points this out in
the Joint Statement of the experts when he says: "the IRRE
is criticized in financial literature for its susceptibility to
distort returns because of its built-in reinvestment

assumption””>.

14.7. The formula used to compute the IRRE (or any internal rate
of return or IRR) automatically assumes that intermediate
cash flows are reinvested on the market, but not at a
market rate; they are assumed to be reinvested at the IRRE
itself. Because the formula used to compute the IRRE is
circular, it can only be solved through iterations. There is
no way to separate the investment’s profitability itself from
the reinvestment gains. However, it is well known that the
IRRE overstates the true profitability of good projects, as
well as the accompanying reinvestment rates, and
understates the true profitability of so-so projects and their
reinvestment rates. It is considered more appropriate to
assume that reinvestments take place at the market rate of
return required on investments of identical risk. In other
words, the appropriate rate of return for compounding
purposes is the cost of equity (opportunity cost) of similar

risk projects/companies.

14.8 It is worth pointing out that the reason for rejecting the
IRRE approach is not one of those mentioned by Mr.
Kaczmarek. The latter argued that the IRRE is inappropriate
as a rate of return for compounding purposes because, at
the time of computation, it was an “expected” rate of
return, not an assured one; at the time of computation, the
expected cash flows were not certain to materialise. Mr.
Kaczmarek is of the opinion that using the IRRE implicit in

the cash flows forecast (either in 1989 or in 1996) to assess

55 Joint Statement of Matters Agreed and Disagreed by Damages Experts, 6 October 2008,

p 20.

147

14.9

14.10

14.11

damages at a later date is tantamount to assuming that
these cash flows would have materialised with perfect

certainty. This is not the case.

It is true that, at the time of the original investment, there
was no certainty that the realised return would be equal to
the expected return: Traffic on the Tollway might turn out
lower/higher than forecast (even in the absence of
Government interference): unplanned but necessary
maintenance might have to be performed, etc. However,
the realised return might conceivably have turned out
higher than forecast, not just lower than forecast. In that
sense, the expected return is the average of what might
have happened and there is no obvious reason to assume
that realised return would have systematically been lower
(barring any unplanned Government interference). Mr.
Kaczmarek’s assertion that a much lower rate, such as a
“riskless” interest rate, is of necessity the appropriate rate
to be used in compounding is thus unjustified; it is just an
ultra-conservative approach. The appropriate reinvestment
rate is the cost of equity, not a low rate of interest nor the
IRRE.

The valid reason for rejecting the IRRE is that it overshoots
or undershoots true expected return, depending on the
circumstances at hand, and almost never equals the true

expected rate of return.

Secondly, the temporal path of values implicit in the IRRE
approach is wrong, so that the compounded investment
value computed on any one date (such as 20 October 2004)
will equal its fair value only by accident. The approach,
such as applied by Mr. Boulton in his numerous appendices,
consists in considering all the positive and negative cash
flows between 1989 and 2021 (under a number of different

scenarios), deducing the average implied rate of return (the

148

IRRE) and then assuming that the original investment
would have started growing in value regularly at that rate
right from 1989.

14.12 This is unrealistic and highly artificial. It is well known that
value evolves as a function, not of time per se, but of cash
flows remaining to be realised in the future. It does not
evolve linearly through time. Value at any one time is a
forward-looking concept and does not depend on how many
(past) periods have elapsed; it depends on what remains
ahead. By comparison, the compounding-at-IRRE approach
makes value at any one time a function, among other
things, of the number of elapsed (past) periods. The only
method which can accurately track value through time is
the Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) method.

14.13 As to Mr. Kaczmarek’s Amounts Invested Approach, both
experts agreed in their Joint Statement that “it is more
common to use an Amounts Invested Approach where the
Tribunal considers that Claimant’s calculation of lost profits
is highly uncertain or speculative”®. The Tribunal does not
believe that the project considered in this case falls into
that category. What there is in this case is a project which,
by 1996, had, for all practical purposes, become a Public
Private Partnership (“PPP”) in a quasi-public utility, with
regulated tariffs aiming to achieve the purposes mentioned
in the Concession Agreement both for Respondent and the
Concessionaire. The six awards referred to by Mr.
Kaczmarek®” as having used the Amounts Invested
Approach bear little resemblance with the present case. In
all those cases, the projects had either never got off the
ground or had been in operation for a short period and

remained of a very speculative nature.

56 Joint Statement of Matters Agreed and Disagreed by Damages Experts, 6 October 2008,

para 2.5.

‘7 Kaczmarek Report of 2 May 2008, p 14.

149

14.14 Thus, in Metalclad v United Mexican States**, the Tribunal

ruled that “discounted cash flow analysis in the present
case because the landfill was never operative and any
award based on_ future profits would be_ wholly

speculative”**.

14.15 In PSEG Global, Inc. et al v Republic of Turkey®°, the

Tribunal states that "(i)t is an accepted fact of the case
that, except for groundbreaking ceremony, there was no
mining undertaken or construction started, not even in
terms of the necessary preparations to that effect” **. Later
on, it adds: "(r)elying on cash flow tables that were part of
proposals that did not materialize does not offer solid basis
for calculating future profits either. The future profits

would then be wholly speculative and uncertain.”°?

14.16 In Tecmed S.A. v United Mexican States®, was a case in

which the claimant argued that its landfill site had illegally

been expropriated. The Tribunal states:

“(t)he non-relevance of the brief history of operation of the
Landfill by Cytar - a little more than two years - and the
difficulties in obtaining objective data allowing application of
the discounted cash flow method on the basis of estimates
for a protracted future, not less than 15 years, together with
the fact that such future cash flow also depends upon
investments to be made - building of seven additional cells
- in the long term, lead the Arbitral Tribunal to disregard
such methodology to determine the relief to be awarded to
the Claimant”.

14.17. MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. & Mtd Chile S.A. dealt with a

dispute concerning a real estate development project which

Metalclad, above n 39.

Metalclad, above n 39, also at ICSID Review-Foreign Investment Law Journal, page 32

para 121.
PSEG Gobal,

Inc et al v Republic of Turkey |\CSID Case No. ARB/02/5, Award of 19

January 2007.

Ibid, at para 304.

Ibid, at para 313.

Tecmed, above n 21.

MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. & Mtd Chile S.A. v Republic of Chile |CSID Case No. ARB/01/7,

21 May 2004.

150

never got off the ground and where the only transaction

was the purchase of land by the claimants.

14.18 In Siemens AG v Argentine Republic®’, the dispute arose in

connection with a contract for the provision of an integral
service for the provision of identity cards, a contract which
Siemens had won through a public bidding process. The
contract had a 6-year term and was automatically
renewable for two 3-year terms, unless a notice to the
contrary was served. Siemens was to receive compensation
only during the operational stage of the programme. The
programme started to operate partially on 1 February 2000
and was halted by the Government the next day. In spite
of months of negotiations, no agreement could be reached
on the continuation of the programme and the contract was

terminated by Government decree, on 18 May 2001.

14.19 In Wena Hotel Limited v Arab Republic of Egypt®’, the

dispute related to 1989-1990 long-term agreements (21 V2
years and 25 years) to lease and develop two hotels located
in Luxor and Cairo which were subsequently seized in 1991
by a government agency. The Tribunal ruled that those
actions constituted breaches of the 1975 BIT between the
U.K. and Egypt and awarded damages to the claimant.
However, it said that it was “not persuaded that the DCF
method (was) appropriate in this case”. The Tribunal noted
in particular that Claimant had operated the Luxor Hotel for
less than 18 months, and had not even completed its
renovations on the Nile Hotel, before they were seized on 1
April 1991%”. It concluded that an award based on the DCF

168

method, “would be too speculative The tribunal referred

Siemens AG v Argentine Republic |CSID Case No. ARB/02/08, 6 February 2007.

Wena Hotel Limited v Arab Republic of Egypt |CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, 8 December

2000.

Ibid, para 124.
Ibid, para 123.

151

69
70

aT

14.20

14.21

to both the Metalclad case® and to the SPP (Middle East) v
Egypt ICC”? case which “declined to accept a discounted
cash flow projection because, inter alia, “by the date of
cancellation the great majority of the work had still to be

done [...]’”.

In the Respondent’s Submission on the Law, (15 September
2008, paras. 258 et seq.), Respondent argued that
compensation should not cover claims with inherently
speculative elements and cited a number of arbitral awards

and authors in support of this statement.

The Tribunal does not dispute that conclusion but it is
however convinced that the present claim is based on far
more than “inherently speculative elements”. The
Concession Agreement, MoA2 and MoA3 were all preceded
by elaborate and sophisticated studies prepared by
independent experts at the request of one or other Party or
by lenders and these studies were clearly used by those
parties as the bases for the determination of the terms of
those various agreements. In the Tribunal’s view, it is quite
appropriate to use the DCF method to calculate damages
owing to Claimant in the present case. DMT meets all the
conditions to qualify as investment to which that
methodology can be applied. While it is true that it has not
achieved its expected financial returns (mainly because of
admitted faults on the part of the Respondent), the
company is still in existence today. It has remained since
1989 the Concessionaire in charge of the Don Muang
Tollway and its subsequent Northern Extension and, under

MoA3, that concession has been extended until 2034.

Metalclad, above n 39.
SPP (Middle East) v Egypt \CC Award, Case No. 3493, 11 March 1983, 22 ILM 752

(1983).

Wena Hotel, above n 66, para 123.

152

DCF approach is the best approach

14.22 If value and damages must be computed on the basis of
what was legitimately expected at any given time, then the
DCF method is the most reasonable one to apply. At any
given time, the investor might have expected to hold the
present value (“PV”) of remaining cash flows (the price
received if it were to sell its interest), plus the compounded

value (at the cost of equity) of dividends already received.

14.23 It is worth noting that Mr. Boulton himself wrote in his
November 2007 report that “From a theoretical standpoint,
DCF is a superior method”*. And also: "The DCF method's
assumption about reinvestment rates is more realistic and
relevant because it incorporates the market-determined

opportunity cost of capital as a discount rate””*

. Finally:
“The DCF method has certain advantages in that it better
takes account of the absolute amount and the timing of

cash flows””*.

14.24 Equally, Mr. Kaczmarek recognises that the DCF
methodology is a valid one to be retained in valuations
associated with projects with a _ track-record of
performance. He writes: "The DCF approach is one of the
most common approaches used to value a business. It
stems directly from the fundamental financial principle that
the enterprise value of a business is equal to the sum of all
future cash-flows produced by the business discounted to
present value at an appropriate rate reflecting the risks of
that business”. He goes on to extend the approach to the

valuation of shares.

Boulton Report of 28 November 2007, p 18.
Boulton Report of 28 November 2007, p 19.
Boulton Report of 28 November 2007, p 26.
Kaczmarek Report of 2 May 2008, p 24.

14.25

14.26

14.27

14.28

In any event, it is interesting that each expert presented,

as an alternative methodology, his own DCF Approach.

As pointed out by the experts and the Parties, none of the
methodologies used provides an absolute assurance that
the results obtained correspond exactly to the actual
damages suffered. But, in the present instance, the
Tribunal is convinced that the application of the traditional
DCF Approach is the one which leads to results
corresponding most closely to what the Parties effectively
expected to occur for the duration of the concession. And
the circumstances of this case fit very well with the large
number of awards where Tribunals have opted for the

application of the DCF methodology.

As demonstrated above by the Tribunal, the Claimant had,
at the time of the signing of MoA2, legitimate expectations
flowing from that Agreement which, through its actions and
omissions, the Respondent did not honour. Such actions
and omissions led to breaches of MoA2 and the Concession

Agreement from 20 October 2004 onwards.

The Tribunal is of the view that the best way to assess

damages is to:

(a) Estimate what would have been the fair value of
the Claimant’s shares on 3 December 2006 (the
date of the sale of those shares) had the
Respondent fulfilled its obligations under MoA2;
said value, computed in THB, should be converted
into Euros at the exchange rate in effect on that

day. We will refer to it as the “But-for value”.

(b) Subtract the proceeds of sale of the Claimant’s

shares on 3 December 2006.

154

(c) Add the dividends, if any, which would have been
received in 2005 and 2006 had MoA2 been applied;
said dividends must be compounded to 3 December

2006 and then converted into Euros.

Cash flows to be considered in the DCF approach to But-for

value

14.29

14.30

Both the return of investment and the return on
investment to DMT were to take place through the
payment of a string of dividends. Therefore, it is But-for
dividends, between 20 October 2004 and 2 July 2021,
which must be discounted to compute the value of DMT
(and Walter Bau’s share in it) on 3 December 2006 (the
date of the Claimant’s sale of its shares). MoA2 (Art. 11)
extended the Concession by 25 years from its signature

which took place on 2 July 1996.

These But-for dividends should be based on the forecasts
of revenues and costs made at the time of signing of
MoA2 (or close to that time). These forecasts, on the one
hand, were based on the real situation at the time, that is
they took into account the effect of past Government
actions (or omissions). On the other hand, the future was
“seen through MoA2”, with the assumption that it would
be applied. Two sets of such forecasts were prepared in
connection with MoA2: one prepared by DMT, another one
prepared by IFCT for the Respondent. DMT’s projections
are more optimistic than IFCT’s projections. The Tribunal
has however found that the reason for the lower
projections by IFCT resulted from the fact that it did not
include the forecast traffic on the Northern Extension. This
does not appear to the Tribunal as a_ reasonable
assumption and it concludes that DMT’s projections should

be retained as the common denominator.

155

14.31

14.32

14.33

Mr. Boulton’s November 2007 Report shows in Appendix
A-7 the expected But-for dividends under DMT’s
projections. Unfortunately, the financing assumed is the
“soft loan” mentioned in MoA2, which both the
Respondent and DMT were aware, at the time of signing
the MoA2, would not be available at the proposed rates
and would have to be renegotiated. The Tribunal has
reworked this scenario with the financing costs (interests
and capital repayments) associated with the 1997
Financing Package rather than the financing costs
associated with the soft loan. These costs are larger and
will thus reduce But-for dividends as long as the 1997

actual loan is outstanding.

The projections included in Appendix A-7 are based on
DMT’s 1996 projections and also assume that the Don
Muang Airport would be operating at 50 per cent of
capacity starting in 2003, because of the planned
construction of a new airport which would draw traffic
away. That is a fair assumption, no matter what happened
subsequently, including delays in the opening of the new
airport and the complete closure of Don Muang Airport
from September 2006 to March 2007. In point of fact, it
was known, at the time of signing of MoA2, that a new
airport was planned and would draw traffic away from

Don Muang Airport.

Much time has been spent by the experts and the Parties
on the impact of the 1997 Asian economic crisis. The
Tribunal is of the view that this should not be factored
into the DCF valuation to be performed, any more than
the subsequent events relating to the delayed opening of
the new airport or the temporary closure of the Don
Muang Airport. As argued by the Respondent, the 1996

projections did not constitute guarantees; this is obvious,

156

76

otherwise they would not be expectations but firm
obligations under the Concession Agreement; but they did
constitute legitimate expectations which the Claimant
could expect to be materialised by the Respondent, in
good faith, through the application of Clause 25 and
Appendix B of the Concession Agreement. Those
projections extending until 2021 could not be - and
certainly were not - seen by the Parties as a
representation of year by year reality but as reasonable
financial results which could be attained over some 25

years.

The discount rate to be used in the estimation of the

December 2006 But-for value

14.34

14.35

The Parties’ respective experts disagreed on the discount
rate to be applied in the DCF approach.”° The Claimant’s
expert favours the WACC “which recognizes the
Claimant’s own sources of funding rather than those
specific to DMT”. The Respondent’s expert argues that
“The correct rate to discount dividends (returns to equity
holders) is DMT’s cost of equity and not the WACC of

Claimant (the dividend receiver)”.

The Tribunal has come to the conclusion that the solution
proposed by the Respondent’s expert should be followed.
Because dividends are the cash flows to be discounted,
the rate appropriate for their discounting is the cost of
equity (“COE”), not the WACC. The COE is the relevant
rate for equity holders, whereas the WACC blends equity
holders and lenders requirements (it would apply to cash
flows going to both equity holders and lenders, whereas
the COE applies to cash flows going to equity holders
only).

Joint Statement of Matters Agreed and Disagreed by Damages Experts, 6 October 2008,

p25.

157

14.36 In addition, the COE must be DMT’s COE, not the
Claimant’s COE. The COE is a function of the business risk
and leverage risk of the cash flows being discounted;
these levered cash flows are DMT’s levered cash flows,
not the Claimant’s. As pointed out by the Respondent’s
expert (ibid), "a dividend stream to be paid by a company
[cannot] have different values depending upon who

actually holds or owns the shares of the company”.

14.37 DMT’s But-for cost of equity in December 2006 must be
estimated under the assumption that MoA2 was, and
would be, implemented (any doubt about the
Government’s willingness to implement MoA2 would
render the business riskier and would justify a higher

discount rate).

14.38 DMT’s COE in 2006 should not be very different from what
it was in 2004; on the one hand, long term Thai
Government bond rates increased slightly from 4.86% to
5.12%’? but on the other hand DMT’s debt ratio and
financial risk should have decreased had MoA2 been
respected (the 1997 Financing package had set regular
principal repayments starting in 1998).

14.39 Some estimates of DMT’s 2004 COE are available,

namely:
(a) The Turnaround company set DMT’s COE at 12%’8;

(b) Intel Vision Securities’ WACC estimates implied a
“current COE” of 26.5% for 2004 and a 13.14% COE
“throughout the remainder of the concession”. The
computations are not exactly clear and detailed, but

the 2004 refinancing and debt reduction detailed in

7 See Mr Kaczmarek's 2 May 2008 Report, p 1279 of the Experts Bundle.

78 December 2004 Report, p 21.

158

Intel’s Table 6’ might be playing a part in the
second estimate. The “current estimate” of 26.5%
is affected by a high debt to equity ratio in 2004.
Although Intel does not explain how this debt ratio
was arrived at, it can be surmised that it reflects
accounting values; its being high must in large part
be due to MoA2 not having been implemented and
having depressed accounting equity. Therefore, the
estimate cannot be used in a But-for scenario
(according to which MoA2 would have been in force).

The 13.14% rate, however, may be considered.

(c) Mr. Kaczmarek recommends a 12% COE without

offering specific computations.®°

14.40 A COE of 11-12% might be an appropriate estimate in a
But-for scenario under which the Respondent was expected
to go along with MoA2’s provisions. This is so not only
because the Respondent’s expert as well as the Turnaround
Company were comfortable with 12%, but also because of
the following reasonableness check: With the general
decrease in rates between June 1997 and December 2006,
the Thailand 10-year Government Bond yield had fallen to
5.25% by mid-December 2006. It is usually agreed that a
5% to 6% premium is the premium applicable to the
average risk on the market. Assuming that DMT was of
average risk, then its normal cost of equity should have
been approximately equal to 5.25% + 5.5% (Government
long bond rate plus average risk premium), that is equal to
10.75%, closer to 11% than to 12%.

14.41 However, the Tribunal also notes that the 1997 Financing
package poses practical computational challenges the

solution of which must have an impact on the final selection

Ibid, p 17.
80 Kaczmarek Report of 2 May 2008, p 31.

159

14.42

14.43

of a discount rate. The June 1997 Financing Package
included loans in THB, as well as a loan in US dollars, and
some of these loans were at floating rates. The But-for
scenario on which the experts relied to obtain the But-for-
value of DMT’s shares in December 2006 is based on the
exchange rate and interest rates that applied in 1997. In
order to preserve consistency between these financial
conditions and the discount rate, the Tribunal is of the
opinion that the discount rate should be based on the
Thailand 10-year Government Bond yield observed in June
1997 (10.13%) and a risk premium of 4% reflecting a
somewhat lower-than-average risk. The reason for this
slightly lower than average risk premium is two-fold: Since
1996, DMT had become a quasi-public utility with the
Government as a major shareholder with considerable
weight and the implementation of MoA2 should have left it
with limited risk to face. The tribunal will therefore retain a

discount rate equal to 14.13%.

As suggested by the experts at the time of the hearing, the
Tribunal availed itself of their offer to perform certain
additional calculations in accordance with eventual
instructions by the Tribunal. The relevant instructions were
issued by the Tribunal and calculations were made by the
experts on the basis of an 11% and a 12% discount rate.
With their joint report of 12 May 2009, the experts provided
the Tribunal with the necessary instruments to make its
own calculations, if a different discount rate were to be

retained by the Tribunal.

The Tribunal has thereafter proceeded to establish the But-
for value on the basis of a 14.13% discount rate and with
the assumptions (Pro-rata 2004 dividend/Discounted sale
proceeds) used by the experts under their third calculation

at paragraph 1.15 of their joint report of 12 May 2009 as

160

14.44

15. COSTS

15.1

15.2

15.3

well as with their other agreed assumptions in that same

report.

The net damages due to Claimant by Respondent, after
subtraction of the discounted value of Claimant’s shares

sold on 3 December 2006, amount to 29.21 million Euros.

The Claimant tried to negotiate a settlement with the
Respondent through diplomatic channels but had no
success. It therefore had no option but to proceed with its
claim. The Claimant did not prevail on a major portion of its
claim because of the Tribunal’s decision that it had no
jurisdiction ratione temporis. The Claimant did, however,
succeed on the jurisdictional argument. That argument
involved a two-day defended hearing in Hong Kong. The

Claimant has succeeded in obtaining an award of damages.

The Respondent’s challenge to its own party-appointed
arbitrator, Dr. Suvarn (made just before the jurisdictional
hearing), involved additional costs which would not have
been incurred had the challenge been made in a more
timely way. The Respondent also failed to produce
documents in some areas where production might have

been expected, e.g. documents on the Hopewell project.

As noted by the Tribunal in its ruling on security for costs
dated 31 October 2007, Articles 9(3)(5) of the 2002 Treaty
apply mutatis mutandis to investor-state claims. Those
clauses, in summary, say that each party is to meet its own
costs subject to any ruling from the Tribunal. Articles 40(1)
and (2) of the UNCITRAL Rules essentially leave the

question of costs to the discretion of the Tribunal.

161

15.4 Limited assistance can be gained from a consideration of
costs awards in other BIT arbitrations. All fact situations

are different.

15.5 The Tribunal notes the difference between the amounts
claimed for costs and expenses by either side. Whilst
acknowledging that a claimant’s costs are usually greater
than a respondent’s because a claimant has the carriage of
the proceedings and bears the onus of proof, the Claimant’s
costs in this case are more than two-and-a-half times those
of the Respondent. In the Tribunal’s view, both parties’
cases were presented with the utmost professionalism and

competence.

15.6 In the exercise of its broad discretion as to costs, taking into
account all the submissions of the parties and given the
Claimant’s partial success overall, the Tribunal considers it
just and equitable to order that the Claimant pay half the
Respondent’s costs and that the Respondent pay half the

Claimant's costs.

15.7 The total costs incurred by the Claimant, including its
contributions to the Tribunal’s fees and expenses and the
hearing costs totals €5,606,443. A like total for the
Respondent is €1,993,331. The total is €7,599,774. The
Respondent’s legal costs were €1,121,000 and _ the
Claimant's legal costs were €3,374,596.

15.8 50% of €5,606,443 is €2,803,222. 50% of €1,993,331 is
€996,667. The difference, therefore, which the Respondent
must pay to the Claimant for costs is €1,806,560.

16. INTEREST

16.1 The Respondent shall pay the Claimant interest on the

amount awarded at the 6 month successive Euribor rate

162

plus 2 per cent for each year, beginning on 3 December

2006 until the date of payment of the Award, compounded

semi-annually.

16.2 The Respondent shall pay interest on the amount awarded

for costs on the above basis beginning from the date of

issue of this award.

17. FORMAL AWARD

17.1 The Tribunal therefore adjudges, orders and awards as

follows:

(a)

The Respondent is to pay the sum of €29.21 million
to the Claimant as damages for the Respondent’s
breaches of its obligations to the Claimant as an
investor under the Bilateral Investment Treaty
between the Federal Republic of Germany and the
Kingdom of Thailand which came into force on 20
October 2004.

The Respondent is to pay to the Claimant interest on
the amount awarded under paragraph (a) hereof on

the basis set out in paragraph 16.1 of this Award.

The Respondent is to pay the Claimant the sum of
€1,806,560 towards the Claimant’s costs and

expenses in this arbitration.

The Respondent is ordered to pay interest on the
amount to the Claimant in the amount awarded
under paragraph (c) hereof on the basis set out in
paragraphs 16.1 and 16.2 of this Award from the

date of issue of this Award.

Dated at Geneva, Switzerland, Seat of the Arbitration

vt
this /~” dayor JULY 2009

Dc borbe

Hon. Sir Ian Barker Q.C.
Chair

wae Doe {_
(bre fe lende Nei enh Srna

 

Hon. Marc Lalonde P.C., 0.C., Q.C. Mr. Jayavadh Bunnag)

164

