Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 1 of 46

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRAT ION IN GENEVA, SWITZERLAND AND
UNDER THE TREATY BETWEEN THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY AND
THE KINGDOM OF THAILAND MADE ON 24 JUNE 2002 CONCERNING THE
ENCOURAGEMENT AND RECIPROCAL TREATMENT OF INVESTMENTS AND
UNDER THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES 1976

BETWEEN

WALTER BAU AG (IN LIQUIDATION)
CLAIMANT

AND

THE KINGDOM OF THAILAND
RESPONDENT

 

PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION
DATED: 5"" OCTOBER 2007

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 2 of 46

 

 

 

1 INTRODUCTION 1
Pr Jural Background 2
y of factual backg! d 10

 

 

 

2 QUESTIONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL.
3 THE TREATIES — PROVISIONS, PREPARATORY DOCUMENTS AND

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

APPROVALS 14
1961 Treaty 14

The provisions. 14
Preparatory dc 1: 16
Approvals under the 1961 Treaty ....c.cccccccssssssssessssssssecsssessseessesssesssesssecssvesseee 17

The 2002 Treaty. 19

The provisions. 19
Preliminary do t 4
Proceedings of the Cc ittee of Ir Approval. 22

 

4 DOES THE CLAIMANT HAVE AN APPROVED INVESTMENT FOR THE

 

PURPOSES OF ARTICLE 8 OF THE 2002 TREATY?.......ccssssssssssssssssssssssssssscssssosesse 25
Expert ii y 25
The Tribunal’s view 28

 

 

5 OBJECT OF INVESTMENT APPROVAL

6 IS THE CLAIMANT AN INVESTOR FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE 2002
TREATY — ABSORPTION OF DYWIDAG.........csssscsssecscsseseseeusee aoscanscensenseee

 

7 ESTOPPEL / PRECLUSION 40
8B ANSWERS TO QUESTIONG..........ssssscssssssssssssssssscessssssssssssssssssssssssssessnucesssssssooeesees 40
9 AWARD 43

 

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 3 of 46

INTRODUCTION

On 13 December 1961, a Treaty came into force between the Respondent,
the Kingdom of Thailand and the Federal Republic of Germany. The aim of
the Treaty was: “The promotion and reciprocal protection of investments’.
The Claimant, as a German national with an ‘investment’ in Thailand,
alleges that it is entitled to seek relief from the Respondent by virtue of
provisions in a similar treaty between the same parties, signed on 24 June
2002 and which came into force on 20 October 2004. The first Treaty will be
referred to as “the 1961 Treaty” and the second Treaty as “the 2002 Treaty”.

By notice dated 21 September 2005 requesting submission of a dispute to
arbitration, Claimant asserted that the 2002 Treaty, under which it brought
its claim for arbitration, applied to “approved investments” made in Thailand
prior to the entry into force of that Treaty because it had an investment

approved under the terms of the 1961 Treaty.

The Claimant alleges that its “approved investment” is in a tollway
concession granted by the Respondent in its territory and that the
Respondent breached its obligations to it as a shareholder of the
concessionaire. It makes its claim for protection under the 2002 Treaty as
an “investor”, as defined in the 2002 Treaty.

The provision in the 2002 Treaty under which the Claimant seeks to bring its
claim for arbitration is Article 10 which reads as follows:

“Settlement of Disputes between a Contracting Party and an
Investor

(1) Disputes concerning investments between a Contracting Party
and an investor of the other Contracting Party should as far as
possible be settled amicably between the parties in dispute.

(2) If the dispute cannot be settled within six months from the date
on which it has been raised by one of the parties to the dispute, it
shall, at the request of either party to the dispute be submitted for
arbitration. Unless the parties to the dispute have agreed otherwise,
the provisions of Article 9(3) to (5) shall be applied mutatis mutandis
on condition that the appointment of the members of the arbitral
tribunal in accordance with Article 9(3) is effected by the parties to
the dispute and that, insofar as the period specified in Article 9(3)
are (sic) not observed, either party to the dispute may, in the
absence of other arrangements, invite the President of the Court of
International Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce
in Paris to make the required appointments. The award shall be
enforced in accordance with domestic law.

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 4 of 46

1.6

(3) During arbitration proceedings or the enforcement of an award,
the Contracting Party involved in the dispute shall not raise the
objection that the investor of the other Contracting Party has
received compensation under an insurance contract in respect of all
or part of the damage.

(4) In the event of both Contracting Parties having become

Contracting States of the Convention of 18 March 1965 on the

Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of

Other States, disputes under this Article between the parties to

dispute shall be submitted for arbitration under the aforementioned

Convention, unless the parties in dispute agree otherwise; each

Contracting Party herewith declares its acceptance of such

procedure.”
The provisions in Article 9(3) to (5) of the 2002 Treaty referred to in Article
10 above, in summary require each party to appoint a member of an arbitral
Tribunal and that the two members so appointed should nominate a national
of a third state to be Chair of the arbitral tribunal within three months from
the date when the Claimant gave notice that it intended to submit the dispute
to an arbitral Tribunal (ie. 21 September 2005). In default of the co-
arbitrators agreeing on a Chairman, the nomination of a Chairman could be
made by the President of the Court of International Arbitration of the

International Chamber of Commerce, Paris (the “ICC Court”).
Procedural Background

The Claimant is Walter Bau AG (In Liquidation) (“Claimant” or “Walter Bau”),
a company incorporated under the laws of the Federal Republic of Germany.
The Respondent is the Kingdom of Thailand (“Respondent”).

The Claimant is represented by Mr Robert Hunter of Lovells LLP, Frankfurt,
Germany and the Respondent is represented by Mr Michael Polkinghorne of
White & Case LLP, Paris, France.

The Claimant, which is in liquidation, through its insolvency administrator
served its Request for Arbitration on 21 September 2005 pursuant to Article
10(2) of the Treaty. In this document, the Claimant appointed the
Honourable Marc Lalonde, P.C., O.C., Q.C. of Montréal, Québec, Canada

as a co-arbitrator.

The Respondent did not immediately respond to the Request for Arbitration.
However, on 30 November 2005, the Respondent appointed Dr Survan
Valaisathien of Bangkok, Thailand as a co-arbitrator.

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH. Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 5 of 46

1.10

1.11

1.12

1.13

1.14

1.15

1.16

 

The co-arbitrators were unable to agree on the appointment of a Chairman
as envisaged by Articles 9(3) and 10(2) of the 2002 Treaty. By letter dated
25 January 2006, the Claimant submitted a Request for Appointment of
Chair to the President of the ICC Court pursuant to Articles 9(4) and 10(2) of
the 2002 Treaty.

In the interim, the Claimant wrote to the ICC Court on 10 February 2006
expressing concems regarding Dr Suvarn’s impartiality.

The Claimant noted that although the Treaty did not provide a mechanism
for the resolution of concems of lack of impartiality against an arbitrator, the
Claimant nevertheless wished to reserve its position on this point. However,
the Claimant never took any formal step to challenge Dr Suvarn’s

appointment.

On 27 February 2006, the ICC Court confirmed Hon. Sir lan Barker QC of
Auckland, New Zealand as the Chairman of the arbitral tribunal.

A preliminary telephone conference was convened by the Chairman on 15
March 2006 between Counsel for the parties and the full Tribunal. The
participants discussed various administrative matters, including a potential
venue and date for a procedural conference to settle Terms of Reference
and Terms of Appointment of the Arbitral Tribunal.

In accordance with arrangements reached at the telephone conference, a
procedural conference was held on 8 June 2006 in Montréal, Québec,
Canada. The Tribunal, counsel for the parties and representatives of the
parties attended. At this conference, there emerged general agreement as
to the Terms of Reference for the arbitration and the Terms of Appointment
of the Tribunal (collectively called ‘Terms of Reference’). A draft Procedural

Timetable was also discussed.

The Respondent indicated at the procedural conference that it wished to
contest the Tribunal's jurisdiction to consider the Claimant's claim for treaty
protection and that it would seek bifurcation of the proceedings in order to
have jurisdictional objections disposed of at an early stage.

On 20 July 2006, the Chairman, on behalf of the Tribunal, settled the form of
a final agreed version of the Terms of Reference and a Procedural

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 6 of 46

1.18

1.19

1.20

1.21

Timetable and sent them to the parties for signature. Pursuant to paragraph
13 of the Terms of Reference, the parties were each required to deposit
US$350,000 as their share of the advance on costs. US$100,000 of the
total amount was to establish an expense account and US$600,000 was to
establish a fees account. These funds were to be held and supervised by
the London Court of Intemational Arbitration (“LCIA") as the stakeholder
approved by the parties. The LCIA was to disburse funds in accordance
with directions from the Chairman given in accordance with the Terms of

Reference.

On 24 July 2006, the Claimant confirmed to the Tribunal that it would sign
the Terms of Reference and that it was arranging to make the necessary
payments to the LCIA. On 28 July 2006, the Respondent advised that it was
also arranging payment of its share of the advance on costs. However,
regarding the Terms of Reference, it noted that it still had a few minor
reservations and that, in any event, the Thai Cabinet's approval could not be
obtained until 16 August 2006.

In light of the Respondent's letter, the Chairman extended the time period for
obtaining the Thai Cabinet's approval to the Terms of Reference until 16
August 2006 and emphasised that the extension should not in any way be
interpreted as permitting either party to veto the Terms of Reference. The
Chairman reminded the parties that the Tribunal had the authority to issue
the Terms of Reference without the parties’ approval and asked that the
parties proceed on the basis that the Terms of Reference as finally settled

were fixed.

The Claimant signed the Terms of Reference and sent its signed copy to the
members of the Tribunal on 10 August 2006. On 11 August 2006, it
forwarded a signed copy of the Procedural Timetable to the Chairman and
advised that the Claimant's share of the advance on costs had been paid to
the LCIA.

On 18 August 2006 the Respondent indicated that it had been unable to
meet the 16 August 2006 deadline referred to in para 1.19 above. The
Chairman granted the Respondent until 4 September 2006 as a final
deadline for obtaining the Thai Cabinet’s approval to the Terms of
Reference.

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 7 of 46

1.22

1.23

1.24

1.25

1.26

1.27

1.28

On 1 September 2006, the Respondent deposited its share of the advance
on costs with the LCIA. On 4 September 2006, it forwarded a signed copy
of the Terms of Reference and the Procedural Timetable to the Tribunal.

Under the Terms of Reference, the juridical seat of the arbitration is Geneva,
Switzerland. The applicable law of arbitration is :

“public international law. Subject to this, where discrete issues of
national law arise, the law to be applied or considered shall
ordinarily be the law of the Kingdom of Thailand although German
law issues may also arise. The Tribunal shall determine the

appropriate law or laws to be applied.”

Under the Terms of Reference, the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (except as
excluded, supplemented or varied by agreement of the parties), the relevant
provisions (if any) of the Treaty and/or such specific orders or instructions of
the Tribunal were to be the applicable procedural rules.

Under the Terms of Reference, the Tribunal was not to be bound by strict
rules of evidence. However, as appropriate, the Tribunal may have regard
to the 1999 Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Commercial
Arbitration adopted by the International Bar Association (“The IBA Rules’).

Under the Terms of Reference, the Chairman was empowered to make

procedural rulings alone, subject to the provisions of Clause 14(c).

On 2 October 2006, the Respondent submitted a Memorial on Jurisdiction
and a Request for Bifurcation. It also sought an order for security for costs
against the Claimant. Both parties made various applications for discovery.
A further telephone conference was held on 21 December 2006 (Auckland
time) to discuss these applications and the timing of a jurisdictional hearing,
should the decision be made to bifurcate the proceedings. The telephone
conference was attended by all members of the Tribunal and counsel for the

parties.

After consideration by members of the Tribunal of the discussion at the
telephone conference, the Chairman, on behalf of the Tribunal, issued an
order on 21 December 2006 which granted the Respondent's application to
bifurcate the proceedings. He ordered that discrete jurisdictional questions
in a form to be agreed between the parties would be considered by the

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 8 of 46

1.29

1.30

1.31

Tribunal at a jurisdictional hearing which was fixed for 20-21 March 2007 in
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. This venue was one acceptable to the parties.

With respect to discovery, the following provisions were made by the
Chairman on behalf of the Tribunal in the 21 December 2006 order:

“8. (a) The Claimant is to confirm in writing that it has no
documents in its possession or power requesting the
approval of the Thai Government in terms of Article 8 of the
BIT.

(b) The Claimant is to confirm in writing that it has no
documents in its possession or power from the German
Government or any organ thereof relating to the negotiation
of either the 1961 or the 2002 Investment Treaties other
than documents (if any) already disclosed.”

The Tribunal refused to make an order for security for costs for the
jurisdictional hearing in favour of the Respondent. It made no decision in the
meantime on the Respondent's application that the Claimant give security
for the Respondent's costs of the arbitration. The Tribunal sought the
following information from the Claimant:

“(a) the insolvency administrator's current estimate of the
amount that would be available after payment of secured
creditors and the costs of the insolvency;

(b) whether, out of this sum, it is possible to ‘ring-fence’ a
discrete amount which would earn interest for the insolvency
but which could be available for security for costs. Such
sum could only be disbursed on the order of the Tribunal.”

The Tribunal considered that, if the Respondent's jurisdictional challenge
were successful, there would be no need to consider any application for
security for costs of a substantive hearing. The parties could not agree on
discovery issues and were in dispute over the scope of paragraph 8(b) of the
Tribunal’s 21 December 2006 Order referred to above at para 1.24. The
Claimant also objected to the reception as evidence of a letter from Dr
Reinhard Zimmer attached to the Respondent's rejoinder on jurisdiction.
The Claimant argued that the letter, as a witness statement (expert or
otherwise) was incomplete and that Dr Zimmer should appear at the hearing
in Kuala Lumpur for cross-examination if reliance were to be placed on his

statement.

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 9 of 46

1.32

1.33

1.35

 

The Chairman on behalf of the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 on 6
March 2007 to dispose of the issues relating to Dr Zimmer's evidence. He
tuled that, should the Respondent wish to rely on Dr Zimmer's evidence at
the hearing, it would have to submit a witness statement that complied with
the IBA Rules and arrange for Dr Zimmer to attend the hearing. The
disclosure issue was to be argued at the hearing. (In the event, Dr Zimmer
was not available to attend the hearing in Hong Kong).

On 16 March 2007, when M. Lalonde was already on his way from Montréal
to Kuala Lumpur for the hearing and the Chairman was about to leave New
Zealand for the hearing, the Respondent emailed the Tribunal challenging
the continued service on the Tribunal of its own party-appointed arbitrator,
Dr. Suvarn Valaisathien. This letter was seemingly in response to an earlier
letter from the Claimant to the Respondent dated 4 March 2007 where it
advised that:

“It [had] come to [its] attention during the course of preparing for the

March hearing that, many years ago, Dr Suvarn Valaisathien

provided some advice and temporarily held a nominal shareholding

in a company connected with this project. The circumstances [were]

as follows. In 1984, Dyckerhoff & Widmann AG (Dywidag”) and a

local Thai engineering company Delta Engineering Construction

Company Limited (“Delta”) established a Thai company named

Dywithai Company Limited (“Dywithai”). For compliance reasons, Dr

Valaisathien held a 2% interest in Dywithai. Under its new name of

Dywidag (Thailand) Company Limited (“Dywidag Thailand”), this

company was part of the consortium which contracted with DMT for

the design and construction of the Don Muang Tollway. Dywidag

ceased to have an interest in the company in 1997. Dr Valaisathien

also provided legal advice to Dywidag and Delta on Thai corporate

and tax law in connection with Dywidag’s and Delta’s establishment
and incorporation of DMT in 1988 and 1989.”

In their email to the Tribunal, the Respondent's lawyers noted that Dr
Suvarn’s appointment had been made by the previous Thai government and
before the engagement of their firm, White & Case. Following receipt of the
Claimant's 4 March 2007 letter, they had obtained lists of shareholders from
Thailand’s Ministry of Commerce which confirmed that between 1984 and
2001, Dr Suvarn had had an equity interest in Dywithai.

The Respondent therefore challenged Dr Suvarn pursuant to Article 10 of
the UNCITRAL Rules, which permits an arbitrator to be challenged by the
party appointing him, if circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts
as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence, as long as the challenging

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 10 of 46

1.37

1.38

party becomes aware of those circumstances following the appointment. In
the Respondent's submission, the circumstances did give rise to justifiable
doubts as to Dr Suvarn’s impartiality and independence in that:

“Dr Suvarn has a close relationship not only with Claimant but also
with an entity closely connected with Claimant by virtue of the facts
that: (i) he provided legal advice to Claimant's predecessor,
Dyckerhoff & Widmann; and (ii) Dr. Suvarn held a long-term interest
in a company that partnered with Claimant's predecessor to
construct the very project that is at issue in this arbitration.

The matter is all the more sensitive given the nature and importance
of this dispute to the Kingdom of Thailand and the need for all
parties, and the Thai people, to have the utmost confidence in the
decisions of this Tribunal.”

The Respondent submitted that the challenge was timely under Article 11 of
the UNCITRAL Rules since it was made within 15 days of the 4 March 2007
letter notifying if of the relevant circumstances. The Respondent invited Dr
Suvarn to withdraw as an arbitrator and, in the event that he did not willingly
do so, the Respondent intimated that it would pursue its challenge with the
President of the ICC Court. The Respondent requested that the hearing on
jurisdiction be adjourned.

In an email of the same date, the Claimant categorised Dr Suvarn’s
involvement with the project as tangential. It submitted that the fact that he
gave advice a considerable time ago was not a ground for impugning his
impartiality. In addition, the Respondent had, in its possession at the time it
signed the Terms of Reference, knowledge of Dr Suvarn’s questioned
involvement. Accordingly, the challenge was excluded under paragraph 3(e)
of the Terms of Reference in which the parties waived any possible
objections to the appointment of the arbitrators on the grounds of potential
conflict of interest and/or lack of independence or impartiality in respect of
matters known to them at the date of signature of the Terms of Reference.

In the interests of efficiency, the Claimant suggested that:

“the hearing should go ahead ... and the evidence be taken, with a
direction by the tribunal — preferably with the consent of the parties —
that there shall be no rehearing if the challenge is upheld. The
challenge could then follow that with a minimum impact on
procedure. ... Should the challenge succeed, the new arbitrator
could be appointed and the tribunal could then determine the issue
upon the basis of the transcript and written submissions.”

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 11 of 46

1.39

1.41

1.42

 

Following this exchange of emails, Dr Suvarn immediately resigned as a co-
arbitrator without protest. The Respondent refused to agree to proceeding
with the hearing without a third member of the Arbitral Tribunal on the basis
suggested by the Claimant. The remaining members of the Tribunal
therefore felt obliged to adjourn the hearing. The hearing was, accordingly,
adjourned, at great inconvenience to the remaining members of the Tribunal,

the parties, counsel and witnesses.

The Chairman held a telephone conference with Counsel for the parties on
20 March 2007 to discuss a timetable for the appointment of a new co-
arbitrator. Following the conference, the Chairman on behalf of the Tribunal
issued Procedural Order No. 2 on 22 March 2007 stipulating the following
procedure:

“4. The Respondent is to have a new arbitrator appointed and

his/her appointment advised to the Tribunal and the
Claimant by 6 pm 20 April 2007 (French time).

2. The new arbitrator should make a declaration of impartiality
and independence and accept the existing Terms of
Reference and Terms of Appointment, subject to any
necessary adjustment to the terms relating to the
remuneration of the Tribunal.

3. The new arbitrator must be available to consider the
jurisdictional challenge in late July/early August 2007 and
conduct the substantive hearing (if any) in March/April 2008.
Any consequential amendments to the TOR should be
considered at the [next] telephone conference ...”

On 11 May 2007, the Respondent advised the Claimant and the Tribunal of
the appointment of its replacement co-arbitrator, Mr Jayavadh Bunnag of
International Legal Counsellors Thailand Ltd, Bangkok. However, although
his appointment had been made, Mr Bunnag did not receive an official letter

of confirmation for a further few days after this date.

Mr Bunnag signed and forwarded a Statement of Independence and
Impartiality to the administrative secretary of the arbitration on 18 May 2007.
Mr Bunnag signified his acceptance to the Terms of Reference on 25 May
2007. After discussions between Counsel and the Tribunal, a jurisdictional
hearing was directed to take place in Hong Kong on 31 July — 1 August
2007. The Respondent wished the venue for the hearing to be in Asia. The
Claimant preferred a venue in London or Paris but ultimately agreed to Hong

Kong.

 

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 12 of 46

1.43

1.45

1.46

1.47

1.48

On 19 June 2007, the Respondent revived the issues of Dr Zimmer and
document production. The Respondent advised that because the German
Government did not consent to Dr Zimmer's participation at the hearing, Dr
Zimmer would not be attending as a witness. The Respondent also objected
to the Claimant's assertions of privilege in relation to the disclosure of those
documents that fell within paragraph 8(b) of the Tribunal's Order for
Directions No. 1. The Claimant provided its response on 13 July 2007.

The Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 on Document Disclosure on 18
July 2007, reiterating its views on Dr Zimmer. It ruled that the Claimant had
already complied with the Respondent's request for broader disclosure by
stating that it had no documents in its possession or power falling within the

scope of the request.

The hearing on the jurisdictional issues took place at the Hong Kong
International Arbitration Centre on 31 July and 1 August 2007. The Claimant
was represented by Mr Robert Hunter and Dr. Mariel Dimsey of Counsel and
the Respondent by Mr Michael Polkinghorne and Ms Sarah Cohen of
Counsel. Representatives of both parties attended the hearing.

Prepared briefs of the evidence-in-chief of the Expert witnesses — one for
each side - had been provided in advance. Each witness was cross-
examined and re-examined. A verbatim transcript was taken of the whole
hearing and made available to the Tribunal and the parties. The parties had
already filed extensive memorials on the jurisdictional issues before the

order for bifurcation had been made.

Written submissions were forwarded by both counsel to the Tribunal on or
about 10 August 2007. The Tribunal is grateful to all counsel for their
assistance and for the high quality of the submissions.

Summary of factual background

Between August 1989 and July 1997, a German corporation called
Dyckerhoff & Widmann AG (“Dywidag”) invested about 750 million Thai baht
(approx. Euro 17.5 million at today’s value) in the Don Muang Tollway
through the purchase of shares in a company known as Don Muang Tollway
Co. Ltd (“DMT”).

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 13 of 46

1.49

1.50

1.51

Dywidag made its investment as a shareholder in DMT as a result of an
invitation by the Department of Highways (“DoH”), a department of the
government of the Respondent, dated 18 September 1987, seeking
applications to tender for the tollway concession. The Respondent was
unwilling or unable to commit public funds to pay for the project. The project
was an urgently-needed infrastructural improvement to the most important
road transport route in Thailand. Dywidag and another investor (“Delta”)
jointly submitted a proposal to the Thai government. DMT was formed for
the purpose of entering into a contract with DoH. DMT was to finance,
design, construct, operate and maintain the tollway for DoH under a
concession agreement to be entered into between DMT and DoH. The
concession was awarded to DMT by DoH on 9 March 1988. The formal
“Tollway Concession Agreement” was entered into by DoH and DMT on 21
August 1989.

The tollway is now a 21 kilometre stretch of six-lane elevated expressway
near Bangkok, constructed over and forming part of Highway 31, the
Viphavadis-Rangsit Road. It provides access to the Don Muang
International Airport and forms part of the most important road in the
Kingdom.

In return for the right to collect tolls at levels agreed to and set in advance
with DoH, DMT bore the entire capital cost of designing and constructing the
tollway plus the operating costs of running and maintaining it for a
concession period of 25 years. At the end of that period, the tollway is to be
handed back to the Respondent in good condition and at no cost to the
Respondent. The value of the concession for the investors lies solely in the
return to be made from the excess of tall income over investment and
operating costs. Dywidag was noted in the concession agreement as one of
DMT’s two and only foreign founding joint-venture partners. The document
itself recites “D & W [and Delta co-founder] have caused the registration of
DMT pursuant to the laws of the Kingdom of Thailand for the purpose of
holding and exercising such a toll highway concession”.

Initially, the shareholding in DMT was 49% to Dywidag and 51% to Delta.
Further investors participated as shareholders in DMT over the years. Some
restructuring of DMT took place in 1996-7. The Respondent itself then
subscribed to shares and the Claimant provided further share capital.

11

 

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 14 of 46

1.53

1.54

1.55

1.56

However, because of the large amount of capital in DMT, the Claimant’s
share stood at 9.87% from the time of the restructuring down until the date
of the request for arbitration. Its percentage of the shareholding had varied
over the years from the 49% initial high.

Dywidag was merged into the Claimant by absorption pursuant to s 20 of the
German Transformation Act on 16 August 2001. The Claimant asserts that,
under German law, it has succeeded to all the rights of Dywidag, including
its shares in DMT. The Claimant's holding of 9.87% of the shares in DMT as
at 8 December 2004, had been approved by the Thai Ministry of Finance.
Although there has been an increase in the Claimant's percentage
shareholding in DMT since the Request for Arbitration, counsel were agreed
that the Tribunal should decide the jurisdictional arguments on the basis of
the Claimant's 9.87% shareholding as at the date of the filing of the
Request for Arbitration.

The Ministry of Finance of the Respondent had entered into a share sale
and purchase agreement with Dywidag, Delta and DMT whereby the
Respondent, Delta and Dywidag each invested capital in DMT and agreed to
regulate matters of share sale and management between themselves. On
26 June 1989, Dywidag and Delta committed themselves to hold together
not less than 30% of the registered capital of DMT throughout the
construction period. This arrangement was superseded after the 1996/7
restructuring referred to in paragraph 1.52.

The invitation to tender had been issued by DoH pursuant to a policy
adopted and approved by the Council of Ministers (‘Full Cabinet’) of the
Respondent. On 20 September 1988, the Full Cabinet approved the project
and granted DMT the concession on the basis of its proposal. The Office of
the Supreme Attorney-General approved the form of the concession. The
DoH granted the concession pursuant to its statutory power under the

Concession Highways Act.

On 11 June 1990, the Full Cabinet approved the concession project as
being eligible for investment promotion privileges such as tax benefits which
were duly granted. On 16 May 1991, another arm of the Respondent called
the Board of Investment (“Bol”) issued a “certificate of investment” to DMT

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 15 of 46

1.57

1.58

1.59

21

2.2

for the implementation and construction of the project. This certificate was

issued under the Investment Promotion Act (“IPA”).

On 11 June 1996, the Full Cabinet approved in principle an amendment to
the concession. On 29 November 1996, DoH granted an amendment to the
concession which extended the tollway a further six kilometres to connect it
with the then Bangkok International Airport. On 6 March 1998, the Bol
issued a certificate of investment to DMT for the construction and operation

of the northern extension.

The tollway and its extension were duly built by DMT over a five year period

and are fully functional.

The essential theme of the Claimant's claim for damages is that the
Respondent failed to keep its part of the bargain with DMT (in which the
Claimant, as legal successor to Dywidag, was a shareholder) by not properly
fixing or increasing the level of tolls for the freeway. The Claimant says it
was thus deprived of its rightful return on its investment over and above the

cost of constructing the tollway.
QUESTIONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL

As noted in the Procedural History, the Tribunal agreed to bifurcate the
arbitral hearing and to consider the questions set out below at a preliminary
hearing. Determination of the questions in favour of the Respondent would

mean the end to the arbitral proceedings.

The agreed questions with which this Partial Award is concerned, are set out

as follows:

“(a) Do the treaties require that a German investment into Thailand be
approved as a precondition for treaty protection?

(b) If so, and without limiting the scope of this question:

(i) What form must that approval take?

(ii) What is the object of the approval?
(iii) Are there different approval requirements under the
treaties?

(iv) Has the Claimant satisfied the approval requirement(s) under
the treaties?

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 16 of 46

2.3

3.1

3.2

3.3

(c) _ If the answer to Issue b(iv) is no, is the Respondent estopped or
precluded from arguing (within the meaning of {| 60 of Professor
Sucharitkul’s Witness Statement) that the Claimant has not?

(d) Is the Claimant entitled to bring this claim in arbitration in light of the
“merger by absorption” of Dyckerhoff & Widmann
Aktiengesellschaft into Walter Bau effective 16 August 2001?”

The parties agreed on the above formulation of questions for consideration
by the Tribunal at this jurisdictional stage of the proceedings before any
hearing on the merits. The Respondent sought answers to the questions
which, if answered in the manner contended for by the Respondent, would
have the effect of depriving the Tribunal of jurisdiction to entertain the
substantive claim. The Respondent advises that, even if the Tribunal were
to rule in favour of the Claimant in respect of the above questions,
canvassed at the hearing in Hong Kong on 31 July/1 August 2007, it still has
other arguments to the effect that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider
the claim. These arguments would be made at any substantive hearing of

the claim on the merits.

THE TREATIES — PROVISIONS, PREPARATORY DOCUMENTS AND
APPROVALS

It is now necessary to record relevant provisions in both Treaties as a
preliminary to considering the arguments on the questions posed.

1961 Treaty
The provisions

The Preamble to this Treaty states the desire “...to intensify economic co-
operation between both States”. and the intention: “...to create favourable
conditions for investments by nationals or companies of each State in the
territory of the other State”. Then follows the declaration: “Recognising that
a contractual protection of investments is apt to stimulate private business

initiatives and to increase the prosperity of both nations”.
Article 1 of the 1961 Treaty provides:

“(1) Each Contracting Party will endeavour to admit in its territory, in
accordance with its legislation, the investment of capital by
nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party, to promote
such investments as far as possible, and to give sympathetic
consideration to the granting of any relevant permits required.”

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 17 of 46

3.4

3.5

(2) Investments owned by, or under the management or effective
control of, nationals or companies of each Contracting Party shall in
the territory of the other Contracting Party not be treated less
favourably by that Party than it treats investments of its own
nationals or companies or investments of nationals or companies of
any third State.”

The Protocol to Article 1, which is declared an integral part of the Treaty,

provides:

“(a) Each Contracting Party is free to decide, in accordance with its
legislation and rules and regulations issued thereunder and with
due regard to its policies and published plans, whether it will grant a
permit required. When a permit is issued the respective investment
enjoys full protection of the Treaty.

(b) in respect of investments in the territory of the Kingdom of Thailand,
the term “investment”, wherever it is used in this Treaty, shall refer
to all investments made in projects classified in the certificate of
admission by the appropriate authority of the Kingdom of Thailand
in accordance with its legislation and administrative practice as an
“approved project”.

The term “investment” is defined by Article 8 thus:

“(1) For the purpose of this Treaty, the term “investment” shall comprise
every kind of asset, and more particularly, though not exclusively:

(a) movable and immovable property as well as any other rights
in rem, such as mortgages, liens, pledges, usufructs and similar
rights.

(b) shares or other kinds of interest in companies,

(c) rights of action for money or for any performance having an
economic value,

(d) copyrights, patents, trade-marks, trade-names and good will,

{e) business concessions under public law.

Any alteration of the form in which assets are invested shall not
affect their classification as investment.

The term “returns” shall mean the amounts yielded by an
investment or profit or interest for a specific period.

2)

(3) The term “nationals” shall mean:

(a) in respect of the Federal Republic of Germany: Germans
within the meaning of the Basic Law for the Federal Republic
of Germany,

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 18 of 46

3.6

3.7

3.8

3.9

(b) in respect of the Kingdom of Thailand: Thai within the
meaning of Thai law.

(4) The term “companies” shall mean any juristic person as well as any
commercial or other company or association with or without legal
personality, having its seat in the territory of either Contracting
Party and lawfully existing consistent with legal provisions,
irrespective of whether the liability of its partners, associates or
members is limited or unlimited and whether or not its activities are
directed at profit.”

The term “investors” was not defined.

The 1961 Treaty did not provide for claims being made by an investor
directly against a State Contracting Party. The only dispute resolution
mechanism was, ultimately, state-versus-state arbitration should negotiation

fail.
Preparatory documents

Under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969
(‘Vienna Convention”), recourse may be had to supplementary means of
interpretation, including travaux préparatoires for the Treaty and other
relevant circumstances. Such recourse provides a useful check to confirm
the ‘plain meaning’ which Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties directs one to consider. It can also determine meaning when the
plain meaning interpretation under Article 31 either (a) leaves the meaning
ambiguous or obscure; or (b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or
unreasonable. The Respondent is not a signatory to the Vienna Convention.
Nevertheless, it is considered as being part of customary international law
since it simply codified existing customary law on the subject: see Namibia
Case — Advisory Opinion [1971] ICJ Reports 16; Hungary v Slovakia ICJ
Reports 1997.

Counsel made submissions on a host of preparatory documents, all of which
have been examined carefully by the Tribunal. It appears that the 1961
Treaty had been negotiated in the context of the Investment Promotion Act
of 1954 and an Amendment to that Act made in 1960.

Article 9 of the 1961 Treaty provided:

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 19 of 46

3.10

3.11

3.12

“The present Treaty shall also apply to approved investments made prior
to its entity into force by not earlier than the 26th October 1960 by
nationals or companies of either Contracting Party in the territory of the
other Contracting Party in the performance of the latter’s legislation.”
The date mentioned is the date when the 1960 Amendment to the IPA
came into force.”

Minutes of a formal meeting, held on 2 August 1960 during the Treaty
negotiations, record a Thai official stating that the date of the coming into
effect of the IPA (26 October 1960) should be the ‘cut-off’ date for the
commencement of the application of the 1961 Treaty. This suggestion was
approved by the negotiating team and found expression in Article 9 above.

The process for obtaining approval under the IPA had been communicated
by the Thai delegation to the German delegation for Treaty negotiations in
the context of a remark by a German delegate at a meeting on 16 October
1961 about the need for clarification of confusion surrounding the different
authorities dealing with private investments. The Thai delegation explained
the Bol’s screening processes and suggested that potential investors might
consider consulting the Bol. Professor Sompong Sucharitkul (the Claimant's
expert witness) was present at this meeting. This appears to have been the
only recorded discussion during the preparatory talks and negotiations for
the 1961 Treaty on the criteria for approval of approved investments.

Approvals under the 1961 Treaty

Certificates of Approval (“CAs”) were issued by the Thai Ministry of Foreign
Affairs to German investors under the 1961 Treaty, the first in 1972 to
Schering Chemicals Limited (“Schering”). This company was not a holder of
a certificate of promotion from the Bol. In the minutes recording the meeting
of officials considering Schering’s application for approval, can be found the
following statement from a representative of the Department of Treaties &
Legal Affairs in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs at a meeting on 19 October
1972:

“...in order to clarify any confusion on this matter, all relevant officials

shall authenticate their understanding to be on a common ground such

that as a result of the Thai-German Treaty and the Investment

Promotion Act investments by German companies and individuals could
be divided into 3 of the following categories:

(a) _ For investments entitled to a Bol Certificate under the Investment
Promotion Act shall be protected by both the Treaty and the Act

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 20 of 46

3.13

3.14

3.15

3.16

as agreed. The Bol Certificate would also constitute the
Certificate of Admission.

(b) For investments not being promoted but had been issued the
Certificate of Admission by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall be
protected under the Treaty only.

(c) For investments not granted with the Bol Certificate or the
Certificate of Admission — not constituting as those under point (a)
or point (b), were entitled to no benefits aside from the benefits
granted by the general laws of the country. Such laws were freely
subjected to any changes and amendments.”

This meeting was attended by representatives of many Thai government
departments and agencies. The Committee Minutes stated that it was a
meeting of “the Committee in charge of the approval of the CA Applications
of Schering Chemicals Ltd”. It seems to have been an ad hoc Committee

rather than one which met regularly.

Other applications for CAs by German companies were granted by the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (“MFA”) in 1982 to B. Grimm & Co. (a
manufacturer) and to DEG (an German equity financier of industrial and
agricultural enterprises) for an investment in The Industrial Finance
Corporation of Thailand. DEG was issued another CA on 6 December 1984

in relation to its investment in Thai Factory Development Co Ltd.

DEG is owned indirectly by the Federal Republic of Germany. DEG is
mandated to invest only in projects which meet certain development,
environmental and social standards. In 1987, it made enquiries of the
Department of Economic Affairs at the MFA about CA approval for
investments in Bangkok Ranch Limited, a duck-breeding and slaughtering
enterprise and another in respect of Thai Agri Business Venture Capital

Company.

DEG set out in its letter of 21 August 1987 to the Department of Economic
Affairs at the MFA its understanding that, because the Bangkok Ranch Ltd
financing proposal was not a “Bol approved project”, that was why a CA in
accordance with Part 1(b) of the Protocol to Article 1 to the 1961 Treaty was
being sought. It wrote a similar letter in respect of financing for Thai Agri
Business Venture Co Ltd on 29 October 1987. Neither letter received any
recorded reply, let alone any challenge to the understanding recorded about
the issuance of CAs. In both cases, DEG was seeking to finance ventures

 

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 21 of 46

3.17

3.18

3.19

3.20

by acquiring an equity participation in the ventures. Both CAs were duly

granted.

The Bangkok Ranch investment was approximately 21.8 million Baht in
value. The total figure for German investment in Thailand in 1987 was
2682.4 million Baht.

Treuarbiet, an accounting and tax consultant firm appointed by the German
Government to administer the German foreign investment guarantee
programme, had the same understanding as DEG. In a letter to Dywidag,
on 10 May 1988, after mentioning the 1961 Treaty, it stated, inter alia:

“The application of the Investment Promotion Treaty
presupposes that the Board of Investment grants a permit under
the Thai Investment Promotion Act 1977 in which the entity in
which the investment is made is designated as “Promoted
Person”. This permit is in the opinion of the Inter Ministerial
Committee for Capital Investment, guarantees an indispensable
prerequisite for legal protection”.

“In those cases in which the afore-mentioned permit cannot be
obtained it is possible to ensure the application of the investment
promotion treaty by the issuance of a certificate of admission by
the Thai Foreign Ministry in accordance with the protocol to the
treaty.”
Treuarbiet's letter to Dywidag was followed by DMT’s application for
approval by the Cabinet of the Tollway project. Specific confirmation that
the concession should be entitled to promotional privileges and Bol approval

followed in due course.
The 2002 Treaty
The provisions

This Treaty reflected many of the provisions of the 1961 Treaty, with some
variations, additions and re-arrangement of Articles. The Preamble is

identical. The relevant portions of this Treaty to record here are as follows:

“Article 1
Definitions
For the purpose of this Treaty

1. the term “investments” comprises every kind of asset, in particular,
though not exclusively,

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 22 of 46

movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in
rem, such as mortgages, liens and pledges;

(a

(b)
(c

shares of companies and other kinds of interest in companies;

claims to money which has been used to create an economic
value or claims to any performance having an economic value;

(d

intellectual property rights, in particular copyrights, patents,
utility-model patents, industrial designs, trade-marks, trade-
names, trade and business secrets, technical processes,
know-how, and good will;

business concessions under public law, including concessions
to explore, extract and exploit natural resources.

(e)

Any alteration of the form in which assets are invested shall not
affect their classification as investment, provided such altered
investment is approved by the relevant Contracting Party if so
required by its laws and regulations.

the term “returns” means the amounts yielded by an investment for
a definite period, such as profit, dividends, interest, royalties or
fees.

the term “investors” with regard to either Contracting Party refers to:
{a) natural persons who

- in respect of the Kingdom of Thailand, are considered
to be nationals within the meaning of its applicable
laws; and

- in respect of the Federal Republic of Germany are
Germans within the meaning of its Basic Law;

(b) legal entities, including companies, corporations, business
associations and other organisations, with or without legal
personality, which are constituted or otherwise duly
organized under the law of that Contracting Party and have
their seat in the territory of that Contracting Party.”

“Article 2(1) to (4)

Admission, Protection and Treatment of Investments

1.

Each Contracting Party shall in its territory promote as far as
possible investments by investors of the other Contracting Party
and admit such investments in accordance with its laws and
regulations.

The Treaty shall apply only to investments that have been
specifically approved in writing by the competent authority, if so
required by the laws and regulations of that Contracting Party.

Each Contracting Party shall in its territory in any case accord such
investments by investors of the other Contracting Party and their
returns fair and equitable treatment and full protection.

Neither Contracting Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or
discriminatory measures the management, maintenance, use,
enjoyment or disposal of investments in its territory of investors of
the other Contracting Party.”

Article 4

41.

Investments by investors of either Contracting Party shall enjoy full
protection and security in the territory of the Contracting Party.

 

20

 

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 23 of 46

3.21

3.22

3.23

2. Investments by investors of either Contracting Party shall not be
expropriated, nationalized or subjected directly or indirectly to any
other measure the effects of which would be tantamount to
expropriation or nationalization in the territory of the other
Contracting Party except for the public benefit and against
compensation. Such compensation shall be equivalent to the value
of the expropriated investment immediately before the date on
which the actual or threatened expropriation, nationalization or
comparable measure has become publicly known. The
compensation shall be paid without delay and shall carry interest at
the market lending rate from the date the payment is due until the
date of actual payment; it shall be effectively realizable and freely
transferable. Appropriate provision shall be made at or prior to the
time of expropriation, nationalization or comparable measure for the
determination and payment of such compensation. The legality of
any expropriation, nationalization or comparable measure, as well
as the compensation thereof, shall, at the request of the affected
investors, be subject to review by due process of law.

Article 8

Scope of Application

This Treaty shall also apply to approved investments made prior to its
entry into force by investors of either Contracting Party in the territory of
the other Contracting Party consistent with the latter's laws.”

Article 10 of the 2002 Treaty gives the right to arbitrate for “disputes
concerning investments between a Contracting Party” (in this the
Respondent) and “an investor of the other Contracting Party’ (as the
Claimant claims to be). The Article defines the procedure for appointing the
Arbitral Tribunal. The provisions of Article 9(3)-(5) apply which deal with
disputes between the parties to the Treaty. Article 10(1) states that such
disputes should as far as possible be settled amicably between the parties in

dispute.
Preliminary documents

A note verbale dated 2 October 1997 from the German Embassy in Bangkok
proposed to the MFA that negotiations be entered into to update the 1961
Treaty. A draft of a new Treaty was attached for the purposes of discussion.
Negotiations commenced in due course and continued over the next year or

so.

The German delegation was unhappy about any Treaty requirement for
approval of investments. The MFA, in a memorandum dated 18 September
2000, stated:

21

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 24 of 46

3.24

3.25

3.26

3.27

“We feel therefore it is essential to maintain this prior approval principle
in order to ensure that the FD! flowing into Thailand will be channelled
into the most needed sectors and will assist in our efforts to achieve
early economic recovery.”

The German Embassy maintained its unhappiness with this position in a
memorandum of 23 March 2001. The Thai side maintained the position
stated in the preceding paragraph.

Agreement on a common text for a new Treaty was reached on 16 May
2002 and the Treaty was signed on 24 June 2002. Included in its provisions
was Article 2(2) quoted earlier.

Proceedings of the Committee of Investment Approval

Despite the apparently ad hoc issuing of a few CAs since 1982, on 9 June
1991, the Thai Cabinet, on the proposal of the MFA, set up a permanent
committee for approving treaty investments. It included representatives of
no fewer than 13 agencies of the Thai Government. The Committee went
through some intemal restructuring but was affirmed by the Office of the
Secretary to the Cabinet on 18 February 1997. The Committee’s mandate
was stated to determine the criteria for the grant of CAs under Treaties with
foreign countries and to “take into consideration the approval of CA as
applied by investors whose countries have investment protection Treaties
with Thailand”.

At the Committee's meeting of 15 August 2002, the following was noted in
the Minutes:

"4.2 Agencies responsible for admission, promotion and protection

Facts: Agencies responsible for admission, promotion and protection of
investments are MOC, Bol and MFA. Besides, there are other agencies
in charge of foreign investments such as Ministry of Industry taking care
of concession, Ministry of Transport taking care of infrastructure in a
field of telecommunication, or other Ministries or Departments that are
involved in the engagement of work.

 

Consideration: The authority in charge of the issuance of the license
and the approval for protection should be the same agency. At this
stage, it may be proposed that Bol, as the agency that looks after the
promotion and protection of investments that have received promotion,
be also the agency to issue CA in accordance with resolutions of the CA
committee, so as to become a one-stop service facility. As for
investments under the responsibility of other official agencies, most of
which were projects of investment in government's infrastructure, it may
be considered that licences received for the investments grant automatic

22

 

 

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 25 of 46

3.28

3.29

3.30

3.31

protection. Matters of publicity for investors’ information should also be
considered.”

The minutes of this 15 August 2002 meeting record that this Committee had
met three times — in 1972, 1994 and 1990. This cannot be strictly correct —
certainly in respect of meetings in 1972 and 1990. The Committee was not
set up until 1991.

Reaching agreement on the correct translation of part of the Minutes of this
meeting occupied some time at the hearing before the Tribunal. After
Professor Sompong, Dr Varachai and Mr Bunnag had conferred, the
following was the agreed translation of a further important part of these

minutes:

“At the first CA Committee meeting in 1972, criteria were set for the
granting of a CA to the effect that it must be an industrial enterprise that
has been given a Bol Certificate of Promotion under the Investment
Protection Act. Those that have not been given such Certificates of
Promotion, or which have previously been given the licence documents
for their investment from relevant authorities could be given a CA. The
criteria for granting of CA were set as earlier proposed by the Ministry as
follows.”

The minutes note that Thailand had 34 investment, promotion and protection
treaties, all of which contained a requirement for CA approval. A later
minute from the same meeting, which was also the subject of an agreed

translation, stated:

“It should be provided that the agency that issues licences and that
which issues Certificates of Admission for protection in accordance with
the Treaty are at the same place. At this stage, it may be proposed that
Bol is the agency that looks after the promotion and protection of
investments that have received promotion, be also at the agency to
issue CA in accordance with the resolutions of the CA Committee, so as
to become a one-stop service facility. As for investments under the
responsibility of other official agencies, most of which were projects of
investments in government's infrastructure, it may be considered that
licences received for the investments grant automatic protection in
accordance with the Treaty. Matters of publicity for investors information
should also be considered.”

A later meeting of the same Committee on 28 August 2002, again attended
by representatives of numerous government agencies, saw the Chairman
informing the meeting that, in the past, investment protection had been given
to foreign direct investments which were high-end value and long-term but
not to portfolios on the Stock Exchange.

23

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 26 of 46

3.32

3.33

3.34

3.35

On 28 August 2002, the minutes of the same Committee record: “The Bol’s
view on investment having been granted, the Bol certificate should be an

approved investment’.

A further meeting of the Committee on 7 February 2003, recorded that 18
applicants for CAs had come from Germany, 3 from the Netherlands and 1
from Taiwan. The meeting concluded with the secretary being asked to draft
criteria for the granting of CAs for the next meeting as a proposal to the
Cabinet. In the meantime, on 15 May 2003, CAs had been issued to two
subsidiaries of Daimler Chrysler AG. Their relevant applications had been
discussed at various meetings of this Committee.

Eventually, on 22 October 2003, there was an official announcement by the
Thai Goverment recording Cabinet approval of future policy for the issue of
CAs under Treaties. This announcement provided, in effect, that:

(a) investments that had been granted licences by the Minister of
Commerce or the Director-General of the Department of Business

Development, or

(b) investments that had received a Certificate of Promotion from the ol,

or
(c) investments under a government concession

would all be entitled to protection under all investment treaties, (not just the
Treaty with Germany). A Certificate of Promotion from the Bol and a
contract for a government concession were to be construed as a Certificate
of Approval (“CAP”) for the investment. Such investment was to be granted
protection under the agreement on the promotion and protection of
investments between the Government of the Kingdom of Thailand and the
government of the country of the foreign investor.

This announcement was intended to give guidelines for future investors.
Several agencies of the Thai Government clearly were of the view at the
meeting that enterprises with a Bol did not need an extra document of

approval before the investor became entitled to Treaty protection.

24

 

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 27 of 46

41

4.2

4.3

DOES THE CLAIMANT HAVE AN APPROVED INVESTMENT FOR THE
PURPOSES OF ARTICLE 8 OF THE 2002 TREATY?

The Tribunal must first decide whether the Claimant is covered by Article 8
of the 2002 Treaty which applies provisions of that Treaty to “approved
investments” made prior to its entry into force by investors of either
Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party consistent
with the latter's laws. Specifically, was it necessary for the Claimant to have
obtained a special CA, in addition to the various approvals DMT obtained
from various departments of the Thai Government to build the tollway and
the very concession it received from the Thai Government to build and
operate the tollway? Unless the Claimant is covered by Article 8, it cannot

maintain its claim for relief in this arbitration.

Essentially, the contention of the Respondent is that neither the various
approvals nor the concession itself constituted sufficient compliance with the
requirements of Article 1 of the 1961 Treaty and its Protocol for specific
approval of its investment and that a further CA was required. In addition,
the Respondent submitted that the Claimant's shareholding did not amount
to an investment within the meaning of Article 8 of the 1961 Treaty. This
argument will be dealt with separately below. The contention of the Claimant
is that there was no CA required and that the various grants of approvals
and the grant of the concession for the tollway itself were adequate
compliance with those requirements of the 1961 Treaty for the obtaining of
approval for the investment. The Respondent's further contention - that the
Claimant was not an ‘investor’ under the 2002 Treaty - will be considered

later.
Expert testimony

Each side called an Expert to discuss the meaning of the various terms in
the Treaties and to comment on the travaux préparatoires and the
bureaucratic processes. The Claimant called Professor Sompong
Sucharitkul who has enjoyed a distinguished academic, legal, diplomatic and
arbitral career extending over 50 years. He has served on various ICSID
and ASEAN arbitral tribunals and annulment committees and also as the
United Nations Compensation Commission to consider claims arising from
the occupation of Kuwait. He occupies a distinguished Chair of International

25

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 28 of 46

44

4.5

Comparative Law at the Golden Gate University School of Law, San
Francisco. In the course of his duties, he had been present at some of the
meetings discussed when reviewing the bureaucratic background. He had

many years’ service in the MFA.

Professor Sompong’s written briefs (and his reply to the Respondent's
Expert) drew widely and extensively from his many fields of experience and

expertise. His essential opinion was that:

(a) the shares held by the Claimant in the DMT came within the meaning
of ‘investment’ under the 1961 Treaty;

(b) this ‘investment’ had been approved by the Respondent to the extent
required by the 1961 Treaty;

(c) because of this being an ‘approved investment’ under the 1961 Treaty,
Article 8 of the 2002 Treaty applied to the Claimant's investment in the
DMT

(d) the Claimant is, accordingly, entitled to claim directly against the
Respondent under the 2002 Treaty and is an ‘investor’ within the

meaning of that Treaty.

(e) Alternatively, the Respondent is estopped by the intemational doctrine
of preclusion (or estoppel) from deviating from the approvals given to
the Claimant by its various agencies and asserting that the Claimant
does not have the approval of its investment required by the Treaties.

(f) The fact that the Claimant's investment is a 9.87% shareholding in
DMT does not exclude treaty protection of that investment.

(g) The Claimant as the legal successor to the rights of Dywidag, can

maintain the claim in its own name.

The Respondent called Dr Virachai Plasai, presently the Director-General of
the Department of International Economic Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Thailand. He has been employed by the FA for 20 years, during which time
he has worked mostly at the Department of Treaties & Legal Affairs. He
transferred to the Department of International Economic Affairs within the
MFA three years ago. Since then, he has been in charge of Investment

26

 

 

 

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 29 of 46

46

47

4.8

4.9

4.10

Treaty negotiations. He has served as a panelist in WTO disputes but not

any involving Thailand.

Dr Virachai opined that, based on his knowledge of international investment
law and Thai approval regimes, the Claimant was not entitled to make any
claim under the 1961 Treaty. That Treaty did not provide for any
investor/state dispute settlement mechanism. In any case, the Claimant's
“investment” was not an “approved investment” under that Treaty and,
therefore the Claimant was unable to benefit from Article 8 of the 2002
Treaty.

He claimed that a “two-step” approach to investment protection was required
by the 1961 Treaty: namely, the acquiring and operating the tollway
concession, which needed both the granting of a concession and approvals
from various agencies along the way plus a separate and specific approval
of the investment for treaty protection purposes from the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. He referred to the various CAs issued since 1972 canvassed at the
hearing, which have been summarised earlier. He was not able to say
whether there had been any more than eight CAs issued to German
investors, despite a huge amount of German investment in Thailand over the
period. The Tribunal notes the reference to 18 CAs granted to German
applicants referred to in paragraph 3.33 above. There was no evidence
given of any more than 8 CAs having been issued.

Each Expert was cross-examined for the better part of a day. The Tribunal
found some of the evidence of these experts of limited value. Some of what
they had to say on the subject of interpretation of treaty terms was really a
matter for submission since they were opining on the very points of
interpretation on which the Tribunal has to make a ruling. However, much of

their evidence has been helpful to the Tribunal.

The Tribunal generally preferred the evidence of Professor Sompong where
it took issue with that of Dr Virachai. One difficulty that the Tribunal found in
Dr Virachai’s evidence was his reluctance to accept that the concept of a
separate CA could have existed before the 1961 Treaty came into force.

The Tribunal is guided in its consideration of interpretation issues by the

broad proposition of Professor Sompong that the approval requirement

27

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 30 of 46

4.11

4.12

4.13

4.14

4.15

 

should be seen as an incentive, not an obstacle, to foreign investment. This
view follows naturally from the expressions in the identical Preambles to
both Treaties quoted earlier. The purpose of both Treaties was to create
favourable conditions for investors in order to stimulate business initiative

and increase prosperity.

Professor Sompong also made the commonsense point that it would be
absurd for any Government to solicit investment and participation by
foreigners in a government project — particularly one like the tollway — and
then subsequently to deny treaty protection to the foreign investors. Such
behaviour, in his view, would cause the country to lose credibility in the
money market and would discourage foreign investment. He particularly
espoused this view for a project as vast and as important to the Thai nation

as the Don Muang tollway.

The Tribunal considers that the above general statements set the
background for consideration of the interpretation issues.

The Tribunal’s view

The wording of Article 8 of the 1961 Treaty is very wide. The term
“investment” shall comprise “every kind of asset and more particularly,
though not exclusively... (b) shares or other kinds of interest in companies,

and (e) business concessions under public law”.

The primary mode for the interpretation of treaties, as indeed of any other
form of documentation, is a consideration of the plain wording. It is not
necessary to revert to secondary evidence if the primary interpretation
produces a clear result. One can have resort to secondary modes of

interpretation as a ‘back-up’ to the primary interpretation.

Professor Sompong’s view was that the Dywidag shareholding in DMT came
within both Article 8(1)(b) and (e) of the 1961 Treaty. The Tribunal agrees.
Shares held by Dywidag in the DMT company clearly come within the term
“investment”. The shares are owned by a national of the Federal Republic
of Germany in respect of a particular project (see Article 8(3)(a)). Article
8(1)(b) refers to shares in companies. The Claimant has also an indirect
interest as a shareholder in the concessionaire in a “business concession
under public law” (see Article 8(1)(e)).

28

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 31 of 46

4.17

4.18

4.19

4.20

The object of the various approvals received by DMT, and through DMT its
shareholders, was the tollway project. That fact that the approval was given
for the project does not prevent a shareholding in the company responsible
for the approved project from being covered by the broad definition of
‘investment’. It is difficult to see how else a foreign investor might obtain an
interest in a concession other than as a shareholder in the concessionaire

company.

In interpreting this and other Articles in the 1961 Treaty, the Tribunal reverts
to its Preamble which emphasises the desire to create a favourable
condition for investment by nationals of Germany and Thailand and a
recognition that a contractual protection of such interests is apt to stimulate
private business initiative and to increase the prosperity of both nations.
This is exactly what happened. Clearly, designing, financing, building and
operating a tollway on such a grand scale was a private business initiative
vastly beneficial for the Kingdom of Thailand which must have contributed to
the Kingdom's prosperity. These general statements in the Preamble
flavour the interpretation of the Treaty, which the Tribunal has reached on
this point.

The Tribunal now considers the meaning of the word “approved” in Article 8
of the 2002 Treaty which relates to approvals under the 1961 Treaty.

The Tribunal considers that this question also can be resolved from an
interpretation of the plain wording of the Treaty itself, bearing in mind the
remedial considerations encouraged by the broad statements in the
Preamble already mentioned. Article 1(1) of the 1961 Treaty requires each
Contracting Party to endeavour to admit in its territory in accordance with its
legislation, the investment of capital by nationals of companies of the other
Contracting Party to promote such investments as far as possible and to
give sympathetic consideration to the granting of any relevant permits
required. The Tribunal notes that the granting of the concession and the
permits and approvals given were all in accordance with various pieces of

Thai legislation.

The Protocols to Article 1 are to be regarded as an integral part of the Treaty
but, nevertheless, cannot undermine the broad effect of Article 1(1) which
underlines the “sympathetic consideration” to be given to the granting of

29

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 32 of 46

4.21

4.22

4.23

4.24

permits and the promotion of investment. The Protocols must be read in the
light of Thailand wanting to stimulate investment in the knowledge that
foreign investors will the more readily invest if they know they will have

investment Treaty protection.

The Claimant relied on Part 1(a) of the Protocol to Article 1 of the 1961
Treaty and the Respondent on Part 1(b). These parts of the Protocol must
be construed together and cannot be isolated from the context of their
relationship with Article 1.

There can be little doubt that the concession for and construction of the
tollway was made in accordance with Thai legislation and regulations and
with due regard to Thai policies and published plans as mandated by Part
1(a) of the Protocol. This was a project which the Thai Government needed
urgently to relieve congestion on the nation’s busiest highway and to
facilitate access to the then international airport for Bangkok. The Tribunal
notes as crucial! to the interpretation point, the second sentence of Part 1(a)
of the Protocol, viz: “When a permit is issued, the respective investment
enjoys full protection of the Treaty’. Such words militate against an investor

having to undergo another exercise seeking a separate approval.

The argument of the Respondent is that Part 1(b) of the Protocol requires a
separate “certificate of admission” by the appropriate authority of the
Kingdom “in accordance with legislation and administrative practice as an
“approved project”. Under this argument, the “permit” under Part 1(a) when
issued does not confer “full protection of the Treaty”, despite the wording of
Part 1(a) noted in the preceding paragraph.

This insistence on a separate certificate of admission is at variance with the
proper interpretation of Part 1(a) of the Protocol, in the Tribunal’s view. No
legislation existed about any specific certificate of admission. There was
legislation, both about granting a concession and approving the investment
by the Bol. The Thai administrative practice was, at best, for the
Respondent, uncertain and equivocal, certainly until the 2003
announcement. The Bol approval process comes within the parameters of
Article 1(b) of the Protocol as a “certificate of admission” by the “appropriate
authority in accordance with its legislation and administrative practice”.

30

 

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 33 of 46

4.25

4.26

4.27

4.28

Dr Virachai relied exclusively on Part 1(b) in support of the two-step
approval process. The Tribunal considers that the expression “Certificate of
Admission” in Part 1(b) could just as easily cover the approvals received by
DMT from both the Cabinet and the DoH as could a separate CA. The
expression in Part 1(b) must refer to the same thing as that in Part 1(a). The
Thai word used for “permit” in Part 1(a) is the same word as is used in Part
1(b) for “certificate”. The English language text is the authoritative one. The
English version uses different words to describe what is essentially the same

concept.

The two parts of the Protocol to Article 1 cannot be read as setting up
inconsistent regimes. It is quite appropriate, on a proper reading of both
parts of the Protocol and Article 1 as a whole to find, as the Tribunal does,
that they refer to the same thing, namely the various approvals obtained by
DMT for the tollway concession. Article 1(1) requires “sympathetic
consideration to the granting of any relevant permits required”. It is hard to
see a two-step approval process as being “sympathetic consideration” —
particularly when the investor concerned has gone through an elaborate
process of tendering for and receiving a concession and then receiving
approvals for the work which was going to bestow great benefit on the

nation.

Article 9 of the 1961 Treaty, which applies that Treaty to “approved
investments” made prior to its entry into force, but not earlier than 26
October 1960, is another indication that the concept of approval can be tied
to something other than a certificate of approval specifically given for the
purposes of protection under the Treaty. The 1961 Treaty was the
Respondent's first-ever Bilateral Investment Treaty. It came into force in
April 1965. There could have been no investments approved under some
kind of “second step” process for the purpose of treaty protection prior to its
coming into force. Yet the Treaty expressly contemplates investments being
approved between October 1960 and April 1965. How else could they have
been approved other than through the Bol certificate process?

The Tribunal notes that Dr Virachai’s admitted, in cross-examination, that he
did not know, nor had he been able to find, when a system of approval of
Treaty protection began. There was no permanent body for considering CA

31

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 34 of 46

4.29

4.30

4.31

4.32

applications until 1991, although there had been an ad hoc Committee to
consider the Schering application in 1972.

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal cannot accept the argument of the
Respondent that Part 1(b) of the Protocol to Article 1 “carves out” an
exception to the general rule set forth in Part 1(a). It also follows, from the
temporal limitation of the Treaty’s application to pre-existing investments,
that the concept of approval must have existed before the Treaty’s entry into
force. On this point, Dr Virachai in cross-examination stated that there was
no obligation for an investor to apply for protection at the time of investment.
Yet to have done otherwise would defy common sense. One contemplates
that an investor would want to have the assurance of Investment Treaty
protection before expending large amounts of money on a development
project. The Tribunal notes that in the instant case Dywidag was advised by
an authoritative source (Treuebeit) that a separate CA was not required if

there was a Bol approval.

Because the point was thoroughly argued and, in case the Tribunal is wrong
in its assessment of the plain meaning of the words of the Treaty, the
Tribunal goes on to have recourse to secondary means of interpretation,
including preparatory works and the circumstances of the Treaty’s

conclusion.

On deciding what form “approval” under the 1961 Treaty might take, one
notes that there was no legislation designating the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
as the appropriate body, although it issued CAs from 1972, when the first
was issued to Schering. The documentation also shows that only eight CAs
had been issued to German investors until 2003 despite the reference to 18
referred to in paragraph 3.33. No others were found and none was ever
issued to a German investor holding a Bol certificate. The correspondence
from important quasi-governmental German organisations indicates their
view that a specific CA was not necessary for those cases when a Bol
approval had been granted. There was no letter from the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs rejecting this view as might have been expected, had the German

organisations been incorrect in their assumptions.

Dr Virachai, acknowledged in cross-examination that approval under the IPA
rather raised an expectation of protection under the Treaty. The German

32

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 35 of 46

4.33

4.34

delegation concerned with negotiating the 1961 Treaty had explained to it,
by the Thai delegation, the screening process of the Bol. From a
consideration of numerous minutes of various governmental committees, the
Tribunal sees a problem of the left hand not seeming to know what the right
hand was doing in various manifestations of government. This phenomenon
is exemplified in those records of meetings when conflicting views of what
was needed for a CA were articulated by public servants. The consequence
of this equivocation and confusion was correctly characterised by Professor
Sompong in his evidence thus: “/f any of the agencies of a state certify that
a foreign investment is approved or is admitted or is legal, then we as a host

government have to provide necessary protection under international law.”

The Respondent relies on the eight CAs that were granted to German
investors from 1972 onwards until the 2003 announcement as evidence that
a separate CA was required in all cases — even for those investments with a
Bol approval. This submission is made notwithstanding the fact that none of
the eight with CAs had or needed Bol approval.

The 1972 application by Schering was considered by a committee of 12
representing eight different governmental bodies or departments. The
minutes produced of the meeting did not refer to any two-step process.
Schering was not the holder of a Bol approval. At the relevant meeting, a
representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs gave his view as recorded in
paragraph 3.12 above.

The DEG/Treuarbeit letters emanated from German companies with links to
the German Government. These entities specialised in investments and
projects within certain developmental, environmental and social standards.
For none of the DEG-backed projects had there been any preceding Bol
approval. The letters sought only investment approval pursuant to Part 1(b)
of the Protocol to the 1961 Treaty. Because other investments covered by
that Treaty had been approved by the Bol, but Bangkok Ranch was not a
Bol-approved project, a CA was sought. As noted earlier, there was no
letter from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs challenging DEG’s view of the
situation. This understanding was also communicated directly to Dywidag
by Treuarbeit prior to its making any investment in the tollway. Dywidag was
told that either Bol status or a letter of admission was an essential

requirement for treaty protection. DMT received Bol approval. This letter to

33

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 36 of 46

4.36

4.37

4.39

Dywidag preceded the application to and approval by the Cabinet of the
tollway project and the concession.

Professor Sompong stated, in evidence, that the agreed translations noted
at paras 3.29 and 3.30 supported the view that, prior to the 2003
announcement, the Bol had been the agency looking after the promotion
and protection of investments. Also, the Claimant’s investment in a
government concession meant that treaty protection was built in
automatically. The very award of a concession must include approval. The
decision in 2003 that the Bol should become a “one-stop shop”, not only for
its statutory functions under the IPA but for issuing CAs as well, confirmed,
in his view, the notion that the Bol had been the approval authority under the
1961 Treaty.

Professor Sompong concluded that it would be illogical to say that the
Government had not approved this tollway project, which had been
approved by several agencies, including the Cabinet. It was obviously a

Government project of high importance.

One can well understand a reluctance to grant CAs for the financing of
private projects by way of loan from a German investor. The financing of a
huge concession of vital importance to the nation such as the tollway in
question is quite a different matter. One would have thought that, given the
amount of government involvement in the tollway construction by way of
both encouragement and approvals, that this was the epitome of a project

which should receive the benefit of an investment treaty.

The minutes of the meetings of the Committee for Investment Approvals
show concern by foreign governments (notably Germany) about the
confusion created by the provision in investment treaties for CAs.
Representatives of the Respondent, in response to questions from a
German Government representative, said that a CA could amount to an
approval for the purposes of the 1961 Treaty, meaning that it was possible
to receive an approval for the purposes of the Treaty by way of a separate

CA, even for a project without Bo! approval.

34

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 37 of 46

4.40

4.41

4.42

4.43

5.1

In this context, the quotation from the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal in an
ASEAN arbitral decision in Yuang Chi Oo Trading v. Myanmar (2003) 8
ICSID Reports 432 is pertinent.

“If Myanmar had wished to draw a distinction between an approval for

the purposes of the 1987 ASEAN agreement and approval for the

purposes of its internal law, it should have made it clear to potential

investors that both procedures co-existed and further how an
application for treaty protection could be made.”

Although the facts in the Myanmar case were rather different, the dictum can
be applied to the instant facts. The Thai Government should have drawn to
the attention of Dywidag, and indeed DEG and Treuarbeit, the distinction
between a Bol and its cognate approvals and a CA. It could easily have
rejected the assumptions of DEG and Treuarbeit but there is no evidence of

its having done so.

In the Tribunal’s view, both the clear meaning of the Treaty and the available
secondary evidence establish the same result, namely that there was no
“two-step” process for obtaining a CA under the 1961 Treaty in cases where

a Bol Certificate of Investment had been obtained.

This view accords with common sense, particularly when one considers the
huge nature of the concession for the tollway being built by DMT for the
Respondent. It encouraged and permitted its construction and operation.
The project clearly was an important piece of infrastructure for the country.
To hold that the lack of a separate ad hoc authorisation deprived the
Claimant of whatever protection the Treaty afforded to the Claimant runs
contrary to common sense and justice. The Tribunal is pleased that a clear
interpretation of the Treaty itself, supported by the documentation and the
subsequent conduct of the Respondent, makes this conclusion possible.

OBJECT OF INVESTMENT APPROVAL

The Respondent further submitted that, even if there were an approval in
terms of the 1961 Treaty of the DMT “project”, nevertheless, the
shareholding of the Claimant's predecessor, Dywidag, was not an
“investment” in terms of Article 8. This was an additional argument to the
one which postulated that no proper approval had ever been given by way of
a special CA. The Respondent contends that the approval under the 1961

35

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 38 of 46

5.2

5.3

54

5.5

 

Treaty, if any, extended only to the building of the highway and not to the
investment made by Dywidag in DMT.

The Claimant’s Request for Arbitration says that its investment in the tollway
was through the purchase of shares in the concession company, DMT, by its
predecessor, Dywidag. The 1961 Treaty distinguished between shares in a
company and business concessions under public law as different forms of
investment. The Respondent submits that any approval under the 1961
Treaty was of the tollway project. Whereas, under the 2002 Treaty, the
approval must relate to the shareholding. The Claimant alleges that
“approved investment” within the meaning of Article 8 of the 2002 Treaty
should be understood to mean “investment” under the 2002 Treaty made in
an approved project under the 1961 Treaty.

The Respondent submits that the two treaties are separate and distinct and
that, upon the 2002 Treaty’s entry into force, the 1961 Treaty was
terminated. (See Article 11(2) of the 2002 Treaty.) This Treaty created two
separate treaty regimes, there being no indication that the later treaty was
intended to amend the earlier treaty. Therefore, the 2002 Treaty should be
assessed on its own terms. The Respondent refers to a dictum in the
Myanmar case which pointed out that inconsistencies can arise between

successive treaties relating to the same subject-matter.

Under this argument, there was nothing in the 2002 Treaty to contain a
single reference to a project approved other than under its terms and
nothing in the preparatory documents to assert that the parties intended the
phrase “Approved Investment” under the 2002 Treaty to have the same
meaning as “investment in an approved project” in the 1961 Treaty.
Consequently, approval under the 1961 Treaty is not necessarily approval
for the purposes of the 2002 Treaty.

The Respondent submits that Part 1(b) of the Protocol to Article 1 of the
1961 Treaty gave the Thai Government a discretion to grant approval to an
“Investment made in projects classified in the certificate of admission” in
accordance with the Kingdom of Thailand's “legislation and administrative
practice”. Included in the term “administrative practice” is a Cabinet
resolution. By contrast, there is nothing defined under Article 8 of the 2002
Treaty to limit the Respondent's discretion to grant approval for investments

36

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 39 of 46

5.6

5.7

5.8

5.9

5.10

5.11

made prior to the Treaty’s entry into force but where investments must be

made “consistent with... laws and regulations”.

Moreover, the Respondent submits that, if there is a change of investment,
the 2002 Treaty requires a fresh approval. Part of Article 1 thereof reads:

“Any alteration of the form in which assets are invested shall not affect
their classification as investment, provided such altered investment is
approved by the relevant Contracting Party so required by its laws and
regulations.”

Under this submission, the Claimant’s investment changed from a direct
investment to an indirect one as part of the renegotiation of the concession
and refinancing of the DMT in 1996/7. This submission assumes that a
shareholding of under 10% is to be categorised as an “indirect” investment.
Reference was made to some OECD guidelines which fixed 10 % as a

benchmark.

The Respondent further submits that Thai legislation concerning
concessions and promotional privileges does not refer to the Treaty
protection approval nor does it confer rights upon equity shareholders in a

concession company.

In broad terms, this argument means that the Tribunal must determine
whether there is a distinction between the protection offered to investors by
the 1961 Treaty as distinct from that offered by the 2002 Treaty.

Professor Sompong said in evidence and the Tribunal accepts:

“| cannot presume that the Thai Government would want to try to alter
the rights of foreign investors... Nor is it intended by treaties to take
away the rights already acquired.”

Clearly, Article 8 of the 2002 Treaty is aimed at protecting investments
approved under the pre-existing regime. Applying a liberal interpretation of
the aims of the Treaty as stated in the Preamble, the Tribunal agrees with
Professor Sompong. It would be inconceivable that rights acquired by an
investor under an earlier treaty with the same aims which had lasted for 40
years should be removed through some drafting sleight-of-hand. The
objects of both Treaties as expressed in their preambles is the same.
Expressed broadly, those objects are the encouragement of foreign
investors and treaty protection. The Tribunal cannot see as valid a

37

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 40 of 46

5.12

5.13

5.14

difference in the two Treaties — one protecting “investments” and the other
“investors” — based on a change in economic philosophy and direction over
a 40 year period. The plain interpretation of the documents precludes such

a strained meaning.

The 2002 Treaty definition of “investments” is not hugely different from that
in the 1961 Treaty. Other than to prescribe nationality and legal form, there
is no detailed definition of “investor”. Presumably, an “investor” under the
2002 Treaty is one of the appropriate nationality who has an “investment” as
defined.

The Tribunal has difficulty in accepting the Respondent's argument. In the

Tribunal’s view:

(a) the Claimant is an “investor” under the 2002 Treaty because it had an
“approved investment” under the 1961 Treaty;

(b) there is no difference between the nature of the Claimant’s
“investment'’ or its status as an “investor” under either Treaty;

(c) the Claimant is entitled as an “investor” under the 2002 Treaty to

whatever benefits given to it by that Treaty.

There is nothing in the Treaty which imposes an arbitrary cap of a minimum
shareholding required for investment treaty protection. Nor is there any
warrant for categorising the Claimant’s 9.87% as an “indirect” investment. A
10% shareholding in a project the size of the tollway may well be a very
large investment. Indeed, the investment only came below 10% after there
had been a large increase of capital, with the Respondent taking an equity
holding. That fact did not make the quantum of the Claimant’s investment
any less. A 10% investment in the financing of a small enterprise might be a
minor investment such as not to warrant treaty protection under some de
minimis principle. There is nothing in either Treaty to so limit an investment.
It would have been easy enough for such a limitation to have been included.
ASEAN guidelines cited by the Respondent have no persuasive quality
when interpreting this Treaty. Neither have the references to a 10 %
threshold expressed at certain meetings of government officials any

relevance.

38

 

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 41 of 46

5.15

5.16

6.1

6.2

6.3

Professor Sompong’s evidence confirms that the discussion at some of the
meetings of a 10% cut-off point had nothing to do with investments such as
a government infrastructure project like the tollway. The officials were more
concerned about giving protection to non-political commercial risks such as

secondary investments in the stock-market.

The Tribunal also rejects, as without substance, the Respondent’s
submission that the reduction of the Claimant's shareholding to 9.87% was a
change in the form of the investment. There was no change of form. The
investment was, as before, a holding of shares. Not debentures, secured

notes or anything other form of investment in a company, but shares.

IS THE CLAIMANT AN INVESTOR FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE 2002
TREATY — ABSORPTION OF DYWIDAG

The Tribunal considers whether the merger by absorption of Dywidag into
the Claimant, effective at 16 August 2001, means that the Claimant can
maintain its claim under the 2002 Treaty. Under Article 20 of the German
Transformation Act, Dywidag merged by absorption into Walter Bau, which
became registered as the shareholder of the shares in DMT on 8 December
2004, before the filing of the Request for Arbitration. Both Dywidag and the
Claimant were German, so there was no change in the nationality of the
juristic entity owning the shares. Dywidag ceased to exist legally without
having to be wound-up.

Under the laws of both Germany and Thailand, the legal succession of the
Claimant's to Dywidag’s rights and obligations, meant that that Dywidag’s
rights and obligations were assumed by the Claimant as if it were Dywidag.
Because of this legal succession, the Claimant is entitled to receive the

benefit of Dywidag’s investment in DMT.

The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Professor Sompong that Thai law has
a similar principle of universal succession, as does the German legal
system, as can be deduced fromthe clear wording of the German statute.
The Respondent was well aware of what had happened. It approved the
registration of the Claimant, Walter Bau, as an “investor” by a letter from the
Ministry of Finance of 7 July 2003. This approval was conditional on a
number of matters which were all satisfied. The conditions were satisfied

39

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 42 of 46

6.4

6.5

7.4

7.2

7.3

7.4

8.1

and no further approval was required of the Ministry of Finance, apart from

being advised.

There is nothing to prevent the acquisition by merger of the shares of an
investor in an “approved investment” under either Treaty provided that the

investor, after the merger, is still a German national.

Accordingly, the various objections to jurisdiction articulated by the
Respondent at this hearing are not accepted by the Tribunal.

ESTOPPEL / PRECLUSION

The Tribunal has considered evidence and argument on whether, assuming
contrary to the Tribunal’s view, that there was a requirement for a separate
CA for the tollway project over and above the various approvals given by
organs of the Thai Government, the Respondent is estopped from asserting
this requirement. Professor Sompong called the Respondent's conduct
discussed earlier an example of the international law of preclusion or

estoppel in common law.

The Tribunal is attracted to the Claimant's argument that, cumulatively, the
grant of the concession, the various approvals and the equivocal stances
taken by various arms of the Thai Government, operated to prevent the
Respondent from asserting any requirement for a CA and that the Claimant
thereafter acted to its detriment by not applying for one.

This argument, however, does rather depend on evidence — particularly

evidence of detriment.

Accordingly, the Tribunal declines to consider this point at the jurisdictional
stage. It can be reserved for evidence and argument at the substantive

hearing.
ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The questions posed for the Tribunal will, accordingly, be answered as

follows:

(a) Do the treaties require that a German investment into Thailand be

approved as a precondition for treaty protection?

40

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 43 of 46

(b)

The 1961 Treaty reserved to each Contracting Party the freedom
whether or not to admit an investment from a national of the other in
accordance with its legislation and statutory regulations and with due
regard to its policies and published plans.

In the case of investment in the territory of the Respondent, the term
“investment” for the purpose of the Treaty is defined as one admitted
for making in a project “approved” in accordance with the
Respondent's legislation and administrative practice. Once admitted,
the investment enjoys the full protection of the Treaty. The existence

of such approval is therefore conclusive evidence of protection.

The 2002 BIT requires approval only to the extent that an investment
is required to be specifically approved in writing by the laws and
regulations of the Contracting Party. Irrespective of that, it applies to
“approved investments” made before its entry into force.

If so, and without limiting the scope of this question:
(i) What form must that approval take?

Approval of an investment includes:

e BOI Approval

* grant of a concession or other government project

° CA

In the case of a goverment project, approval is inherent and any
form of specific approval is ratione cessante.

(ii) What is the object of the approval?

The object of approval is the project or activity in which the foreign

national’s investment is made.

Are there different approval requirements under the treaties?

(ii

No, the 2002 Treaty applies to approved investments made prior
to its entry into force and thus by definition must be interpreted by
renvoi to the 1961 Treaty. to the extent that Article 8 2002 Treaty

41

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 44 of 46

does not apply, Article 2(2) is similar in all material respects to
Article 1 / Protocol 1 1961 Treaty.

Has the Claimant satisfied the approval requirement(s) under

2

the treaties?
Yes, approval was given by reason of:
¢ The fact that this was a Government project.

* The approval of the grant of the Concession by the
Respondent's Council of Ministers.

e The grant of the Concession by the Department of
Highways with the approval of the Council of Ministers
following scrutiny of the agreement by the Attorney-

General's Office.

e The approval of the project itself for promotional
privileges by the Council of Ministers.

« The approval of the amendments of the Concession to

encompass the Northern Extension.

e The specific grants of promotional privileges to DMT by

the Board of Investment.

e Entry into the Share Purchase Agreement of 17 May
1997 by the Respondent directly with the Claimant.

(c) ff the answer to Issue b(iv) is no, is the Respondent estopped or
precluded from arguing (within the meaning of {| 60 of Professor
Sucharitkul’s Witness Statement) that the Claimant has not?

Not applicable.

(d) /s the Claimant entitled to bring this claim in arbitration in light of the
“merger by absorption” of Dyckerhoff & Widmann Aktiengeselischaft
into Walter Bau effective 16 August 2001?”

Yes.

42

 

   

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 45 of 46

9

9.1

9.2

9.3

AWARD

The Tribunal having carefully considered the documentary evidence and the
written and oral submissions of the parties and given due weight thereto,
and rejecting all submissions to the contrary, hereby makes issues and
publishes this Award and FINDS, AWARDS, AND DECLARES AS
FOLLOWS:

(a) The Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider the Claimant's claim on the
merits, subject to its considering at the substantive hearing any further
jurisdictional arguments not already canvassed at the hearing in Hong
Kong on 31 July / 1 August, 2007.

(b) The hearing of the Claimant's claim on the merits, plus the
jurisdictional arguments referred to in (a) above, will take place in 2008
at a time and place to be fixed by the Tribunal.

(c) The questions posed for the Tribunal are answered as in para 8.1

above.

(d) The costs of the jurisdictional hearing are reserved for determination
by the Tribunal if and when it considers a ruling on the costs of the

substantive hearing.

The Respondent's claim for security for costs now needs to be ruled upon by
the Tribunal. The Claimant is to supply the information mentioned in para
1.30 hereof.

The Terms of Reference will need to be altered — particularly on the question
of the remuneration on the Tribunal, consequent upon the replacement of Dr
Suvarn by Mr Bunnag and the cancellation of the hearing in Kuala Lumpur.

43

 

Case 1:10-cv-02729-RJH Document 7-1 Filed 08/17/10 Page 46 of 46

Date at Geneva, Switzerland, Seat of the Arbitration
this sf day of October 2007

barn _

Hon. Sir lan Barker
Chair

verve Le cee Dagrarth tong g

Hon. Marc Lalonde P.C., O.C., Q.C. Mr/Jayavadh Bunnag._7

 

