PUBLIC DOCUMENT

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER ELEVEN
OF THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT AND THE 1976 UNCITRAL
ARBITRATION RULES

between

WESTMORELAND MINING HOLDINGS LLC

Claimant

and

GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

Respondent

(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 3

DECISION ON BIFURCATION

 

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

Ms. Juliet Blanch (Presiding Arbitrator)
Mr. James Hosking
Professor Zachary Douglas QC

Secretary of the Tribunal

Dr. Veronica Lavista

20 October 2020

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

Procedural Order No. 3

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
L PROCEDURAL HISTORY. -2-
Il. THE DISPUTING PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS ......ccccee cee ceceeeees estes neeeeeeeeeeneieee -4-
A. The Respondent’s Position .........ccccseceseesessesesseseseeesseesseeseesssetseetsesiseesseeeets -4-

i. Was the Claimant a Protected Investor at the time of the alleged breaches
as required by NAFTA Articles 1116(1) and 1117(1)?......0.....

ii. The Claimant has not made out a prima facie damages claim under
NAFTA Articles 1116(1) and 1117(1)

iii. Did the challenged measures “relate to” the Claimant or its investment as
required by NAFTA Article 1101(1)? oo. eee neeeee eet teteeeeeeeees -7T-

iv. Time limits under NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2).
v. Inadmissibility due to NAFTA Article 1108(7)(b)..

B. The Claimant’s Position

 

 

 

 

 

i. The temporal objection

 

 

ii. Time limits under NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2)..... eee -1l-

iii. Inadmissibility due to NAFTA Article 1108(7)(D)........cesceseeseesseseeeeeseeeee -12-

C. The Respondent’s Reply -13-

D. The Claimant’s Rebuttal -13-

TH. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS ...0..c.cccccessecececseesessneseeeeieeseeseeseesessnessssenseneeneenees -13-
IV. DECISION - 18-

 

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

Procedural Order No. 3

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 24 July 2020, the Respondent filed Canada’s Request for Bifurcation together with
Exhibits R-001, R-002 and R-029 and Legal Authorities RLA-002 to RLA-035
(“Bifurcation Application’).

On 14 August 2020, the Claimant submitted Claimant’s Response to Canada’s Request
for Bifurcation together with Exhibits C-019, C-023, C-026 and C-027, Legal
Authorities CLA-001 to CLA-007, and certain Legal Authorities submitted by the
Respondent (“Claimant’s Opposition’).

On 28 August 2020, the Respondent filed Canada’s Reply to the Claimant’s Response
regarding Bifurcation together with Exhibit R-041 and Legal Authorities RLA-036 to
RLA-041 (“Respondent’s Bifurcation Reply”).

On 11 September 2020, the Claimant filed Claimant’s Rejoinder to Canada’s Reply in
Support of its Request for Bifurcation together with Exhibits C-009, C-019, C-023,
C-028 to C-031, Legal Authorities CLA-002, CLA-004, CLA-008 to CLA-012, and
certain Exhibits and Legal Authorities submitted by the Respondent (“Claimant’s
Opposition Rejoinder”).

On 16 July 2020, the Disputing Parties further agreed that a Hearing on Bifurcation (the
“Hearing”) would be held on 24 September 2020 via the video streaming platform
WebEx.

The following individuals attended the Hearing on behalf of the Disputing Parties:

For Claimant:

 

Counsel

Mr. Elliot Feldman Baker & Hostetler, LLP

Mr. Michael Snarr Baker & Hostetler, LLP

Mr. Paul Levine Baker & Hostetler, LLP

Ms. Analia Gonzalez Baker & Hostetler, LLP

Mr. Alexander Obrecht Baker & Hostetler, LLP

Party

Mr. Jeremy Cottrell Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC

For Respondent:

Counsel

Mr. Adam Douglas Trade Law Bureau, Global Affairs Canada,
Government of Canada

Ms. Krista Zeman Trade Law Bureau, Global Affairs Canada,

-2-

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

Ms

Ms

Mr.

Mr.

Ms

Ms

Procedural Order No. 3

. Megan Van den Hof
. Alexandra Dosman

. Mark Klaver

. Benjamin Tait

. Nadine Robinson

. Jennifer Sadaka-Alberti

Parties

 

Mr.

Ms.

Mr.

Mr.

Kyle Dickson-Smith
Landy Zhao

Peter Ciechanowski

s. Sheri Anderson

s. Marieke Dube

s. Julie Boisvert

Don McDougall

s. Elena Lapina

Government of Canada
Trade Law Bureau, Global Affairs Canada,
Government of Canada
Trade Law Bureau, Global Affairs Canada,
Government of Canada
Trade Law Bureau, Global Affairs Canada,
Government of Canada
Trade Law Bureau, Global Affairs Canada,
Government of Canada
Trade Law Bureau, Global Affairs Canada,
Government of Canada
Trade Law Bureau, Global Affairs Canada,
Government of Canada

Ministry of Justice and Solicitor General,
Government of Alberta

Ministry of Justice and Solicitor General,
Government of Alberta

Ministry of Justice and Solicitor General,
Government of Alberta

Trade Policy International Unit, Ministry of Jobs,
Economy and Innovation, Government of Alberta
Climate Partnerships and Initiatives, Regulatory
and Compliance Branch, Ministry of Environment
and Parks, Government of Alberta

Investment Trade Policy Division, Global Affairs
Canada, Government of Canada

Investment Trade Policy Division, Global Affairs
Canada, Government of Canada

Investment Trade Policy Division, Global Affairs
Canada, Government of Canada

7. In addition, the following attended on behalf of the Non-Disputing Parties:

The United Mexican States
Mr. Antonio Nava

Ms.

The United States of America

Ms.

. Cindy Rayo

. Nicole C. Thornton

Mr. John I. Blanck

Director de Consultoria Juridica de Comercio
Internacional

Directora General de Comercio Internacional de
Servicios e Inversién

U.S. Department of State
U.S. Department of State

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

Procedural Order No. 3

Each Party gave an opening presentation, the Respondent then gave its reply followed
by the Claimant’s rebuttal, and questions were asked of each Party by the Tribunal.

On 2 October 2020 the Claimant filed a note, in accordance with the Tribunal’s
direction, providing its submissions on the Sastre v. Mexico case,! which was
incorporated into the record as RLA-42 by the Tribunal at the commencement of the
Hearing.

This Procedural Order sets out the Tribunal’s decision on the Respondent’s Bifurcation
Application.

THE DISPUTING PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

The Disputing Parties’ positions, insofar as relevant to the issue of bifurcation, are set
out below.

A. THE RESPONDENT’S POSITION

The Respondent makes four objections that it characterises as relating to jurisdiction
and one with respect to admissibility:

i. the Claimant was not a protected investor at the time of the alleged breaches;
ii. the Claimant has not made out a prima facie damages claim;

iii.

the challenged measures do not “relate to” the Claimant or its investments
pursuant to NAFTA Article 1101(1);

iv. the Claimant has not made a timely claim; and
v. NAFTA Article 1102 does not apply by virtue of NAFTA Article 1108(7)(b).

As a preliminary point, the Respondent says that Article 21(4) of the applicable
procedural rules, the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (the “1976 UNCITRAL
Rules”) establishes a presumption that questions of jurisdiction should be heard in a
preliminary phase to ensure fairness and efficiency in the arbitral proceedings such that
the Tribunal’s discretion is fettered. In determining whether bifurcation is fair and
efficient it is necessary to consider the resources which would be expended in litigating
an ultimately unsuccessful claim, such resources extending to the “significant time and
resources....at both the federal and provincial levels that will not be captured in a Costs

' Email from the Tribunal to the Disputing Parties on 24 September 2020.

-4-

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

Procedural Order No. 3

Award.”? If some of the Respondent’s objections warrant bifurcation then it would be
procedurally unfair and inefficient not to hear all the objections together.

The Respondent’s objection with respect to Article 1108 is being brought pursuant to
the Tribunal’s general powers granted under Article 15(1) of the 1976 UNCITAL
Rules.

The Respondent next says it is common ground that the factors to be considered by the
Tribunal in determining whether to exercise its discretion in favour of ordering
bifurcation are those set out in Philip Morris v. Australia,* (the “Philip Morris
factors”) namely:

i. Is the objection prima facie serious and substantial: the Respondent contends an
objection is prima facie serious and substantial if it is not frivolous or vexatious,
citing the only four NAFTA cases proceeding under the 1976 UNCITRAL
Rules which have had to consider the question of bifurcation as well as the
decisions of many other investment tribunals operating under the 1976
UNCITRAL Rules. The Respondent says it is important to apply the same
standard to ensure consistency for all future disputing parties but it further notes
that were the Tribunal minded to apply a higher standard, the Respondent’s
objections would meet such higher standard.

Can the objection be determined without prejudging or entering the merits: the
test is not, the Respondent notes, whether there is any overlapping of issues.
Whilst some evidence may need to be reviewed both with respect to
jurisdictional objections as well as the merits, this is not sufficient of itself to
avoid bifurcation.*

 

iii

. If successful, will the objection dispose of all or any essential part of the claims
raised.

The Respondent makes three temporal jurisdictional objections as detailed in paragraph
12(i)-(iii) above (the “temporal objections”). At the heart of each of the Respondent’s
temporal objections is the fact that the Claimant did not come into existence until
January 2019 and did not acquire the Canadian business the subject of the claim until
March 2019. The Respondent says that the Claimant “is a new company owned by a
former creditor of Westmoreland Coal Company, or WCC. WCC sold its Canadian

2 Transcript, 14:11-14.

3 RLA-002, Philip Morris Asia Limited v. The Commonwealth of Australia, UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2012-
12, Provisional Order No. 8 (14 April 2014), {{ 109.

+ RLA-041, Lighthouse Corporation Pty Ltd and Li C ion Ltd., IBC v. Di ic Republic of
Timor-Leste, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/2, Provisional Order No. 3, Decision on Bifurcation and Related Requests
(8 July 2016), { 25(b).

 

-5-

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

20.

Procedural Order No. 3

business to the Claimant in an arms-length purchase as part of WCC’s bankruptcy
proceedings. Now WCC is set to dissolve.”>
facts, they are three independent objections which must be determined individually but
it would be efficient for all three to be determined as preliminary issues.

Whilst each of these emanate from similar

The Respondent’s temporal objections are the first three set out below.

i. Was the Claimant a Protected Investor at the time of the alleged breaches as
required by NAFTA Articles 1116(1) and 1117(1)?

Given the Claimant did not acquire the Canadian businesses until March 2019 when it
purchased them at arm’s length as part of Westmoreland Coal Company (“WCC”)’s
restructuring, the Claimant’s status as an investor in Canada can only have commenced
at that date. At the time of the measures complained of, it could not, therefore have
been a protected investor nor could it have had protected investments. The Claimant is
not WCC; indeed, this is clearly demonstrated by the Claimant’s act, upon acquiring
the Canadian businesses, of initiating new arbitration proceedings in its own name and
filing its own consent and waiver as required by NAFTA rather than continuing the
arbitration proceedings commenced by WCC. The Claimant is a new entity seeking to
claim for losses allegedly suffered by WCC, the seller of the Canadian investments.

The Respondent contends that this objection meets each of the Philip Morris factors:
(i) it is clearly serious and substantial given the Tribunal only has jurisdiction if the
Claimant can demonstrate it was protected by NAFTA at the time of the alleged
breaches; (ii) it requires consideration of a discrete issue, namely when did the Claimant
become an ‘investor of a Party’ (the Respondent says March 2019 when it acquired the
investments) whereas the merits require consideration of WCC’s treatment in 2015 and
2016 (the fact that the Respondent asserts in its substantive defence that the Claimant
has not been accorded treatment under Articles 1102 and 1105 does not mean there is
any overlap with the merits, it just highlights the absurdity of the Claimant claiming a
breach that predates its investment in Canada); and (iii) it is common ground that if
successful it disposes of the entirety of the Claimant’s claims.

ii. The Claimant has not made out a prima facie damages claim under NAFTA
Articles 1116(1) and 1117(1)

The Claimant is claiming for damages suffered by WCC; it itself could not have
incurred damage by reason of the alleged breaches as (i) they predate its existence as
an investor of a Party and (ii) it did not own or control an enterprise at the time such
enterprise incurred damages. Again determining this objection will not require the
prejudgement of the merits as, for the purposes of the jurisdictional challenge, the

5 Transcript, 25:10-14.

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

21.

22.

23.

24.

Procedural Order No. 3

Claimant need only show as a matter of law that either it or its enterprise could have
incurred the claimed loss or damage by reason of the alleged breach given it only
became an investor and acquired the investment in March 2019, whereas at the merits
stage, the Claimant will have to prove causation and quantum. Finally, if the
Respondent succeeds with this jurisdictional challenge, the claim is disposed of as no
loss will have been suffered by the Claimant.

iii. Did the challenged measures “relate to” the Claimant or its investment as
required by NAFTA Article 1101(1)?

The Claimant has failed to show that the challenged measures relate to it. NAFTA
Article 1101(1) is a gateway provision, limiting access to NAFTA Chapter Eleven to
circumstances where a challenged measure relates to a claimant and its investment. At
the time the challenged allocation of Transition Payments was made in 2016 the
Claimant neither existed nor had any investments in Canada. The same is true with
respect to Alberta’s 2015 Climate Leadership Plan (the “Climate Plan”). The objection
is clearly serious and substantial, does not enter the merits nor require the Tribunal to
prejudge the merits as again it merely requires consideration of, on the one hand, when
the Claimant became an investor of a party and acquired its investment and on the other
hand when the challenged measures occurred. It does not require any analysis of
whether the alleged damages have a causal link to each of the claimed breaches but is
a distinct enquiry.

iv. Time limits under NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2)

The Respondent’s fourth jurisdictional objection arises out of the three year time
limitation period under NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2). As a matter of NAFTA
practice, such an objection is usually determined as a preliminary issue. The
Respondent accepts that the temporal objections must be established before this fourth
objection can be determined.

The critical date pursuant to Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) is 12 August 2016 as the
Notice of Arbitration was received on 12 August 2019. To determine this jurisdictional
challenge it is only necessary to identify the date on which the Claimant acquired actual
or constructive knowledge of the alleged breach and loss: there is no prejudging of the
merits in undertaking this analysis.

The Claimant now says it is not challenging the Climate Plan (which was announced
on 22 November 2015, being outside this limitation period) but its Request for
Arbitration is replete with references to the Climate Plan, identifying it as the
challenged measure and noting that the value of its investment was reduced as a result
of the Climate Plan. The Claimant now refers to “Albertan Measures that breached the

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

25.

26.

° Tra

  

Procedural Order No. 3

minimum standard of treatment”,® but those measures are unidentified, the Claimant
asserting that “What the Measure is cannot be identified without an examination of
Alberta’s action and their impacts on Westmoreland.”’ This suggests that the Claimant
will be using the document production phase as a fishing exercise to identify possible
NAFTA breaches. However pursuant to Article 18(2) of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules,
a Claimant must identify the facts supporting the claim and the points at issue.
By saying that it is not challenging the Climate Plan but equally not identifying the
measure in issue, the Claimant is in breach of Article 18(2). The reason the Claimant
has not identified the measure out of which its claim arises is because the only relevant
measure is the Climate Plan and the Claimant is seeking to create ambiguity over its
claim to circumvent this limitation period. This evidences that the objection is serious
and substantial. It would be unfair and inefficient to proceed to the merits phase before
the Claimant identifies the measure it challenges. Determining this question will not
require the Tribunal to prejudge the merits as the only question to be resolved is one of
timing. As the Climate Plan was announced before the critical date, no investigation
will be required into the effect of the Climate Plan (to the extent consideration of the
Climate Plan is required as part of considering background facts, this is not an issue)
and if the objection were resolved in the Respondent’s favour, it would result in a
material reduction in the scope of the merits phase, leaving just the Transition Payments
as a disputed measure.

y. Inadmissibility due to NAFTA Article 1108(7)(b)

The Respondent also raises an admissibility objection pursuant to Article 1108(7)(b)
which provides that, inter alia, Article 1102 does not apply to “subsidies or grants
provided by a Party or a state enterprise, including government-supported loans,
guarantees and insurance.” As an objection to inadmissibility as opposed to
jurisdiction, the Tribunal is asked to exercise its discretion to bifurcate under Article
15(1) of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules, however the Respondent submits that in any
event the objection meets the Philip Morris factors and says that the Disputing Parties
both agree that this is the test the Tribunal should apply to determine this objection.

The wording of the Article indicates that Article 1108(7) objections should be
determined prior to turning to the merits. Considering the ordinary meaning of the
words used in this Article, it should be interpreted broadly. The dictionary definitions
of a “subsidy” and “grant” together with the fact that the payments were made
voluntarily under the Alberta Grants Regulations, expressly on the basis that “the
Province is under no legal obligation to compensate or otherwise pay any amount to
[the recipients]” and were publicly described as ‘grants’ are all highly probative of the
fact that the Transition Payments under the Off Coal Agreements (““OCAs”) were

 

pt, 43:9-10.

7 Transcript, 43:14-17.

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

27.

28.

Procedural Order No. 3

indeed grants or subsidies. This objection is serious and substantial. No investigation
into the merits will be required because the issue for the purposes of the Respondent’s
admissibility objection is whether “the transition payments [were] assignments of
money by Alberta? Were they sums of money granted by Alberta to support something
held to be in the public interest?” whereas the issue to be considered for the merits is
whether “the Claimant [was] discriminated against because Canadian companies
received payments relating to their coalmine assets? Was the Claimant inequitably or
arbitrarily excluded from receiving a transition payment?”*® The questions for
determining admissibility therefore do not require prejudgement of the questions for
determining the merits of whether there was a breach of Article 1102. The Respondent
accepts that the OCAs are contracts but says that is irrelevant — government-supported
loans, guarantees and insurance are all affected by contracts.

The fact the Tribunal may need to review the OCAs in both analyses is not on point;
rather it will not need to make any determinations which prejudge the merits. How the
Government decided to whom Transition Payments should be made is not a question
that needs to be answered to determine the Article 1108(7)(b) objection. Examining
the OCAs to determine whether or not the Transition Payments were ‘grants’ or
‘subsidies’ for the purposes of Article 1108(7)(b) does not require any examination into
the questions of whether domestic companies received payment for their coal assets or
into how Alberta decided to allocate the Transition Payments. For the purposes of the
Article 1108(7)(b) analysis, the OCAs speak for themselves. There is not a sufficient
overlap to deny bifurcation of this question. There are just two questions for the
Tribunal to address: (i) determining the correct meaning of ‘grant’ and ‘subsidy’ and
then (ii) applying that meaning to the Transition Payments to determine if they come
within it.? Finally, if the objection were resolved in the Respondent’s favour it would
dispose of the Claimant’s claim that the Transition Payments were in breach of NAFTA
Article 1102, which would “eliminate the need for a factually complex, inherently
comparative national treatment analysis.”!°

B. THE CLAIMANT’S POSITION

As a preliminary point, whilst the Claimant accepts the application of the Philip Morris
factors, it notes that the Tribunal always retains discretion as to whether or not to order
bifurcation, irrespective of whether the three Philip Morris factors are met. Each case
turns on its own facts and the Tribunal should not be bound by the “straitjacket” of only

® Transcript, 54:5-14.
° Transcript, 66:1-14.
© Transcript, 57:18-19.

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

Procedural Order No. 3

considering whether bifurcation should be ordered by reference to the Philip Morris
factors.!!

Turning to the first of these three factors, the Claimant says the Respondent is wrong
to say serious and substantial equates to frivolous and unworthy: there is a threshold
between these two positions which the Tribunal should apply.

The Claimant further says that the facts necessary to examine each of the Respondent’s
objections are intertwined with the facts necessary to determine the merits. For
example, “Canada’s argument that the Claimant is not an investor of another Party
with a foreign investment to which the alleged breaches relate under Article 1101 is a
Merits question” and “Canada’s theory that Westmoreland was not accorded treatment

because [the Claimant] purchased the assets after the Measures were enacted is the
12

 

same argument that Canada has advanced in its jurisdictional objection.
necessitate the determination of facts which fall to be considered both with respect to
jurisdictional objections and the merits.

Further, the questions to be answered are not entirely legal and will require significant
resources and delay in the procedural timetable. In any event, even were the
Respondent’s objections to be determined in its favour, not all of the Claimant’s claims
would be disposed of. Thus bifurcation will not lead to efficiency.

Finally, the Claimant says that there is no efficiency to be gained in hearing any of the
objections in a bifurcated hearing. Were the Claimant to successfully defeat the
Respondent’s objections significant time and resources would have been wasted.
Bifurcation may be appropriate where the question is entirely legal and is a clear issue
but that is not the case here where the facts pertinent for the jurisdictional objections
are intertwined with the merits and the bifurcated issues would require factual
development.

i. The temporal objections

The Claimant concedes it is a new entity from WCC but the change from WCC was not
a complete change; there was a consistent connection between the two entities. When
WCC filed for bankruptcy protection in 2018 it owned Prairie Mines and Royalty. As
part of the restructuring, the Claimant was created as a wholly owned subsidiary of
‘WCC. Prairie Mines and Royalty were transferred from WCC to Westmoreland Mining
Holdings LLC (“WMH”) and WCC then transferred its equity ownership in WMH to
the first lienholders of WCC. “The Westmoreland that emerged from bankruptcy was

4 Transcript, 98:9-99:16, CLA-003, Gavrilovic v. Republic of Croatia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39, Decision on
Bifurcation (21 January 2015), 4 66.
2 Transcript, 97:3-18.

-10-

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

34.

35.

36.

37.

Procedural Order No. 3

substantially the same as the Westmoreland that entered.”'? At all relevant times
Prairie Mines and Royalty were owned by a U.S. investor such that the nationality of
the investment and the investor remained the same, the only material change was the
restructured entity.

The Respondent recognised this continuity and did not require adherence by the
Claimant to the NAFTA formalities, for example consultation, on the basis these had
already been carried out by WCC. Upon commencing arbitration, the Claimant did not
materially change the Statement of Claim or the Notice of Intent from that issued by
‘WCC and it merely changed the waiver letters to change the name of the Claimant. It
cannot be the case that “NAFTA ’s drafismen intended to deny fundamental investment
protections for foreign investors undergoing restructuring, whether it be an
intracompany transfer of assets, bankruptcy, or, as here, both.”'*

The investigation the Tribunal would need to undertake to determine if the
Westmoreland of 2019 is the same as the Westmoreland of 2018 “would be a deep
.a fairly complicated process .....introducing probably Expert Witnesses
es, on corporate reorganizations, on an explanation of why we think that

inquiry into...
on bankrupte
the Claim survived the corporate reorganization, which at the time was, indeed, the

 

  

advice of a small army of specialized lawyers. So, the Tribunal would have to examine
that, and that would also be at the heart of how Westmoreland was being distinguished
because we don’t know for sure exactly what the Government of Alberta’s reasoning
was in excluding Westmoreland from payment. So, perhaps it perceived a different
company or perhaps at that time when it made the decision not to compensate
Westmoreland it had some sense of a character of Westmoreland that’s different that
we don’t know about yet. So, it is one thing to examine whether the Company was the
same and that — but that’s a deep and complicated examination, but also, knowing what
the company is, is, it seems to us, central to the Merits of the Claim.”'> No prior cases
have considered this issue and the Claimant contends there would be no efficiency in
bifurcating this issue.

Whilst the Claimant concedes that, were the Respondent to succeed in these temporal
objections, its claims would all be disposed of, they are not serious or substantial and
they cannot be examined without prejudging or entering the merits.

ii. Time limits under NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2)

The measure the Claimant asserts as the basis of its claim is the disparate treatment
occasioned by the Transition Payments and not the announcement of the Climate Plan.

3 Transcript, 93:15-17.
4 Transcript, 93:6-11.
'S Transcript, 110:21-111:20.

-1ll-

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

38.

39.

40.

Procedural Order No. 3

Whilst the Climate Plan is “an important contextual fact”’,'° it is a statement of intent
and not a measure for which the Claimant seeks redress. The Claimant was not directly
damaged by the announcement of the Climate Plan: the date for the Claimant’s actual
or constructive knowledge must be the point at which it knew or should have known
that it was damaged. It “arises when the Government started handing out money. And
even then, it was not yet a closed matter as to whether Westmoreland was going to see
some of that money. They were continuing behind-the-scenes conversations, and it is
not until Westmoreland knows it’s damaged and knows it’s not going to get any money
that there’s a measure to be challenged here.”'” This was July 2017. “[WJhat the
character of these transition payments is, is central to determining how [the Claimant]
was treated compared to the others. That is the — that’s our Claim.”'®

    

 

This objection is not serious or substantial, it cannot be considered without prejudging
or entering the merits and if successful it would not dispose of all of the claim, leaving
the claim arising out of the Transition Payments to be determined.

iii. Inadmissibility due to NAFTA Article 1108(7)(b)

Article 21(4) of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules does not apply to this claim and the burden
shifts to the Respondent: it has failed to meet this burden. The relevant words in Article
1108(7)(b) must be construed narrowly as it is an exception. The fact the Transition
Payments were described by the Respondent as grants is irrelevant; the ordinary
definition of ‘grant’ is a “giff’ and these Transition Payments were not gifts. The
express terms of the OCAs note there was consideration for the Transition Payments,
providing that:

“7(a) Subject to the provisions of Section 7(b), neither the
Company nor any Plant Owner shall commence any legal action
against the Province or any provincial agency, including the
Independent System Operator and the coal facilitator, with
respect to the mines, coal supply agreements, mining contracts
or mining equipment related to the coal used to fuel the Plants,
or alleging any other cause of action in relation to the phase out
of Coal Fired Emissions from the Plants.”!

To understand whether the Transition Payments were indeed grants or subsidies, the
Tribunal will need to look behind the words of the OCAs, review the negotiations
leading to their conclusion, their intent, whether the Albertan Government’s conduct
was consistent with the payment of a grant or subsidy, and consider how they were

'6 Transcript, 90:6-15.

"” Transcript, 107:19-108:4.

'8 Transcript, 107:15-18.

9 ©.023, Off-Coal Agreement between Capital Power et al. and Her Majesty the Queen In Right of Alberta
(represented by Ministry of Energy), 24 November 2016, § 7(a).

-12-

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

Al.

42.

43.

Ill.

44.

4S.

46.

Procedural Order No. 3

administered and how the money was distributed pursuant to the OCAs. In any event
even if the Respondent were successful with respect to this objection, it would have no
effect on the Claimant’s Article 1105 claim.

Again, this objection is neither serious or substantial, it cannot be examined without
prejudging or entering the merits and will not dispose of the entire case, leaving the
Article 1105 claim to be determined.

C. THE RESPONDENT’S REPLY

The Respondent noted the Claimant’s apparent withdrawal in its oral submissions of its
allegation that the coal phase out programme denied it the reasonable expectation of its
investments in breach of Article 1105 (as stated in paragraph 105 of its Notice of
Arbitration), such that the only measure it now challenges is the Transition Payment.
The Respondent sought the Claimant’s confirmation of this but otherwise reiterated its
submission that the Climate Plan was outside the limitation period.

D. THE CLAIMANT’S REBUTTAL

In its rebuttal, the Claimant explained there is nothing to withdraw: its claim relates to
“the limitation of the policy, and that policy is implemented when these payments begin
to be paid out, and when they are paid out, to the exclusion of Westmoreland, and we
learned that we are not going to receive any.”

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

The Tribunal has considered all the relevant factual and legal arguments presented in
the Disputing Parties’ written submissions and oral presentations. The fact that any
argument, allegation or specific piece of evidence is not mentioned in the following
analysis does not mean that the Tribunal has not considered it.

The decision in this Procedural Order 3 only relates to bifurcation. The Tribunal’s
considerations and decisions regarding bifurcation do not prejudice any future decision
the Tribunal will make with respect to the substance of the Respondent’s preliminary
objections or the Disputing Parties’ submissions on the merits.

Article 21(4) of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules provides as follows: “In general, the
arbitral tribunal should rule on a plea concerning its jurisdiction as a preliminary
question. However, the arbitral tribunal may proceed with the arbitration and rule on
such a plea in their final award.” It follows that when a party raises an objection to
jurisdiction, the presumption is that such objection will be determined as a preliminary

2 Transcript, 134:5-10.

-13-

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

47.

48.

49.

50.

Procedural Order No. 3

issue. Having said that, this is a matter for the Tribunal’s discretion and we are not
bound by that presumption; it is after all only a presumption. There will be
circumstances where this presumption will not be followed, in particular where the
matters raised by the objection are inextricably interlinked with the merits.

Before we turn to consider each of the Respondent’s objections, we first consider the
test we should apply in determining whether each objection should be heard as a
preliminary issue. Both Disputing Parties referred to the Philip Morris factors but
disagree as to the meaning of the first one, namely whether the objection is prima facie
serious and substantial. The Respondent says we should follow the meaning used in all
four NAFTA arbitrations under the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules such that an objection is
serious and substantial if not frivolous or vexatious. This would ensure consistency of
decisions and also comport with the presumption to bifurcate under the 1976
UNCITRAL Rules. The Respondent says it has cited authorities and case law and has
demonstrated that each objection, on its face, is serious and substantial. The Claimant
on the other hand points to other decisions where tribunals have applied a test which
sets a higher threshold than non-frivolous, being “a shade grayer than Canada’s black-
and-white description” ?'

In applying the first factor against each of the Respondent’s objections, we find that
each is, on its face, certainly not frivolous or vexatious and, moreover, satisfies the
higher threshold of prima facie serious and substantial if indeed that is a higher
threshold, as the Claimant appears to submit.

We therefore turn to the first three objections raised by the Respondent: the temporal
objections. The Respondent submits that the three temporal objections must be
considered independently being based on different aspects of the language used in the
relevant NAFTA Articles, however for the purposes of considering the application of
the Philip Morris factors we consider the three together as the question of the legal
status of the Claimant at the time of the alleged breaches of NAFTA Articles 1102 and
1105 is at the heart of each of these objections.

The first of the Respondent’s temporal objections is that the Claimant was not a
protected investor at the time of the alleged breach. The Claimant clarified its position
during the oral hearing, explaining that the measure out of which its claims arise is the
payment of the Transition Payments which commenced in July 2017. The Claimant
does not dispute that it had not been incorporated at that time. As explained during the
oral hearing, its case rests on the fact that both the investment and investor were at all

2! Transcript, 96:1-2, see RLA-007, Gran Colombia Gold Corp. v. Republic of Colombia, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/18/23, Procedural Order No. 3 (Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation) (17 January 2020)
427; CLA-008, Glencore Finance (Bermuda) Limited v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, PCA Case No. 2016-39,
Procedural Order No. 2 (Decision on Bifurcation) (31 January 2018) 5; CLA-009, Red Eagle Exploration
Limited v. Republic of Colombia, ICSID Case No. ARB/18/12, Decision on Bifurcation (3 August 2020) { 42.

-14-

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

51.

52.

53.

54.

Procedural Order No. 3

material times United States nationals and that the Westmoreland that went into
bankruptcy in 2018 is materially the same as the Westmoreland that emerged from
restructuring in 2019. The U.S. bankruptcy restructuring was intended to preserve
assets and rework liabilities so that the Westmoreland assets could function as an
ongoing concern. Whilst the Claimant submits that determination of this issue may
require evidence from several specialised experts as to, inter alia, U.S. bankruptcy and
restructuring law, and that these issues may be complex, we do not accept that that is
of itself grounds for refusing bifurcation. We further do not accept the Claimant’s
submission that determination of this issue would require any consideration of how the
Claimant was perceived by the Government of Alberta and on what basis payment to it
was declined. These are issues which, whilst they may be relevant to the merits, do not
impinge on the legal status of the 2018 and 2019 Westmoreland companies.

We next turn to the second temporal objection: can the Claimant (i) claim for a loss
suffered before it came into existence and/or (ii) claim on behalf of an enterprise it did
not own or control at the time of the alleged breach. Again, we do not accept that
determination of this issue will require prejudging or entering the merits. The issue to
be determined is again a legal question: could the Claimant or its enterprise have
incurred the claimed loss or damage by reason of the alleged breach where the Claimant
only became an investor and acquired the investment in March 2019. Determination of
this question will again likely require expert evidence on U.S. bankruptcy and
restructuring law but again will not require a factual analysis that overlaps with the
merits; nor does it present a risk of prejudging or entering the merits.

The third temporal objection, whether the challenged measure(s) relate to the Claimant
or its investment, again turns on the legal effects of the restructuring process undertaken
by WCC and the status of the Westmoreland that entered into bankruptcy as opposed
to the Claimant when it was incorporated. Again, we do not accept that determination
of this objection will require a factual analysis that overlaps with the merits; nor does
it present a risk of prejudging or entering the merits. Accordingly, the second Philip
Morris factor is satisfied with respect to each of the Respondent’s temporal objections.

Finally, it is common ground between the Disputing Parties that if any of the three
temporal objections is successful, it would dispose of the entirety of the claims raised.
Accordingly, the third Philip Morris factor is satisfied with respect to the temporal
objections.

We next turn to the Respondent’s fourth jurisdictional objection, that the Claimant’s
actual or constructive knowledge of the alleged breach and loss occurred more than
three years before it commenced this arbitration, in breach of the time limitation period
under NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2). The Respondent says the cut-off date for
the purposes of the limitation period is 12 August 2016. The Claimant explained in the

-15-

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

55.

56.

57.

Procedural Order No. 3

oral hearing that the measure it complains of was the entry into the OCAs in November
2016 by the Government of Alberta and the payments made thereunder that started in
July 2017, not the publishing of the Climate Plan. Further, the Claimant says that the
Respondent’s fourth objection cannot be examined without the risk of prejudging or
entering the merits. Determining the date on which the Claimant acquired actual or
constructive knowledge of the alleged breach and loss is not a simple issue. Whilst it
had awareness of the content of the Climate Plan as announced and of the fact the OCAs
were being concluded and even that Transition Payments were being made, it was not
aware at the time that Transition Payments were first made that it would be excluded
from such payments. Therefore, determining the date on which it acquired constructive
knowledge will require investigation inter alia into: (i) the Government of Alberta’s
decision-making process in deciding to which companies Transition Payments should
be made; (ii) how and when those decisions were reached; and, (iii) consideration of
the wider factual matrix. Such analysis will clearly require traversing issues relating to
the merits of the dispute.

We accept the Claimant’s submission as to the scope of the exercise that will likely be
required to determine the date on which it acquired actual or constructive knowledge
of the breach and loss suffered and accordingly we agree that this fourth objection
cannot be determined without traversing the merits. With respect to the third Philip
Morris factor, it is accepted by both Disputing Parties that a successful determination
will not dispose of all of the claims raised. Indeed it seems to us that it would not in
any event determine any claims arising out of the payment of the Transition Payments
given that the first of the OCAs pursuant to which the payments were made were only
entered into three months after the cut-off point of 12 August 2016.

We turn finally to Canada’s objection as to the admissibility of the claims premised on
NAFTA Article 1108(7)(b). Without specifically addressing the utility of applying the
Philip Morris factors to admissibility objections, the Disputing Parties both made
reference to these factors whilst considering whether or not this objection should be
determined as a preliminary issue. In determining whether to exercise our discretion to
order that this objection be heard as a preliminary issue, we therefore also take note of
the Philip Morris factors.

We accept that determining the correct meaning of the words ‘grant’ and ‘subsidy’ as
contained in the article is purely a question of law, however, we do not accept that
applying that interpretation to the OCAs to determine whether the Transition Payments
were a grant or subsidy can be undertaken solely by considering the OCAs on their
face. The fact that the payments were made pursuant to the Alberta Grants Regulation
and publicly disclosed as grants is relevant but not conclusive and we accept that it may
be necessary to go beyond the wording used in the OCAs and consider the wider factual
matrix existing at the time the OCAs were concluded in order to determine whether

-16-

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

58.

59.

Procedural Order No. 3

these Transition Payments come within the meaning of a ‘grant’ or ‘subsidy’ for the
purposes of NAFTA Article 1108(7)(b). Accordingly, to the extent relevant, the second
Philip Morris factor is not satisfied. With respect to the third factor, if this objection
were decided in the Respondent’s favour, it would dispose of the Claimant’s Article
1102 claim and the necessarily complex and expensive analysis of “like circumstances”
but it would not dispose of the Claimant’s Article 1105 claim.

Having completed our analysis of the five objections applying the Philip Morris factors,
and having found that those factors weigh in favour of bifurcating the temporal
objections but against bifurcation of the remaining objections, we turn now to whether
the presumption contained in Article 21(4) of the 1976 UNCITRAL Rules should be
followed. In considering this question we note the Claimant’s submissions that it would
not be fair if the Respondent’s objections were heard before it were able to present its
case in a merits hearing, particularly in the circumstances that Transition Payments
were made to three Canadian companies whereas the Claimant, being the only non-
Canadian company, did not receive any payment. We also understand the Claimant’s
submissions that efficiency would not be achieved if the Respondent’s objections were
unsuccessful, leading only to delay. However, we have found that the Philip Morris
factors support bifurcation of the three temporal objections and we do not accept there
would be any potential duplication of issues or evidence in determining these objections
as a preliminary issue. Accordingly, we see no reason either in terms of fairness or
efficiency not to follow the presumption that the three temporal objections should be
determined as preliminary issues.

The position is different with the fourth and fifth objections. Whilst we appreciate that,
as a matter of NAFTA practice, the limitation objection is usually determined as a
preliminary issue, we are concerned that determining both it and the fifth objection
would likely stray into areas of the merits. We understand the Respondent’s concerns
with respect to the need to expend federal and provincial time and resources which
could not adequately be captured by a costs award and its submissions that if we are to
determine any of the objections it would be procedurally efficient to determine them
all. However, given that there is no linkage between the investigation and analysis we
would need to undertake to determine the three temporal objections and that required
with respect to the fourth and fifth objections, we do not believe there to be any
efficiency to be gained in also hearing these two final objections: indeed it appears to
us to be likely that it would only lead to inefficiency and delay. Accordingly, we do
not exercise our discretion to order that the fourth and fifth objections should be heard
as preliminary issues.

-17-

Westmoreland Mining Holdings LLC v. Government of Canada
(ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3)

 

Procedural Order No. 3

IV. DECISION

60. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal:

a. Grants the Respondent’s request to bifurcate the present proceedings between
(i) the temporal jurisdictional objections and (ii) the merits of the case and any and
all other jurisdictional or admissibility objections;

b. Directs the Disputing Parties to confer as to whether the proposed timetables set out
in the Disputing Parties’ 31 July 2020 email to the Tribunal should be followed or
whether a revised timetable should be agreed in the light of this order; and

c. Reserves costs for subsequent determination.

Date: 20 October 2020

On behalf of the Tribunal:

[Signed]

Ms. Juliet Blanch
Presiding Arbitrator

-18-

