5/29/2017 Jones Day | World Wide Minerals achieves right to arbitrate its expropriation and international law claims against Republic of Kazakhstan

BE

World Wide Minerals achieves right to arbitrate its
expropriation and international law claims against Republic of
Kazakhstan

January 2016

An arbitral tribunal convened under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules
has held that Kazakhstan is a legal successor to the 1989 Agreement
between the Government of Canada and the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments (the "Canada/USSR BIT"). As a result,
eligible Canadian investors with potential claims against the
Government of Kazakhstan for actions taken by the State since the
dissolution of the USSR can bring them to arbitration under that
Treaty, even though a new treaty between Canada and an
independent Kazakhstan remains elusive.

Jones Day client, World Wide Minerals Ltd. ("WWM"), a Toronto-based
mining company, has been attempting to redress the expropriation of
its assets in Kazakhstan for almost 20 years. Based upon its multi-
million dollar investment in 1996-1997, WWM managed and operated
one of the largest uranium-processing facilities in the former Soviet
State. It entered into a number of agreements with the Republic of
Kazakhstan whereby the Government promised its full cooperation in
the venture, and WWM invested millions of dollars to repair and
modernize the country's uranium processing facilities and to finance
mineral production. Soon thereafter, the Republic of Kazakhstan
breached its contractual obligations to WWM and imposed upon it
bureaucratic restrictions that frustrated the object and purpose of
those contracts—ultimately leading to the suspension of operations at
WWM's facility, and the bankruptcy, confiscation, and forced sale of its
assets by the State. According to WWM's President and CEO, Paul A.
Carroll, a citizen and resident of Canada and also a Claimant in the
matter, the arbitral claim seeks to "hold Kazakhstan accountable for its
deliberate acts and omissions that deprived WWM of its substantial
investment in the country."

Retained as counsel to WWM in November 2013, Jones Day teamed
up with Judge Stephen M. Schwebel, former President Judge of the
International Court of Justice, and Professor Malcolm Shaw Q.C. of
Essex Court Chambers, a leading scholar on the issue of State
succession, to argue the legal point of Kazakhstan's obligations under
the Canada/U.S.S.R. BIT. The Government of Canada also intervened
in the matter with an amicus submission, supporting the conclusion
that Kazakhstan succeeded to the Treaty. The Tribunal is comprised of
Sir Franklin Berman QC, Professor John Crook and Professor William W.
Park.

One of the most important aspects of the Tribunal's decision is the

http:/www.jonesday.com/experiencepractices/ExperienceD etail. aspx?experienceid=30875 12

5/29/2017 Jones Day | World Wide Minerals achieves right to arbitrate its expropriation and international law claims against Republic of Kazakhstan

door it opens for other Canadian investors with potential claims
against Kazakhstan. Moreover, the former Soviet Union signed Bilateral
Investment Treaties with a number of other states besides Canada,
and investors from those states with grievances against Kazakhstan
(or potentially other former Soviet Republics), can conceivably take
advantage of those treaties, even if there is no treaty in force with the
now-independent CIS State.

The Jones Day team was led by Global Disputes partners Baiju S.
Vasani (London), Melissa S. Gorsline (Washington) and Charles T.
Kotuby Jr. (Washington). The team included Sylvia Tonova in London;
James Egerton-Vernon, Lindsay Reimschussel, and Maria Pradilla Picas,
all in Washington; and Anastasiya Ugale in Paris.

For additional information about this matter, please contact:
Baiju S. Vasani, Melissa Stear Gorsline, Charles T. Kotuby Jr.

Client(s): World Wide Minerals Ltd.
Practice(s): Global Disputes

Office(s): London, Washington

http:/www.jonesday.com/experiencepractices/ExperienceD etail. aspx?experienceid=30875

22

