PCA Case No. AA 227

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION BEFORE A TRIBUNAL CONSTITUTED
IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 26 OF THE ENERGY CHARTER TREATY
AND THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES 1976

- between -

YUKOS UNIVERSAL LIMITED (ISLE OF MAN)

- and -

THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

 

INTERIM AWARD ON JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY

 

30 November 2009

Tribunal
L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC, Chairman
Dr. Charles Poncet
Judge Stephen M. Schwebel

Mr. Brooks W. Daly, Secretary to the Tribunal
Ms. Judith Levine, Assistant Secretary to the Tribunal
Mr. Martin J. Valasek, Assistant to the Tribunal

Registry
Permanent Court of Arbitration

Representing Claimant: Representing Respondent:

Professor Emmanuel Gaillard Mr. Robert Greig

Dr. Yas Banifatemi Dr. Claudia Annacker

Mr. Philippe Pinsolle Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton LLP
Shearman & Sterling LLP 12, rue de Tilsitt

114, avenue des Champs-Elysées 75008 Paris, France

75008 Paris, France

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

LIST OF DEFINED TERMS. vi
INTRODUCTION 1
I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 1

Il.

 

 

A. Commencement of the Arbitration Proceedings

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B. Constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal ......0..0..0. csc cece cesses eeseeseeseeseeseeseesseseeseeseeneaneenee 2
C. Written and Oral Proceedi 5
FACTUAL BACKGROUND ll
A. Energy Charter Treaty 11
B. The Parties to These ProceedingS .............ccccscecessesesesseseessesesseseeseseeeseseeseseeesesneeeesneee 12
1. Claimants and Related Entities .....0..0....ccccssccstsseeseeseeseessestestestesnesestenteanenteneenees 12
2. Respondent 13
Yukos Oil Corporation OJSC 13
Criminal Proceedings 13
E. Additional Measures 15
1. Annulment of Yukos Merger with Sibneft......0..0.0.0 cece eeeeeeneeeeeeeeees 15
2. TaxR 16
3. Freezing of Shares and Assets .........c.cccececssesesseseseseseseseeseseseeeeseseseseeeesneneeeseee 16
4. — Threatened Revocation of Licenses ...........:scssscseeseseseseeeeeseeeseeesesteteesteteeseseeeee LT
5. Sale of Yuganskneftega: 17
6. Bankruptcy Proceeding: 18
PARTIES’ WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS .........0:.cesccssseesseessesssessessseessessesssessneesseesneesnssseseseesees 18
A. Respondent’s Position 19
B. Clai ” Position 31
THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEP..........sccscsscssssssesesssestestesessesesseenessesnesneesaeneess 39
A. Respondent’s Requests for Relief .............cccccsscessessessessesteseeseesteenesnesseseenssneeeeseeeeseenees 39
B. Claimant’s Requests for Relief ............cececccscescessessessesestesteesesteeseseeseseensaneensseeneaeeees 39
APPLICABLE LAW 40

 

VI. SUMMARY OF WITNESSES’ TESTIMONY ..........c:scccessesessesseseeeeseessseenssneensaneeneseeees! 46

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. Respondent’s Witnesses 46
1. Professor Suren Avakiyat .......c..cccccccsccce cece ceeees cece csneeenenestsneeeneeeesneaeeneeaes 47
2. Mr. Sydney Fremantle 49
3. Mr. Anatoly Martynov 51
4. Mr. Martin Mann, QC 53
5. Professor Daniel Berman ..............ccccccesessesseesesseesesesesesesesssesesteseaeneaeesees 56
6. Dr. Marat Baglay 57
7. Professor Martti Kosk iemi 58
8. Professor Alexey Kostin 60
9. Professor Yevgeny SukhanoV ............ccsceccesescesesneseseeseseesteseeseseesteseeaeseeaeenese 61
10. Professor Gerhard Hafner. 62
11. Professor Igor Lukashuk ..

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12. Mr. S.V. Vasilyvev, on behalf of the Russian Ministry of Justice...........0.0......63

13. Professor Georg Nolte 64

14. Professor Angelika Nussberget .............ccccccsccsesseseseesesesseseesestsneeeneneseeneeeeeeeeaes 65

15. Professor Alain Pellet 66

16. Mr. Stephen Knipler 67

17. Professor Myron Nordquist 68

18. Professor Andrey Lisitsyn-Svetlanov..........ccscscesesseeseeseeseeseesteseeseestestesnesteneesees 69

19. Professor Stef van Weeghel ............ccscssecstesseesstestessesteseesestestesnesesnestesnesteneesees 70

B. Cl ” Witnesses 71
1. Mr. Vladimir Gladyshev ..0....0.0..ccccce cece cseeee tenes cesses neneeesneeeneeeteneaeeeeeaes 71

2. Mr. Brian Green, QC 74

3. Professor James Crawford, SC......c.cccccccsesscssssesesseseeecseseeseseescseceesessesesecseseeseeee 78

4. — Professor W. Michael Reisman ............sc.ccssescessessesseseeseseesseseesteseesteseeseseeaeenese 82

VII. ISSUES FOR ANALYSIS AND DECISION .........ccesseessesssessessesseesseessessseeeseessessseesesesesens 86

-ii-

VII. ANALYSIS
A.

Does the Provisional Application of the ECT in the Russian Federation, as
Defined by Article 45, Provide a Basis for the Tribunal’s Jurisdiction over the

Merits of the Claims in this Arbitration? ....0..0..0....ccscscsseseesteseesteseesteseesteseeateseeanenees

1. Introduction

88

- 88
88

 

2. Is a Declaration Required under Article 45(2)? oo... eeeseeeseeteeeeneeeeee

a) Parties’ Submission

b)  Tribunal’s Decision...........
3. Is a Declaration Required under Article 45(1)? ........ccceeces eee eee eseeeeeeeeeeeee

a) Parties’ Submission

b) — Tribumal’s Decision 2.0.0.0... ce ceccceeeseseseseseseseseseseseecneneeeseeeeeteseeeeeeteeeeeeeee
4. What Effect Should Be Given to the Limitation Clause in Article 45(1)? .

a)  All-or-Nothing vs. “Piecemeal” Approach. ........0.0.ccceeeeeeeneeeeeeee

(i) Parties’ Submission:

 

(ii) Tribumal’s Decision ..........ececeesececeseceeeseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseeeeeseae

b) Is the Principle of Provisional Application Inconsistent with Russian
Law?

 

c) Are the Provisions of the ECT P Relating to Dispute Resolution
Inconsistent with Russian Law?.. soeeseseeseeseeseeseeseens cesses

  

(i) _ Parties’ ission:

 

(ii) Tribumal’s Decision ..........ececeesececeseceeeseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseeeeeseae

5. Conclusion

Is Claimant a Protected Investor with an Investment under the ECT? ..........0.:0000+

1. Introduction

 

2. Does Claimant Qualify as a Protected “Investor” under Article 1(7)? ............
a) Parties’ Submission
b) — Tribumal’s Decision ......0.....ceceeececeseseseseseseseseseseseeeseseeeseneeeteseeeneeeeeeeereee

3. Does Claimant “Own or Control” a Protected “Investment” under
Article 1(6)?

 

a) Parties’ Submission

b) — Tribumal’s Decision ......0.....ceceeececeseseseseseseseseseseseeeseseeeseneeeteseeeneeeeeeeereee

- iii -

- 90

91

 

 

. 126

127
134
145
147
147
148
148
150

153
154

C. Are the Claims Barred by the “Denial-of-Benefits” Provision (Article 17) of the

ECT?
1. Introduction
2. Notification R

(Article 21) of the ECT?
1.
2.

 

 

 

a) Parties’ Submission

b) — Tribumal’s Decision 2.0.0.0... ce ceccceeeseseseseseseseseseseseecneneeeseeeeeteseeeeeeteeeeeeeee

Substantive Condition

a) Ownership and Control of Claimant...
(i) Factual Background ou... cece cesses cece eseeeeeeeeseeneeneeeeeeeaee

(ii) Parties’ Submission:

 

(iii) Tribumal’s Decision ..........ccececesececeseceseseseseseseseeesesesesesesnseseeeseeeeneene
b) Is the Russian Federation a Third State? ............ccseseseeeteeeeeteteeeteeeeeeeeee

(i) Parties’ Submission:

 

(ii) Tribunal’s Decision

c) Can the Russian Federation Invoke Ownership or Control of
Claimant by Israeli Nationals in Order to Take Advantage of
Article 17(1)?

 

(i) Parties’ Submission:

 

 

 

 

Introduction

 

Parties’ Submissions

 

 

 

198
198
(ii) Tribunals Decision 0.0.0... eseeeesceeseseeeeeeeesesneeneneeeeneee 199
D. Are All or Some of the Claims Barred by the “Taxation Measures” Carve-Out
202
202
205
a) | What is the Scope of the Carve-out for “Taxation Measures”? .............. 205
(i) What is the Meaning of “Taxation Measures” as Set Out in
Article 21(7)?...eescessseceecseesstessneeseeeseees ... 205
(ii) Does the Carve-out Operate to Deprive a Tribunal of
Jurisdiction over the Covered Matters, or Does it Merely
Modulate the Obligations that Can Be Enforced in an
Arbitration, thus Going to Admissibility/Merits? ............0.0....... 206
(iii) If the Carve-out Goes to Jurisdiction, Did Respondent Timely
Raise the Issue? ...........cccececeeeeee . 207
207

b) What is the Scope of the Claw-back for Article 13 (Expropriation)? .....

-iv-

c) How should the Claims be Characterized for Purposes of Article 21? ...

3. Tribunal’s Decision

 

E. Are All or Some of the Claims Barred by the “Fork-in-the-Road” Provision
(Article 26(3)(b)(i)) of the ECT? o.oo. eeceescesseeseeseessessesseeesnessessneeneeseeseeseseneeenetsee

1. Parties’ Submissions

 

2. Tribunal’s Decision

 

IX. DECISION
APPENDIX: YUKOS HOLDING STRUCTURE.

209
209

 

1994 EU Joint Statement

Auriga-type Trusts

Baikal

Bering Sea MBA

BIT

Briefing

BVI

Claimants
Constitution
Cyprus-Russia DTC

Deferred Requests

ECT

ECT Explanatory Note

EU

GATT

LIST OF DEFINED TERMS

Joint statement by the Council, the
Commission and the Member States of the
European Union on Article 45 of the
European Energy Charter Treaty, 14
December 1994

The Auriga Trust, the Draco Trust, the
Mensa Trust, the Tucana Trust, and the

Pictor Trust

Baikal Finance Group, an entity purportedly
controlled by the Russian State

Maritime Boundary Agreement for the
Bering Sea, in connection with which notes
were exchanged between the United States
and the USSR on | June 1990

Bilateral Investment Treaty

U.S. Administration Briefing on the Energy
Charter Treaty, 1 November 1994.

British Virgin Islands

Hulley, VPL and YUL

Constitution of the Russian Federation, 1993
Cyprus-Russia Double Taxation Convention
Requests and objections from the Parties
regarding document production addressed in
Procedural Order No. 2, 8 September 1996
Energy Charter Treaty, 1994

Explanatory Note submitted by the Russian
Government to the Duma together with the
draft ECT ratification law, 26 August 1996

European Union

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade,
1994

-Vi-

GML

Guernsey Trusts

FLIT

Hulley

ICJ

ICSID

ILC

Limitation Clause

NAFTA

P&C Agreement

Palmus Settlement

Parties
PCA

Red Cross

Respondent

GML Limited, a company incorporated in
Gibraltar

Trusts created in Guernsey in 2003 and
2005 which hold the shares of GML (the
Auriga Trust, the Draco Trust, the Mensa
Trust, the Tucana Trust, the Pictor Trust, the
Southern Cross Trust, and the Palmus Trust)

Federal Law on International Treaties of the
Russian Federation, 1995

Hulley Enterprises Limited, a company
organized under the laws of Cyprus and
Claimant in PCA Case No. AA 226

International Court of Justice

International Centre for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes

International Law Commission of the
United Nations

The phrase at the end of Article 45(1) of the
Energy Charter Treaty: “...to the extent
that such provisional application is not
inconsistent with its constitution, laws or
regulations.”

North American Free Trade Agreement,
1992

Agreement on Partnership and Cooperation
between the European Union and _ the

Russian Federation 1994

Settlement on 5 March 2003 creating the
Palmus Trust

Claimants and Respondent
Permanent Court of Arbitration

The International Committee of the Red
Cross

Russia, Russian Federation

- vii -

RSP

Russian Notification

Rysaffe

Southern Cross Declaration

Trade Amendment

Treaty

UNCITRAL Rules

USSR

VCLT

VPL

VP Trust

Yukos

YUL

Russian Service Provider

Notification of 20 August 2009 by Russian
Federation to Portuguese Republic pursuant
to Article 45(3)(a) of the Treaty

Rysaffe Trust Company (C.I.) Limited

Declaration of Discretionary Trust dated 26
April 2005, for the Southern Cross Trust

Declaration made by the Russian Federation
under Article 6(2)(a) of the Amendment to
Trade-Related Provisions of the Energy
Charter Treaty

Energy Charter Treaty, 1994

Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law,
1976

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,
1969

Veteran Petroleum Limited, a company
organized under the laws of Cyprus and
Claimant in PCA Case No. AA 228

Veteran Petroleum Trust

Yukos Oil Corporation OJSC, a joint stock
company incorporated in Russia in 1993

Yukos Universal Limited, a company
organized under the laws of the Isle of Man
and Claimant in PCA Case No. AA 227

- viii -

INTRODUCTION

1.

Three shareholders of Yukos Oil Corporation OJSC (“Yukos”)—Hulley Enterprises
Limited (“Hulley”), a company organized under the laws of Cyprus, Yukos Universal
Limited (“YUL” or “Claimant’”), a company organized under the laws of the Isle of
Man, and Veteran Petroleum Limited (“WPL”), a company organized under the laws of
Cyprus (collectively, “Claimants”)—initiated arbitrations against the Russian Federation
(“Respondent,” “Russian Federation” or “Russia”) which together with Claimants

constitute the “Parties.”

The three arbitrations were heard in parallel with the full participation of the Parties at all
relevant stages of the proceedings. Mindful of the fact that each of the three Claimants
maintains separate claims in separate arbitrations that necessitate separate awards, the
Tribunal nevertheless shall discuss these arbitrations as a single set of proceedings,
except where circumstances distinct to particular Claimants necessitate separate
treatment. Thus throughout Parts I to VI, the introductory portions of this Interim Award,
the plural “Claimants” is used collectively for Hulley, YUL and VPL. In Parts VII, VIII
and IX, the Issues, Analysis and Decision portions of this Interim Award, the singular

“Claimant” refers specifically to YUL.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

A. (COMMENCEMENT OF THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS

On 2 November 2004, all three Claimants delivered to the President of Russia
notifications of claim with respect to Russia’s alleged violation of obligations said to be
owed to Claimants’ investments in Russia under the Energy Charter Treaty (“ECT” or
“Treaty”)' and sought to settle the disputes amicably pursuant to Article 26(1) of the
ECT.

Having failed to settle their disputes amicably within the three-month period prescribed

under Article 26(2) of the ECT, on 3 February 2005, Hulley and YUL initiated arbitration

' Energy Charter Treaty, Lisbon, 17 December 1994, 2080 UNTS 95.

-1-

6.

proceedings through Notices of Arbitration and Statements of Claim against Respondent.
Subsequently, through a Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim dated 14 February
2005, WPL initiated arbitration proceedings against Respondent (collectively, the
“Notices of Arbitration and Statements of Claim”). Claimants’ requests for arbitration
against Respondent were made pursuant to Article 26(4)(b) of the ECT and the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

(“UNCITRAL Rules”)?

Claimants alleged in their Notices of Arbitration and Statements of Claim that
Respondent expropriated and failed to protect Claimants’ investments in Yukos, resulting

in “enormous losses,” and sought all available relief in respect of those losses.

B. CONSTITUTION OF THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

In their Notices of Arbitration and Statements of Claim, Claimants appointed Mr. Daniel

Price as arbitrator.
On 8 April 2005, Respondent appointed Judge Stephen M. Schwebel as arbitrator.

By a letter dated 26 May 2005, Claimants informed the Permanent Court of Arbitration
(“PCA”) that the deadline for the appointment of the presiding arbitrator by the Party-
appointed arbitrators had expired and requested that the Secretary-General of the PCA
designate an appointing authority pursuant to Article 7(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules.
Claimants further stated that they would have no objection to the Secretary-General of
the PCA acting as the appointing authority. By a letter dated 17 June 2005, Respondent
accepted the Secretary-General of the PCA as appointing authority, while making it clear
that such acceptance did not constitute acceptance of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in these

arbitrations.

By letter dated 4 July 2005, the PCA communicated to the Parties a list of three
prospective presiding arbitrators in accordance with the list procedure foreseen in

Articles 6(3) and 7(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules. On 19 July 2005, the Parties

? UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (1976) GA Res. 31/98.

-2-

communicated their choices to the PCA, but no arbitrator set forth on the list was
considered acceptable to both sides. On 20 July 2005, the PCA notified the Parties that
the list procedure had failed and on 21 July 2005 the PCA Secretary-General exercised
his discretion, pursuant to Article 6(3)(d) of the UNCITRAL Rules, and directly
appointed Maitre L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC (the “Chairman’’) as presiding arbitrator.

Through a letter dated 1 August 2005, Claimants agreed to Respondent’s proposal that
The Hague be selected as the legal seat of the arbitrations and confirmed that the Parties

agreed to have the PCA administer these arbitrations.

On 15 October 2005, Respondent submitted its Statements of Defense, in which it
objected to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and denied Claimants’ allegations of expropriation

and unfair and inequitable treatment.

On 31 October 2005, a preliminary procedural hearing was held at the Peace Palace, The
Hague, during which the Parties and the members of the Tribunal signed Terms of
Appointment confirming, inter alia, that: (a) the members of the Tribunal had been
validly appointed in accordance with the ECT and the UNCITRAL Rules, (b) the
proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the UNCITRAL Rules, (c) the
International Bureau of the PCA shall act as registry, (d) the issues in dispute shall be
decided in accordance with the ECT and applicable rules and principles of international
law, (e) the language of the arbitration shall be English, and (f) all pleadings, documents,
testimonial evidence, deliberations and actions taken by the Tribunal, shall remain
confidential in perpetuity, unless the Parties release the arbitrators from this obligation.

The preliminary procedural hearing was attended by the following:

Tribunal

Maitre L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC
Mr. Daniel Price
Judge Stephen M. Schwebel

Claimants Respondent

Counsel Counsel

Professor Emmanuel Gaillard Mr. Robert T. Greig
Dr. Yas Banifatemi Dr. Claudia Annacker
Mr. Philippe Pinsolle Mr. Grégoire Bertrou

Mr. Charles Olson

Party Representatives
Mr. Tim Osborne

Mr. Kevin Bromley
Mr. Christopher Cook
Mr. Rodney Hodges

Permanent Court of Arbitration

Mr. Brooks Daly
Ms. Evelien ter Meulen

Court Reporter
Mr. Trevor McGowan

At the preliminary procedural hearing, the Tribunal also determined that it would rule on
Respondent’s plea concerning jurisdiction and the admissibility of the claim as a
preliminary question and ordered a procedural calendar for the conduct of the arbitration.
The procedural calendar was subsequently confirmed through Procedural Order No. 1,

dated 8 November 2005.
On 31 May 2007, Mr. Daniel Price resigned as arbitrator.

On 26 June 2007, Claimants appointed Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler as
arbitrator to replace Mr. Price. Through a letter dated 29 June 2007, Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler disclosed, for purposes of transparency, certain circumstances
connecting her then law firm to Claimants and Claimants’ counsel which, in her view, did
not affect her independence and impartiality. On the basis of those relationships, by its
letter of 13 July 2007, Respondent challenged Claimants’ appointment of Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler pursuant to Article 11 of the UNCITRAL Rules. By a letter dated 20
July 2007, Professor Kaufmann-Kohler maintained that the circumstances disclosed in
her letter of 29 June 2007 did not affect her independence and impartiality. Through their
letter of 26 July 2007, Claimants did not agree to the challenge of Professor Kaufmann-
Kohler’s appointment as arbitrator. On 31 July 2007, Respondent requested a ruling
from the Secretary-General of the PCA on Respondent’s challenge to the appointment
pursuant to Article 12 of the UNCITRAL Rules. After providing the Parties the
opportunity to comment on the challenge, on 4 September 2007, the Secretary-General of

the PCA sustained the challenge of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler as arbitrator and invited

Claimants to appoint a substitute arbitrator in accordance with Article 7 of the

UNCITRAL Rules.

On 24 September 2007, Claimants appointed Dr. Charles Poncet as arbitrator.

Cc. WRITTEN AND ORAL PROCEEDINGS

Pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1, Respondent filed its First Memorials on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility on 28 February 2006 (“First Memorials”). Claimants filed their
Counter-Memorials on Jurisdiction and Admissibility on 30 June 2006 (“Counter-

Memorials”).

By letter dated 27 March 2006, Claimants requested that Respondent produce certain
documents relied upon in its First Memorials. On 8 May 2006, following extensive
correspondence, the Tribunal ordered that Respondent produce all the documents relied
upon in Respondent’s Memorials. These documents were to be submitted by 17 May
2006. On 17 May 2006, Respondent produced certain documents; however, in a letter
dated 19 May 2006, Claimants pointed out that Respondent had failed to produce all the
required documents and requested that the Tribunal direct Respondent to comply fully
with the Tribunal’s letter of 8 May 2006 and grant Claimants additional time to prepare
their Counter-Memorials. The Chairman requested that Respondent provide its
comments on Claimants’ letter of 19 May 2006, and by a letter dated 26 May 2006,
Respondent stated that it had produced all the requested documents, although some of
them were secondary—rather than primary—source documents, and therefore requested
that the Tribunal deny Claimants’ application. The Chairman requested that Respondent
provide its comments on Claimants’ letter of 26 May 2006, and by a letter dated 1 June
2006, Claimants reiterated all of the terms of their letter dated 19 May 2006. The
Tribunal directed Respondent to produce the primary sources listed in the table attached
to Claimants’ letter dated 19 May 2006; the deadline for submission of the documents
was 23 June 2006. On 23 June 2006 Respondent provided some of the documents

requested.

On 8 September 2006, after considering various requests and objections from the Parties

for the production of certain documents, including the various pleadings and requests

-5-

20.

21.

22.

23.

relating to the Parties’ respective “unclean hands” contentions and Respondent’s
contention that “Claimant(s’) corporate responsibility must be disregarded because it is
an instrumentality of a criminal enterprise” (collectively, the “Deferred Requests”), the
Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, which granted a number of requests, denied
others, and invited the Parties to attempt to reach agreement by 18 September 2006 on
whether the Deferred Requests should be considered during the Jurisdiction and
Admissibility phase or deferred to the merits phase, if any. If the Parties were unable to
reach agreement, the Tribunal invited the Parties to communicate their respective views
on the question in writing by 2 October 2006 and to comment on the other Party’s

submission by 16 October 2006.

On 31 October 2006, after receiving the Parties’ submissions following their inability to
reach agreement, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, deciding that it was
appropriate to defer consideration of the Parties’ contentions concerning “unclean
hands,” Respondent’s “criminal enterprise” contention, and the resolution of the Deferred
Requests (or relevant portions thereof) to the merits phase, if any. Prior to rendering its
decision on the Deferred Requests, and in order to facilitate identification of the factual
issues in dispute as to which further document production ought to be ordered, the
Tribunal also invited Claimants to inform the Tribunal whether they were prepared to
stipulate certain facts. On 3 November 2006 Claimants submitted a stipulation of facts,

and on 8 November 2006, Respondent submitted its observations on the stipulations.

On 28 November 2006, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4, wherein it made a
determination on certain of the Parties’ Deferred Requests, and modified the procedural

calendar.

Respondent filed its Second Memorials on Jurisdiction and Admissibility on 31 January

2007 (“Second Memorials”).

On 6 March 2007, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5, which, inter alia,
(a) directed Respondent to provide certain documents requested by Claimants (including
publicly available documents), (b) reminded the Parties of their obligation to produce and
submit to the other Party all documents relied upon in their Memorials or by their

witnesses/experts in their statements/opinions, and (c) ruled that a Party’s failure to

-6-

24.

25.

26.

produce a document within the prescribed time may, on application of the other Party,
result in the Tribunal drawing an inference adverse to the defaulting Party or even

excluding or limiting the evidence in support of which the document has been invoked.

Claimants filed their Rejoinders on Jurisdiction and Admissibility on 1 June 2007

(“Rejoinders”).

On | December 2007, a hearing was conducted at the Conference Centre of the World
Bank, Paris, concerning certain procedural matters, hearing schedules, the production of
additional documents, and Claimants’ request for interim measures for the safekeeping of

Yukos’ company records. In attendance were the following:

Tribunal

Maitre L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC
Dr. Charles Poncet
Judge Stephen M. Schwebel

Claimants Respondent

Counsel Counsel

Professor Emmanuel Gaillard Mr. Robert T. Greig

Dr. Yas Banifatemi Mr. Matthew D. Slater
Mr. Philippe Pinsolle Dr. Claudia Annacker
Mr. Mark McNeill Mr. J. Cameron Murphy
Ms. Jennifer Younan Dr. Maja Ménard

Ms. Anna Crevon
Mr. Jean-Baptiste Godon

Party Representatives
Mr. Tim Osborne

Mr. Christopher Cook
Mr. Rodney Hodges

Assistant to the Tribunal

Mr. Martin Valasek

Permanent Court of Arbitration
Mr. Brooks Daly

Court Reporter
Mr. Trevor McGowan

At the procedural hearing, the Tribunal denied a 22 November 2007 request by Claimant

for interim measures for the preservation of Yukos documentation in the possession,

-7-

27.

custody, or control of Russia, in light of statements concerning the safekeeping of Yukos
company records in a decision of the Moscow Arbitrazh Court dated 12 November 2007.
This decision was subsequently confirmed on 12 December 2007 as Procedural Order

No. 6.

On 8 and 9 May 2008, a procedural hearing was conducted at the Peace Palace, The
Hague. The Chairman was authorized by his co-arbitrators to chair the procedural
hearing alone. The procedural hearing dealt with a number of matters, including
Claimants’ request for interim measures of preservation dated 1 December 2007, the
Parties’ respective requests to exclude certain documents from the evidentiary record, and
the conduct of the scheduled hearing on jurisdiction and admissibility. In attendance

were the following:

Tribunal

Maitre L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC

Claimants Respondent

Counsel Counsel

Professor Emmanuel Gaillard Mr. Robert T. Greig

Dr. Yas Banifatemi Mr. Matthew D. Slater

Mr. Philippe Pinsolle Dr. Claudia Annacker

Mr. Mark McNeill Mr. J. Cameron Murphy
Ms. Jennifer Younan Dr. Maja Ménard

Ms. Anna Crevon Mr. Guillaume de Rancourt

Mr. Jean-Baptiste Godon
Ms. Tania Steenkamp
Mr. Gueorgui Babitchev

Party Representatives

Mr. Tim Osborne

Mr. Christopher Cook
Assistant to the Tribunal

Mr. Martin Valasek

Permanent Court of Arbitration
Mr. Brooks Daly

Ms. Véronique Laughlin

Court Reporter

Mr. Trevor McGowan

28.

29.

On 11 June 2008, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 7, in which the Tribunal
ruled upon matters arising from the hearing of 8 and 9 May 2008. The Tribunal decided
upon the admission of certain ECT documentation. The Tribunal also decided that while
it will remain seized of Claimants’ application for interim measures, an order would not
be issued in light of Respondent’s understanding that the relevant Yukos company

records at issue would be retained by the Moscow Arbitrazh Court for a period of 5 years.

On 5 August 2008, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 8, ruling, inter alia, upon
the allocation of time between the Parties for cross-examination and excluding a witness
statement from the evidentiary record. The Tribunal then declared the evidentiary record

of the jurisdiction and admissibility phase of the arbitrations closed.

On 23 September 2008, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 9, deciding certain

procedural matters with respect to the hearing on jurisdiction and admissibility.

On 10 November 2008, Claimants and Respondent submitted their respective Skeleton
Arguments in aid of the oral arguments to be presented at the hearing on jurisdiction and

admissibility.

The hearing on jurisdiction and admissibility was conducted at the Peace Palace, The
Hague, on 17 to 21 November, 26 to 29 November, and 1 December 2008. Claimants
cross-examined the following witnesses: Professor Suren Avakiyan, Mr. Sydney
Fremantle, Mr. Martin Mann, QC, Mr. Daniel Berman, and Mr. Anatoly Martynov.
Respondent cross-examined Mr. Vladimir Gladyshev and Mr. Brian Green, QC. The
Tribunal also heard the Parties’ closing statements and rebuttal. Over the course of the

hearing, the following were in attendance:

Tribunal

Maitre L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC
Dr. Charles Poncet
Judge Stephen M. Schwebel

Claimants Respondent

Counsel Counsel

Professor Emmanuel Gaillard Dr. Claudia Annacker
Dr. Yas Banifatemi Mr. Matthew Slater
Mr. Philippe Pinsolle Mr. Jonathan Blackman
Mr. Mark McNeill Mr. David Sabel

Ms. Jennifer Younan Mr. William McGurn

Ms. Coralie Darrigade Mr. Cameron Murphy
Ms. Ximena Herrera Dr. Maja Ménard

Ms. Anna Crevon Ms. Ksenia Khanseidova
Mr. Jean-Baptiste Godon Mr. Lorenzo Melchionda
Mr. Gueorgui Babitchev Mr. Milo Molfa

Ms. Jamia Sulayman Mr. Lee Berger

Mr. Guillaume De Rancourt
Mr. Matthew Bunda

Ms. Rachel Goldbrenner
Mr. Rashid Sharipov

Mr. Thomas Price

Mr. Stephane Sollogoub

Party Representatives
Mr. Tim Osborne

Mr. Christopher Cook
Mr. Rodney Hodges

Witnesses
Mr. Vladimir Gladyshev Party Representatives
Mr. Brian Green, QC Mr. Vladislav Maslyannikov

Mr. Konstantin Gavrilov
Mr. Maxim Musikhin
Witnesses

Professor Suren Avakiyan

Mr. Sydney Fremantle

Mr. Anatoly Martynov

Mr. Martin Mann, QC

Professor Daniel Berman
Assistant to the Tribunal

Mr. Martin Valasek

Permanent Court of Arbitration

Mr. Brooks Daly

Ms. Judith Levine

Mr. Aloysius Llamzon
Mr. Erwann Nicot

Court Reporter

Mr. Trevor McGowan
Ms. Christina Yanni

Interpreters

Mr. Yuri Somov
Mr. Kirill Savinski

By a letter dated 2 December 2008, the Tribunal confirmed that no Post-Hearing Briefs

would be requested in these arbitrations.

-10-

On 31 August 2009, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it had learned from the
Government of Portugal that, on 20 August 2009, Russia had notified the Portuguese
Republic as Depository of the Treaty of Russia’s intention not to become a party to the
Treaty pursuant to Article 45(3)(a) of the Treaty (the “Russian Notification”). The
Tribunal requested the Parties to submit their observations as to what effect, if any, the
Russian Notification had on the Tribunal’s consideration of the issues now before it. By
letters dated 15 September 2009, the Parties submitted their written observations in

response to the Tribunal’s request.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The disputes between the Parties to the present proceedings arose during the period
between July 2003 and August 2006, after Yukos had emerged following the collapse of
the Soviet Union to become the largest oil company in the Russian Federation. In
essence, the disputes between the Parties involve various measures taken by the Russian
Federation against Yukos and associated companies, that culminated in the bankruptcy of
Yukos in August 2006, thereby allegedly adversely affecting Claimants’ investments in
Yukos. Such acts include both criminal prosecutions and other measures that Claimants

allege to be in violation of the ECT.

A. ENERGY CHARTER TREATY

The ECT was opened for signature on 17 December 1994 and entered into force on
16 April 1998. According to Article 2 of the Treaty, its purpose is to establish “‘a legal
framework in order to promote long-term co-operation in the energy field... in

accordance with the objectives and principles of the Charter.”

The Russian Federation signed the ECT on 17 December 1994. The Treaty was
submitted for ratification to the Parliament of the Russian Federation on 26 August 1996.
Respondent notes that its Parliament has “never ratified the Treaty, nor has it ever
adopted any law accepting or approving its provisional application.” Instead, the
proposal to ratify the Treaty met “fierce opposition” in the State Duma hearings in April
1997 and January 2001 and continued to meet such opposition. Respondent therefore

contends that at all relevant times, the Treaty had not yet entered into force for the

-ll-

40.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

Russian Federation, and that Claimants cannot rely on its terms in the present

proceedings.

In contrast, Claimants submit that the Russian Federation has applied the Treaty on a
provisional basis since signing it in December 1994, in accordance with Article 45 of the

Treaty.

On 20 August 2009, the Russian Federation notified the Portuguese Republic, as the ECT
Depository, of its intention not to become a party to the ECT. According to Respondent,
the Russian Notification is “fully consistent with the positions taken in these proceedings
by the Russian Federation, and was not intended to have any effect on the jurisdictional

and admissibility issues currently before the Tribunal.”

Claimants consider that the Russian Notification of 20 August 2009 has “no effect
whatsoever on the Tribunal’s consideration of the issues before it,” other than furnishing
further support for the conclusion that by terminating provisional application of the ECT
pursuant to Article 45(3) of the ECT, Russia “admits having applied the Treaty from the
date of signature with such provisional application giving rise to legally binding rights

and obligations.”

B. THE PARTIES TO THESE PROCEEDINGS

1. Claimants and Related Entities

The three Claimants in these related cases are all part of the Yukos group of companies,
which had at its center the Yukos Oil Corporation OJSC, headed by Chief Executive
Officer Mr. Mikhail Khodorkovsky.

Claimant in PCA Case No. AA 227, YUL, was incorporated on 24 September 1997 in the
Isle of Man (a Dependency of the United Kingdom).

Claimant in PCA Case No. AA 226, Hulley, was incorporated in the Republic of Cyprus
on 17 September 1997 and was a 100 percent owned subsidiary of YUL.

Claimant in PCA Case No. AA 228, VPL, was incorporated in the Republic of Cyprus on
7 February 2001.

-12-

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

2. Respondent

Respondent in these three proceedings is the Russian Federation.

Cc. YUKOS OIL CORPORATION OJSC

After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Yukos was incorporated as a joint stock company
in 1993 by Presidential Decree. Fully privatized in 1995-1996, it was a vertically
integrated group engaging in exploration, production, refining, marketing and distribution
of crude oil, natural gas and petroleum products. Its three main production subsidiaries
were Yuganskneftegaz, Samaraneftegaz and, from 1997, Tomskneft. In May 2002,
Yukos became the first Russian company to be ranked among the top ten largest oil and
gas companies by market capitalization worldwide. At its peak in 2003, it had 100,000
employees, six main refineries and a market capitalization estimated at over
US$33 billion. After its 2003 merger with Sibneft, according to Claimants, YukosSibneft
became the fourth largest oil producer worldwide, behind BP, Exxon and Shell. At the
time of Respondent’s alleged adverse actions in the summer of 2003, Yukos was engaged

in merger negotiations with ExxonMobil and Chevron.

Respondent, however, contends that Yukos was a “criminal enterprise,” engaged in a

variety of tax evasion schemes and other fraudulent activities.

D. CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

Starting in July 2003, a series of criminal investigations were initiated by the Russian
Federation against Yukos management and activities. Claimants characterize these
actions as harassment, motivated by Mr. Khodorkovsky’s participation in Russian
(opposition) politics and intended—together with tax reassessments—to lead to the
nationalization of Yukos’ assets. Respondent contends that its actions were in response

to illegal acts committed by Yukos and its officers and shareholders.

Between July and October 2003, three key Yukos officers were arrested. In July 2003,
Mr. Platon Lebedev, Director of YUL and Chairman of Hulley, was arrested on charges
of embezzlement and fraud; he was sentenced to nine years in prison in May 2005. In

October 2003, Mr. Vasily Shakhovsky, President of Yukos—Moscow, was charged with

-13-

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

and later convicted of tax evasion. In October 2003, Mr. Khodorkovsky himself was
arrested and charged with crimes including forgery, fraud and tax evasion; he was also
sentenced to a nine-year prison term in May 2005. As a result of these arrests, a number
of high-ranking Yukos executives fled Russia, such as Mr. Leonid Nevzlin, Deputy
Chairman of Yukos until 2003. On 2 February 2007, new charges of embezzlement and

money laundering were brought against Messrs. Khodorkovsky and Lebedev.

Further arrest warrants were issued from mid-January 2004 against individuals who
either held office in Yukos or were associated with it. From late November 2004,
mid-level managers and lower-ranking employees were charged or became the subject of
criminal investigations. From 2005, several remaining Yukos officials, including many
foreign nationals, declined to return to Russia as a result of these investigations.
Claimants contend that by April 2006, no fewer than 35 top managers and employees of
Yukos had been interrogated, arrested or sentenced and that lawyers acting for Yukos had
been obstructed in their work. During the same period, Russian authorities conducted

searches, seizures and interrogations of Yukos property and personnel.

Claimants contend that all of these actions amounted to harassment and intimidation, that
they “severely hampered” the functioning of Yukos as a business and that the underlying

motive was to nationalize Yukos’ assets.

In response, Respondent contends that Claimants are “part of a criminal enterprise
engaging in a number of illegal activities [...] including tax evasion, tax fraud, and
schemes to avoid enforcement of tax liens” and that Claimants have “engaged in a pattern
of criminal activity” designed to divert funds from Russian entities through tax fraud and
embezzlement. It contends that Claimants had participated in an illegal tax scheme
designed to misuse special low-tax zones in Russia and that they were aware of the

illegality of the tax fraud scheme.

Respondent contends that in addition to participation in tax fraud schemes, Claimants
participated in a “massive transfer pricing scheme by which hundreds of millions of
dollars from the sales of oil and other products were illegally siphoned off to offshore
entities for the benefit of Khodorkovsky/Lebedev and other controlling Russian

oligarchs.” Through this scheme, oil or other products would be sold by Russian entities

-14-

54.

55.

56.

57.

at below-market prices to offshore companies with no official affiliation to Yukos and
then re-sold at market prices, with the profits going to Yukos officials. Respondent
contends further that Yukos committed other corporate crimes, such as attempting to
issue shares in Yukos subsidiaries to offshore companies in order to dilute the
shareholdings of minority shareholders, manipulating the Yukos share price in order to
buy back Yukos shares from the banks at below-market prices, and embezzlement of

funds.

Respondent also contends that Yukos officials have been engaged in violent crimes, such
as the murder, attempted murder and assault of persons seeking to enforce Russian tax

laws or otherwise perceived to threaten Yukos interests.

Respondent denies that Yukos and its officers were targeted in a discriminatory way,
contending that Russian taxation measures have also applied to other offenders and that
the searches and seizures were taken as part of legitimate taxation measures and
conducted in accordance with the appropriate procedural protections available under

Russian law.

E. ADDITIONAL MEASURES

In the period between October 2003 and August 2006, Yukos and its subsidiaries faced a
series of additional measures, including the annulment of Yukos’ merger with Sibneft,
tax reassessments, the freezing of shares and assets, the threatened revocation of licenses,
mutual legal assistance measures and the forced sale of Yukos’ main production facility,
Yuganskneftegaz. These measures were followed by the bankruptcy of Yukos in August
2006.

1. Annulment of Yukos Merger with Sibneft

A merger was completed between Yukos and Sibneft, Russia’s fifth largest oil company,
in October 2003. According to Claimants, the resulting entity, YukosSibneft, became the
world’s fourth largest oil company. In November 2003, however, after Yukos had
acquired 92 percent of Sibneft’s shares and after the arrest of Mr. Khodorkovsky,

Sibneft’s controlling shareholder, Mr. Roman Abramovich, halted the merger process

-15-

58.

59.

60.

based on court findings of Yukos’ violations of Russian securities and anti-monopoly

laws.

2. Tax Reassessments

Respondent contends that from 2000 until Mr. Khodorkovsky’s arrest in 2003, Yukos had
“implemented an illegal and fraudulent tax evasion scheme designed to misuse special
low-tax zones within the Russian Federation,” known as “ZATOs” or “internal offshore
zones.” It alleges that the scheme involved setting up numerous sham companies in
internal offshore zones to enjoy a favorable tax regime in those territories. Claimants
deny that Yukos’ actions with regard to these trade subsidiaries was illegal or fraudulent,
but rather was consistent with Russian legislation in place at the time. They contend that
changes to Russian tax legislation were implemented retroactively and for ulterior

purposes.

In April 2004, the Russian Ministry of Taxation issued a tax reassessment for Yukos
exceeding US$3.4 billion for 2000, which was largely upheld by the Moscow Arbitrazh
Court. Similarly large tax reassessments were issued in the period between 2004 and
2006 for subsequent tax years. (For instance, 2001 taxes were re-assessed in the amount
of US$4.1 billion, 2002 taxes in the amount of US$6.9 billion and 2004 taxes in the
amount of US$6.1 billion.) Yukos’ subsidiaries were also faced with large tax
reassessment claims for the years 2001-2003. Respondent contends that the
reassessments were a consequence of Yukos’ activities relating to the tax fraud scheme.
Claimants submit, however, that the reassessments “were so excessive that the Russian

authorities’ strategy of destroying Yukos became plain.”

Claimants note that Yukos made numerous proposals to the Russian authorities
throughout this period to settle the tax claims, which were ignored or rejected by the
Russian authorities. Overall, Claimants contend, “there have been over 70 offers to settle

Yukos’ tax claims, all of which have been ignored by the Russian authorities.”

3. Freezing of Shares and Assets

At the same time that tax reassessments were being filed against Yukos and its

subsidiaries, Russian authorities began freezing shares and other assets belonging to

-16-

64.

Yukos and related entities. In October 2003, Russian prosecutors froze shares held by
Yukos Universal and Hulley in Yukos—thereby freezing 53 percent of all shares in
Yukos. Orders issued by the Moscow Arbitrazh Court in April and June 2004 prevented
Yukos from disposing of any of its assets. An application by Yukos in July 2004 to have
sufficient assets released to meet its tax liabilities was ignored and a US$241 million
surcharge was applied for late payment of taxes. Similar fines for late tax payments were

charged in 2001 and in 2002.

In July 2004, Russian authorities began seizing Yukos’ shares in Yuganskneftegaz,
Samaraneftegaz and Tomskneft. Yuganskneftegaz bank accounts were frozen in August
2004 and thirteen additional freezing orders were imposed on Yukos’ bank accounts in
September 2004. The Russian authorities also used mutual legal assistance treaties to

affect Yukos’ interests abroad.

Respondent does not dispute the freezing of Yukos’ assets but contends that “[t]he
freezing of assets of the debtor, including shares owned by it, is a standard enforcement

measure for tax levies and judgments.”

4. Threatened Revocation of Licenses

Between October 2003 and December 2004, the Russian Ministry of Natural Resources
conducted a review of Yukos’ compliance with oil production license obligations.
Searches were conducted in September 2004 concerning Yuganskneftegaz licenses; in
October 2004, a Government task force recommended revoking 24 licenses to Yukos’
subsidiaries, and a special commission began investigations into Yukos’ oil and gas fields

in the Saratov Region. Investigations ended in December 2004.

5. Sale of Yuganskneftegaz

In July 2004, the Russian Federation indicated that it intended to appraise and sell
Yuganskneftegaz to pay off Yukos’ back taxes. A valuation carried out by investment
bank Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein at the request of the Russian Federation valued
Yuganskneftegaz at between US$15.7 billion and US$18.3 billion. A valuation carried

out by JP Morgan, at the request of Yukos, valued Yuganskneftegaz at between

-17-

Til.

US$16 billion and US$22 billion. The Russian Ministry of Justice announced that Yukos
was worth only US$10.4 billion.

After Yukos’ attempts to file for bankruptcy in both the Russian Federation and the
United States failed, Yuganskneftegaz was sold at auction on 19 December 2004 for
US$9.37 billion to Baikal Finance Group (“Baikal”), an entity purportedly controlled by
the Russian State. On 23 December 2004, Baikal was bought by State-owned Rosneft.

6. Bankruptcy Proceedings

Claimants allege that the Russian Federation first reported in March 2005 that it intended
to “push Yukos into bankruptcy in order to redistribute its remaining assets.” On
6 March 2006, a syndicate of banks filed a bankruptcy petition before the Moscow
Arbitrazh Court, pursuant to a Sale Agreement with Rosneft. Yuganskneftegaz filed a
separate bankruptcy petition against Yukos, which was subsequently joined to that of the
bank syndicate. On 29 March 2006, bankruptcy proceedings were commenced against
Yukos, placing it under external supervision, and on 1 August 2006, Yukos was declared

bankrupt.

Yukos’ remaining assets were acquired by State-owned Gazprom and Rosneft, with the
bankruptcy auctions raising a total of US$31.5 billion. In November 2007, Yukos was

liquidated and struck off the register of legal entities.

PARTIES’ WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS

As indicated in Part C of the Procedural History above, the Parties submitted two rounds
of memorials. Each party took full advantage of the written phase of these proceedings,
filing detailed and extensive written submissions. Respondent’s First Memorial runs to
150 pages, and was accompanied by 311 exhibits and five witness statements.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial is 137 pages long, and was accompanied by 453 exhibits
and three witness statements. Respondent’s Second Memorial runs to over 250 pages,
and was accompanied by 494 exhibits and 15 witness statements. Finally, Claimant’s
Rejoinder runs to over 200 pages, and was submitted with 641 exhibits and four witness
statements. Hundreds of other additional exhibits and witness statements were submitted

in the course of the proceedings.

-18-

70.

71.

The Tribunal studied these submissions carefully. The Parties’ principal arguments are
re-stated in the Tribunal’s analysis of the issues in Part VIII, below. For purposes of this
introductory chapter, the Tribunal reproduces below verbatim the written “skeleton

arguments” that the Parties submitted prior to the hearing at the Tribunal’s request.

A. RESPONDENT’S POSITION

The text of the paragraphs below is produced directly from paragraphs 1 to 53 of

Respondent’s Skeleton Argument submitted on 10 November 2008.

A. Claimants’ Mandatory Opt-Out Declaration Argument is Without
Merit

1. The Russian Federation is entitled to rely on the
inconsistency clause in Article 45(1) of the ECT irrespective
of whether the Russian Federation ever made an opt-out
declaration under Article 45(2)(a).

2. Article 45(1) provides that the ECT is to be provisionally
applied as to each signatory “to the extent that such
provisional application is not inconsistent with its
constitution, laws or regulations.” Article 45(2)(a)
separately provides that an ECT signatory “may” deliver to
the Treaty Depository a declaration “that it is not able to
accept provisional application.” Contrary to Claimants’
contention, Article 45(2)(a) is not a compulsory procedural
mechanism, and a Treaty signatory need not have made an
opt-out declaration in order to rely on the inconsistency
clause in Article 45(1).

3. The plain language of Article 45, its context, the Treaty’s
travaux préparatoires, circumstances at the time of the
Treaty’s conclusion, and State practice in the application of
the Treaty all support this conclusion.

4. By their terms, Article 45(1) is self-executing and does not
require the delivery of an opt-out declaration, and Article
45(2)(a) operates in express derogation of Article 45(1)
(“Notwithstanding paragraph (1)”) and, in any event, is not

obligatory (a signatory “may” deliver an opt-out
declaration).

5. The inconsistency clause in Article 45(1) is based on
standard inconsistency clauses included in other treaties,
none of which provide for an opt-out mechanism. When
originally proposed, Article 45(1) was drafted as a stand-
alone clause without an opt-out mechanism. Article
45(2)(a) was added later only to accommodate those States

-19-

that did not want to apply the Treaty provisionally at all, for
political or other reasons.

6. At least six States separately stated that they considered
themselves entitled to rely on the inconsistency clause in
Article 45(1) without making an opt-out declaration. A
Joint Statement of the EU Member States, the Council and
the Commission of the European Union is to the same
effect. The informal transparency declarations made by
several States, relied on by Claimants, are unavailing.
While some States did make transparency declarations, none
of the transparency declarations was ever delivered to the
Treaty Depository, as required by Article 45(2)(a), and
several States which expressly relied on Article 45(1),
including Germany, France, Spain, and Luxembourg, never
made transparency declarations. Though not legally
relevant, the Russian Federation’s failure to make a
transparency declaration is not surprising, given the
extraordinarily rapid pace of legal and constitutional change
in Russia in the period in question. Under the chaotic
circumstances then prevailing, no detailed analysis of the
Treaty’s consistency with Russian law could fairly be
expected.

B. Claimants’ All-or-Nothing Approach to Article 45(1) of the Treaty

is Without Merit

7. Pursuant to Article 45(1), each provision of the Treaty must
be provisionally applied, but only to the extent performance
of the obligation created by that provision is not inconsistent
with Russia’s Constitution, laws or regulations. Claimants’
argument notwithstanding, Article 45(1) does not operate on
an “all-or-nothing basis” so as to require, as a matter of
principle, either that the entire Treaty be provisionally
applied, or that no portion of the Treaty be provisionally
applied.

8. The plain language of Article 45(1), its context, the Treaty’s
travaux préparatoires, the circumstances at the time of the
Treaty’s conclusion, and State practice in the application of
the Treaty all support the conclusion that Article 45(1) is to
be applied provision-by-provision, and not on an all-or-
nothing basis.

9. In common usage, confirmed by standard dictionary
definitions, “to the extent that” refers to the “scope” or
“width of application.” “To the extent that” is precisely the
language used when drafters wish to make clear that a
provision is to be applied only insofar as what follows is the
case. If it had been intended that the Treaty would be
provisionally applied in whole or not at all, Article 45(1)
would have instead provided for the Treaty’s provisional

-20-

application “if? such provisional application is not
inconsistent with a signatory’s domestic laws. The drafters
of the Treaty likewise could not plausibly have intended that
a signatory’s provisional application of the entire Treaty
would in principle be inconsistent with a signatory’s
“regulations.”

10. The travaux préparatoires confirm that the negotiating
States expected that provisional application would differ
from country to country based on different domestic
inconsistencies; that even relatively minor regulations could
result in the non-application pro tanto of an inconsistent
Treaty provision; and that even a signatory which had no
objection in principle to provisional application would only
have to apply the Treaty’s investment protection provisions
to the extent not inconsistent with the signatory’s own
constitution, laws or regulations.

. State practice is fully in accord. As reflected in the Joint
Statement made by the EU Member States, the Council and
the Commission of the European Union, Article 45(1),
“defining the conditions and limits for the provisional
application of the ECT by the Signatories[, . . .] does not
create any commitment beyond what is compatible with the
existing internal legal order of the Signatories.” With
specific reference to the Russian Federation, the Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom stated as recently as February 7, 2006, that Article
45 of the Treaty “places some obligations on the Russian
Federation, but only to the extent that such provisional
application is not inconsistent with its constitution, laws or
regulations” (emphasis supplied). Mr. Craig Bamberger, the
Chairman of the ECT Legal Subgroup, and other scholars,
agree with the views expressed in the Joint Statement and in
the more recent statement of the UK Secretary of State.

12. The Tribunal must accordingly determine whether the
dispute-settlement obligations imposed by Article 26 of the
Treaty are consistent with Russia’s Constitution, laws and
regulations.

C. The Claims (and their Resolution by Arbitration) are Inconsistent

with Russia’s Laws and Constitution

13. For purposes of Article 45(1), a Treaty provision is
inconsistent with a signatory’s constitution, laws or
regulations if, prior to ratification, the Treaty provision (a)
imposes an obligation that conflicts with the signatory’s
domestic law, or (b) creates a new obligation that requires
the taking of legal action that, under the signatory’s
constitution, may only be taken by the signatory’s
legislature (as distinguished from its executive branch). The

-21-

a

travaux préparatoires reflect the importance of the latter
type of inconsistency, a concern made explicit in Article
45(1) by the addition to that Article of language requiring
the Treaty to be provisionally applied only to the extent the
Treaty is consistent not just with a signatory’s laws and
regulations, but also its constitution.

. Claimants’ argument that Russian law is irrelevant in

principle to the provisional application of the Treaty would
render the Treaty’s inconsistency clause a legal nullity and
is based on a fundamental misunderstanding of the monist
nature of the Russian legal system.

. According to Claimants, Russian law is irrelevant here

because the investors’ claim is based on a treaty guarantee
rather than domestic law, and thus any resulting investor-
State arbitration is “autonomous and distinct from
proceedings under the legal system of the host State.” This
argument is premised on an extreme dualist view, in which
investment treaty protections operate on an entirely separate
plane from domestic law. Claimants’ argument is
unavailing both because the argument would, as a matter of
principle, deny any possible application to all domestic law
exceptions, including the inconsistency clause in Article
45(1), and because Russia does not have a dualist legal
system.

. Following Claimants’ tautological argument, there could

never in principle be an inconsistency between a treaty
provision and a signatory’s domestic laws, each operating
on its own separate plane. The Russian Federation submits,
to the contrary, that the very purpose of a domestic-law
exception to provisional application of a treaty is precisely
to reconcile treaty-imposed obligations with conflicting
domestic-law obligations.

. Russia’s legal system is, in any event, monist (not dualist) in

nature. International treaties form an integral part of
Russian law, and must be applied directly by Russia’s
courts. If ratified, the Russian Federation’s treaties prevail
over inconsistent legislation other than the Constitution.
Contrary to Claimants’ unstated and incorrect assumption,
investment treaty protections are directly enforceable in
Russian courts, and do not exist on some “autonomous and
distinct” plane.

. Under Russian law, disputes arising from sovereign acts or

omissions, including claims for damages for expropriation,
may not be submitted to arbitration absent a legal enactment
in the form of a law or a ratified treaty so providing.
Disputes involving the lawfulness of expropriation, taxation
measures, bankruptcy, and other regulatory matters are

-22-

S

20.

21.

within the exclusive jurisdiction of Russia’s courts, and may
not be submitted to arbitration. The Russian Federation’s
Civil Procedure Code, Arbitrazh Procedure Code and Tax
Code confirm the exclusive jurisdiction of Russian courts
over these issues, and prohibit their arbitration. Claimants’
request for damages is based on allegedly illegal sovereign
acts of various Russian authorities, none of which under
Russian law may be submitted to arbitration, unless a
specific law provides otherwise. The ECT, an unratified
treaty, is not such a law.

 

. In light of the exclusive jurisdiction granted to Russian

courts by Russian law to resolve disputes of the type
presented here, allowing Claimants’ claims to be resolved
by mandatory arbitration under Article 26 of the Treaty
would be inconsistent with both Russia’s laws and its
Constitution. The Russian Constitution is based on the
principle of separation of powers and the rule of law. Each
branch of State power exercises its power independently,
and no branch may usurp the power of another branch. The
Russian Constitution specifically preserves the prerogatives
of Russia’s Federal Assembly (parliament) in the treaty-
making process—law-making treaties must be ratified by
the adoption of a federal law by both the Duma and the
Federation Council—and prohibits the Government from
legislating through the conclusion and implementation of
international treaties that amend or complement federal
laws. This ratification requirement is an emanation of the
principle of separation of powers established in Article 10 of
the Constitution, and is reflected in Article 15(1)(a) of the
Federal Law on International Treaties. Under the latter
Article, all treaties whose implementation requires “the
amendment of existing or the adoption of new federal laws,
and also those establishing rules that are different from those
provided for by law,” are subject to ratification.

 

  

The Treaty is also inconsistent with other provisions of
Russian law, in addition to the non-arbitrability of disputes
involving sovereign acts or omissions and the exclusive
jurisdiction of Russian courts to resolve those disputes.
Russian law requires privity between the parties to an
arbitration agreement, unless a ratified treaty (for example, a
ratified bilateral investment treaty) provides otherwise.
Professor Kostin’s expert opinion on this point has not been
disputed. The standing offer to arbitrate investor-State
disputes contained in Article 26 of the Treaty is thus
inconsistent with Russian law.

Russian law also does not allow the shareholders of a
Russian joint stock company, such as Claimants, to assert a
claim based on injuries allegedly suffered by the company,
its management or its subsidiaries. Professor Sukhanov’s

-23-

22.

23.

2.

25.

26.

v

a

x

a

a

expert opinion on this point has not been disputed.
Claimants’ assertion of damages alleged to have been
suffered in their capacity as shareholders, in reliance on
Article 26, in conjunction with Articles 1(6) and (7), of the
Treaty, is thus likewise inconsistent with Russian law.

Claimants’ contention that Article 23(1) of the Federal Law
on International Treaties provides blanket legislative
approval for the Russian Government to provisionally apply
all treaties, including the ECT, is equally unavailing. Article
23(1) is merely a restatement of Article 25(1) of the Vienna
Convention on the Law’ of Treaties, which,
uncontroversially, provides that a treaty may be
provisionally applied pending its entry into force if, and
under the conditions, agreed in the treaty.

Claimants’ blanket-approval argument proves too much and
is inconsistent with State practice. If Article 23 of the
Federal Law on International Treaties constitutes blanket
approval for the Treaty’s provisional application, then (a) so
does Article 25 of the Vienna Convention, and (b) no party
to the Vienna Convention would have found provisional
application of the Treaty problematic or have invoked the
inconsistency clause in Article 45(1). Claimants’ view
notwithstanding, nine States party to the Vienna Convention
deposited declarations under Article 45(2)(a) of the Treaty
that they could not accept its provisional application, and
four States party to the Vienna Convention stated at the
signature conference that they could not apply the Treaty,
relying on the inconsistency clause in Article 45(1).

Claimants also contend that Article 23 of the Law on
International Treaties shows Russian law and treaty practice
to be “perfectly familiar” with the concept of provisional
application. The Russian Federation’s familiarity with
provisional application cannot, however, override the
express inconsistency clause contained in Article 45(1).

Claimants mistakenly rely on general statements made by
Russian politicians and officials as to the salutary effect of
the Treaty, the Russian Federation’s practice with respect to
bilateral investment treaties, the Explanatory Note to the
draft federal law providing for ratification of the Treaty, and
a draft document of unknown origin and authorship.

General statements made by certain Russian politicians and
officials as to the Treaty’s benefits are manifestly not a
formal or even informal expression of the Russian
Federation’s views with respect to the scope of the
provisional application of the Treaty, and are directly at
odds with the Russian Federation’s continuing refusal to
ratify the Treaty.

-24-

27. The Russian Federation’s bilateral investment treaty practice
not only does not support Claimants’ position, it
affirmatively undermines their argument. All of the bilateral
investment treaties cited by Claimants were ratified by the
Russian Federation, and none of them provides for
provisional application prior to ratification. It is undisputed
that Claimants have not invoked any of the Russian
Federation’s bilateral investment treaties. That these
treaties, following ratification, provide for mandatory
investor-State dispute settlement is irrelevant to the pre-

ratification consistency-analysis required under
Article 45(1).
28. Several explanatory notes prepared in connection with the

ratification of Russian bilateral investment treaties state that
these treaties are subject to ratification because they contain
“provisions different from those provided by Russian
legislation,” singling out the investor-State arbitration
provisions, among others. The Russian Federation’s
bilateral investment treaty practice thus confirms (a) that
mandatory investor-State arbitration is not merely
“additional” to Russian law, as Claimants contend, but is
inconsistent with Russian law, and (b) that application of
Article 26 prior to ratification would be inconsistent with
Russia’s Constitution and laws.

 

29. The Explanatory Note to the draft federal law on the
ratification of the Treaty states that “provisional application
of the ECT would be implemented to the extent that it would
not be inconsistent with the constitution, laws and
regulations of the country in question.” The Note thus
appropriately concludes, in reliance on the “to the extent”
clause contained in Article 45(1), that “the provisions on
provisional application were in conformity with Russian
legal acts.” As with most Russian explanatory notes, the
ECT Explanatory Note does not contain a detailed or
comprehensive analysis of the consistency of the Treaty’s
provisions with Russian law. The dispute settlement
provisions are not mentioned at all, let alone analyzed.

 

30. The statement in the Explanatory Note that “The provisions
of the ECT are consistent with Russian legislation,” relied
on by Claimants, is a correct statement of Russian law from
the post-ratification perspective of the Note, and does not
aid in the analysis of the pre-ratification consistency of the
Treaty with domestic law, required under Article 45(1).
That the Note analyzes the state of Russia’s legal affairs
following ratification is clear from other statements in the
Note, including the need for GATT-related legislation to be
enacted and Russia’s customs laws to be amended,
developments that would manifestly be “consistent” with
Russia’s domestic law only post-ratification. Although the

 

-25-

Note does not address the Treaty’s dispute settlement
mechanism, the Note does state that the ECT is “consistent
with the provisions of Russian bilateral investment treaties,”
and that inconsistencies between Treaty provisions and
Russian domestic law would be resolved by ratification. It
will be recalled that the Russian Federation’s bilateral
investment treaties, like the Treaty, provide for mandatory
investor-State arbitration, and are likewise subject to
ratification because their dispute settlement mechanism is
inconsistent with domestic Russian law.

 

3

. Claimants also rely heavily on a draft document of unknown
origin and authorship, referred to by Claimants as the
“Russian Note” even though there is no evidence that this
document was prepared, let alone adopted, by the Russian
authorities, and overwhelming evidence that the document
was never distributed at the session of the Energy Charter
Conference identified by Claimants. There is, in any event,
nothing in the document at odds with the Russian
Federation’s position that the Treaty is to be provisionally
applied only to the extent consistent with Russian domestic
law, and that Article 26 is inconsistent with Russian law.

D. The Claims are Based on Taxation Measures Other than Taxes and
are thus Barred under Article 21 of the Treaty

32. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction or, alternatively, Claimants’
claims are inadmissible, because (a) the Treaty does not
create any rights or obligations with respect to Taxation
Measures (with enumerated exceptions), (b) the claims in
these proceedings are based on Taxation Measures, and (c)
none of the enumerated exceptions is applicable to the
claims asserted by Claimants in these proceedings.

 

3.

»

Article 21(1) of the ECT provides that “nothing in this
Treaty shall create rights or impose obligations with respect
to Taxation Measures of the Contracting Parties,” except as
otherwise provided in the sub-sections to that Article. The
same Article further provides, “In the event of any
inconsistency between this Article and any other provision
of the Treaty, this Article shall prevail to the extent of the
inconsistency.”

3.

z

. Taxation Measures include not only tax laws and
regulations, as Claimants contend, but also measures
relating to taxes, including the imposition, administration,
collection and enforcement of taxes.

35. The plain meaning of Article 21 requires a broad and
inclusive interpretation of Taxation Measures. Article
21(7)(a) states, “The term ‘Taxation Measure’ includes (i)
any provision relating to taxes of the domestic law of the

- 26 -

3

3

3

3

a

2

8.

©

Contracting Party.” The quoted text confirms that Taxation
Measures was intended to have broad and inclusive scope,
covering “any provision relating to taxes.” Had the drafters
intended to limit Taxation Measures solely to the (already
broad) provisions referred to in Article 21(7), they would
have instead provided that Taxation Measures “means”
(rather than “includes”) the referenced provisions.

. Articles 21(3) and (6) make clear that Taxation Measures

cover not only tax laws and regulations, but also a State’s
imposition and collection of taxes. Article 21(3) gives
preferential treatment to “any Taxation Measure aimed at
ensuring the effective collection of taxes.” The “collection
of taxes” is clearly a subset of the broader class of Taxation
Measures. Article 21(6) confirms that Taxation Measures
include not only the collection of taxes, but also their
imposition. This Article provides, “For the avoidance of
doubt, Article 14 [dealing with an Investor’s right to transfer
capital, returns and other payments] shall not limit the right
of a Contracting Party to impose or collect a tax by
withholding or other means.”

The object and purpose of Article 21 supports the Russian
Federation’s interpretation. States are understandably
concerned about possible limitations on their ability to raise
revenue. A State’s right to promulgate tax laws and
regulations is meaningless unless the State also has the right
to collect, administer and enforce its tax laws and
regulations. The Russian Federation’s interpretation is
consistent with the purpose intended to be served by Article
21—to protect a State’s right to promulgate and enforce its
tax laws, and to avoid interference with tax treaties
specifically intended to address these issues.

The Russian Federation’s interpretation of Taxation
Measures is supported by other tribunals, and by the
testimony of Mr. Stephen Knipler, the executive officer of
the International Tax Division of Australia’s Tax Office
during the ECT negotiations, and of Professor Daniel
Berman, the Legislation Counsel to the U.S. Congress Joint
Committee on Taxation, during the same period. Claimants
have not offered any reason or basis for not crediting Mr.
Knipler’s testimony that Taxation Measures includes
measures relating to taxes, and, in particular, the imposition,
administration, collection or enforcement of taxes.

Claimants’ reliance on the exception to Article 21(1)
contained in Article 21(5) is misplaced. Article 21(5) states
that Article 13, dealing with expropriation, “shall apply to
taxes.” It is an established rule of treaty interpretation that
different treaty terms are intended to refer to different
matters. Article 21(5) refers to “taxes,” meaning a State’s

-27-

tax laws and regulations, and not to Taxation Measures, a
broader term that “includes” not only “taxes” but also “any
provision relating to taxes.” Claimants’ contrary argument,
based on the French text of the Treaty—that “taxes” is either
a broader term or interchangeable with “Taxation
Measures”—is inconsistent with the text of the Treaty, and
ignores both the fact that the Treaty’s tax provisions were
negotiated exclusively in English (not French) and the
considerable authority that gives primacy to the original
(here, English) text, even in cases where several texts are
equally authentic.

40. Claimants’ reliance on the exception to Article 21(1)
contained in Article 21(3) is likewise unavailing. Article
21(3) provides that Articles 10(2) and (7) “shall apply to
Taxation Measures,” with two enumerated exceptions.
Claimants, however, have never asserted a claim under
either Article 10(2) or Article 10(7).

41.

Claimants’ procedural objections to this defense are not well
founded. Respondent’s Statement of Defense expressly
objected to jurisdiction, as required by UNCITRAL Rule
21(3), and even though not so required, also put Claimants
on notice of the Taxation Measures carve-out contained in
Article 21(1). The cases cited on this issue by Claimants are
clearly distinguishable.

The Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction Ratione Personae and Materiae

42. The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione personae and
materiae (a) because Claimants are shell companies, (b)
because Claimants are owned and controlled by Russian
oligarchs, including Khodorkovsky, Lebedev and other
Russian nationals, and (c) because Claimants are mere
nominees who do not own or control the Yukos shares that
are the subject of these proceedings.

43. The Russian oligarchs (Khodorkovsky and Lebedev, among
others) have publicly conceded in newspaper interviews and
in other legal proceedings that they effectively own and
control Claimants’ nominal investment in Yukos. In the
case of Veteran Petroleum Limited (“VPL”), the Swiss
Premiére Cour de Droit Public has found _ that
Khodorkovsky, Lebedev, Golubovitch, Nevzlin, Doubov,
Brudno and Chakhnovski are the beneficial owners of the
totality of Yukos shares allegedly owned or controlled by
VPL. VPL has also failed to establish that it was even a
Yukos registered shareholder when VPL filed its request for
arbitration.

44. The remaining Yukos shares at issue are also only nominally
owned by Yukos Universal Limited and Hulley Enterprises

- 28 -

45.

4

47.

a

6

3

Limited. Both Yukos Universal Limited and Hulley
Enterprises Limited are totally dominated by the Russian
oligarchs through multiple off-shore shells, for which no
bona fide purpose is discernable. In large part because of
Claimants’ less than full compliance with the Tribunal’s
document production orders, the Tribunal does not now
have before it a complete account of the relations between
these intermediate legal entities. It is nonetheless clear that
one of the principal purposes of the complex legal structure
adopted at the Russian oligarchs’ behest was to render
opaque, but preserve, the oligarchs’ continuing de facto
ownership and control of the Yukos shares. In furtherance
of this goal, the oligarchs interposed into the chain of
nominal ownership and control legal entities and individuals
who appeared to receive limited indicia of ownership and/or
control, but who in fact acquired no genuine ownership
interest in any of the relevant assets, nor any powers that
would diminish the Russian oligarchs’ continued effective
control in fact over those assets.

Claimants have separately acknowledged that they have “no
substantial business activity” in their countries of
incorporation.

. The object and purpose of the Treaty is to promote and

protect foreign investments and foreign investors. The
Treaty was never intended to protect Russian investors
investing in Russia, and does not provide a remedy for host
State nationals. Under “rules and principles of international
law” applicable to this proceeding under Article 26(6) of the
Treaty, a shell company dominated and controlled by host
State nationals has no right to bring a claim against the host
State. Like other fundamental principles of customary
international law, the rule that nationals of a State may not
assert an international claim against their own State cannot
be dispensed with tacitly.

Granting shell companies protection under the Treaty would
also be inconsistent with Russian law. As a result of its
ratification, the EU-Russia Partnership and Cooperation
Agreement is now an integral part of Russian law and of the
framework for trade, business, and investment conducted by
EU companies in Russia. Claimants, EU shell companies
lacking the “real and continuous link with the economy” of
an EU Member State required by Article 30(h) of the EU-
Russia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, are thus not
entitled to protection as investors under Russian law.
Insofar as matters covered by the EU-Russia Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement are also covered by the Treaty,
Article 105 of the EU-Russia Partnership and Cooperation
Agreement provides that the Treaty’s provisions shall apply,

-29 -

F,

48.

49.

but not until the Treaty comes into force for the Russian
Federation, which has not happened.

The Russian Federation’s veil-piercing defenses lead to the
same conclusion. In accordance with the Tribunal’s
Procedural Order No. 3 of October 31, 2006, these issues are
not addressed here.

Under Article 1(6) of the Treaty, the Yukos shares that are
the subject of these proceedings must be “owned or
controlled” by Claimants. The Understanding with respect
to Article 1(6) adopted upon signature of the Treaty is that
“control of an Investment means control in fact.” Claimants
apparently concede that they do not meet this standard, and
instead rely on their nominal ownership of the Yukos shares.
Nominal ownership is insufficient to establish ownership of
an “Investment” within the meaning of Article 1(6) of the
Treaty or ius standi under “applicable rules and principles of
international law.”

The Claims are Inadmissible Because Part III of the Treaty Does
Not Confer Rights on Claimants

50.

5

52.

Article 17 of the Treaty reserves the right to deny the
Treaty’s benefits to companies owned or controlled by
nationals of a third State that do not have substantial
business activity in their country of incorporation. Each of
the Claimants is a shell company lacking substantial
business activity in its country of incorporation.

. Claimants’ contention that host State parties are not third

State nationals is unavailing. If Treaty benefits may be
denied to third State nationals, a fortiori they may be denied
to host State nationals. In any event, the term “third State,”
which is not defined in the Treaty, is used there in a manner
that does not exclude the possibility that a third State may be
a Contracting Party or a signatory, and a majority in interest
of the “Russian” oligarchs are in fact nationals of Israel, a
“third” State.

The Treaty’s object and purpose also support the denial of
benefits to host State nationals. Claimants’ argument
notwithstanding, no notification to Contracting Parties is
required in order to invoke Article 17(1), and even if
notification were required, the Russian Federation exercised
its right to deny Treaty benefits to EU shell companies such
as Claimants by ratifying and publishing the EU-Russian
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.

-30-

G. The Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction Over Disputes Submitted to
Russian Courts or to the European Court of Human Rights

53. Each of the Russian oligarchs who owns and controls
Claimants, including in particular Khodorkovsky and
Lebedev, has brought complaints before the European Court
of Human Rights containing allegations that overlap with
those raised by Claimants in these proceedings. Lawsuits
have also been brought before Russian courts against the
Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation and other
Russian State bodies based, inter alia, on alleged violations
of “applicable principles and norms of international law”,
including the European Convention on Human Rights. The
fork-in-the-road clause contained in Article 26(3)(b)(i) of
the Treaty precludes these investors from re-litigating in
these arbitrations disputes that have already been submitted
to the European Court of Human Rights or to a Russian
court. Claimants are in effect requesting the Tribunal to sit
above the Russian Supreme Court and the Russian courts of
appeal that have previously heard and issued final rulings in
respect of the same allegations made by Claimants in these
arbitrations.

B. CLAIMANTS’ POSITIONS

The text of the paragraphs below is produced directly from paragraphs 13 to 47 of
Claimants’ Skeleton Argument submitted on 10 November 2008 (with footnotes

omitted).

III. The Russian Federation is Bound by the ECT—Article 45

13. The Russian Federation contends that it is not bound by the
ECT. As a starting point, the Russian Federation argues that
the provisional application of treaties does not give rise to
legally enforceable rights and obligations. Its chief contention,
however, is based on Article 45(1) of the ECT, which it alleges
provides for the partial application of the Treaty provisions by
virtue of the so-called “inconsistency clause”. The Russian
Federation claims that it is not bound by the ECT as regards
the Claimants in these arbitrations because the application of
every relevant provision of the ECT, including Article 45
itself, would be inconsistent with the Russian Federation’s
Constitution, laws or regulations. The Russian Federation’s
interpretation of Article 45 of the ECT, which sets out the
regime of provisional application under the Treaty, is
fundamentally flawed and should be rejected. In any event, the
ECT is not inconsistent with the Russian Federation’s
Constitution, laws or regulations.

-31-

14. Provisional application of treaties creates legally enforceable
rights and obligations under international law: Provisional
application is a well-established treaty mechanism creating
legally enforceable rights and obligations under international
law. The Respondent is all the more familiar with these
principles in that the Russian Federation and its predecessor,
the USSR, have a long-standing practice of provisionally
applying treaties so as to give rise to legally enforceable rights
and obligations. Thirty-two international treaties entered into
by the Russian Federation, including the ECT, are today
provisionally applicable. The Russian Federation’s suggestion
that provisional application is some kind of legal anomaly,
without legal effect, has no basis whatsoever and must fail.

15. The plain language of Article 45 of the ECT provides for
automatic provisional application of the Treaty unless
specific signatory decides to opt out from such provisional
application: Article 45(1) of the ECT establishes the principle
of provisional application, while the remainder of Article 45
sets out its operation. In particular, under Article 45(2), any
signatory that is not able to accept provisional application can
decide to opt out from such provisional application at the time
of signature by making a declaration to that effect. This
interpretation is based on the plain language of Article 45 of
the ECT, and is confirmed by its context and the travaux
préparatoires of the Treaty. The Russian Federation’s
interpretation, which would dissociate Article 45(1) from
Article 45(2) so as to create two separate regimes in which a
signatory State may choose whether or not it is bound by
provisional application depending on whether or not it is party
to a dispute with an investor, is entirely unsubstantiated. The
Russian Federation’s interpretation further ignores the
fundamental safeguard of reciprocity contained in Article
45(2)(b) of the ECT and, if given effect, would mean that a
signatory State can invoke all rights under the Treaty while
escaping any obligations by merely relying on the
“inconsistency clause” in Article 45(1). Such a position is
untenable and must be rejected.

 

16. Subsidiarily, the need for a declaration under Article 45(1): In
any event, even assuming that the interpretation of Article 45
of the ECT as proposed by the Russian Federation were the
correct interpretation, which the Claimants deny, a declaration
is still needed in order for a signatory State to opt out of
provisional application under Article 45(1). This is clear from
the text of Article 45, and the circumstances of its negotiation
and conclusion. It is further confirmed by the fact that all
signatory States that expressed concerns regarding provisional
application made a declaration with a view to avoiding the
application of the Treaty, be it on the basis of Article 45(2) or
Article 45(1). Therefore, even under the Respondent’s own
interpretation, a declaration is needed for a signatory State to

 

-32-

opt out of provisional application on the basis of either
paragraph (1) or paragraph (2) of Article 45 of the ECT. As
the Russian Federation has not notified its counterparties of
any inconsistency of the Treaty with its Constitution, laws or
regulations, under either paragraph, it cannot claim that it is
not bound by the Treaty.

17. In any event, the ECT is not inconsistent with the Constitution,
laws or regulations of the Russian Federation: Even assuming
that the interpretation of Article 45 of the ECT as proposed by
the Russian Federation were the correct interpretation, which
the Claimants deny, and that a declaration in relation to Article
45(1) is not required, contrary to the Claimants’ submissions,
the ECT is not inconsistent with the Russian Federation’s
Constitution, laws or regulations. Russian law fully recognizes
the principle of provisional application, and there is no
inconsistency between the substantive provisions of the Treaty
and Russian law either. To the contrary, at all times—during
the negotiation of the ECT, at the time of its proposed
ratification by the Duma, and subsequently—the Russian
Federation has maintained and represented that both the
mechanism of provisional application and the provisions of the
Treaty are consistent with its Constitution, laws and
regulations.

 

2

. It follows that, under Articles 45 of the ECT, the Russian
Federation is bound by the Treaty.

IV. The Claimants Qualify as Protected Investors Under the ECT—
Article 1(7

19. The Russian Federation contends that the Claimants are not
protected Investors under the ECT, relying on a host of
allegations including that the Claimants are allegedly shell
companies owned or controlled by Russian nationals. The
Russian Federation’s arguments are misplaced and must fail.

20. The definition of Investor under the ECT: Article 1(7)(a)(ii) of
the ECT defines “Investor” as, with respect to a Contracting
Party, “a company or other organization organized in
accordance with the law applicable in that Contracting Party”.

21.

The Claimants are organized in accordance with the law
applicable in Contracting States: The Claimants are
companies organized in accordance with the law applicable in
Cyprus, in the cases of Hulley and VPL, and the Isle of Man,
in the case of YUL, and therefore meet the requirements of
Article 1(7)(a)(ii) of the ECT.

22. Express treaty language cannot be overridden by alleged

general principles of law: The Russian Federation does not
dispute that the Claimants are companies organized in

-33-

accordance with the law applicable in Contracting States. It
claims, however, that the Claimants’ nationality should be
ignored based on vague and unsubstantiated principles of
international law. There is no basis in international law for
ignoring the corporate nationality of the Claimants. The
language of Article 1(7)(a)(ii) of the ECT is clear and
determinative in this regard and, contrary to the Respondent’s
submission, it is not for this Tribunal to ignore the express
language of the Treaty itself. In any event, reference to the
state of incorporation is the most common method of defining
the nationality of corporate entities under modern BITs and
international law.

Nn
a

. It is clear from the foregoing that the Claimants are protected
Investors under the ECT and the Respondent’s attempts to
suggest otherwise must fail.

V. The Claimants Have a Protected Investment_under the ECT—

Article 1(6

24. The Russian Federation contends that the Claimants do not
have protected Investments under the ECT alleging, amongst
other things, that the Claimants did not inject any foreign
capital into the Russian Federation in connection with their
acquisition of Yukos shares. The Russian Federation’s
arguments are without merit and must fail.

25.

on

The definition of an Investment under the ECT: “Investment”
is defined in Article 1(6)(b) of the ECT as “every kind of asset,
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by an Investor and
includes [...] a company or business enterprise, or shares,
stock, or other forms of equity participation in a company or
business enterprise”.

26. The Claimants own shares in Yukos: As shareholders of
Yukos at all relevant times for the purposes of these
arbitrations, the Claimants directly own protected Investments
and therefore meet the requirements of Article 1(6)(b) of the
ECT.

27. The Russian Federation’s unpersuasive argument on the
alleged lack of ‘injection of foreign capital’: It cannot be
disputed that the Claimants have directly owned Yukos shares
at all material times. This, in fact, is not disputed by the
Respondent. The Claimants therefore hold protected
Investments within the definition provided by Article 1(6)(b)
of the ECT. The language of Article 1(6)(b) is clear and
determinative in this regard and the Russian Federation’s
attempt to insert additional requirements regarding “origin of
capital” or “injection of foreign capital” finds no support in the
text of the definition of Investment, nor in the context in which
the term is defined.

 

-34-

28. The Claimants undeniably hold protected Investments under
the ECT, and the Russian Federation’s numerous and
unsubstantiated attempts to override the plain language of the
Treaty must be rejected.

VI. The Conditions fora Denial of the Benefits of Part III of the
ECT to Each of the Claimants are not Met

29. The Russian Federation argues that the Claimants should be
denied the benefits of Part III of the ECT on the basis of
Article 17, and that these arbitrations are nothing but a
domestic dispute between Russian nationals and the Russian
Federation. As shown below, the cumulative conditions for a
denial of the benefits of Part III of the ECT are not met and
each of the Claimants fully benefits from the protection of the
Treaty.

3

Ss

. Article 17 is a reservation of right which must be exercised:
Article 17 provides that each Contracting Party “reserves the
right” to deny the benefits of Part III. It follows from the plain
meaning of these words that each Contracting Party has a right
under Article 17(1) of the ECT to deny a covered investor the
benefits of Part III; but as long as that right has not been
exercised the investor benefits from the protection of Part III of
the ECT. That the right to deny the benefits of Part III is an
option that needs to be exercised by a Contracting Party is
confirmed by the travaux préparatoires of the Treaty. Further,
if a Contracting Party is to exercise its reserved right under
Article 17(1) of the ECT, it must do so by a clear and
unambiguous act. Contrary to the Respondent’s contention,
Article 17(1) of the ECT does not therefore operate
automatically. As the Russian Federation did not exercise its
reserved right to effectively deny the benefits of Part III of the
ECT to each of the Claimants, Article 17(1) does not apply in
these arbitrations.

3

- Once exercised, the right of denial only operates
prospectively: In any event, even assuming that the Russian
Federation has effectively exercised its reserved right to deny
the benefits of Part III of the ECT to each of the Claimants in
its First Memorial of February 28, 2006, which the Claimants
deny, the Russian Federation does not challenge that such
exercise can only operate prospectively and cannot have a
retroactive effect, i.e. it can only have effect on new wrongful
acts occurring after the date on which the reserved right has
been effectively exercised, as opposed to the mere continuation
of previous wrongful acts.

32. The Claimants are not owned or controlled by citizens or
nationals of a third State: In any event, even assuming that the
Russian Federation has effectively exercised its reserved right
to deny the benefits of Part III of the ECT to each of the

-35-

Claimants, which the Claimants deny, Article 17(1) of the ECT
still cannot apply because the cumulative conditions for the
Russian Federation to exercise its right under Article 17 are
not met, i.e. the Claimants are not owned or controlled by
citizens or nationals of a third State. Hulley is a wholly-owned
subsidiary of YUL, a company incorporated in the Isle of Man.
YUL, in turn, is a wholly-owned subsidiary of GML Limited, a
company incorporated in Gibraltar. GML Limited is owned by
Palmus Trust Company Limited (Guernsey) (as trustee for the
Palmus Trust) and Rysaffe Trustee Company (C.1.) Limited (as
trustees for the remaining Guernsey Trusts). Likewise, VPL is
owned by Chiltern Trust Company Limited (Jersey) (as trustee
of the Veteran Petroleum Trust). The Claimants are therefore
not owned by Russian nationals. Nor are they controlled by
Russian nationals since control in each of the Trusts resides
with the relevant trustees for the benefit of Russian nationals
as regards the Guernsey Trusts and for the benefit of YUL and
former Yukos employees as regards the Veteran Petroleum
Trust. As a result, the Claimants are not “owned or controlled”
by Russian nationals.

we
a

. The Russian Federation is not a third State under the ECT:
Even assuming that the Claimants are owned or controlled by
Russian nationals, which the Claimants deny, the Russian
Federation is not a “third State” under the ECT. It is plain that
“third State” in Article 17(1) refers to a non-Contracting Party
under the ECT and this is confirmed by the Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties, as well as the travaux préparatoires of
the ECT. By contrast, when contracting States intend to
exclude the benefits of an investment protection regime to
entities controlled by nationals of the host State, they so
provide expressly. This was not done by the ECT drafters.
The Russian Federation, which is bound by the ECT, cannot
therefore claim to be a “third State” for the purposes of Article
17(1).

3.

-

It results from the above that the cumulative conditions for the
application of Article 17 of the ECT are not met and the
Respondent’s objection must fail.

VIL The Russian _Federation’s Other__Unavailing _Objections—
Articles 26 and 21

A. The Claimants’ Jus Standi

35. The Respondent alleges that the Claimants lack jus standi
because they are supposedly enforcing a claim that properly
belongs to Yukos.

36. This is plainly wrong as a matter of fact. The Claimants do not
purport to enforce rights belonging to Yukos but are enforcing
their own rights arising under the ECT as shareholders.

-36-

37. The Respondent’s objection is also wrong as a matter of law.
The distinction between the rights of a shareholder arising
under an investment treaty and the rights that belong to the
local company is well-established in international law. The
Russian Federation’s attempt to rely on the inconsistency
clause in Article 45(1) of the ECT to argue that shareholders
lack standing under Russian law to bring claims for injuries to
companies in which they own shares is equally misplaced. As
demonstrated above, the Russian Federation’s “inconsistency
clause” theory is without merit because both the principle of
provisional application and the provisions of the Treaty are
consistent with Russian law. Even assuming that Russian law
is somehow relevant, which the Claimants deny, it is diffi
to see how the alleged lack of a statutory right under Russian
law could deprive the Claimants of standing under the ECT,
except to demonstrate just how outlandish and all-
encompassing the Respondent’s theory of Article 45(1) is.

  

 

38. The Respondent's objection is ill-founded and must fail.

B. Fork-in-the-Road—Article 26

  

39. The Russian Federation contends that there exist a very large
number of cases that have been brought by or on behalf of
Yukos or by the “Russian oligarchs” themselves in the Russian
courts and the ECHR in which the actions complained of in
these arbitrations were subjected to judicial review. On that
basis, the Russian Federation contends the Tribunal lacks
jurisdiction to hear and decide the Claimants’ claims pursuant
to Article 26(3)(b)(i) of the ECT. The Respondent’s
contention is entirely groundless and must fail.

  

40. None of the proceedings relied on by the Russian Federation
satisfy any of the cumulative conditions set out in Article
26(3)(b)(i) of the ECT, the so-called fork-in-the-road
provision: (i) the Claimants in these arbitrations are not parties
to any of the proceedings cited by the Russian Federation; (ii)
none of the proceedings cited by the Russian Federation
concern an alleged breach of Part III of the ECT; and (iii) the
Claimants have not submitted these claims to any “previously
agreed dispute settlement procedure” or to the Russian courts.

41. The Russian’s  Federation’s objection based ~— on
Article 26(3)(b)(i) of the ECT is manifestly without merit and
must fail.

C. Taxation Measures—Article 21

42. The Russian Federation contends that the Claimants’ claims
are premised on Taxation Measures and therefore fall within
the exemption of Article 21(1) of the ECT. The Respondent’s
objection based on the taxation provision of the ECT, which it

-37-

. Article 21 applies to the enactment of tax “provision:

now appears to raise as an objection to jurisdiction, fails in a
number of respects.

. The Respondent's jurisdictional objection is time-barred: For

the first time in its Reply, the Russian Federation sought to
state a jurisdictional objection based on Article 21(1),
contending that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction because the
phrase “nothing in this Treaty” in that provision allegedly
excludes the Russian Federation’s “offer to arbitrate [in]
Article 26” of the ECT. To the extent that the Respondent’s
objection based on Article 21(1) of the ECT is stated as a
jurisdictional objection, it is time-barred under Article 21(3) of
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules which provides that an
objection to jurisdiction is to be made no later than in the
statement of defence.

 

 

Further, in any event, even assuming that the Russ
Federation is entitled to base a preliminary objection on Article
21 of the ECT, which the Claimants deny, it does not apply
here. It is clear that under Article 21 of the ECT a Taxation
Measure, as this term is specifically defined in paragraph (7),
is an actual “provision” relating to taxes, be it found in
domestic law or in a tax treaty, nothing else. Article 21
therefore preserves the liberty of each Contracting State to
enact legislation and regulations relating to taxes and the
Respondent’s numerous attempts to distort and expand the
scope of this definition to enforcement actions find no support
in the text of the Treaty itself. Because the Russian
Federation’s right to enact tax “provisions” is not at issue in
these arbitrations, Article 21(1) of the ECT does not apply to
the Claimants’ claims.

. Articles 13 and 10 expressly apply to Taxation Measures:

Even assuming that Taxation Measures have the meaning
given to them by the Respondent, which the Claimants deny,
the Russian Federation conveniently ignores that the Treaty’s
substantive investment protections contained in Articles 13,
10(2) and 10(7) apply to Taxation Measures of the Contracting
Parties by virtue of Articles 21(5) and 21(3), respectively, and
that expropriatory or discriminatory actions are sanctioned
under the Treaty even where they relate to Taxation Measures.

Conduct under the guise of taxation not covered: In any event,
assuming that Taxation Measures have the meaning given to
them by the Respondent, which the Claimants deny, the
actions complained of by the Claimants do not fall within the
scope of Article 21 because they are not genuine Taxation
Measures. Indeed, the Russian Federation’s actions were not a
genuine exercise of the Russian State’s prerogative to impose
taxes, but merely a pretext for the Russian Federation’s
expropriation of Yukos’ assets to the benefit of State-owned

- 38 -

entities. Further, the Russian Federation feigns to ignore that a
significant part of the acts complained of by the Claimants
have no relation whatsoever to taxation.

47. The Russian Federation’s objection based on Article 21 of the
ECT is therefore ill-founded and must fail.

IV. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

A. RESPONDENT’S REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

723. The Russian Federation requests that the Tribunal issue an award:

(a)

(b)

(©)

(d)

(e)

determining that it lacks jurisdiction to entertain the claims brought by

Claimant;

in the alternative, determining that all claims brought by Claimant are

inadmissible;

in the alternative, determining that all claims relating to Taxation Measures

other than those, if any, based solely on taxes are inadmissible;

in the alternative, determining that all claims relating to taxes, if any, must
be referred to the competent authorities pursuant to Article 21(5)(b)(i) of the

Treaty;

ordering Claimant to pay all of the Russian Federation’s costs, expenses,

and attorneys’ fees; and

granting any further relief against Claimant that the Tribunal deems fit and

proper.

B. —_ CLAIMANT’s REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

74. Claimant requests the Tribunal:

(a)

to render an award determining that it has jurisdiction over the claims

brought by Claimant and that such claims are admissible

-39-

75.

76.

77.

(b) to order Respondent to pay all of Claimant’s costs, including its legal fees

and expenses; and

(c) To order any other relief that may be appropriate.

APPLICABLE LAW

The procedural law to be applied by the Tribunal consists of the procedural provisions of
the ECT (particularly Article 26), the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, and, because The
Hague is the place of arbitration, any mandatory provisions of Dutch arbitration law.
This Interim Award is made pursuant to Article 1049 of the Netherlands Arbitration Act
1986.

The substantive law to be applied by the Tribunal consists of the substantive provisions
of the ECT, the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties* (“VCLT”), and applicable
rules and principles of international law. In addition to the foregoing sources, the
national law of the Russian Federation is relevant with regard to certain issues, as is the
national law of the places in which Claimants and/or related entities are incorporated or

established.

Throughout this Interim Award, the Tribunal refers to and analyzes specific provisions of
the ECT. For ease of reference, the key relevant provisions are also collected and

reproduced below, in the order that they appear in the Treaty:

Article 1—Definitions
[...]

(6) Investment” means every kind of asset, owned or controlled directly
or indirectly by an Investor and includes:

(a) tangible and intangible, and moveable and immovable, property,
and any property rights such as leases, mortgages, liens, and
pledges;

* Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Vienna, 23 May 1969, 1155 UNTS 331.

-40-

(b) a company or business enterprise, or shares, stock, or other
forms of equity participation in a company or business
enterprise, and bonds and other debt of a company or business
enterprise;

(c) claims to money and claims to performance pursuant to contract
having an economic value and associated with an Investment;

(

&

Intellectual Property;

(e

Returns;

(f) any right conferred by law or contract or by virtue of any
licences and permits granted pursuant to law to undertake any
Economic Activity in the Energy Sector.

 

(7) “Investor” means:

(a) with respect to a Contracting Party:

(i) a natural person having the citizenship or nationality of or
who is permanently residing in that Contracting Party in
accordance with its applicable law;

(ii) a company or other organization organized in accordance
with the law applicable in that Contracting Party;

(b) with respect to a “third state,” a natural person, company or other
organization which fulfils, mutatis mutandis, the conditions
specified in subparagraph (a) for a Contracting Party.

[...]
Article 17—Non-Application of Part III in Certain Circumstances

Each Contracting Party reserves the right to deny the advantages of this
Part to:

(1) a legal entity if citizens or nationals of a third state own or control
such entity and if that entity has no substantial business activities in
the Area of the Contracting Party in which it is organized;

[...]

-41-

Article 21—Taxation

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Article, nothing in this Treaty
shall create rights or impose obligations with respect to Taxation
Measures of the Contracting Parties. In the event of any
inconsistency between this Article and any other provision of the
Treaty, this Article shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

(2) Article 7(3) shall apply to Taxation Measures other than those on
income or on capital, except that such provision shall not apply to:

(a) an advantage accorded by a Contracting Party pursuant to the tax

provisions of any convention, agreement or arrangement
described in subparagraph (7)(a)(ii); or

(b

any Taxation Measure aimed at ensuring the effective collection
of taxes, except where the measure of a Contracting Party
arbitrarily discriminates against Energy Materials and Products
originating in, or destined for the Area of another Contracting
Party or arbitrarily restricts benefits accorded under Article 7(3).

(3) Article 10(2) and (7) shall apply to Taxation Measures of the
Contracting Parties other than those on income or on capital, except
that such provisions shall not apply to:

(a) impose most favoured nation obligations with respect to
advantages accorded by a Contracting Party pursuant to the tax
provisions of any convention, agreement or arrangement
described in subparagraph (7)(a)(ii) or resulting from
membership of any Regional Economic Integration
Organization; or

(b

any Taxation Measure aimed at ensuring the effective collection
of taxes, except where the measure arbitrarily discriminates
against an Investor of another Contracting Party or arbitrarily
restricts benefits accorded under the Investment provisions of
this Treaty.

(4) Article 29(2) to (6) shall apply to Taxation Measures other than
those on income or on capital.

(5) (a) Article 13 shall apply to taxes.
(b) Whenever an issue arises under Article 13, to the extent it
pertains to whether a tax constitutes an expropriation or whether

a tax alleged to constitute an expropriation is discriminatory, the
following provisions shall apply:

(i) The Investor or the Contracting Party alleging expropriation
shall refer the issue of whether the tax is an expropriation or

-42-

whether the tax is discriminatory to the relevant Competent
Tax Authority. Failing such referral by the Investor or the
Contracting Party, bodies called upon to settle disputes
pursuant to Article 26(2)(c) or 27(2) shall make a referral to
the relevant Competent Tax Authorities;

(ii) The Competent Tax Authorities shall, within a period of six
months of such referral, strive to resolve the issues so
referred. Where non-discrimination issues are concerned, the
Competent Tax Authorities shall apply the non-
discrimination provisions of the relevant tax convention or,
if there is no non-discrimination provision in the relevant tax
convention applicable to the tax or no such tax convention is
in force between the Contracting Parties concerned, they
shall apply the non-discrimination principles under the
Model Tax Convention on Income and Capital of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development;

(iii) Bodies called upon to settle disputes pursuant to
Article 26(2)(c) or 27(2) may take into account any
conclusions arrived at by the Competent Tax Authorities
regarding whether the tax is an expropriation. Such bodies
shall take into account any conclusions arrived at within the
six-month period prescribed in subparagraph (b)(ii) by the
Competent Tax Authorities regarding whether the tax is
discriminatory. Such bodies may also take into account any
conclusions arrived at by the Competent Tax Authorities
after the expiry of the six-month period;

(iv) Under no circumstances shall involvement of the Competent
Tax Authorities, beyond the end of the six-month period
referred to in subparagraph (b)(ii), lead to a delay of
proceedings under Articles 26 and 27.

(6) For the avoidance of doubt, Article 14 shall not limit the right of a
Contracting Party to impose or collect a tax by withholding or other
means.

(7) For the purposes of this Article:

(a) The term “Taxation Measure” includes:

(i) any provision relating to taxes of the domestic law of the
Contracting Party or of a political subdivision thereof or a
local authority therein; and

(ii) any provision relating to taxes of any convention for the
avoidance of double taxation or of any other international
agreement or arrangement by which the Contracting Party is
bound.

-43-

(

¢

vo

(b) There shall be regarded as taxes on income or on capital all taxes
imposed on total income, on total capital or on elements of
income or of capital, including taxes on gains from the alienation
of property, taxes on estates, inheritances and gifts, or
substantially similar taxes, taxes on the total amounts of wages
or salaries paid by enterprises, as well as taxes on capital
appreciation.

(c

A “Competent Tax Authority” means the competent authority
pursuant to a double taxation agreement in force between the
Contracting Parties or, when no such agreement is in force, the
minister or ministry responsible for taxes or their authorized
representatives.

(d) For the avoidance of doubt, the terms “tax provisions” and
“taxes” do not include customs duties.

[...]

Article 26—Settlement of Disputes Between an Investor and a
Contracting Party

Disputes between a Contracting Party and an Investor of another
Contracting Party relating to an Investment of the latter in the Area
of the former, which concern an alleged breach of an obligation of
the former under Part III shall, if possible be settled amicably.

If such disputes cannot be settled according to the provisions of
paragraph (1) within a period of three months from the date on
which either party to the dispute requested amicable settlement, the
Investor party to the dispute may choose to submit it for resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Contracting Party
party to the dispute;

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute
settlement procedure; or

(c

in accordance with the following paragraphs of this Article.

(3) (a) Subject only to subparagraphs (b) and (c), each Contracting

Party hereby gives its unconditional consent to the submission of
a dispute to international arbitration or conciliation in accordance
with the provisions of this Article.

(b) (i) The Contracting Parties listed in Annex ID do not give such

unconditional consent where the Investor has previously
submitted the dispute under subparagraph (2)(a) or (b).

-44-

(4) In the event that an Investor chooses to submit the dispute for
resolution under subparagraph (2)(c), the Investor shall further
provide its consent in writing for the dispute to be submitted to:

L..]

(b) a sole arbitrator or ad hoc arbitration tribunal established under
the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (hereinafter referred to as
“UNCITRAL”)

[...]
Article 45—Provisional Application

(1) Each signatory agrees to apply this Treaty provisionally pending its
entry into force for such signatory in accordance with Article 44, to
the extent that such provisional application is not inconsistent with
its constitution, laws or regulations.

(2) (a) Notwithstanding paragraph (1) any signatory may, when signing,
deliver to the Depository a declaration that it is not able to accept
provisional application. The obligation contained in paragraph
(1) shall not apply to a signatory making such a declaration.
Any such signatory may at any time withdraw that declaration by
written notification to the Depository.

(b) Neither a signatory which makes a declaration in accordance

with subparagraph (a) nor Investors of that signatory may claim
the benefits of provisional application under paragraph (1).

(c

Notwithstanding subparagraph (a), any signatory making a
declaration referred to in subparagraph (a) shall apply Part VII
provisionally pending the entry into force of the Treaty for such
signatory in accordance with Article 44, to the extent that such
provisional application is not inconsistent with its laws or
regulations.

(3) (a) Any signatory may terminate its provisional application of this
Treaty by written notification to the Depository of its intention
not to become a Contracting Party to the Treaty. Termination of
provisional application for any signatory shall take effect upon
the expiration of 60 days from the date on which such
signatory’s written notification is received by the Depository.

(b) In the event that a signatory terminates provisional application
under subparagraph (a), the obligation of the signatory under
paragraph (1) to apply Parts III and V with respect to any
Investments made in its Area during such provisional application
by Investors of other signatories shall nevertheless remain in
effect with respect to those Investments for twenty years

-45-

VI.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

following the effective date of termination, except as otherwise
provided in subparagraph (c).

(c) Subparagraph (b) shall not apply to any signatory listed in Annex
PA. A signatory shall be removed from the list in Annex PA
effective upon delivery to the Depository of its request therefor.

SUMMARY OF WITNESSES’ TESTIMONY

The Parties submitted extensive evidence relevant to the issues of jurisdiction and
admissibility. Respondent submitted statements or opinions from 19 witnesses, while
Claimants submitted opinions from four witnesses. In all, the Tribunal has reviewed over

795 pages of written testimony, as well as hundreds of exhibits.

The purpose of the present section of the Tribunal’s Interim Award is to provide an
overview of the witnesses’ evidence. The following is not meant to be exhaustive.
Rather, it serves to provide a summary of the vast evidentiary universe on the basis of
which the Tribunal has reached its conclusions with respect to jurisdiction and

admissibility.

The Tribunal has considered the evidence of those witnesses that were cross-examined as
well as those witnesses who submitted written statements but were not called to the
hearing. With respect to this latter category, the Tribunal has kept in mind that these

witnesses were not subject to any cross-examination.

A. RESPONDENT’S WITNESSES

At the hearing, Claimants called five of Respondent’s 19 witnesses. They were:

1) Professor Suren Avakiyan
2) Mr. Sydney Fremantle

3) Mr. Anatoly Martynov
4) Mr. Martin Mann, QC

5) Professor Daniel Berman

Respondent’s other witnesses, who did not appear for cross-examination, were:

6) Dr. Marat Baglay

7) Professor Martti Koskenniemi
8) Professor Alexey Kostin

9) Professor Yevgeny Sukhanov

- 46 -

10) Professor Gerhard Hafner
11) Professor Igor Lukashuk
12) Mr. S.V. Vasilyvev, on behalf of the Russian Ministry of Justice
13) Professor Georg Nolte
14) Professor Angelika Nussberger
15) Professor Alain Pellet
16) Mr. Stephen Knipler
17) Professor Myron Nordquist
18) Professor Andrey Lisitsyn-Svetlanov
19) Professor Stef van Weeghel
83. The following summary will first address the testimony of Respondent’s witnesses who
appeared before the Tribunal, in order of appearance. This is followed by a review of the

evidence from Respondent’s witnesses who did not appear.

1. Professor Suren Avakiyan

84. Professor Avakiyan is the head of the Department of Constitutional and Municipal Law

of the Faculty of Law of the Moscow State University of M.V. Lomonosov.

85. In his Expert Opinion,* Professor Avakiyan explains the relationship between the 1993
Constitution of the Russian Federation (“Constitution”) and international treaties of the
Russian Federation. He concludes that the Russian Federation may not conclude
international treaties whose provisions contradict the Constitution and would require its
amendment. Professor Avakiyan explains that any treaty that annuls, modifies, or adds
provisions to Russian legislation must be ratified in order to become effective. He then

explains the ratification process for international treaties in the Russian Federation.

86. Professor Avakiyan summarizes his conclusions as follows: (a) a federal law on
ratification gives an international treaty the force of law in the territory of the Russian
Federation; (b) in the absence of relevant domestic rules implementing an international
treaty that has been ratified and has become effective, the rules of the treaty apply
directly; and (c) the application, prior to its ratification, of an international treaty that is

subject to ratification contradicts the Constitution.

* Professor Suren Avakiyan, Expert Opinion on the Constitutional Legal Aspects of the Conclusion and Application
of International Treaties of the Russian Federation, 21 February 2006.

-47-

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

With respect to the ECT, Professor Avakiyan testifies that its application is impossible
without simultaneous and numerous amendments to Russian legislation. Pursuant to the
Constitution, the ECT is subject to ratification by the Federal Assembly; provisional
application of the ECT and, in particular, of its dispute-resolution provisions without such

ratification would be inconsistent with the Constitution.

In his Second Opinion, Professor Avakiyan comments on the Opinion of Claimants’
expert, Mr. Gladyshev, dated 29 June 2006. In particular, Professor Avakiyan points out
that, in his view, the 1995 Federal Law on International Treaties of the Russian
Federation (“FLIT”) does not allow provisional application of the ECT in the present
case, because the ECT was not submitted to the Duma within the six-month deadline

established in Article 23(2) of the FLIT.
Professor Avakiyan appeared before the Tribunal for examination on 17 November 2008.

During cross-examination, Professor Avakiyan was taken through the various instruments
in the Russian Federation relating to international treaties. Professor Avakiyan stated his
belief that international treaties that are subject to ratification should never be applied
provisionally. He asserted that Article 23 permits provisional application, but only where
a treaty is consistent with and does not require amendments to Russian legislation. He
testified that Article 23 of the FLIT should be amended in order to clarify this limitation

and avoid any ambiguities.

On redirect examination, Professor Avakiyan stated that there was no contradiction
between Article 45(1) of the ECT and Article 23 of the FLIT. If the Russian Federation
wished to apply the ECT to the extent that it did not conflict with Russian legislation,
then the ECT needed to be ratified within the required period. He added that those who
had signed the ECT had not complied with the provisions of law governing treaty
ratification. He went on to say that the ECT contained a large number of provisions that

conflicted with Russian legislation, and that therefore the ECT could not apply

5 Professor Suren Avakiyan, Expert Comments regarding Expert Opinion of V. Gladyshev dated June 29, 2006,
19 January 2007.

- 48 -

92.

93.

94.

95.

provisionally save for those few provisions that did not contradict Russian legislation,

such as those establishing the logistical procedures for the Secretariat.

2. Mr. Sydney Fremantle

Mr. Fremantle retired from the British Civil Service in November 1994, where he had
been head of the International Energy Unit in the Department of Trade and Industry for
the previous ten years. In this capacity he participated in the negotiations of the
Agreement on the International Energy Programme and represented the United Kingdom
on, inter alia, the International Energy Agency’s Governing Board and the European
Commission’s High Level Energy Group. He participated in preparatory work leading to
the creation of the ECT, although he retired about two months before actual signature of

the ECT, with some residual involvement through working groups.

In his Opinion,® Mr. Fremantle first sets out the working procedures for the ECT
negotiations. Mr. Fremantle testifies that while the ECT drew on precedents such as
many bilateral investment treaties (“BITs”), the North American Free Trade Agreement
(“NAFTA”), and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (“GATT”), there were

deliberate departures from the standard provisions of such texts.

The conclusions in Mr. Fremantle’s Opinion are: (a) Article 45(1) imposes provisional
application upon those signatories who have not made a declaration under Article 45(2);
(b) the “to the extent” clause in Article 45(1) is an integral qualification of the obligation
to apply the ECT provisionally; (c) no further action is necessary to qualify the
obligation; (d) Article 45(2) enables a signatory to avoid all obligations of the ECT
(excluding Part VII) even if not consistent with its internal laws; (e) reciprocity was
irrelevant to negotiation of the ECT and impossible to achieve; and (f) transparency

would have been of little value to the investor and would add nothing to Article 20 ECT.

Mr. Fremantle appeared before the Tribunal for examination on 17 and 18 November

2008.

® Mr. Sydney Fremantle, Opinion Concerning the Provisional Application of the Energy Charter Treaty, 21 January

2007.

- 49 -

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

Mr. Fremantle was cross-examined on the “boldness” of certain of his statements
regarding international law, given that he is not a lawyer. He explained that his opinions
were guided by information obtained as a participant in negotiations. He acknowledged
that after presentation of the draft to the plenary his own role was less authoritative, but
he attended certain plenary sessions until retirement in December 1994 and kept binders

of papers in order to write a book.

Upon being shown unredacted versions of documents on which he had relied,
Mr. Fremantle confirmed names of those delegations, including Austria, Russia, and the
European Union, referred to in his Opinion as having constitutional or other problems
making provisional application difficult. Mr. Fremantle testified about his perception of

the positions of various delegations on provisional application.

Mr. Fremantle further testified that there was a sense of urgency in finalizing the ECT, in
the belief that it would help overcome the Russian energy crisis. Urgency was also the
motivation behind splitting the treaty into the present ECT, dealing with investments, and
a later document (never completed) covering the pre-investment stage. He further agreed

that provisional application was also due to a sense of urgency.

Mr. Fremantle acknowledged that the ECT established formal reciprocity—protecting the
investors of each State party in turn. However, he asserted that while Russia was
applying the treaty provisionally, Russian investors could bring claims against other
member States even if, due to legal and constitutional inconsistencies, Article 45(1) of
the Treaty prevented other investors from invoking the ECT against Russia.

Mr. Fremantle was of the view that Russia was applying the ECT provisionally.

Mr. Fremantle testified that transparency in identifying inconsistent laws was not possible
in relation to Article 45(1) and was “abandoned” by the delegates of Working Group II.
He acknowledged that Japan continued to seek some transparency discipline as late as
February 1994, but abandoned the idea of specifying all inconsistent laws by March
1994.

On re-examination, Mr. Fremantle described the trade-off between achieving a

comprehensive Treaty and having it apply quickly. He explained that because of

-50-

concerns over inconsistency between the Treaty and domestic laws, some countries
would not have been willing to sign the Treaty until conflicting laws had been repealed.
Thus, the abandonment of transparency was one of the trade-offs enabling the widespread

signature of the ECT.

3. Mr. Anatoly Martynov

102. Mr. Martynov is the head of a private Russian company providing consultancy on trade
policy issues. During the period 1992-1994, he worked at the Ministry of Foreign
Economic Relations of the Russian Federation, as the head of the Legal and Treaty
Department. In that capacity, he participated in the negotiations on the ECT and the
Agreement on Partnership and Cooperation between the European Union and the Russian

Federation, signed in June 1994 (“P&C Agreement”).

103. Mr. Martynov’s evidence was given in support of Respondent’s contention that without
express consent resulting from ratification of the ECT or from specific Russian
legislation, the Russian Federation cannot be involved in dispute settlement through

international arbitration.

104. In his Statement,’ Mr. Martynov recalls that he and the Russian delegation considered
there were two options under Article 45 of the ECT regarding provisional application for

States intending to sign the ECT between 17 December 1994 and 16 June 1995:

¢ to agree to apply the ECT provisionally under Article 45(1), relying on the
limitations imposed in that sub-paragraph by the words “to the extent that such
provisional application is not inconsistent with its constitution, laws or

regulations”; or

e at the moment of signature of the ECT, to deliver a declaration under
Article 45(2) of the ECT, that the State is unable to accept its provisional

application.

7 Mr. Anatoly Martynov, Witness Statement concerning the Provisional Application of the Energy Charter Treaty,
14 December 2006.

-51-

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

Mr. Martynov recalls that the Russian delegation considered it possible to propose to the
Russian Government provisional application under Article 45(1), relying on the words
“to the extent that such provisional application is not inconsistent with its constitution,

laws or regulations.” He explains that this position was motivated by the fact that at the

 

time Russia’s economy was in a process of transition, necessitating considerable
modification of Russian legislation. The limitation in Article 45(1) would therefore
ensure that Russia’s obligations under the ECT would be consistent with both existing

and future Russian legislation before ratification of the ECT.

Mr. Martynov also states that the Russian delegation had a clear understanding that
Russia would not be able to apply the international dispute resolution provisions of the
ECT. In this regard, he notes that because Russia continues to adhere to the concept of
absolute State immunity—as reflected in both the old and new Code of Civil Procedure
of the Russian Federation—Russian consent is required in order to be able to bring
proceedings against the Russian Federation. He concludes that without express consent
resulting from ratification of the ECT or from specific Russian legislation, the Russian

Federation cannot be involved in dispute settlement through international arbitration.

Lastly, Mr. Martynov asserts that the P&C Agreement was negotiated before the ECT,

covered much of the same subject matter and “anticipated the conclusion of the ECT.”
Mr. Martynov appeared before the Tribunal for examination on 19 November 2008.

Under cross-examination, Mr. Martynov affirmed that he participated in negotiations for
the ECT. He further acknowledged that he had been appointed by the Minister for
Foreign Economic Relations to be a member of the Russian delegation, which was
comprised of representatives of five Russian Ministries. With regard to the negotiation
process, he testified that each Ministry would develop its own opinion on an issue, to be
submitted to the representative of the Ministry of Energy (as coordinator of the Russian
delegation) and coordinated into one draft, except where an issue fell under the
competence of the Russian Government, in which case an opinion would be submitted to
and approved by the Government. Mr. Martynov testified that draft and final written
instructions were generated after each conference or working group session, but that he

did not keep copies of the classified reports of the delegations to the Ministry in Moscow

-52-

generated on issues within his and his Ministry’s competence, though he assumed that

they were kept at the relevant Ministry or department, or destroyed.

110. Mr. Martynov was then also questioned about the international arbitration provision in
Article 26 of the ECT, the difference in meaning between Russian “arbitrazh” courts,
which are part of the court system, and private courts of arbitration outside the State
judicial system. Mr. Martynov confirmed that the Law on Foreign Investments referred
to resolution of disputes between a foreign investor and the Russian Federation before a
non-government body, outside the State judicial court system, for which consent is

required.

4. Mr. Martin Mann, QC

111. Mr. Mann has been in independent practice as a commercial chancery barrister since
1970 and is one of the joint heads of the chambers at XXIV Old Buildings, Lincoln’s Inn,
London. Mr. Mann provided a First Opinion concerning the Auriga-type Trusts, the
Palmus Trust, the Southern Cross Trust and the Pavo Trust,® as well as a First Opinion
concerning the Veteran Petroleum Trust (“VP Trust”).? He also provided a Second

Opinion on each of these two categories of trust.'°

112. In his First Opinion concerning the Auriga-type Trusts and others, Mr. Mann maintains
that (a) the trustees of these trusts have no “control” over these trusts and have, at most,
illusory powers over the GML Limited (“GML”) shares, (b) the trustees did not become
beneficial owners of the GML shares, and (c) the trusts in respect of these shares were
incompletely constituted and ineffective. Mr. Mann refers to (a) the extensive powers
and unfettered discretion of the Protectors in the Auriga-type Trusts and the Palmus
Trust; (b) the scope of the Anti-Bartlett provisions in the trust documents; and (c) the Call

Options granted to GML in respect of the GML shares settled into the Auriga-type Trusts

® Mr. Martin Mann, QC, Opinion re Auriga Type Trusts, the Palmus Trust, the Southern Cross Trust and the Pavo
Trust, 22 January 2007.

° Mr. Martin Mann, QC, Opinion re the Veteran Petroleum Trust, 27 January 2007.
'° Mr. Martin Mann, QC, Second Opinion re Auriga Type Trusts, the Palmus Trust, the Southern Cross Trust and the

Pavo Trust, 21 July 2008; Second Opinion re the Veteran Petroleum Trust, 21 July 2008.

-53-

and the Southern Cross Trust. Finally, Mr. Mann refers to the so-called rule in Saunders
v. Vautier'’ in support of the proposition that the trust can be terminated, even though
there exist “discretionary objects,” and that this affects the trustees’ ownership and

control of the GML shares.

113. In his First Opinion regarding the VP Trust, Mr. Mann’s interpretation of the trust and

related documents leads him to the following conclusions:

e YUL and Yukos can jointly instruct the trustee to vote and/or retransfer the Yukos
shares at their discretion and, similarly, can jointly instruct the trustee to retransfer

the VPL Shares.
¢ Neither VPL nor the trustee is the beneficial owner of the Yukos shares.

114. In his Second Opinion regarding the Auriga-type Trusts, in reply to the first written
Opinion of Claimants’ expert, Mr. Green, QC, Mr. Mann concedes that the trusts are
valid by reference to the general law and standard forms and precedents, but opines that
the trusts have an impact on control over the GML shares. He asserts that the proper way
to address the “control” issue is through the following question:

Do the rights within any given trust give the trustee meaningful

power through its holding of GML shares over the way in which
GML’s affairs including its daily business are conducted?

115. Mr. Mann then addresses several key related points:

¢ The Protector is not a fiduciary and is not subject to the control of the court in
exercising powers that, as in the case of these trusts, he can exercise in his own

interests.

e As a result of the Call Option agreements, the trustees of the Auriga-type Trusts
and the Southern Cross Trust can exercise the voting rights attached to the GML

shares only in accordance with GML’s directions.

"' Saunders v. Vautier (1841) 41 Eng. Rep. 482 (Ch.).

-54-

¢ It is probable that a court would hold that a transfer of shares, bereft of all the

rights normally attached to them, does not carry the beneficial interest.
116. In his Second Opinion regarding the VP Trust, Mr. Mann makes the following points:

¢ The trust purported to be established for the Mezzanine Amount is invalid as
being in relation to a future interest, termed in English law an “expectancy,”
which, under English law, the Court will only enforce if the intended transfer is a

transfer for value, which was not the case with the VP Trust.

¢ The rule in Saunders v. Vautier therefore applies in relation to the Yukos shares,
because there are no others, besides YUL, with enforceable rights to the Yukos

shares and the fruits of those shares.

e Mr.Green’s “theories” regarding impediments to the exercise of the rule in

Saunders v. Vautier are incorrect. In particular:
(a) there is no implied agreement not to terminate the VP Trust;

(b) the Canadian case of Buschau & National Trust Company v. Rogers
Communications Inc.’ is irrelevant and distinguishable from the facts in
this case, and runs counter to the public policy considerations in Saunders

v. Vautier; and

(c) the trustee’s indemnity rights do not preclude termination of the VP

Trust.

117. Mr. Mann appeared before the Tribunal for examination and cross-examination on
19 November 2008. In respect of the VP Trust, he opined that the trust over the
Mezzanine Amount is unenforceable because the interest in this case—the expectation
that there will be a capital gain out of which a portion can be carved out for the Russian

Service Provider to donate—is merely a speculation or hope.

"? Buschau & National Trust Company v. Rogers Communications Inc., [2006] 1 S.C.R. 973, 2006 SCC 28 (Can.).

-55-

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

In respect of the Auriga-type Trusts, Mr. Mann testified that the trustees would tend to
follow the settlor’s wishes concerning the distribution of the trust property. Mr. Mann
also explained that, in his opinion, the Anti-Bartlett provisions in the trusts are not

standard.

5. Professor Daniel Berman

Professor Berman is an international tax lawyer with over 20 years experience in the
U.S. Government and the private sector. Since July 2008 he has been professor of tax
law at Boston University Law School. At the time of preparing his Opinion, Professor

Berman was a partner in the law firm of Thelen Reid Brown Raysman & Steiner.

In his Opinion,"° Professor Berman asserts that much of the language of Article 21 of the
ECT was inserted at U.S. insistence to conform to U.S. BIT practice, referring in

particular to the 1984 U.S. Model BIT.

Professor Berman attended an Administration Briefing on the ECT on 1 November 1994
(‘Briefing’), conducted by officials of the U.S. Departments of State, Commerce,
Treasury and Energy and the Office of the U.S. Trade Representatives. Professor
Berman explains that the discussion of tax issues at the Briefing, which was led by an
official named Ann Fisher (from the Office of Tax Policy of the Department of the
Treasury), did not include any suggestion that “tax measures” as defined in the ECT
could give rise to rights and obligations under the ECT that were broader or differed in
any way from those that could arise from the corresponding definition in U.S. BITs and
other trade and investment agreements. He asserts that such a difference surely would

have been highlighted at the Briefing.

Professor Berman concludes based on his professional experience in public and private
practice, as well as the Briefing he attended and subsequent conversations he had with

Ms. Fisher in December 2006, that the definition of ‘Taxation Measures’ in the ECT

'3 Professor Daniel Berman, Opinion on the Scope of the Term “Taxation Measures” in the Energy Charter Treaty,
22 January 2007.

- 56 -

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

should be interpreted to include any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or practice

related to the imposition, administration, or enforcement of taxation.

Professor Berman appeared before the Tribunal for examination on 19 November 2008.
During a short direct examination he modified his written opinion by noting that the

references therein to the U.S. Model BIT should properly have been cited as the NAFTA.

During cross-examination, Professor Berman acknowledged that his involvement with
the ECT was limited to attending the Briefing in 1994 and to participating in some calls

with treasury officials.

Professor Berman stated his belief that the negotiations of the tax provisions of the ECT
were conducted in English, though his knowledge was based on what Ms. Fisher had told
him. He had not reviewed the travaux préparatoires and was not familiar with notes

prepared by the French delegation in French.

When it was recalled that the United States had not signed the ECT, Professor Berman
nevertheless maintained that the intention of the party that drafted the provision, even if it
did not ultimately become a Contracting Party, should still be given great weight in the

interpretation of such a treaty provision.

Upon re-examination, Professor Berman explained why U.S. policy had been developed
to contain a very broad carve-out for tax measures in relation to trade and investment

treaties.

6. Dr. Marat Baglay
Dr. Baglay is a former judge of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation.
Dr. Baglay’s Opinion'* was given in support of Respondent’s contention that any

provisional application of the ECT would violate several provisions of the Russian

Constitution. His Opinion addresses the supremacy of the Constitution, the powers of the

 

‘4 Dr. Marat Baglay, Opinion on Provisional Application of. ional Treaties according to the Constitution of
the Russian Federation, 26 February 2006.

-57-

parliament and government under the system of separation of powers, the provisional

application of international treaties and the provisional application of the ECT.

130. According to Dr. Baglay, a non-ratified international treaty may not be legally applied
without the adoption of relevant federal law. Such an application would violate Russian
constitutional law, including the principle of separation of powers. If a federal executive
body were entitled to bind the Russian State through the provisional application of
treaties, it would assume legislative powers that have not been granted to this body by the
Constitution. Consequently, provisional application of a rule-setting international treaty

that is not validly ratified is contrary to the Russian Constitution.

131. Furthermore, Dr. Baglay considers that the ECT, which has not yet been ratified, remains
subject to the control of the Constitutional Court. As such, the Constitutional Court has
the authority to determine, upon a proper request, the ECT’s compliance with the Russian
Constitution, including, in particular, the question of whether the provisional application

of Parts III and V of the ECT is compatible with the Russian Constitution.

7. Professor Martti Koskenniemi

132. Professor Koskenniemi is Academy Professor with the Academy of Finland. He is also
the Director of the Erik Castrén Institute of International Law and Human Rights
(Helsinki) as well as a Hauser Global Professor of Law at the New York University Law
School. He has been a member of the International Law Commission (“ILC”) since
2002 and has worked for the Finnish Ministry for Foreign Affairs as Counselor for Legal

Affairs and as Director of the Division of International Law.

133. Professor Koskenniemi’s Opinion’ covers the provisional application of treaties in the
Finnish legal system, and what is meant by the provisional application of the ECT being

subject to a State’s “constitution, laws or regulations.”

'S professor Martti Koskenniemi, Expert Opinion on the Provisional Application of International Treaties in the
Finnish Constitutional Law Context, especially with regard to the Energy Charter Treaty, 27 October 2006.

- 58 -

134.

135.

136.

Professor Koskenniemi notes that the President of Finland expressly authorized the
provisional application and the signature of the ECT on 8 December 1994. The ECT was
accepted by Parliament and ratified by the President on 11 July 1997. The ECT entered
into force in Finland on 16 April 1998. In the Government’s report to Parliament on
Finland’s treaty policy of 7 February 1997, it was noted that Finland had been applying
the ECT provisionally since December 1994. According to Professor Koskenniemi,
Finland relied on Article 45(1) in accepting provisional application since Article 37(3) of
the ECT, which limited the budgetary authority of Parliament, was contrary to Finnish

law.

Professor Koskenniemi then turns to his interpretation of Article 45(1) of the ECT. As to
the object and purpose of provisional application, he opines that when States agree on
provisional application, they do so in order to take immediate action in support of the
objective of the treaty. Provisional application institutes a transitory system, bridging the
temporal gap between the signature of a treaty and its entry into force. This means that
clauses on provisional application are regular treaty clauses, in that they establish
obligations on treaty parties to do what is required so as to facilitate the commencement
of the operation of the main treaty. Clauses on provisional application are also
exceptional, in that they temporarily suspend the normal rules on the submission of

treaties to the regular constitutional procedure on ratification, acceptance and approval.

Turning specifically to the ECT, Professor Koskenniemi observes that given the purpose
of clauses providing for provisional application, the well-established rule of international
law that a State may not invoke its domestic law as justification for failure to perform an
international treaty obligation, does not override the express wording of Article 45(1) of
the ECT which makes provisional application subject to the domestic law of the signatory
State. When a State agrees on the temporary application of a treaty so as to prepare its
entry into force, it is understandable that such application is subject to domestic laws and
regulations. Professor Koskenniemi notes that collapsing the distinction between the
regular operation of the treaty and its provisional application fails to give meaning to the
distinction made in the treaty itself and undermines the fundamental principles of the

treaty system on an international and a domestic level.

-59-

137. Under the ECT, States have two choices. Under Article 45(1), a State can choose the
regular system of applying the treaty provisionally in a manner not inconsistent with its
constitution, laws or regulations. Alternatively, under Article 45(2), a State can opt out

of provisional application altogether by making the required declaration.

138. Professor Koskenniemi disagrees with Claimants’ expert, Professor Crawford, that the
second choice is the “obvious mechanism by which a signatory may avoid provisional
application.” The first choice follows the normal practice of States as regards provisional
application and is a balance between the need to prepare the entry into force of the treaty
and the need to protect domestic constitutional rules on the division of powers in treaty
matters. He also disagrees with the interpretation of Claimants’ other expert, Professor
Reisman, of treating Articles 45(1) and 45(2) as a single system of provisional
application. The provisions indicate no procedural linkage and are understood by the

Contracting Parties to operate independently of each other.

8. Professor Alexey Kostin

139. Professor Kostin is a lawyer in Russia. He is a senior professor and the head of the
Private International and Civil Law Department of the Moscow State Institute of

International Relations.

140. Professor Kostin’s Opinion'® was offered in support of the position, that under Russian
legislation, claims of a public nature cannot be referred to arbitration and that a specific

agreement to arbitrate between the actual disputing parties is also required.

141. According to Professor Kostin, only disputes arising from civil law may be referred to
arbitration according to relevant Russian legislation on international arbitration. He cites
paragraphs 2 and 4 of the Russian Law on International Commercial Arbitration of 1993
and Article 1(2) of the Russian Federal Law on Arbitral Tribunals in the Russian

Federation.

'S professor Alexey Kostin, Opinion on Certain Issues of Arbitrability, 21 February 2006.

-60-

142.

143.

144.

145.

146.

147.

Citing several Russian scholars, Professor Kostin states that the reference to civil law in
these statues means that disputes relating to public law cannot be referred to arbitration.
Professor Kostin considers that while a federal law may exempt certain civil law issues
from the general scope of “civil law” arbitration, a federal law may not add disputes
arising from relationships regulated by other branches of law, such as public law, to its

scope.

Professor Kostin considers that public law issues such as taxation, enforcement of tax
regulations, expropriation and criminal matters would not be subject to arbitration under

Russian law unless they could be qualified as civil law disputes.

Moreover, Russian legislation requires a written agreement to arbitrate between the
Parties. Professor Kostin emphasizes that there are not, nor have there ever been,

deviations from this approach.

9. Professor Yevgeny Sukhanov

Professor Sukhanov is the head of the Civil Law Department of the Law Faculty of the

M.V. Lomosonov Moscow University.

In his Opinion,'’ Professor Sukhanov addresses the question of “whether a shareholder
has a right under current Russian law to bring claim(s) against persons (or entities) that

have caused damage to the joint stock company, in which he or it is a shareholder.”

After discussing the applicable legal rules, Professor Sukhanov explains that while
shareholders have the right of claim in respect of the joint-stock company in which they
participate, they have no rights in respect of property which belongs to the joint-stock
company itself. The rules of tort law cannot be applied in this situation because the
damage is inflicted to the property of the joint-stock company and not to the property of
its shareholders. Consequently, the right to bring a claim for the protection of its interests

is enjoyed only by the joint-stock company itself.

"7 Professor Yevgeny Sukhanov, Opinion on the Issue of Possibility of a Shareholder’s Claims against Counter
Parties of the Joint-Stock Company in Connection with Damage Caused by the Latter to the Company, 22
February 2006.

-61-

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.

Professor Sukhanov notes that under Russian law, shareholders are entitled to bring
claims in connection with their ownership against persons other than the joint-stock
company itself in three exceptional cases, none of which applies in the situation under

review.

Accordingly, Professor Sukhanov concludes, shareholders to joint-stock companies
cannot bring claims against third parties that have caused damage to the joint-stock

company in which they participate.

10. Professor Gerhard Hafner

Professor Hafner is a professor of Public International Law and European Law at the Law

Faculty of the Vienna University.

In his Opinion,'® Professor Hafner addresses (a) the legal effect of the Austrian
declaration that it cannot apply the ECT on a provisional basis, and (b) the question of
whether Austria was under an obligation to make a declaration in order to avail itself of

the “to the extent clause” in Article 45(1) of the ECT.

He concludes: (a) Article 45(1) of the ECT provides that provisional application of the
ECT upon signature becomes effective only insofar as the domestic legal order of the
signatory does not contradict the provisions of the ECT; (b) a signatory may rely on the
“to the extent clause” in Article 45(1) of the ECT without making a declaration;
(c) Austria’s declaration in relation to Article 45(1) of the ECT is declaratory in nature;
(d) Article 45(2) of the ECT provides a regime of provisional application that is separate
and distinct from that of Article 45(1); and (e) the exclusion of provisional application
pursuant to Article 45(2) of the ECT requires a declaration by the signatory, which has

constitutive effect.

'S professor Gerhard Hafner, Legal Opinion, 30 December 2006.

-62-

153.

154.

155.

156.

157.

11. Professor Igor Lukashuk

The late Professor Lukashuk was the Director of the Centre for International Legal
Analysis of the Centre for the State and Law of the Russian Academy of Sciences in

Moscow and a member of the ILC.

In his Opinion,” Professor Lukashuk noted that the ECT was not submitted to the Duma
for ratification within a six-month period and that the Duma never ratified the ECT.
Moreover, the application of the Treaty requires amendments of existing laws or the
adoption of new federal laws. Consequently, pursuant to Article 15(1) of the FLIT,

ratification is required.

In Professor Lukashuk’s opinion, pursuant to international and domestic law, the ECT
cannot be applied in the Russian Federation even on a provisional basis to the extent that
it contradicts the Russian Constitution, laws and regulations, and that only the Russian

courts are competent to decide the issues submitted by Claimants.

12. Mr.S.V. Vasilyvev, on behalf of the Russian Ministry of Justice

In_ his Report,” the Deputy Minister of Justice of the Russian Federation,
Mr. S.V. Vasilyev, confirms that the Russian Federation signed the ECT on 17 December
1994, that the Government sent the Treaty to the Duma for ratification on 26 August

1996 and that the Duma had not yet ratified the Treaty.

The Russian Ministry of Justice considers that the ECT should not be applied
provisionally in the Russian Federation because Article 45 of the ECT provides for its
provisional application only in accordance with national law and the ECT was not ratified

by the Duma or sent to the Duma within the six-month term established by law.

"° Professor Igor Lukashuk, Opinion on Provisional Application of the Energy Charter Treaty.

»® Deputy Minister $.V. Vasilyvev, Report of the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation, 12 December 2006.

-63-

158.

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

13. Professor Georg Nolte

Professor Nolte is a professor of comparative public law, international law and European
law at the University of Munich. He is also a member of the European Commission for

Democracy through Law of the Council of Europe.

Professor Nolte’s Opinion”! addresses (a) the relationship between Article 45(1) and
Article 45(2) of the ECT, and (b) the question of how German law does not allow for the
provisional application of an arbitration clause such as the one contained in Article 26 of

the ECT.

Professor Nolte submits that the purpose of Article 45(1) is to act as a general safeguard
clause that prevents the provisional application of the ECT from affecting domestic law,
while the purpose of Article 45(2) is to allow States “not able to accept provisional

application” to put their non-application beyond dispute.

Professor Nolte submits that the text of Article 45, as well as its object and purpose, all
support the notion that Articles 45(1) and 45(2) are separate protective measures. He
argues that, from the language of the Treaty and the negotiating history, it is clear that the
signatory States included Article 45(2) so as to provide protection for parties that would
be unable to provisionally apply the treaty for political or other reasons. Professor Nolte
gives several examples of State practice of ECT signatory States in support of his

conclusions.

Professor Nolte then discusses the relationship between German law and the ECT to

illustrate conflicts between domestic law and the Treaty’s provisions.

Professor Nolte proceeds to discuss “areas reserved for legislation” on institutional
grounds, invoked when certain administrative institutions are established or expanded. It
is generally understood that this extends to changes to the judiciary. It can be implied
that any change to the German judicial system—specifically arbitration proceedings

available under the ECT—could not be effected without parliamentary approval.

>! Professor Georg Nolte, Opinion concerning Provisional Application of Article 26 of the Energy Charter Treaty
‘from an International and German Constitutional Law Perspective, 31 October 2006.

-64-

164. Having opined that an arbitration mechanism cannot be created in Germany without
parliamentary approval, Professor Nolte contends that there are no domestic laws
available under German law that could serve as a basis for arbitration under Article 26

ECT.

165. Professor Nolte concludes that German constitutional law does not allow for the
provisional application of the arbitration mechanism in Article 26 ECT without
parliamentary authorization. Since Article 45(1) ECT provides for consideration of
domestic legal impediments, such a position is in conformity with the regime of

provisional application under the ECT.

14. Professor Angelika Nussberger

166. Professor Nussberger is a professor of law and the Director of the Institute of Eastern

European Law at the University of Cologne.

167. In her Opinion,” Professor Nussberger discusses the change in the legal order that has
taken place in the Russian Federation since end of the Soviet Era and as a result of the

adoption of the 1993 Russian Constitution.

168. Among other things, Professor Nussberger notes that the Constitution is silent with
regards to the provisional application of treaties and the VCLT stops short of regulating
the status of provisionally applied treaties as a matter of Russian domestic law. However,
Article 23(1) of the FLIT permits provisional application, as long as the treaty is
submitted to the Duma within six months for ratification. As the ECT was sent to the
Duma for ratification after the expiry of the six-month period, and the Duma has not
passed a law on ratification or a law extending provisional application, the continued

provisional application of the ECT constitutes a breach of Russian domestic law.

® Professor Angelika Nussberger, Opinion concerning the Provisional Application of the Energy Charter Treaty by
the Russian Federation, 17 January 2007.

-65-

169. According to Professor Nussberger, the ECT is different from other treaties that the
Russian Federation applies provisionally because its provisional application is restricted

by Article 45(1), which provides for the precedence of national law.

170. Professor Nussberger states that provisional application of the ECT violates both the
vertical and horizontal separation of powers. First, as a treaty that must be ratified, the
provisional application of the ECT cannot continue after six months without the consent
of the Duma in the form of a law of ratification. Second, the ECT cannot be applied
provisionally insofar as the provisional application would be incompatible with Chapter 7
of the Constitution, which provides that the executive cannot regulate the judicial

settlement of disputes as the ECT’s arbitration clause seeks to do.

15. Professor Alain Pellet

171. Professor Pellet, a professor of law at Paris X-Nanterre University, is a member and

former Chairman of the ILC.

172. Professor Pellet’s Opinion”? discusses the provisional application of a treaty under French

constitutional law.

173. Professor Pellet explains that under the French Constitution, the Executive Branch has
the power to conclude treaties pursuant to Article 52(1) of the Constitution. However,
some categories of treaty, enumerated in Article 53 of the Constitution, must be ratified
or approved by virtue of a statute adopted by Parliament. These include treaties that,
among other things, modify provisions that are matters for statute, commit the finance of

the State, relate to international organizations, or are commercial in nature.

174. The ECT was signed by France in the name of the President on 17 December 1994. Its
ratification was authorized by Parliament on 27 May 1999. During the ratification
process of the ECT, neither the French Parliament nor the Government specified the

reasons for referring the matter to Parliament. In Professor Pellet’s opinion, this silence

> Professor Alain Pellet, Legal Opinion on the Provisional Application of a Treaty under French Constitutional Law
(Taking the Example of the Energy Charter Treaty), 13 December 2006.

- 66 -

cannot hide the fact that this was “not a pure discretionary choice but a legal obligation,”
because (a) the ratification of this treaty has affected certain “provisions which are matter
for statute law” according to Article 53; (b) the ECT falls into the category of “treaties or
agreements relating to international organization” because it establishes an international
organization; (c) the ECT commits the finance of the State; and (d) the ECT is a

“commercial treaty” within the meaning of Article 53.

175. Professor Pellet states that, in France, the provisional application of treaties is only
possible when the treaty’s subject-matter falls within the power of the Executive Branch
or, when Parliament has authorized it in advance. Professor Pellet considers that it is not
the mere inclusion of an arbitration mechanism in a treaty that prevents provisional
application of the treaty by France. Where, however, the arbitration mechanism itself
touches upon one of the subject matters reserved under Article 34 of the Constitution to
the legislative branch—such as by exempting foreign investors from the jurisdiction of

the domestic courts—ratification pursuant to Article 53 of the Constitution is required.

176. He submits that, by signing the ECT, France only accepted the provisional application of
the ECT’s provisions to the extent that they did not conflict with its Constitution, in
accordance with Article 45(1) of the ECT. Professor Pellet concludes that only the few
provisions of the ECT that do not fall under Article 53 of the Constitution may have been

applied on a provisional basis before its ratification by France.

16. Mr. Stephen Knipler

177. Mr. Knipler has been a Senior Tax Counsel (International) for the Australian Tax Office
since 21 March 2002, after having had responsibility for the past 24 years for
participating on behalf of Australia in the negotiation of tax provisions in international

treaties, in particular the ECT.

178. In his Statement,”4 Mr. Knipler asserts that he attended the ECT negotiations concerning

tax provisions held in Brussels in 1994 and was closely involved in the negotiations

> Mr. Stephen Knipler, Witness Statement, 22 January 2007.

-67-

179.

180.

181.

182.

183.

184.

concerning taxation issues, particularly in the drafts of what became Article 21 of the

Treaty. Mr. Knipler states that the ECT tax provisions were negotiated solely in English.

During the course of the ECT negotiations, the Australian delegation had a clear mandate
to ensure that the ECT did not cover any measures related to taxation, including measures

relating to imposition, administration, collection or enforcement.

At the conclusion of negotiations, Mr. Knipler was satisfied that Article 21 was
consistent in its content and effect with the instructions given to the Australian delegation

and confirms that is reflected in the final text of the ECT.

17. Professor Myron Nordquist

Professor Nordquist is a professor of international law and the Associate Director of the

Centre for Oceans Law and Policy at the University of Virginia School of Law.

Professor Nordquist’s Opinion® addresses the assertion of Claimants and their expert,
Mr. Gladyshev, that the Russian Federation’s practice with respect to certain maritime
agreements is consistent with the view that the Russian Federation consented to be bound
under international law to the provisional application of the compulsory dispute
settlement provisions of Article 26 of the ECT. Professor Nordquist considers that this
assertion is factually and legally erroneous, and that there is no legal support for the
notion that the Russian Federation agreed to the provisional application of a dispute

resolution procedure requiring compulsory arbitration at the request of a private party.

According to Professor Nordquist, while the Russian Federation accepted “provisional
arrangements” under the 1982 United Nations Law of the Sea Convention, this is not the

same as provisional application under Article 25 of the VCLT.

Similarly, the Exchange of Notes between the United States and the Soviet Union in
connection with the maritime boundary agreement for the Bering Sea on 1 June 1990

(“Bering Sea MBA”) is a source of authority under international law to set up a

>5 Professor Myron Nordquist, Expert Witness Statement, 19 January 2007.

- 68 -

185.

186.

187.

188.

“provisional arrangement of a practical nature.” The practice of both the Russian
Federation and the United States is uniformly consistent with the establishment of
provisional arrangements and uniformly inconsistent with the provisional application of
the Bering Sea MBA itself. Contrary to what was asserted by Claimants, neither the
Bering Sea MBA nor the Exchange of Notes in connection with the Bering Sea MBA

called for provisional application of the agreement.

Professor Nordquist disagrees with Mr. Gladyshev’s assertion that a 2001 submission by
the Russian Federation to the United Nations Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf demonstrates that Russia is provisionally applying the Bering Sea
MBA. He argues that the public information available on the Russian submission clearly
does not refer to the agreement as being provisionally applied, nor does it refer to a
maritime boundary as having been established by such an agreement, whether as a result

of provisional application or otherwise.

Professor Nordquist doubts the legal and factual credibility of Mr. Gladyshev’s
contention that the Russian Federation acquiesced in the issuance of oil exploration
licenses by the United States in the Navarin Basin located in the Bering Sea—and that

these ‘claims’ were subsequently withdrawn under the Bering Sea MBA.

Finally, Professor Nordquist asserts that no American President would claim competence
to bind the U.S. Government to compulsory dispute resolution with a private party on the
basis of provisional application of a treaty, without ratification pursuant to the advice and
consent of the U.S. Senate, nor would the Senate tolerate such a claim. As a result, even
if the Bering Sea MBA were an example of provisional application, it would not be
evidence of State practice corroborative of provisional application of compulsory dispute

resolution.

18. Professor Andrey Lisitsyn-Svetlanov

Professor Lisitsyn-Svetlanov is the Director of the Institute of State and Law of the
Russian Academy of Sciences and the author of a number of works on the legal

regulation of foreign investment in the Russian Federation and the former Soviet Union.

- 69 -

189. In his Opinion,”® Professor Lisitsyn-Svetlanov asserts that a “foreign investment” under

Russian law must involve an injection of foreign capital.

190. Russian investment laws were promulgated with the purpose of granting certain benefits
to foreign investors in exchange for obtaining new funds from abroad and essential
expertise. In respect of such foreign funds and expertise, the relevant statutes commonly
provided that these should be “injected” by foreign investors into the local economy. In
the Russian language, “to inject” means to bring something new into something that
already exists. It is the injection and contribution of something new that is a
characteristic feature of an investment, as differentiated from a general foreign trade

transaction.

19. Professor Stef van Weeghel

191. Professor van Weeghel is a professor of international tax law at the University of

Amsterdam and is a tax partner at Stibbe.

192. In his Opinion,”’ Professor van Weeghel reaches three main conclusions about Claimants

and taxation law.

193. First, Hulley was not entitled to obtain the taxation benefits contained in the Cyprus-
Russia double taxation convention (“Cyprus-Russia DTC”) in respect of the Yukos
dividends because (a) Hulley had a permanent establishment in Russia under
Article 10(4) of the Cyprus-Russia DTC) because it either had a place of management in
Russia, or it had an agent in Russia; and (b) those dividends were attributable to the

permanent establishment in Russia.

194. Second, VPL was not entitled to obtain the taxation benefits contained in the Cyprus-
Russia DTC because it was not the beneficial owner of the Yukos dividends within the

meaning of Article 10(2) of the Cyprus-Russia DTC).

© Professor Andrey Lisitsyn-Svetlanov, Legal Opinion, 22 February 2006.

>” Professor Stef van Weeghel, Expert Witness Report, 29 January 2007.

-70-

195.

196.

197.

198.

199.

Third, the Yukos holding structure is a sham or otherwise abusive under general
principles of international tax law and designed specifically to avoid taxation obligations.

Therefore rights to tax benefits under the Cyprus-Russia DTC should be denied.

According to Professor van Weeghel, tax authorities do not always have to accept
artificial legal constructions. Anti-abuse doctrines to counter artificial legal constructions
have developed in and are common to many countries including the Russian Federation
and Cyprus. He refers to the example of a Swiss Federal Court denying the benefits of a
double taxation treaty to a Danish company in circumstances analogous to the Yukos

holding structure.

Professor van Weeghel refers to international efforts to control the use of tax havens and
notes that the OECD Forum on Harmful Tax Practices in its 2000 Progress Report
identified 35 tax havens which included Isle of Man, Gibraltar, Jersey, and the British
Virgin Islands. Professor van Weeghel examines the Yukos holding structure, and notes
that the bottom of the structure is the successful and profitable Russian oil company
developing and exploiting natural energy resources in Russia, while at the top of the
structure is a small number of Russian individual shareholders. He concludes that it is
“hardly perceivable” that the Russian individual shareholders, in setting up the Yukos
holding structure, had any other goal in mind than low taxation and lack of transparency
in respect of ownership of Yukos shares. Such a structure would normally fall within the

scope of international efforts to counter the harmful use of tax havens.

B. CLAIMANTS’ WITNESSES

As noted, Claimants submitted four expert legal opinions. At the hearing, Respondent
called two of Claimants’ experts for cross examination—Mr. Vladimir Gladyshev and
Mr. Brian Green, QC. Professor James Crawford, SC and Professor W. Michael Reisman
were not called to the hearing. The following summary of Claimants’ witness evidence

follows the order outlined above.

1. Mr. Vladimir Gladyshev

Mr. Gladyshev is a Russian attorney in Moscow, who has been in private practice since

1994. From 1981 to 1989 he worked in the Treaty and Legal Department of the Soviet

-71-

Ministry of Foreign Affairs and between 1989 and 1994 was posted to the Madrid
Embassy of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (“USSR”). He was not directly

involved in the negotiation of the ECT.

200. In his First Opinion,”* Mr. Gladyshev makes the following main contentions. First, the
Russian Federation’s long-standing practice shows that it favors the provisional
application of treaties and recognizes that the treaties it applies on a provisional basis
impose binding obligations on the Russian Federation. Second, the Russian Government
declared to the Duma, during the ratification process, that the ECT is consistent with
Russian law. In accordance with the rules of international law and its own treaty
practice, the Russian Federation has applied the ECT as a binding instrument and has
relied on its terms. Third, Mr. Gladyshev contends that the ECT is in fact consistent with

Russian law.

201. To reach these conclusions, Mr. Gladyshev discusses the rules of customary international
law, the FLIT (which permits the provisional application of treaties), Russian legal
scholarship and Russian treaty and judicial practice, citing examples of other treaties to
which Russia is party. Attached to his opinion is a list of 45 treaties that he contends are
currently being applied by the Russian Federation on a provisional basis, amidst a list of
390 treaties signed by the USSR/Russian Federation that were applied—or are being

applied—on a provisional basis prior to ratification.

202. In support of his assertion that the Russian Federation has repeatedly accepted the
binding nature of provisionally applied treaties, Mr. Gladyshev cites a number of
examples, the most salient of which is the Bering Sea MBA. It was signed on | January
1990, and has been provisionally applied since 15 June 1990, in accordance with the
express terms of the Exchange of Notes between the United States and Russian
Federation, as evidenced by (a) the Russian Government’s express reference to the
boundaries as defined in the Bering Sea MBA as the outer limits of its continental shelf;

(b) the United States’ enforcement of the Bering Sea MBA against Russian shipping

°8 Mr. Vladimir Gladyshev, Opinion concerning the Provisional Application of the Energy Charter Treaty by the
Russian Federation, 29 June 2006.

-72-

vessels on multiple occasions, without protest from the Russian Federation; and (c) the
Russian Government’s acquiescence in the issuance by the United States of licenses to
companies for oil exploration in areas to which Russia’s earlier claim was withdrawn in

the Bering Sea MBA.

203. Mr. Gladyshev’s Second Opinion” reiterates his view that the Russian Federation
repeatedly accepted the binding nature of provisionally applied treaties in general and
applied the ECT, in particular, as a binding instrument. He contends that the fact that the
ECT was not submitted to the Duma for ratification within the six-month period set out in
Article 23(2) of the FLIT has no effect on Russia’s continuing application of the Treaty.
Attached to his Second Opinion is a list of treaties that were provisionally applied,

submitted to the Duma after the six-month period and subsequently ratified.

204. Mr. Gladyshev appeared before the Tribunal on 20 November 2008. Under cross-
examination Mr. Gladyshev testified that although he had not been involved in the
negotiation of the ECT, he had been involved in negotiation of Russia’s other treaties and

regularly applies international law in his practice.

205. In response to questions on the FLIT, Mr. Gladyshev affirmed that it prescribes
procedures for the ratification of treaties, but that some treaties do not require ratification.
Shown several examples of treaties that he had cited in support of Russian practice on
provisional application, he maintained that the fact that Russia had signed such treaties
supported his contention, regardless of whether Russia had ever applied the provisional
application clause. He acknowledged further that, of the treaties listed in Attachment 2 to

his opinion, except for the ECT, none provided for investor-State arbitration.

206. In a series of questions on Russian constitutional law and the separation of powers,
Mr. Gladyshev maintained that the operation of the separation of powers for treaty-
making in Russia is prescribed not only in the Russian Constitution, but in the FLIT, such

that there is no category of treaty that cannot be applied provisionally. Questioned

°° Mr. Vladimir Gladyshev, Second Opinion concerning the Provisional Application of the Energy Charter Treaty by
the Russian Federation, 2 May 2007.

-73-

207.

208.

209.

210.

further on the distinction between the Soviet approach and that of the Russian Federation,
he resisted characterizing the Soviet State as dualist and the Russian Federation as
monist, and reasserted that agreement on the provisional application of the ECT

amounted to a treaty concluded by the Russian Federation.

When questioned about resolutions of the Supreme Court of Russia, Mr. Gladyshev
acknowledged that he was familiar with Resolutions 5 and 8. After being shown a
statement by Professor Igor Lukashuk that the Russian courts are bound by a Supreme
Court decree according to which only ratified treaties can take priority over contrary rules
of law, Mr. Gladyshev contended that this includes provisionally applied treaties,
invoking Professor Lukashuk’s own book, The Norms of International Law in the

Russian Legal System.

When questioned on the text of Article 45(1) of the ECT, Mr. Gladyshev agreed that his
Opinion did not discuss whether his list of treaties had such an “inconsistency clause,”
which he attributed to his belief that international law does not include a regime for such
“inconsistency clauses.” He restated his opinion that the Russian State took the view that

Article 45(1) did not apply to Russia and that the ECT was consistent with its laws.

2. Mr. Brian Green, QC

Mr. Green is a specialist trusts practitioner at the English Bar. He has been in this
practice since 1981, and was appointed a QC in 1997. He practices out of Wilberforce
Chambers, Lincoln’s Inn, London. Mr. Green provided a first and second opinion on the

Auriga-type Trusts, and a first and second opinion on the VP Trust.

In his First Opinion regarding Auriga-type Trusts,*” Mr Green stated that these trusts are
routine examples of offshore trusts, substantially similar to the Jersey standard form. An
analysis of the salient features of each trust would show a coherent set of trusts operating
for the benefit of all or any of the beneficiaries for the duration of the relevant trust

period. He defines “control” over the GML shares as “control” over those rights

*© Mr. Brian Green, QC, Opinion re Auriga-Type Trusts, the Palmus Trust, the Southern Cross Trust and the Pavo
Trust, 4 May 2007.

-74-

attaching to the GML shares that allow “control” to be exercised over GML, and
concludes that the trustees have control over the GML shares. Mr. Green opines as

follows in relation to the key related issues:

¢ The Protector’s powers, far from being entirely at his discretion, must be

exercised in a fiduciary manner and for the benefit of the beneficiaries.

¢ The Anti-Bartlett provisions, exempting the trustee from a duty to perform certain
actions, must be distinguished from provisions that would take away from the

trustee the right to do so.

¢ The Call Option agreements proceed on the explicit basis that legal and beneficial
ownership of the GML shares will remain in the trustees pending “Completion,”
and do not involve any transfer of property to the security holder (i.e., GML

itself).

¢ The rule in Saunders v. Vautier has no application to the trust here, since the class

of beneficiaries is open.

211. In his First Opinion regarding the VP Trust,*!

Mr. Green opines that Mr. Mann’s
interpretation of the trust and related documents is incorrect, and offers the following

conclusions based on his analysis of the issues:

¢ The provisions of the trust instrument clearly show that the trustee is vested with

ownership and control over the VPL shares.

¢ The fact that the trustee is required to act in accordance with the instructions of a
Voting Committee in exercising any voting powers attaching to the Yukos shares

does not interfere with the trustee’s ownership and control over the VPL shares.

3! Mr. Brian Green, QC, Opinion re the Veteran Petroleum Trust, 4 May 2007.

-75-

212.

The provisions requiring the trustee to sell the Yukos shares as directed by the
Russian Service Provider (“RSP”) do not equate with the RSP owning or

controlling the Yukos shares.

The trust appears as an arrangement referred to in the UK as an “unapproved

profit sharing scheme.”

Successive interests are created in the Yukos shares, which are in the nature of
fixed-interest trusts. The beneficiaries are YUL and the veteran employees of

Yukos.

The rule in Saunders v. Vautier is inapplicable to the Yukos shares; as for the
VPL shares, there are several impediments to the exercise by YUL of any rights

under the rule.

In his Second Opinion regarding the Auriga-type Trusts,*” Mr. Green states that, the

trusts being typical and valid trusts as regards the GML shares, it cannot seriously be

argued

that the terms of the trusts have the extraordinary effect that ownership or control

of the trust assets resides other than in the trustees. He makes the following principal

points:

As regards the rule in Saunders v. Vautier, even when the principle is potentially
applicable, it does not justify the conclusion that the GML shares (or any other
trust property) is owned or controlled by anyone other than the respective trustees

unless and until the principle is effectively invoked.

The security interest created by the Call Option agreements is at most in the
nature of a charge and not a mortgage. A charge does not involve any transfer of
property to the security holder, much less does it involve the chargee becoming

the legal owner of such shares.

* Mr. Brian Green, QC, Second Opinion re Auriga-Type Trusts, the Palmus Trust, the Southern Cross Trust and the
Pavo Trust, 30 September 2008.

- 76 -

e In relation to Protector control, Mr. Green observes that the Protectors have no
consent power as regards the exercise by the trustee of the voting rights over

GML shares.

e Finally, Mr. Green maintains that Mr. Mann has failed to establish that the
beneficial interest in the GML shares was retained by the settlor/first-named

Protector.

213. In his Second Opinion regarding the VP Trust,’ Mr. Green opines as follows on the

additional points raised by Mr. Mann:

e Reliance on the “expectancy” principle is erroneous, as the question here involves
whether a party (YUL), being the present owner of present property (the Yukos
shares), was able to assign such present (not expectant) property to a trustee, to
hold the same on trust. The trust over the Mezzanine Amount is therefore valid

and enforceable, and the beneficiaries are the veteran employees of Yukos.

e¢ There remain significant impediments to the exercise by YUL of the rule in
Saunders v. Vautier in relation to the VPL Shares, namely: (a) no unilateral right
to terminate the trust; (b) inapplicability of the rule in relation to a pension trust
fund (i.e., the Rogers Communications Inc. case); and (c) the trustee’s indemnity

rights take priority over YUL/Yukos’ rights.

e Finally, even when the rule in Saunders v. Vautier is potentially available, that
principle does not enable beneficiaries to control the trustee or to claim ownership

of the trust property so long as the trust is ongoing.

214. Mr. Green appeared at the hearing for cross-examination on 20 November 2008. His oral

testimony addressed the following points, among others:

e Explaining the inclusion of the International Red Cross in discretionary trusts,

Mr. Green testified that it is the normal practice in properly-drafted trusts to

*3 Mr. Brian Green, QC, Second Opinion re the Veteran Petroleum Trust, 30 September 2008.

-71-

215.

216.

ensure that the equitable interests under the trusts are completely disposed of, so
that there is no beneficial vacuum at the end of the trust pursuant to which the
property, no matter how remote, might be said to fall back into the estate of the

settlor.

Normally, a letter of wishes is designed to communicate to the trustees the
settlor’s aspirations at the time that the letter is written as to the way in which the
beneficial enjoyment of the trust property might devolve over time. It is general

in its terms and makes clear that it is only of precatory effect.

In the Southern Cross Trust, any beneficiary can let the trustees know that he no
longer wishes to be a beneficiary. Unlike English law, Guernsey law does not
require that disposing of anything like an equitable interest should be in writing.
Therefore, it is possible for the trustees to have removed Mr. Khodorkovsky

without clear written instructions.

The Call Option agreements gave each of the individual participants comfort as
regards the other. They gave GML a mechanism to remove an individual
participant if it decided in the future that a particular participant was no longer
desirable. This is not uncommon in partnership or joint venture agreements of the

present kind.

3. Professor James Crawford, SC

Professor Crawford, SC, is the Whewell Professor of International Law at the University

of Cambridge and a member of Matrix Chambers.

Professor Crawford’s First Opinion™ addresses Respondent’s arguments that the Tribunal
lacks jurisdiction and that Claimants lack standing. Professor Crawford concludes:
(a) provisional application of a treaty is a genuine form of application and provisionally
applied treaty provisions may have legal effect; (b) accordingly, by accepting provisional

application of the ECT, Respondent accepted the obligations of Parts III and V of the

* Professor James Crawford, SC, Energy Charter Treaty Arbitration: Jurisdiction Issues, 22 June 2006.

-78 -

217.

218.

219.

Treaty; (c) in particular, given that the arbitration clause of the ECT was being
provisionally applied by Respondent, Notices of Arbitration filed by qualified investors
perfected an agreement to arbitrate which was, and remains, independent of the continued
provisional application of the ECT itself; and (d) on the facts as stipulated, the dispute

settlement provisions of the ECT apply to Claimants.

Within an overview of the modes of consent under the law of treaties, Professor
Crawford reviews the drafting history of Article 25 of the VCLT and highlights two
amendments that confirm that provisionally applied treaties have legal effect. During the
Vienna Conference, the draft text was modified to include Article 35(2), which provides
specific rules for the termination of a provisionally-applied treaty. Additionally, the draft
text was modified to replace the words “enter into force provisionally” with “apply
provisionally,” a change intended to make clear that “provisionally” referred to the time
of the treaty’s application, rather than its legal force or effectiveness during that time
period. Professor Crawford further rejects Respondent’s position that the pacta sunt
servanda tule in Article 26 of the VCLT only applies to a treaty in force: the VCLT

plainly intended provisional application to fall within the framework of that rule.

After reviewing State practice in connection with provisional application, including the
examples of the GATT and the privatization of the International Telecommunications
Satellite Organization, Professor Crawford concludes that a claim based on provisional
application is “a form of consent widespread in recent treaties, including the ECT itself,

and it involves a mode of application of the treaty to the extent stipulated in it.”

With respect to Respondent’s interpretation of Articles 45(1) and 45(2), Professor
Crawford states that the correct construction is that Article 45(1) provides the general
rule to accommodate constitutional or other requirements of participating States, and
Article 45(2) provides a mechanism under which the rule is to operate. He states that
Respondent’s position does not make sense given the reciprocity limitation in
Article 45(2)(b). A declaration under Article 45(2)(a), by virtue of the operation of
Article 45(2)(b), would maintain parity between States, whereas the operation of

Article 45(1), according to Respondent’s construction—which might occur only after a

-79 -

220.

221.

222.

dispute had arisen—would be unilateral in its effect. States are not to be taken to have

negotiated such anomalous situations unless there is a clear indication to that effect.

Professor Crawford states that, assuming that Article 45(1) could operate independently
of Article 45(2), the internal law of a State must be clear as to its exclusionary effect to
avoid the provisional application of a treaty. Professor Crawford states that it cannot be
assumed that the mere existence of a constitutional requirement of ratification is
inconsistent with provisional application and international law has traditionally been
reluctant to allow internal limitations to affect treaty provisions. Article 46 of the
VCLT—which permits the invalidation of consent to a treaty entered into in violation of
internal law—has an “exceptional character’ and is rarely applicable, and more
importantly that its scope does not cover provisional application, but only definitive

acceptance.

In connection with Article 17 of the ECT, Professor Crawford emphasizes the
notification requirement, and observes that tribunals have been clear that notification by
the State seeking to deny advantages to investors must be unambiguous. Professor
Crawford acknowledges the practical difficulty of notifying offshore companies of the
exercise of the Article 17 right but asserts that this is why Article 17(1) allows States to
issue, by clear statement, denials respecting the whole class of investors and potential
investors. Though international law provides no formal notice requirements in such a
situation, the principle is evident in the depositary requirements under Article 80 of the
VCLT. To constitute notice under Article 17(1), a clear statement by the Government of
Respondent published with an appropriate authority—such as the Energy Charter
Secretariat—would be required. Even if the statement in Respondent’s pleadings was

sufficient, the withdrawal from the arbitration clause would have no retroactive effect.

In response to Respondent’s objection that Claimants are shell companies, Professor
Crawford observes that the ECT requires only that the “investor” be organized under the
laws of a Contracting State. Companies incorporated in Contracting Parties are embraced
by the definition, regardless of the nationality of shareholders, the origin of investment
capital or nationality of the directors or management. In several cases where companies

have been registered in tax shelters, arbitral tribunals made no further enquiry to uncover

-80-

223.

224.

225.

226.

their “real” nationality or found it unnecessary to go beyond the terms of the treaty

definition of “investor.”

In his Further Opinion*’, Professor Crawford sets out his position on the applicability of
pacta sunt servanda to provisionally applied treaties and provides detailed responses to
and comments on the witness statement of Mr. Fremantle and the expert opinions of

Professors Hafner, Koskenniemi, Lukashuk, Nolte and Pellet.

In connection with Professor Koskenniemi’s opinion, Professor Crawford disagrees that
provisional application should be interpreted in a “limitative way.” Provisional
application has legal effect because it is what the parties have agreed. Interpretative
presumptions are beside the point when the terms of the parties’ agreement are as explicit

as Article 45 of the ECT.

With respect to Professor Koskenniemi’s opinion that the executive ought not to be able
to bind a State internationally in contravention of its domestic constitutional law,
Professor Crawford asserts that the position of international law is that treaties can be
entered into by more or less formal means; it is—within broad limits—for the State itself
to ensure compliance with its constitutional requirements, which Article 45(2) allows
them to do freely. Further, there is no rule that treaties cannot have effect before
ratification, since there is no rule requiring ratification. Finally, it is necessary to look at
the effect on third parties acting in good faith. The Russian Federation consented to
provisional application and gave no reason for investors to doubt the effectiveness of its

consent.

Turning to Professor Lukashuk’s opinion, Professor Crawford disagrees with the opinion
that provisional application applies in accordance with the State’s “constitutional
processes.” The VCLT does not condition the validity of the legal effect of treaty

commitments upon compliance with constitutional processes. He further comments that

5 Professor James Crawford, SC, Further Opinion on Energy Charter Treaty Arbitration: Jurisdiction Issues, 3 May

2007.

-81-

227.

228.

229.

unless a treaty provides otherwise, it is for the State to ensure that it complies with any

internal constitutional processes in accepting provisional application.

Finally, Professor Crawford addresses the scope of travaux préparatoires. Travaux
préparatoires include evidence of the conference or other meetings where the treaty text
was discussed, including proposals communicated, but not private statements or
recollections. Professor Crawford regards the following evidence as based upon false
travaux and as effectively inviting the Tribunal to engage in “‘an investigation ab initio of
the supposed intentions of the parties [to the Treaty]: (a) Professor Berman’s reference
to congressional briefings and his personal knowledge of the facts; (b) Mr. Fremantle’s
reliance on certain non-comprehensive papers and his memory of negotiations;
(c) Mr. Knipler’s reference to the “mandate” of the Australian delegation and his personal
satisfaction regarding compliance with the Australian delegation’s instructions; and
(d) Mr. Martynov’s “clear understanding that Russia would not be able to apply
provisionally those provisions [...] that related to a settlement of disputes by
international arbitration” though there is no record of this. Professor Crawford confirms
that interpretation of a treaty is a matter of law, not of fact, and that much of
Respondent’s witnesses’ testimony is fundamentally inadmissible. Resort to the travaux
is a subsidiary means of resolving “ambiguities or uncertainties or, in exceptional cases,

to correct an interpretation which is ‘manifestly absurd or unreasonable.’”

4. Professor W. Michael Reisman

Professor Reisman is currently the Myres S. McDougal Professor of International Law at
Yale Law School, where he has been a member of the faculty since 1965. He has been

elected to the Institut de Droit International.

Professor Reisman’s Opinion*® addresses the ECT’s provisional application regime under
Article 45, the denial of benefits regime under Article 17, and the meaning of

“investment” in the Treaty and its binding effect on Russia.

°6 Professor W. Michael Reisman, Opinion concerning Arbitral Jurisdiction under the European Energy Charter
Treaty with Respect to the Russian Federation in the Yukos Case, 28 June 2006.

-82-

230.

231.

232.

233.

234.

When a treaty contains a provisional application clause, it imposes obligations on a State
by virtue of that State’s participation in the adoption of the treaty. According to
Professor Reisman the law of provisional application operates according to the twin
principles of drafting freedom and State consent; a provisionally-applicable treaty

constitutes a binding and enforceable legal instrument between States.

Professor Reisman asserts that Article 45 of the ECT establishes two different regimes
for provisional application. The first regime—consisting of Articles 45(1), 45(2)(a),
45(2)(b) and 45(3))—is for the ECT as a whole. The second regime—consisting of
Article 45(2)(c)—applies exclusively to Part VII of the ECT.

The first regime, which includes the dispute settlement obligations in Part V based on
alleged breaches of the investment-protection obligations set forth if Part III, applies
automatically to every signatory State, without possibility of reservation, subject “to the
extent that such provisional application is not inconsistent with its constitution, laws or
regulations.” The only time a signatory can claim that such provisional application is
inconsistent with its constitution, laws or regulations, is at the moment of signature. At
that time, a State that resists provisional application must deliver a declaration that it is
not able to accept the provisional application because of the inconsistency that doing so
would create with its constitution, laws or regulations. Other provisions of the ECT make
it clear that this is the intended meaning of the text. Moreover, the bulk of the practice

with respect to Article 45 confirms that this is the understanding of the parties.

Accordingly, Professor Reisman states, it is not permissible for a signatory, which had
not previously exercised the option of making a declaration at the moment of signing, to
invoke subsequently its constitution, laws or regulations as a justification for dishonoring

its commitment to apply the ECT provisionally.

Professor Reisman opines that the ECT’s provisional application regime applies to
Russia. When Russia signed the ECT on 17 December 1994, it did not make a
declaration under Article 45(2)(a). Neither did Russia make a declaration, accepting
arguendo its interpretation of Article 45(1). Notably, Russia consistently held itself out
as a member of the ECT and has actively participated in the Conference and Charter

mechanisms under Part VII.

-83-

235.

236.

237.

238.

239.

According to Professor Reisman, the ECT is not a political treaty. Russia’s allegation
that the pacta sunt servanda rule is not applicable to a treaty that is applied on a
provisional basis is not correct. All agreements concluded between States are subject to

this rule with the possible exception of a modus vivendi; the ECT is not a modus vivendi

 

and was moreover registered as a treaty with the Secretary of the United Nations.
Further, the fact that the ECT’s provisional application regime provides for a precise

mode of termination indicates that its binding nature.

He also notes that Russia cannot claim that the provisional application of the ECT would
violate the Russian Constitution, and the provisional application regime is not in manifest
violation of Russian law. As provided by Article 46 of the VCLT, the violation must be a
manifest, in other words, a violation of internal law regarding the competence to
conclude treaties that is objectively evident to any other State. There was no such
manifest violation here and Russia cannot advance this claim after allowing third parties

to rely on its own assurances.

Professor Reisman opines that the arbitration provisions of the ECT are not inconsistent
with Russian laws and regulations. It is an undisputed principle of international law that
international obligations prevail over provisions of domestic law and that a State cannot
invoke domestic provisions to avoid its international obligations. This same principle is

applicable in international investment arbitration.

Professor Reisman then considers whether Claimants may avail themselves of the
protections and benefits of the ECT in view of Article 17. According to Professor
Reisman, Article 17 does not operate automatically. The right given by Article 17 to
each Contracting Party to deny the advantages of Part III is an executory rather than an
executed right; it must be exercised by way of a positive action by a State wishing to
benefit from it, until which time the designated class of investors or investments benefit
from Part III. Once the right to deny benefits of Part III has been exercised by a
Contracting Party, the effect operates prospectively from the date of the exercise of the

right.

According to Professor Reisman, Russia is a Contracting Party to the ECT. While Russia

has not yet ratified the ECT and the ECT has therefore not literally entered into force for

-84-

240.

241.

Russia, to exclude Russia and similarly-situated States from the definition of
“Contracting Party” would eviscerate the provisional application regime and the
provisional application obligations of Article 45. The result would be “manifestly

absurd” and “unreasonable” in the sense of Article 32(b) of the VCLT.

Professor Reisman states that citizens or nationals of a Contracting Party are not covered
by Article 17. Article 17(1) permits a Contracting Party to deny the advantages of
Part III to a legal entity organized under the laws of a Contracting Party but owned or
controlled by nationals of a third State if that entity “has no substantial business activities
in the area of the Contracting Party in which it is organized.” ECT case-law supports the
position that Article 17(1) does not apply to legal entities owned or controlled by citizens
or nationals of a Contracting Party. Had the drafters of the ECT intended to permit a
Contracting Party to deny the advantages of Part III to entities owned or controlled by its
nationals but organized according to the laws of another Contracting Party, Article 17(1)
would not limit the denial option to entities owned or controlled by “citizens or nationals

of a third state.” Russia is a Contracting Party, not a third State.

Professor Reisman then turns to the question of whether the ECT requires the investment
to have a cross-border origin. He considers that the requirements for “Investment” have
been met. Russia argues that when ascertaining the international character of an
investment, the origin of the capital is relevant and decisive. There are however only
four requirements that must be fulfilled in order for an “Investment” to qualify under the
ECT: (a) “every kind of asset, including shares and stocks;” (b) “owned or controlled”;
(c) “directly or indirectly”; (d) by an Investor as defined by the ECT. All four
requirements are satisfied in this case: the investment is in the form of shares of the
Yukos Oil Corporation; the Notices of Arbitration and Statements of Claim stipulate that
Claimants own the shares of Yukos. The ECT does not distinguish between “real
owners” or otherwise and disregards the nationality of the investors beyond the
requirement that it be a national of a Contracting Party. Also, it is a recognized principle
of investment law that claims by shareholders are separate and independent from the
claims of the corporate entity. Nor is control a legally-relevant factor. Modern

investment law, with which the ECT is consistent, does not require the ownership of a

-85-

242.

VII.

243.

majority of the shares, but allows minority and non-controlling shareholders to bring a

claim to an international tribunal.

In a letter dated 14 March 2007, Professor Reisman confirms that he received and read
Respondent’s Reply and its appended expert opinions and that he does not wish to change

his opinion.

ISSUES FOR ANALYSIS AND DECISION

Based on the Parties’ written and oral submissions, the following issues arise for analysis

and decision by the Tribunal:

A. Does the provisional application of the ECT in the Russian Federation, as defined
by Article 45, provide a basis for the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the merits of the

claims in this arbitration?

1. Is a declaration required under Articles 45(2)?
2. Is a declaration required under Article 45(1)?
3. What effect should be given to the “to the extent” clause in Article 45(1)

as it relates to the Russian Federation?

B. Is Claimant a protected Investor with an Investment under the ECT?

1. Does Claimant qualify as a protected “Investor” under Article 1(7)?

2. Does Claimant “own or control” a protected “Investment” under

Article 1(6)?

C. Are the claims barred by the “denial-of-benefits” provision (Article 17) of the
ECT?

1. Is there a notification requirement under Article 17 and, if so, did the

Russian Federation satisfy such requirement?

- 86 -

2. Is Claimant a legal entity owned or controlled by nationals of a third

State?

(a)

(b)

(c)

Who owns and controls Claimant?
Is the Russian Federation a “third State”?

Can the Russian Federation invoke the ownership or control of

Claimant by Israeli nationals to take advantage of Article 17(1)?

D. Are all or some of the claims barred by the “Taxation Measures” carve-out

(Article 21) of the ECT?

1. What is the scope of the carve-out for “Taxation Measures”?

(a)

What is the meaning of “Taxation Measures” as set out in

Article 21(7)?

(b) Does the carve-out operate to deprive a tribunal of jurisdiction over
the covered matters, or does it merely modulate the obligations that
can be enforced in an arbitration, thus going to
admissibility/merits?

(c) If the carve-out goes to jurisdiction, did Respondent timely raise
the issue?

2. What is the scope of the claw-back for Article 13 (expropriation)?

»

How should the claims be characterized for purposes of Article 21?

E. Are all or some of the claims barred by the “fork-in-the-road” provision in

Article 26(3)(b)(i) of the ECT?

-87-

VIII. ANALYSIS

244.

245.

A.

The central issue in this phase of the arbitration is the interpretation of Article 45 of the

ECT, concerning the meaning of provisional application of the Treaty as provided for in

DOES THE PROVISIONAL APPLICATION
FEDERATION, AS DEFINED BY ARTICLE 45, PROVIDE A BASIS FOR THE
TRIBUNAL’S JURISDICTION OVER THE MERITS OF THE CLAIMS IN THIS
ARBITRATION?

Introduction

that Article.

The Tribunal considers it helpful to quote again the terms of Article 45 of the ECT,

which provides, in relevant part, as follows:

(1) Each signatory agrees to apply this Treaty provisionally pending its

entry into force for such signatory in accordance with Article 44, to
the extent that such provisional application is not inconsistent with
its constitution, laws or regulations.

(2) (a) Notwithstanding paragraph (1) any signatory may, when signing,

deliver to the Depository a declaration that it is not able to accept
provisional application. The obligation contained in paragraph
(1) shall not apply to a signatory making such a declaration.
Any such signatory may at any time withdraw that declaration by
written notification to the Depository.

(b) Neither a signatory which makes a declaration in accordance

with subparagraph (a) nor Investors of that signatory may claim
the benefits of provisional application under paragraph (1).

(c

Notwithstanding subparagraph (a), any signatory making a
declaration referred to in subparagraph (a) shall apply Part VII
provisionally pending the entry into force of the Treaty for such
signatory in accordance with Article 44, to the extent that such
provisional application is not inconsistent with its laws or
regulations.

(3) (a) Any signatory may terminate its provisional application of this

Treaty by written notification to the Depository of its intention
not to become a Contracting Party to the Treaty. Termination of
provisional application for any signatory shall take effect upon
the expiration of 60 days from the date on which such
signatory’s written notification is received by the Depository.

- 88 -

OF THE ECT IN THE RUSSIAN

246.

247.

248.

(b) In the event that a signatory terminates provisional application
under subparagraph (a), the obligation of the signatory under
paragraph (1) to apply Parts III and V with respect to any
Investments made in its Area during such provisional application
by Investors of other signatories shall nevertheless remain in
effect with respect to those Investments for twenty years
following the effective date of termination, except as otherwise
provided in subparagraph (c).

(c

Subparagraph (b) shall not apply to any signatory listed in Annex
PA. A signatory shall be removed from the list in Annex PA
effective upon delivery to the Depository of its request therefor.

Special attention is drawn to the phrase at the end of Article 45(1), which reads “. . . to
the extent that such provisional application is not inconsistent with its constitution, laws
or regulations.”

Article 45(1).

The Tribunal will refer to this phrase as the “Limitation Clause” of

It is common ground between the Parties that Respondent signed the ECT on
17 December 1994 and made no declaration at that time or at any time thereafter under
Article 45(2) or, for that matter, under Article 45(1). It is also common ground that
Respondent is not among the signatories, listed in Annex PA of the ECT, that do not
accept the provisional application obligation of Article 45(3)(b). Respondent submits to
the Tribunal that the dispute settlement provisions in Part V of the ECT are not binding
on the Russian Federation because they are inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of
the Russian Federation and hence trigger the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1).
Respondent therefore submits that this Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to consider the
merits of the claims in this arbitration. Claimant counters that the Russian Federation
cannot limit provisional application of the ECT without a declaration under Article 45(2)
(or at least under Article 45(1)) and that, in any event, the obligations in Part V of the

ECT are not inconsistent with the Constitution or laws of the Russian Federation.
Thus, the following issues arise for analysis and decision by the Tribunal:

a) Must the declaration referred to in Article 45(2) be made in order for a
signatory to benefit from the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1)? In other

words, in the language of Claimant’s submission, is the declaration

- 89 -

249.

b)

c)

2.

provided for in Article 45(2) the “mechanism” through which the

Limitation Clause of Article 45(1) is implemented?

If the answer to issue (a) is no, is some form of prior declaration or notice
to the other ECT signatories nevertheless required under Article 45(1) in
order for a signatory to be able to invoke the Limitation Clause of

Article 45(1)?

If the answer to (b) is no, what effect should be given to the Limitation
Clause of Article 45(1)? In order to determine this question, the Tribunal
must answer the preliminary issue of whether the Limitation Clause of
Article 45(1) represents an “all-or-nothing” proposition, that is—whether
it concerns the inconsistency of the principle of provisional application
with the Constitution, laws or regulations of Respondent, or whether it
requires a “piecemeal” approach which requires the analysis of the
consistency of each provision of the ECT with the Constitution, laws and
regulations of Respondent. Depending on its answer to this preliminary
question, the Tribunal must determine either (i) whether the principle of
provisional application per se is consistent with the Constitution, laws and
regulations of Respondent, or (ii) whether particular inconsistencies
between specific provisions of the ECT (those of Part V in particular) and
the Constitution, laws and regulations of Respondent preclude the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the merits of the claim in this arbitration.

Is a Declaration Required under Article 45(2)?

In this subsection, the Tribunal turns its attention to the first issue which it has identified,

namely whether the declaration referred to in Article 45(2) must be made in order for a

signatory to benefit from the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1). Since Respondent did

not make such a declaration, an affirmative answer to this question would dispose of the

Article 45 issue in favour of Claimant.

-90-

250.

251.

252.

a) Parties’ Submissions

Respondent argues that Articles 45(1) and 45(2) represent, respectively, two separate
regimes on provisional application. The difference between Articles 45(1) and 45(2),
submits Respondent, is that the former applies only in case of inconsistency between the
treaty provisions and a signatory’s constitution, laws or regulations, whereas a signatory
may also avail itself of the latter provision and thus declare that it is unwilling—for
political or other reasons—including inconsistency, to apply the ECT provisionally. This
gives rise, Respondent argues, to the fundamental difference in procedural regimes:
Article 45(2) calls for an express declaration whereas none is required as regards 45(1).
Respondent submits that its interpretation of the relationship between Articles 45(1) and
45(2) is supported by the unambiguous wording of Article 45(2), by the ECT drafting

history (the travaux préparatoires) and by the State practice of the ECT’s signatories.

According to Claimant and its expert witnesses (Professors James Crawford and Michael
Reisman), it is clear, pursuant to applicable principles of international law and the plain
meaning of the provisions, that Article 45(1) establishes the principle of provisional
application whereas Article 45(2) establishes the procedure according to which a
signatory State may opt out of the concept of provisional application agreed in
Article 45(1). Claimant argues, moreover, that Article 45(2) establishes the legal regime
resulting from a State’s decision to withdraw from provisional application. Claimant
affirms that it is only this interpretation which ensures reciprocity for States that choose
to rely on the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1), via the safeguard of Article 45(2)(b).
Article 45(2)(b), it is recalled, states:

Neither a signatory which makes a declaration in accordance with
subparagraph (a) nor Investors of that signatory may claim the benefits
of provisional application under paragraph (1).

Claimant also notes that the Russian Federation made a declaration under Article 6(2)(a)
of the Amendment to the Trade-Related Provisions of the Energy Charter Treaty (the
“Trade Amendment”), rather than rely on the limitation clause of Article 6(1) of the
Trade Amendment, which mirrors Article 45(1) of the ECT, by providing for provisional
application of the Trade Amendment subject to a limitation clause. Claimant submits that

the Russian Federation, being familiar with the mechanism and operation of provisional

-91-

application, would have made a declaration under Article 45(2) if it had a problem with

the provisional application of the Treaty.

253. In its Second Memorial, Respondent emphasizes that Article 45(2) of the ECT is an “all
or nothing proposition with respect to the substantive provisions of the Treaty,” distinct
from Article 45(1) of the ECT, which calls for an analysis of inconsistency between each
provision of the Treaty and Russian law. Respondent highlights the plain meaning of
Article 45(2), which is introduced by the word “notwithstanding,” and which provides
that any signatory “may” deliver a declaration. This evidences, Respondent argues, that
the declaration under Article 45(2) is independent of Article 45(1) and, as opposed to
Article 45(1), is optional. In support of its interpretation of Article 45, Respondent refers
to the expert opinions of Sydney Fremantle, the chairman of Working Group 1,” and

Professors Hafner, Koskenniemi, Nolte and Pellet.

254. In its Second Memorial, Respondent also relies, among others, on the following

arguments:

e Six States that expressly relied on Article 45(1) in their declarations did not make
a declaration under Article 45(2), namely Austria, Luxembourg, Italy, Romania,

Portugal and Turkey.

e Three other States made no declaration at all, but relied on the Limitation Clause

in Article 45(1), namely Finland, France and Germany.

e¢ European Union (“EU”) authorities, through a joint “Statement by the Council,
the Commission and the Member States on Article 45 of the European Energy

Charter Treaty” approved in December 1994 (“1994 EU Joint Statement”), have

57 Under the auspices of the European Energy Charter Conference, Working Group II was charged with preparing
and negotiating the Treaty during the period 1990 to 1994.

-92-

relied on the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1) in concluding that there is no

obligation to enter a declaration of non-application under Article 45(2).°8

Article 45(1) is a standard inconsistency clause, similar to such clauses found in a
number of other treaties; Respondent avers that treaties providing an exception to
provisional application generally do not include a mechanism for a signatory to

avail itself of the exception.

The issue of reciprocity of rights and obligations in relation to Article 45(1) was
raised and dismissed during the ECT negotiations as being both an impossible and
an undesirable objective; furthermore, treaty practice demonstrates that

reciprocity is rarely applied in the context of provisional application.

The link drawn by Claimant between Article 6(2)(a) of the Trade Amendment and
Article 45(2) is “absurd”: Lithuania, like Russia, only made a declaration under

Article 6 of the Trade Amendment and not under Article 45(2).

255. In its Rejoinder, Claimant submitted a number of arguments, including the following:

Applicable rules of treaty interpretation, particularly Articles 31 and 32 of the
VCLT, lead to the conclusion that Article 45(1) establishes the principle of
provisional application while Article 45(2) provides the procedural mechanism

for a State to opt out of such provisional application.

Article 45(2)—and, specifically, paragraph (b) thereof—ensures reciprocity of the
rights granted and the obligations undertaken by virtue of provisional application,
an important safeguard, confirmed by the travaux préparatoires, that necessarily

applies to any State’s derogation from provisional application.

The Russian Federation is not among the following States which have, in some

way, refused provisional application of the ECT:

38 “Statement by the Council, the Commission and the Member States on Article 45 of the European Energy Charter
Treaty,” in “A” Item Note from the Permanent Representatives Committee to the Council of the European Union,
Doc. 12165/94, 14 December 1994, Annex I, p. 3, Exhibit R-352.

-93-

o the twelve States that availed themselves of the opting-out mechanism

pursuant to a declaration under Article 45(2)(a);°? or

othe six States that declared, in one way or another, that they would not apply

the ECT provisionally in accordance with Article 45(1).°

e As regards the three States—Finland, Germany and France—which, according to
Respondent, purportedly relied on the inconsistency clause of Article 45(1) in not
applying the ECT or provisions thereof without making any declaration, the
travaux préparatoires do not establish that any one of these States ever took the
view that it had an issue of “inconsistency” that would create an obstacle to

provisional application of the ECT.

¢ The 1994 EU Joint Statement is similarly of no avail, as its purpose was to enable
the Communities, on the basis of the proposed interpretation of Article 45, to
apply the Treaty provisionally within the limits of their competence. This is
confirmed by the Council decisions of 15 December 1994 on the provisional
application of the Treaty by the European Community and the European Atomic
Energy Community, respectively, providing that each Community would apply
the Treaty “to the extent that the Community has competence for the matters
governed by the Treaty” [emphasis added].‘! The transparency requirement of
Article 45 was thus satisfied, since this “declaration,” made at the time of the
signature of the Treaty by the Communities, allowed the provisional application

of the Treaty by the Communities within the limits of their competence.

® Australia, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Hungary, Iceland, Japan, Lichtenstein, Malta, Norway, Poland, Switzerland and
Turkmenistan.

*° Austria, Luxembourg, Italy, Romania, Portugal and Turkey.

*! See Council decision of 15 December 1994 on the provisional application of the Energy Charter Treaty by the
European Community (94/998/EC), Official Journal of the European Communities, 31 December 1994,
Annex C-1010; Council decision of 15 December 1994 approving the provisional application of the ECT by
Decision of the Commission on behalf of the European Atomic Energy Community (94/067/Euratom), Official
Journal of the European Communities, 31 December 1994, Annex C-1009.

-94-

256.

257.

258.

During oral argument, Respondent reiterated its written arguments that Articles 45(1) and
45(2) represent separate and different regimes. Respondent focused on the plain and
ordinary meaning of the provisions, particularly the use of the adverb “[n]otwithstanding”
at the beginning of Article 45(2), as well as the extensive travaux préparatoires
demonstrating that Article 45(2) was drafted because of the specific concerns of several
countries regarding political obstacles to provisional application. Respondent also
highlighted the 1994 EU Joint Statement, in which the Council, the Commission and the
Member States of the EU agreed, according to Respondent, that Article 45(1) does not
create any commitment beyond what is compatible with the existing internal legal order
of the signatories and that “on the basis of this interpretation of Article 45(1) to the ECT,
a signatory is not bound to enter a declaration of non-application, as is provided for in
Article 45(2) of the ECT.” Finally, with the help of a comparative timeline of ECT
negotiations and political events in Russia, Respondent sought to demonstrate that, while
the ECT was being negotiated, the Russian Federation was undergoing dramatic political
and constitutional change which, Respondent argues, made it very difficult for Russia to
be able to take a firm stand on the inconsistency of provisional application under the

ECT.

During the oral hearing, Claimant challenged Respondent’s arguments. It referred to the
clear language of Articles 45(1) and 45(2) and submitted that, whereas Article 45(1)
contains “the obligation” to apply the ECT provisionally, Article 45(2) is the mechanism
which allows a State to opt out of that obligation on grounds of inconsistency or for any
other reason. Claimant also sought to demonstrate, by highlighting testimony from the
cross-examination of Mr. Fremantle, that the negotiating countries did place emphasis on
the importance of reciprocity. Finally, according to Claimant, a careful analysis of the
travaux préparatoires confirms that Article 45(2) was conceived as the necessary

mechanism for the implementation of the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1).

In its oral reply submissions, Respondent addressed mainly the issues of reciprocity and
transparency. It submitted that the parties had agreed upon a formal concept of

reciprocity in relation to Article 45(1), namely that “[e]ach signatory assume[d] the

-95-

259.

260.

obligation to apply the Treaty to the extent not inconsistent with its domestic law?

Respondent again highlighted the travaux préparatoires. Respondent sought to
demonstrate that Article 45(2) was not inserted to provide a transparency discipline to
countries relying on Article 45(1), but rather to allow a separate regime for certain
countries to be able to opt out of provisional application for reasons other than legal or

constitutional inconsistency.

In rebuttal, Claimant countered in relation to the reciprocity issue (again by reference to
Mr. Fremantle’s testimony) and argued that the State practice of countries like Austria
did not support Respondent’s reliance on the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1) because
those countries were transparent in putting other countries and their investors on notice
that they could not and would not apply the ECT provisionally. Claimant argued that
Respondent’s analysis of the travaux préparatoires was misleading since it was not
presented in chronological order. Again, Claimant sought to demonstrate, by reference to
the travaux préparatoires, that the negotiators had inserted in Article 45(2) a mechanism
to implement the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1). As for the 1994 EU Joint
Statement, Claimant argued that, on its face, the document shows that the EU was not
convinced of the interpretation of Article 45(1) on which it was basing its position. In
any event, Claimant maintained, the EU has no or very little competence in relation to
Part III of the ECT (on investment promotion and protection). Finally, Claimant
contrasted the transparency of the European Community, which declared that it was
applying the ECT “.. . to the extent that it has competence for the matters governed by
the Treaty,” with the conduct of the Russian Federation, which “let the world think that

[it was] applying the Treaty provisionally.”

b) Tribunal’s Decision

The applicable rules of treaty interpretation, as codified by the VCLT, read as follows:

* Hearing Transcript, | December 2008, p. 4:9-11.

* Hearing Transcript, 1 December 2008, p.144:14-16.

- 96 -

261.

262.

Article 31—General rule of interpretation
1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the
ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall
comprise, in addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all
the parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in
connection with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the
other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which
establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its
interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the
parties so intended.

Article 32—Supplementary means of interpretation
Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation,
including the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its
conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the
application of article 31, or to determine the meaning when the

interpretation according to article 31:

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or
(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

Each side deployed arguments based on the ordinary meaning of Article 45, on State

practice and on the travaux préparatoires.

In accordance with Article 31 of the VCLT, the Tribunal begins by considering the

language of Article 45 and its ordinary meaning in its context and in the light of the

-97-

263.

264.

265.

Treaty’s object and purpose. After having considered the totality of the evidence and
reviewed the Parties’ submissions, the Tribunal has little difficulty in concluding that
Respondent’s thesis and interpretation of Articles 45(1) and 45(2) are to be preferred over
those of Claimant. Article 45(1), while establishing a binding obligation for each
signatory to apply the ECT provisionally, on its face limits the scope of that obligation
through the Limitation Clause beginning with “to the extent.” Nothing in the language of
Article 45 suggests that the Limitation Clause in Article 45(1) is dependent on the
mandatory making of a declaration under Article 45(2). To the contrary, as argued by
Respondent, the use of the word “may” rather than “shall” in relation to the making of a
declaration makes clear that a declaration under Article 45(2)(a) is permissive, not
obligatory. Furthermore, the use of the word “[nJotwithstanding” to introduce
Article 45(2) plainly suggests that the declaration in Article 45(2)(a) can be made
whether or not there in fact exists any inconsistency between “such provisional

application” of the ECT and a signatory’s constitution, laws or regulations.

Claimant argues that paragraph (1) of Article 45 sets out the principle of provisional
application, and that paragraph (2) sets out the mechanism which must necessarily be
invoked by a signatory to opt out of provisional application. As Respondent points out,
however, it is not uncommon for a limitation clause of the kind included in Article 45(1)
to be self-executing. Indeed, Article 45(2)(c), which claws back the provisional
application of Part VII of the Treaty for a signatory that has made an opt-out declaration
under Article 45(2)(a), contains a similar limitation clause which, on its face, is self-

executing and clearly does not require a declaration.

In sum, the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of Articles 45(1) and 45(2), when
read together, demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Tribunal that the declaration which
is referred to in Article 45(2) is a declaration which is not necessarily linked to the

Limitation Clause of Article 45(1).

Further support for the Tribunal’s conclusion is provided by the State practice of some of
the other signatories to the ECT. In particular, the Tribunal notes that while twelve States
did make a formal declaration under Article 45(2) opting out of provisional application,

six States (Austria, Luxembourg, Italy, Romania, Portugal and Turkey) relied on the

- 98 -

266.

267.

268.

Limitation Clause in Article 45(1), or the ability to opt out of provisional application for
inconsistency with the domestic regime, without delivering a formal declaration to the
Depository under Article 45(2). While the Tribunal accepts Claimant’s point that four of
these countries made some form of declaration prior to signing the Treaty (Austria, Italy,
Romania and Portugal), both Luxembourg and Turkey relied on Article 45(1) when they

signed the ECT without submitting any kind of declaration.

The Tribunal notes that Claimant made extensive reference to the travaux préparatoires
in an attempt to support its argument that there was a linkage between Article 45(1) and
Article 45(2)(a). Claimant highlighted the chronology of the development of Article 45
and pointed to the many proposals and counter proposals of the negotiating parties which,
it argued, demonstrate the linkage. The Tribunal acknowledges that the preparatory work

of the Treaty could lead to a finding of linkage between Articles 45(1) and 45(2).

At the same time, the Tribunal recalls that, according to the VCLT’s principles of treaty
interpretation, Article 32 provides supplementary means of interpretation. Under
Article 32 of the VCLT, recourse may be had to the travaux préparatoires:

in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of

article 31, or to determine the meaning when the interpretation according

to article 31: (a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or (b) leads
to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

The Tribunal does not consider that its interpretation of Article 45 resulting from the
application of the general rule of interpretation leads to a result which is manifestly
absurd or unreasonable. Nor has the Tribunal found that its interpretation of Article 45
according to Article 31 of the VCLT “leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure”; quite
the contrary. The Tribunal recognizes that, in practice, tribunals and other treaty
interpreters may consider the travaux préparatoires whenever they are pleaded, whether
or not the text is ambiguous or obscure or leads to a manifestly absurd or unreasonable
result. But, in the present case, the Tribunal concludes that the plain and ordinary

meaning to be given to these two treaty provisions, read together, demonstrates that there

-99 -

is no linkage between them. It is thus the terms of the Treaty as finally adopted that

govern.

269. The Tribunal notes that its conclusion is in harmony with the conclusion reached by the
ICSID tribunal in the Kardassopoulos.* In a passage which the Tribunal finds apposite

to the present case, that tribunal reasoned as follows:

There is no necessary link between paragraphs (1) and (2) of Article 45.
A declaration made under paragraph (2) may be, but does not have to be,
motivated by an inconsistency between provisional application and
something in the State’s domestic law; there may be other reasons which
prompt a State to make such a declaration. Equally, a State whose
situation is characterised by such inconsistency is entitled to rely on the
proviso to paragraph (1) without the need to make, in addition, a
declaration under paragraph (2). The Tribunal is therefore unable to read
into the failure of either State to make a declaration of the kind referred
to in Article 45(2) any implication that it therefore acknowledges that
there is no inconsistency between provisional application and its
domestic law. “°

3. Is a Declaration Required under Article 45(1)?

270. Having concluded that the regimes limiting or excluding provisional application in
Articles 45(1) and 45(2) are independent of one another, the Tribunal now addresses the
question whether some form of prior declaration or notice to the other signatories is
nevertheless required under Article 45(1) in order for a signatory of the ECT to be able to

later invoke the Limitation Clause. Since it is common ground between the Parties that

* As Professor Reisman notes: “Article 32 provides only a supplementary means of interpretation. Parties to a
dispute are first obliged to construe the ordinary meaning of the text in application of Article 31.” Professor W.
Michael Reisman, Opinion concerning Arbitral Jurisdiction under the European Energy Charter Treaty with
Respect to the Russian Federation in the Yukos Case, 28 June 2006, para. 15. He further cites Methanex Corp. v.
United States, First Partial Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 7 August 2002 (UNCITRAL). Professor
Crawford, for his part, affirms that travaux préparatoires “cannot contradict the actual language of the treaty
(absent manifest absurdity).” Professor James Crawford, SC, Further Opinion on Energy Charter Treaty
Arbitration: Jurisdiction Issues, 3 May 2007, para. 34. See also, e.g., Maritime Delimitation and Territorial
Questions between Qatar and Bahrain, Judgment, ICJ Reports 1995, p. 6 (applying Article 31 of the VCLT and
discussing the proper role of travaux préparatoires).

* Kardassopoulos v. Georgia, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, 6 July 2007.

“© Ibid. at para. 228.

- 100 -

271.

272.

273.

274.

Respondent did not make such a prior declaration or give prior notice, an affirmative

answer to this question would dispose of the Article 45 issue in favour of Claimant.

a) Parties’ Submissions

In its First Memorial, Respondent argues that no declaration is required pursuant to
Article 45(1). In support of its position, Respondent highlights the case of Luxembourg.
In Luxembourg, the bill submitted to the Chamber of Deputies for approval of the ECT
stated explicitly as follows:

The adoption of this Treaty being based on Article 37 of the constitution

of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, there will be no provisional

application of this Treaty in Luxembourg up until its due and proper
ratification.

[emphasis added]

Luxembourg was not included on the Energy Charter Conference Secretariat’s
preliminary list of signatories that indicated either that they would not apply the Treaty
provisionally in accordance with Article 45(1) or that they made or intended to make a
declaration under Article 45(2)(a). Respondent concludes:

Thus, the language of the Treaty itself, its negotiating history, and the

practice of signatories demonstrates conclusively that provisional

application of the Treaty is subject to a signatory’s constitution, laws and

regulations pursuant to Article 45(1) of the Treaty, regardless of whether
the signatory made a declaration pursuant to Article 45(2).

In its Counter-Memorial, Claimant argues that, even if Article 45(1) operates
independently of Article 45(2), both provisions nevertheless require an express
declaration of some kind. The rationale for the requirement, argues Claimant, is
transparency: no State is supposed to know or should be required to know another
State’s internal legal constraints. Finally, Claimant also refers to State practice:

As regards the ECT, all signatories that have declined to apply the Treaty

on a provisional basis have made a declaration to that effect. The

Russian Federation, however, has not made any declaration, at any time,

in any manner and on any basis with respect to the provisional
application of the ECT.

In its Second Memorial, Respondent again highlights the example of Luxembourg. In

addition, invoking the expert opinions of eminent Finnish, German and French jurists,

- 101 -

275.

276.

277.

Respondent asserts that Finland, Germany and France each relied on the Limitation
Clause of Article 45(1) because of an inconsistency between its internal laws and the

obligation of provisional application without making a declaration.

In response, Claimant argues in its Rejoinder that the fundamental principles of
transparency and reciprocity in modern international law dictate that other signatories be
put on timely notice of legal barriers to provisional application:

For the sake of transparency and predictability, it is only legitimate that

States, when negotiating an instrument as important as the ECT and a

binding mechanism as important as provisional application, are informed

at the time of signature of their counterparts’ unwillingness (for political

reasons or otherwise) or inability (for constitutional reasons or
otherwise) to apply to the Treaty on a provisional basis.

The importance of these principles, Claimant submits, is illustrated by Article 45(3)(b) of
the ECT, which states that, in the event that a signatory terminates provisional
application, the signatory’s obligation to apply Parts III and V of the ECT with respect to
any investment made during such provisional application shall nevertheless remain in

effect for twenty years following the effective date of termination.

Claimant, as evidence of transparency, notes that six States flagged their respective
concerns with provisional application under Article 45(1) during the negotiations, namely
Switzerland, Austria, Hungary, Japan, Norway and Romania. As regards Finland,
Germany and France, which Respondent refers to as examples of countries that remained
silent yet relied on the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1), Claimant submits that the
travaux préparatoires do not establish that any of these countries ever took the view
during the negotiations that they had an issue of “inconsistency” that would create an
obstacle to the provisional application of the ECT. Claimant adds that, while emphasis
was placed during the negotiations of the ECT on the need for States wishing to opt out
of provisional application to inform the other parties prior to signature,”” it is noteworthy
that the Russian Federation was not among the delegations which stated that provisional

application was not acceptable to them; to the contrary, Claimant asserts, the Russian

*7 See Energy Charter Secretariat Note, 28 April 1994, Exhibit R-355.

- 102 -

278.

279.

280.

Federation emphasized the importance of provisional application throughout the

negotiations.

Respondent’s position on this issue was well summarized in its Pre-Hearing Skeleton

Argument:

At least six States separately stated that they considered themselves
entitled to rely on the inconsistency clause in Article 45(1) without
making an opt-out declaration. A Joint Statement of the EU Member
States, the Council and the Commission of the European Union is to the
same effect. The informal transparency declarations made by several
States, relied on by Claimants, are unavailing. While some States did
make P y declarations, none of the transp declaration:
was ever delivered to the Treaty Depository, as required by
Article 45(2)(a), and several States which expressly relied on
Article 45(1), including Germany, France, Spain, and Luxembourg,
never made transparency declarations. Though not legally relevant, the
Russian Federation’s failure to make a transparency declaration is not
surprising, given the extraordinarily rapid pace of legal and constitutional
change in Russia in the period in question. Under the chaotic
circumstances then prevailing, no detailed analysis of the Treaty’s
consistency with Russian law could fairly be expected.

 

In oral argument, Respondent further developed each one of the points dealt with in the

previous paragraph.

In response, Claimant pointed to the tables created by the ECT Secretariat concerning the
position of signatories that did not intend to apply the ECT provisionally. Both the
original list dated 19 December 1994"* and the updated list dated 1 March 1995"? identify
certain signatories which intended not to apply the ECT provisionally “in accordance
with Article 45(1)” and others as having made a declaration that they would not apply the
ECT provisionally “in accordance with Article 45(2)(a).” Claimant’s submission, in
respect of these lists, is that even those countries which relied only on Article 45(1)
nevertheless responded to the ECT Secretariat’s request that their position in relation to

provisional application be made clear to all the other signatories of the Treaty.

“8 Annex C-1003.

*® Annex C-1004.

- 103 -

281.

282.

283.

284.

Claimant also made the related argument that the Russian Federation should be estopped
today from claiming constitutional or other legal impediments to provisional application
because, not only did it give no notice of inconsistency under Article 45(1), it had, rather,
throughout the negotiation of the ECT, consistently been a strong proponent of

provisional application and an ardent advocate of a robust regime.

b) Tribunal’s Decision

The Tribunal’s decision on this issue turns on the distinction which must be made
between what may have been said to be desirable during the negotiations and what,
eventually, became legally required in the Treaty. The evidence which Claimant has
adduced makes it abundantly clear that, during the negotiations, a number of States
stressed the importance of transparency when discussing the inconsistency provision of
what eventually became Article 45(1). The Tribunal notes in this connection that the six
delegations (Switzerland, Austria, Hungary, Japan, Norway and Romania) that had
flagged their problems with provisional application during the negotiations ended up
filing or making some form of declaration. It is equally clear that the Secretariat
encouraged signatories to be transparent in relation to provisional application and the
obligations which flowed from such provisional application and, in this connection,
tracked the signatories’ intentions vis-a-vis provisional application under either Articles
45(1) or 45(2). The Tribunal accepts that, throughout the ECT negotiations, great

emphasis was put on transparency by different actors, including the Russian Federation.

However, the fact remains that, at the end of the day, when the negotiations were
concluded and the ECT signed by the Russian Federation, Article 45(1) did not expressly
require any form of declaration or notification in order to allow a signatory to invoke the
Limitation Clause. Transparency did not trump the clear inconsistency provision of
Article 45(1). Applying the rules of interpretation of Articles 31 and 32 of the VCLT,
which were quoted earlier, the Tribunal cannot read into Article 45(1) of the ECT a
notification requirement which the text does not disclose and which no recognized legal

principle dictates.

The Tribunal therefore concludes, based on the ordinary meaning of Article 45(1) in its

context, and subject to considerations of estoppel (addressed below), that the Russian

- 104 -

285.

286.

287.

50

See Hearing Transcript, 18 November 2008, p. 163:

Federation may, even after years of stalwart and unqualified support for provisional
application and, until this arbitration, without ever invoking the Limitation Clause, claim
an inconsistency between the provisional application of the ECT and its internal laws in

order to seek to avoid the application of Part V of the ECT.

In closing its analysis on this issue from the point of view of treaty interpretation, the
Tribunal notes Claimant’s argument that the object and purpose of the ECT, namely
investment promotion and protection, requires the Tribunal to read a notification
requirement into Article 45(1). The Tribunal cannot accept this argument. The evidence,
particularly the testimony of Mr. Fremantle, which it accepts on this point, demonstrates
that the negotiating parties were driven by their objective to have as many signatories as
possible apply the ECT provisionally from the very beginning.” The relative flexibility
of Article 45(1), interpreted in accordance with its terms as not requiring any notification

or declaration, certainly serves this purpose.

The Tribunal noted above that its conclusion on the interpretation of Article 45(1) was
subject to considerations of estoppel. Indeed, Claimant argued that the Russian
Federation should be estopped from seeking to rely on the Limitation Clause in
Article 45(1) due to its long-standing and unqualified support for the provisional
application of the ECT during the negotiations. Respondent replied that the conditions
for the existence of a situation of estoppel are not met in this case because, according to
the North Sea Continental Shelf Cases, Claimant, to succeed with its estoppel argument,
would need to establish more than mere support by the Russian Federation during the

negotiations of the Treaty for the provisional application of the ECT.

Respondent referred the Tribunal to the following passage from the judgment of the

International Court of Justice (“ICJ’”) in the North Sea Continental Shelf Cases:

[I]t appears to the court that only the existence of a situation of estoppel
could suffice to lend substance to [the contention that the Federal

 

15. The Tribunal also notes Professor Crawford's statement

 

that one of the main functions of provisional application of treaties generally is “giving immediate effect to treaty
provisions because of their importance or urgency.” Professor James Crawford, SC, Further Opinion on Energy
Charter Treaty Arbitration: Jurisdiction Issues, 3 May 2007, para. 22.

- 105 -

Republic was bound by the Geneva Convention on the Continental Shelf]
[...], — that is to say if the Federal Republic were now precluded from
denying the applicability of the conventional régime, by reason of past
conduct, declarations, etc., which not only clearly and consistently
evidence acceptance of that régime, but also had caused Denmark or the
Netherlands, in_reliance_on_such conduct, detrimentally to_change
position or suffer some prejudice.”!

[emphasis added]

288. Applying the standard thus established by the ICJ, the Tribunal concludes that the present
case does not satisfy the conditions for the existence of a situation of estoppel. The
Tribunal finds that the estoppel argument fails principally because Respondent’s support
for provisional application of the ECT during the negotiations, even if it could be
considered “consistent,” never “clearly” excluded the possibility that Respondent was in
fact relying on its interpretation of the operation of the Limitation Clause in Article 45(1)

which would in any event exclude or limit provisional application of the Treaty.

289. The Tribunal therefore now turns to the issue of what effect should be given to the

Limitation Clause in Article 45(1) of the ECT.

4. What Effect Should Be Given to the Limitation Clause in
Article 45(1)?
a) All-or-Nothing vs. “Piecemeal’”’ Approach

290. The Tribunal has concluded that Respondent may rely on the Limitation Clause of
Article 45(1) even though it has neither made a declaration under Article 45(2) nor served
any prior notice under Article 45(1). Thus, the Tribunal must determine what effect

should be given to the Limitation Clause itself and it now turns its attention to that issue.

5! North Sea Continental Shelf Cases (Germany v. Denmark | Germany v. Netherlands), IC} Judgment of
20 February 1969, ICJ Reports 1969, p.3, Exhibit R-415, p.26, para. 30.

- 106 -

291.

292.

293.

294.

It is helpful to recall the text of Article 45(1):

Each signatory agrees to apply this Treaty provisionally pending its entry
into force for such signatory in accordance with Article 44, to the extent
that such pro mal application is not inconsistent with its constitution.
laws or regulations.

[emphasis added]

Firstly, the Tribunal must address the preliminary question of what triggers the
Limitation Clause in Article 45(1). The Parties’ positions differ. According to
Respondent, the clause requires a “piecemeal” approach which calls for the analysis of
the consistency of each provision of the ECT with the Constitution, laws and regulations
of the Russian Federation. According to Claimant, the inquiry is an “all-or-nothing”
exercise which requires an analysis and determination of whether the principle of
provisional application per se is inconsistent with the Constitution, laws or regulations of

the Russian Federation. The Parties’ arguments will now be summarized.

(i) Parties’ Submissions

According to Respondent, the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1), by giving priority to the
Constitution, ensures that provisional application of the ECT does not infringe upon the
prerogatives of the Legislature (in Russia, the State Duma): any particular provision of
the ECT thus applies on a provisional basis, Respondent submits, only if it is either (a) in
conformity with existing legislation, (b) within the exclusive competence of the

Executive or (c) approved by the Duma.

In its written submissions, Respondent argues that the plain language of Article 45(1), its
context, the Treaty’s travaux préparatoires, the circumstances at the time of the Treaty’s
conclusion and State practice in the application of the Treaty all support the conclusion
that the applicability of the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1) must be examined on a

provision-by-provision basis. Specifically, Respondent submits as follows:

¢ In common usage, confirmed by standard dictionary definitions, “to_the extent
that” refers to the “scope” or the “width” of provisional application. “To the
extent that” is precisely the language used when drafters of a clause in a treaty or

a statute wish to make clear that a provision is to be applied only insofar as what

-107-

then follows is the case. If the drafters had intended that the Treaty would be
provisionally applied in whole or not at all, Article 45(1) would have instead
provided for the Treaty’s provisional application “if” such provisional application
is not inconsistent with a signatory’s domestic laws. In addition, the drafters of
the Treaty, adds Respondent, could not seriously have intended that a signatory’s
provisional application of the entire Treaty could in principle be inconsistent with

a signatory’s “regulations.”

e The travaux préparatoires confirm that the negotiating States expected that
provisional application would differ from country to country based on different
domestic inconsistencies and that even relatively minor regulations could result in
the non-application pro tanto of an inconsistent Treaty provision. Respondent
concludes that even a signatory which had no objection in principle to provisional
application would only have to apply the Treaty’s investment protection
provisions to the extent they were not inconsistent with the signatory’s own

constitution, laws or regulations.

e State practice is fully in accord with Respondent’s interpretation. Respondent
refers to the 1994 EU Joint Statement to the effect that Article 45(1), “defining
the conditions and limits for the provisional application of the ECT by the
Signatories [. . .] does not create any commitment beyond what is compatible with
the existing internal legal order of the Signatories.” With specific reference to the
Russian Federation, the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs

of the United Kingdom stated as recently as 7 February 2006 in the House of

 

Commons that Article 45 of the Treaty “places some obligations on the Russian
Federation, but only to the extent that such provisional application is not

inconsistent with its constitution, laws or regulations” [emphasis added].*

295. In its Rejoinder, Claimant presents a comprehensive rebuttal of Respondent’s arguments,

starting with the argument based on the plain meaning of the words used in the

* See House of Commons Hansard Written Answers, pt. 3, Column 1045 W et seq., Exhibit R-365.

- 108 -

296.

297.

Limitation Clause of Article 45(1). Claimant notes that the express limitation of
Article 45(1) is: “to the extent that such provisional application is not inconsistent with
[each signatory’s] constitution, laws or regulations.” According to Claimant, therefore,
what must be consistent with a signatory’s domestic law is “such provisional
application.” In other words, Claimant asserts, each signatory agrees to be bound by the
Treaty if the principle of provisional application is consistent with its domestic law. If,
on the other hand, a signatory’s domestic law does not allow it to be bound by way of
provisional application, it may decline to assume any international obligations under the

Treaty.

In response to Respondent’s argument that Article 45(1) allows for a “piecemeal”
assessment of inconsistency between particular provisions of the ECT and a signatory’s
domestic law, which could lead to provisional application of some but not all provisions
of the Treaty, Claimant argues that neither Respondent nor its experts provide any
justification for the basis on which the text of Article 45 would make a distinction
between a “partial” application under Article 45(1) and an “all or nothing” application
under Article 45(2)(a). To the contrary, Claimant observes, both provisions refer to
“provisional application” without further qualification: consistency of “provisional
application” with a signatory’s internal law under Article 45(1), and opting out of

“provisional application” under Article 45(2)(a).

Indeed, Claimant argues that Respondent’s interpretation, even if admissible under the
most basic principles of treaty law—which, Claimant argues, do not permit domestic law
to take priority over international obligations—requires a rewriting of Article 45 to
accord with Respondent’s submission. According to Claimant, Respondent’s
interpretation would require the Tribunal to accept the equivalent of the following
revision: “Each signatory agrees to apply this Treaty provisionally pending its entry into
force for such signatory in accordance with Article 44, to the extent that sueh-previsional
appleations [the Treaty’s provisions are] not inconsistent with its constitution, laws or
regulations.” Respondent’s interpretation, Claimant argues, would add an entirely new
concept—inconsistency with the substantive provisions—that finds no basis in the text of

the Treaty.

- 109 -

298.

299.

300.

Claimant also refers to the travaux préparatoires of the Treaty. Claimant notes that the
initial exception to the obligation to apply the Treaty provisionally was introduced by the
US. delegation in the following terms:

The signatories agree to apply this Agreement provisionally following

signature, to the extent that such provisional application is not

inconsistent with their national laws pending its entry into force in
accordance with Article 40 above.

Claimant submits, in this respect, that the language “such provisional application,” which
was never modified afterwards, reflected the requirement of consistency between
“provisional application” per se and the signatories’ internal laws and not consistency

between “the provisions of the Treaty” and the signatories’ internal laws.

Finally, Claimant argues that the concept of “inconsistency” under Article 45 must
necessarily relate only to the principle of provisional application and not to the Treaty’s
substantive provisions, because Part VI of the Treaty, entitled “Transitional Provisions,”
already addressed the issue of granting signatories sufficient time to adapt the particulars
of their legal regime to the framework of the Treaty. Article 32 of the ECT provides as
follows:
(1) In recognition of the need for time to adapt to the requirements of a
market economy, a Contracting Party listed in AnnexT may

temporarily suspend full compliance with its obligations under one
or more of the following provisions of this Treaty [. . .]

Claimant notes that the Russian Federation filed notifications with respect to Article 6(2)

and Article 20(3) and was thus listed in Annex T of the “Contracting Parties entitled to

transitional arrangements.”

During the hearing, each side presented a focused version of its arguments on this point,
in large measure emphasizing differences on what each considered the proper ordinary

meaning to attribute to the language used in Article 45(1).

(ii) Tribunal’s Decision

Having reviewed the totality of the evidence and considered the written and oral
arguments of both Parties, the Tribunal finds that the ordinary meaning of the terms of

Article 45(1), in their context and in the light of the object and purpose of the Treaty,

- 110-

303.

favours Claimant’s interpretation. In the Tribunal’s opinion, by signing the ECT, the
Russian Federation agreed that the Treaty as a whole would be applied provisionally
pending its entry into force unless the principle of provisional application itself were

inconsistent “with its constitution, laws or regulations.”

Again, the starting point for the Tribunal must be the words used in Article 45(1). The
Limitation Clause states that each signatory agrees to apply the Treaty provisionally “to
the extent that such provisional application is not inconsistent with its constitution, laws
or regulations.” Respondent and Claimant focus on different parts of this clause in

support of their respective positions:

¢ Respondent argues that “ ‘[t]o the extent that’ is precisely the language used when
drafters of a clause in a treaty or a statute wish to make clear that a provision is to
be applied only insofar as what then follows is the case.” Respondent adds that
had the drafters intended the Treaty to be provisionally applied in whole or not at
all, Article 45(1) would have instead provided for the Treaty’s provisional
application “if” such provisional application is not inconsistent with a signatory’s

domestic laws.

¢ Claimant, by contrast, emphasizes the use of the terms “such provisional
application” in the Limitation Clause: “to the extent that such_provisional
application is not inconsistent with [each signatory’s] constitution, laws or
regulations.” According to Claimant, therefore, what must be consistent with a
signatory’s domestic law is “such provisional application.” In other words,
Claimant asserts, each signatory agrees to be bound by the Treaty if the principle

of provisional application is consistent with its domestic law.

The Tribunal finds that neither party has properly parsed the Limitation Clause of
Article 45(1). While each party has provided a starting point for the analysis, neither has

carried it through to its conclusion:

¢ Considering Respondent’s argument first, the Tribunal agrees that the phrase “to
the extent that” is often the language used when drafters of a clause in a treaty or

a statute wish to make clear that a provision is to be applied only insofar as what

-1ll-

then follows is the case. Far from being determinative of the meaning of the
Limitation Clause, however, the use of the introductory words “to the extent that”
requires the Tribunal to examine carefully the words that follow, namely “that
such provisional application is not inconsistent with [each signatory’s]

constitution, laws or regulations.”

¢ Turning to Claimant’s argument about the meaning of these words, the Tribunal
finds that Claimant does not provide sufficient support for its interpretation of the
phrase “such provisional application” as necessarily referring to the principle of
provisional application. Article 45(1) does not refer anywhere to the principle of
provisional application, but rather to “[e]ach signatory agree[ing] to apply this

Treaty provisionally . . .”

For the Tribunal, the key to the interpretation of the Limitation Clause rests in the use of
the adjective “such” in the phrase “such provisional application.” “Such,” according to
Black’s Law Dictionary (Seventh Edition), means “that or those; having just been
mentioned.” The Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary (Tenth Edition) defines “such”
as “of the character, quality, or extent previously indicated or implied.” The phrase “such
provisional application,” as used in Article 45(1), therefore refers to the provisional
application previously mentioned in that Article, namely the provisional application of

“this Treaty.”

The Tribunal concludes, therefore, that the meaning of the phrase “such provisional
application” is context-specific, in that its meaning is derived from the particular use of
provisional application to which it refers. In Article 45(1), the particular use of
provisional application to which it refers is provisional application of “this Treaty.”
Accordingly, Article 45(1) can therefore be read as follows:

(1) Each signatory agrees to apply this Treaty provisionally pending its

entry into force for such signatory in accordance with Article 44, to the

extent that the provisional Li of this Treaty is not i:
with its constitution, laws or regulations.

[emphasis added]

-112-

306.

309.

By contrast, the Tribunal refers to the Limitation Clause in Article 45(2)(c), which reads:

(c) Notwithstanding subparagraph (a), any signatory making a
declaration referred to in subparagraph (a) shall apply Part VII
provisionally pending the entry into force of the Treaty for such
signatory in accordance with Article 44, to the extent that such
provisional application is not inconsistent with its laws or regulations.

[emphasis added]

In this context, the phrase “such provisional application” necessarily has a different

meaning, referring to the provisional application of only Part VII of the Treaty.

In order to interpret the meaning of the Limitation Clause in Article 45(1), and thereby
determine the scope of Respondent’s obligation under Article 45(1), the Tribunal must
therefore determine what is meant by “the provisional application of this Treaty,” for it is
the inconsistency of “such provisional application” which determines the scope of

Respondent’s obligation under Article 45(1).

There are two possible interpretations of the phrase “the provisional application of this
Treaty”: it can mean either “the provisional application of the entire Treaty” or “the
provisional application of some parts of the Treaty.” The Tribunal finds that, in context,
the former interpretation accords better with the ordinary meaning that should be given to
the terms, as required by Article 31(1) of the VCLT. Indeed, without any further
qualification, it is to be presumed that a reference to “this Treaty” is meant to refer to the

Treaty as a whole, and not only part of the Treaty.

The Tribunal notes that its finding on the scope of provisional application in Article 45(1)
is entirely consistent with the decision on jurisdiction rendered in the Kardassopoulos
case. In the relevant passages of that decision, to which the Tribunal subscribes, that

tribunal wrote:

205. Article 45(1) does not say in terms what it meant by saying that
each signatory agreed to “apply this Treaty provisionally.” The meaning
of that concept is thus to be determined by (i) an interpretation of that
phrase, and (ii) the generally accepted meaning of the notion of the
provisional application of a treaty.

- 113 -

206. As noted in the earlier section of this decision, the general rule for
the interpretation of a treaty is set out in Article 31(1) of the Vienna
Convention.

207. The treaty’s context includes in particular the text of the treaty
taken as a whole, including its preamble (Article 31(2)). Article 31(3)(c)
of the Vienna Convention further provides that together with the context:

“There shall be taken into account [. . .] any relevant rules of
international law applicable in the relations between the
parties.”

208. This includes relevant rules of general customary international law.

209. Applying the ECT provisionally is used in contradistinction to its
entry into force: “[. . .] agrees to apply this Treaty provisionally pending
its entry into force [...].” Provisional application is therefore not the
same _as entry into force. But the ECT’s provisional application is a
course to which each signatory “agrees” in Article 45(1): it is (subject to
other provisions of the paragraph) thus a matter of legal obligation. The
Tribunal cannot therefore accept Respondent’s argument that provisional
application is only aspirational in character.

 

210. It is “this Treaty” which is to be provisionally applied, i.e, the
Treaty as a whole and in its entirety and not just a part of it; and use of
the word “application” requires that the ECT be “applied.” Since that
application is to be provisional “pending its entry into force” the
implication is that it would be applied on the same basis as would in due
course result from the ECT’s (definitive) entry into force, and as if it had
already done so.

 

211.  It_follows that _the language used_in Article 45(1) is to be
interpreted as meaning that each signatory State is obliged, even before
the ECT has formally entered into force, to apply the whole ECT as if it

had already done so.
L..]

 

219. There is, nevertheless, in the Tribunal’s view a sufficiently well-
established practice of provisional application of treaties to generate a
generally accepted understanding of what is meant by that notion.
Where what is in issue is, as in the present case, the provisional
application of the whole treaty, then such provisional application imports
the application of all its provisions as if they were already in force, even
though the treaty’s proper or definitive entry into force has not yet
occurred.

[emphasis added]

-114-

310.

313.

The Tribunal’s determination also becomes obvious when the alternative phrases are
inserted into Article 45(1), leading to a choice between the following alternative
interpretations:

Each signatory agrees to apply this entire Treaty provisionally pending

its entry into force for such signatory in accordance with Article 44, to

the extent that the provisional application of the entire Treaty is not
inconsistent with its constitution, laws or regulations.

[emphasis added]

OR

Each signatory agrees to apply some parts of this Treaty provisionally
pending its entry into force for such signatory in accordance with

Article 44, to the extent that the provisional application of some parts of
the Treaty is not inconsistent with its constitution, laws or regulations.

[emphasis added]

In the Tribunal’s opinion, there is no basis to conclude that the signatories would have
assumed an obligation to apply only part of the Treaty provisionally, without making
such partial provisional application explicit. The Tribunal therefore concludes that the
Limitation Clause in Article 45(1) contains an “all-or-nothing” proposition: either the

entire Treaty is applied provisionally, or it is not applied provisionally at all.

Furthermore, the Tribunal concludes that the determination of this “all-or-nothing”
question depends on the consistency of the principle of provisional application with a
signatory’s domestic law. The alternative—that the question hinges on whether, in fact,
each and every provision of the Treaty is consistent with a signatory’s domestic legal
regime—would run squarely against the object and purpose of the Treaty, and indeed

against the grain of international law.

Under the pacta sunt servanda rule and Article 27 of the VCLT, a State is prohibited
from invoking its internal legislation as a justification for failure to perform a treaty. In
the Tribunal’s opinion, this cardinal principle of international law strongly militates
against an interpretation of Article 45(1) that would open the door to a signatory, whose
domestic regime recognizes the concept of provisional application, to avoid the
provisional application of a treaty (to which it has agreed) on the basis that one or more

provisions of the treaty is contrary to its internal law. Such an interpretation would

- 115 -

undermine the fundamental reason why States agree to apply a treaty provisionally. They
do so in order to assume obligations immediately pending the completion of various

internal procedures necessary to have the treaty enter into force.

Allowing a State to modulate (or, as the case may be, eliminate) the obligation of
provisional application, depending on the content of its internal law in relation to the
specific provisions found in the Treaty, would undermine the principle that provisional

application of a treaty creates binding obligations.

Provisional application as a treaty mechanism is a question of public international law.
International law and domestic law should not be allowed to combine, through the
deployment of an “inconsistency” or “limitation” clause, to form a hybrid in which the
content of domestic law directly controls the content of an international legal obligation.
This would create unacceptable uncertainty in international affairs. Specifically, it would
allow a State to make fluctuating, uncertain and un-notified assertions about the content
of its domestic law, after a dispute has already arisen. Such a State, as Claimant argues,
“would be bound by nothing but its own whims and would make a mockery of the
international legal agreement to which it chose to subject itself.” A treaty should not be
interpreted so as to allow such a situation unless the language of the treaty is clear and

admits no other interpretation. That is not the case with Article 45(1) of the ECT.

In respect of the relationship between international obligations and domestic law in the
treaty context, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Professor Crawford on “a strong

presumption of the separation of international from national law”:

The fact is, nonetheless, that international tribunals are reluctant to allow
States to plead their internal law as a basis for avoiding what would
otherwise appear to be their treaty commitments, and that reluctance
extends to cases such as the present. It reflects a strong underlying value
against_self-jud and _a_stron: ion of the ion of
international from national law. Article 27 VCLT (and the corollary,
Articles 3 and 32 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility) are
routinely cited across a range of contexts. Even where there is an
express treaty exception for domestic legal requirements, that is not
treated as a self-judging or “automatic” reservation, and it has to be
explained to the satisfaction of the international tribunal — which retains

- 116 -

its Kompetenz-Kompetenz — what the domestic requirement means, why
it applies and how far it goes.**

[emphasis added]

317. Turning specifically to the ECT and the meaning of Article 45(1), Professor Crawford

observes as follows:

The negotiating parties having opted for an unusually strong system of
immediate provisional application of the ECT (while allowing States to
opt out of it and take the consequences of doing so under
Article 45(2)(b)), I_do_not_accept that_they intended _to_allow ready
evasion of the regime.

[emphasis added]

318. Similarly, the Tribunal accepts the testimony of Professor Reisman on this issue. In his

Opinion dated 28 June 2006, Professor Reisman writes:

Hence, whatever the mode by which provisional application is achieved,
“it can hardly be challenged that provisional application is based on the
mutual consent of states.”*° The alternative view, “that provisional
application is based on a unilateral declaration of intent by contracting
parties to de facto apply a treaty subject to existing constitutional and
legislative possibilities,” is untenable insofar as “[t]he adoption of such a
view could seriously impair the legal effects of provisional application as
national law may prevail over the treaty.” That result would be
inconsistent with Article 27 of the Vienna Convention.”

319. The Tribunal also finds pertinent to its conclusion the writings of Mr. Osminin, who
participated in the drafting of the Russian FLIT and in the negotiation of numerous

international treaties entered into by the Russian Federation. He writes as follows:

® Professor James Crawford, SC, Further Opinion: Energy Charter Treaty Arbitration: Jurisdiction Issues, 3 May
2007, para. 15.

* Ibid. at para. 23.

55 René Lefeber, “The Provisional Application of Treaties,” in Jan Klabbers (ed.) Essays on the Law of Treaties
pp.81, 89 (1998).

°° Ibid.

*’ VCLT, Article 27 (“A party may not invoke the provisions of its internal law as justification for its failure to
perform a treaty.”).

-117-

[T]he principle that “obligations must be observed” (pacta sunt
servanda) extends also to provisionally applied treaties. In this respect
the legal consequences of the provisional application of a treaty are the
same as the legal consequences of its entry into force. [. . .] The regime
of provisional application presupposes that the obligations arising from
the provisionally applied treaty will be complied with in full until the
treaty enters into force, or until its provisional application is terminated
by mutual agreement of the States among which the treaty is being
applied provisionally, or until the State notifies the other States
provisionally applying the treaty of its intention not to become a party to
the treaty.”*

[emphasis added]

The Tribunal reiterates that its interpretation of the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1) is
based on its specific language in its context. The Tribunal recognizes, as do Claimant’s
experts, Professors Crawford and Reisman, that parties negotiating a treaty enjoy drafting
freedom and could (using clear and unambiguous language) overcome the “strong
presumption of the separation of international from national law.” Indeed, parties to a
treaty are free to agree to any particular regime. This would include a regime where each
signatory could modulate (or eliminate) its obligation of provisional application based on
consistency of each provision of the treaty in question with its domestic law. For the
reasons set out above, however, agreement to such a regime would need to be clearly and

unambiguously expressed, a standard which Article 45(1) does not meet.

The Tribunal’s interpretation of Article 45(1) is also supported by State practice. As
already noted in an earlier section, six States (Austria, Luxembourg, Italy, Romania,
Portugal and Turkey) relied expressly on the Limitation Clause in Article 45(1). An
analysis of the statements or declarations made by these States confirms that each one of
them relied on Article 45(1)—sometimes alone and sometimes in conjunction with
Article 45(2))—for the non-application of the entire Treaty under the provisional
application regime. Respondent itself has described these six signatories as States who
“consider themselves unable to apply and have not applied any provision of the Treaty on
a provisional basis.” Not one of these six States, in other words, relied on the Limitation

Clause in Article 45(1) for the interpretation now posited by Respondent, namely the

58 B 1, Osminin, Adoption and Implementation of Treaty Obligations by States (2006), p. 319, Annex C-267.

- 118 -

selective or partial provisional application of the ECT based on the non-application of
only those individual provisions that are claimed to be inconsistent with a signatory’s

domestic law.

322. Similarly, in the lists it maintained to keep track of the intentions of the signatories, the
ECT Secretariat identified the States that intended to rely on Article 45(1) as intending to
do so in order to avoid provisional application of the Treaty altogether. Thus, the
preliminary list of signatories prepared by the ECT Secretariat, dated 19 December 1994,
described signatories intending to rely on Article 45(1) as States “which will not apply

°° [emphasis added]. This

preliminary list identified Austria, Italy, Portugal, Romania and Turkey. The updated list

the Treaty provisionally in accordance with Article 45(1)

prepared by the ECT Secretariat, dated 1 March 1995, described the same category of
signatories in exactly the same way, as States “which will not apply the Treaty

provisionally in accordance with Article 45(1)"°

[emphasis added]. In addition to the
countries already identified on the list dated 19 December 1994, this list included

Hungary” and Luxembourg.

323. Respondent refers to France, Finland and Germany in order to support its position that
some signatories of the ECT in fact do rely on the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1) in
order to limit or reduce the scope of their provisional application obligation under the
Treaty. To make its point, Respondent relies on expert reports in respect of each country,

submitted respectively by Professors Pellet, Koskenniemi and Nolte.

324. In their respective reports, Professors Pellet, Koskenniemi and Nolte focus on the
separation of powers and the treaty-making process in France, Finland and Germany,
respectively. The Tribunal notes that Professors Koskenniemi and Nolte, in addition,
opine in their reports on the provisional application regime of the ECT. Respondent has

not, however, provided any evidence that France, Finland or Germany represented to its

* Annex C-1003.
® Annex C-1004.

°' Hungary ultimately made an opt-out declaration under Article 45(2)(a) of the ECT.

- 119-

counterparts, at the time of the negotiation of the Treaty, that it understood Article 45(1)
as meaning that it could rely at any time on this provision in order to single out for
exclusion individual ECT provisions that were “inconsistent” with its domestic law, or

that its obligations under the ECT would be restricted in any manner.

Respondent also seeks support for its interpretation of Article 45(1) from the

interpretation given to Article 45(1) by the Council, Commission and Member States of

the European Union. In connection with the EU Council’s decisions approving the

provisional application of the ECT by the European Community and the European

Atomic Energy Community, the following joint statement by the Council, Commission

and the Member States (the 1994 EU Joint Statement) was entered into the minutes:
Article 45(1) of the European Energy Charter Treaty should be

interpreted as defining the conditions and limits for the provisional
application of the ECT by the Signatories:

(a) it does not create any commitment beyond what is compatible with
the existing internal legal order of the Signatories;

(b) on the basis of this interpretation of Article 45(1) to the ECT, a
Signatory is not bound to enter a declaration of non-application, as is
provided for in Article 45(2) ECT;

(c) this interpretation allows the Community to limit the provisional
application to the matters which fall under its competence.

Respondent points to the 1994 EU Joint Statement as an example of State practice
supporting an interpretation of Article 45(1) that would allow the partial provisional
application of the ECT, in this case limited to those matters falling within the competence

of the European Community.
The Tribunal finds this argument unpersuasive:

e First, even if the 1994 EU Joint Statement could be said to support Respondent’s
position, the weight of State practice, as demonstrated above, supports Claimant’s
position—namely that the Limitation Clause in Article 45(1) has been used as the

basis for opting out of the provisional application of the Treaty altogether.

¢ Second, and even more important, the Tribunal does not find that the 1994 EU

Joint Statement supports Respondent’s position. The 1994 EU Joint Statement

- 120-

does not say, and cannot be read as meaning, that certain elements of the ECT
will not be provisionally applied by the European Community because they are
inconsistent with the Community’s internal legal order. The 1994 EU Joint
Statement, rather, says that Article 45(1) “does not create any commitment
beyond what is compatible with the existing internal legal order of the
Signatories.” On this basis, the 1994 EU Joint Statement concludes that the
European Community can safely sign the ECT, and accept the obligation of
provisional application, without taking on any obligation to do anything that is
beyond its competence. This is therefore not so much an example of partial
provisional application of the ECT due to inconsistency with the EC’s legal order,
as it is an example of the EC’s partial jurisdiction for the provisional application
of the whole ECT—meaning, necessarily, that some parts of the ECT simply

cannot be provisionally applied by the EC.

Third, the 1994 EU Joint Statement entered into the minutes has no legal or
binding value, as opposed to the Council decisions themselves. The Tribunal
notes that the preamble of the Council decision in respect of the provisional
application of the ECT by the European Community does not refer to
Article 45(1) of the ECT or the notion of partial provisional application due to
inconsistency. Rather, the Council decision focuses on the partial competence of
the European Community for the matters covered by the provisional application
of the Treaty:
Whereas the provisional application of the Energy Charter

Treaty will help attain the objectives of the European
Community;

Whereas the European Community has competence for parts of
the Energy Charter Treaty;

[...]

The European Community shall apply on a provisional basis
from the time of signature the Energy Charter Treaty to_the
extent that it has competence for the matters governed by the
Treaty.

[emphasis added]

-121-

e Finally, the Tribunal notes that the Council Legal Service considered the
interpretation of Articles 45(1) and (2) included in the 1994 EU Joint Statement to
be “restrictive and possibly unilateral” and cautioned that the interpretation could

“create a problem of transparency in relation to other negotiating Parties.”

328. In light of the Tribunal’s conclusion on the interpretation of Article 45(1), the Tribunal
does not find it necessary to consider the travaux préparatoires concerning the Limitation
Clause in Article 45(1).

329. The Tribunal therefore concludes that Article 45(1) requires an analysis and
determination of whether the principle of provisional application per se is inconsistent
with the Constitution, laws or regulations of the Russian Federation. If it is not
inconsistent, then this Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear Claimant’s claims under
Article 26 of the Treaty, which would apply provisionally in the Russian Federation in

accordance with Article 45(1). It is to that issue that the Tribunal now turns.

b) Is the Principle of Provisional Application Inconsistent with
Russian Law?

330. There is no significant debate between the Parties on the issue of whether the principle of
provisional application per se is inconsistent with the Constitution, law or regulations of
the Russian Federation. Claimant asserts that the principle is not inconsistent with
Russian law, citing ample legislative and doctrinal authorities in support of its
submission, and concludes on that basis that the Limitation Clause in Article 45(1) is
unavailable to the Russian Federation. Respondent does not seriously challenge the
authorities cited by Claimant on this point. Respondent’s principal argument against
provisional application of the ECT, as seen earlier, is based on the interpretation of
Article 45(1), not on the assertion that provisional application per se is unknown or

unrecognized by Russian law.

® Report from the Presidency to the Permanent Representatives Committee, 8 December 1994, Annex C-921, at p.4
n. 6, in fine.

- 122-

333.

63

Although the issue therefore does not raise much controversy, the Tribunal nevertheless
confirms that Claimant has demonstrated to the Tribunal’s satisfaction that the principle
of provisional application of treaties is recognized in the Russian Federation, as it was in

the Soviet Union.

The Tribunal’s analysis commences with the applicable legislation of the Russian
Federation. Article 23(1) of the FLIT provides clear and unequivocal confirmation of
Claimant’s submission:

1. An international treaty or a part thereof may, prior to its entry into

force, be applied by the Russian Federation provisionally if the treaty

itself so provides or if an agreement to such effect has been reached with
the parties that have signed the treaty.

Article 23(2) of the FLIT then provides that decisions on the provisional application of a
treaty shall be made by the body that signs the treaty, in accordance with the procedure
set out in Article 11 of the FLIT. Article 11 of the FLIT, in turn, specifies that the
President of the Russian Federation has the authority to negotiate and sign international

treaties that are being concluded on behalf of the Russian Federation.

Although Professor Avakiyan, one of Respondent’s experts, was asked to opine on
provisional application, he made no reference to these provisions of the FLIT in his first
written opinion. Under cross-examination, Professor Avakiyan acknowledged the
legislative basis for provisional application of international treaties in the Russian
Federation under the FLIT, and also acknowledged that the FLIT is in conformity with
the Constitution and the principle of separation of powers of the Russian Federation.
Indeed, during oral submissions, Respondent’s counsel stated clearly that “Russian law is
of course familiar with the concept of provisional application, and that was never in

dispute.”

Hearing Transcript, 17 November 2008, p. 46:10-16. His own personal opinion was that treaties that have

provisions that are inconsistent with Russian law should never be provisionally applied, and that Article 23 of the
FLIT, which permits such provisional application, should therefore be amended in order to clarify this limitation.
Ibid. at pp. 39:22 to 40:5.

Hearing Transcript, 26 November 2008, p. 143:5-7.

- 123 -

335. Claimant’s expert on Russian law, Mr. Gladyshev, opined that Article 15(4) of the
Constitution gives priority to all international treaties of the Russian Federation over
domestic law, whether such treaties are ratified or whether “the parties agreed to have
provisional application of an international treaty as a binding instrument, as they did in

1965

the case of the Energy Charter Treaty.

336. The question regarding the principle of provisional application under Russian law was
answered perhaps most clearly in the response of the Russian Federation to a question
posed in the context of a study commissioned by and prepared for the Committee of
Legal Advisers on Public International Law of the Council of Europe in 2001:

15. Is the provisional application of a treaty before its entry into force
possible in your legal system and under what conditions?

Yes, if a treaty itself so provides or signatory states so agreed.
[emphasis added]

337. In his written expert opinions, Mr. Gladyshev referred to the long tradition of provisional
application in the treaty practice of the Russian Federation and, previously, of the USSR.
According to Mr. Gladyshev—and this was not challenged by Respondent—there are

currently some 45 treaties being applied provisionally by the Russian Federation.

338. The Tribunal therefore has no difficulty in concluding that the principle of provisional
application is perfectly consistent with the Constitution, laws and regulations of the
Russian Federation. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the whole of the ECT applied
provisionally in the Russian Federation until such provisional application was terminated,
in accordance with the notification that the Russian Federation made on 20 August 2009,
pursuant to Article 45(3)(a) of the Treaty, of its intention not to become a Contracting
Party to the Treaty. Article 45(3)(a) provides that: “Termination of provisional

application for any signatory shall take effect upon the expiration of 60 days from the

% Hearing Transcript, 20 November 2008, p. 83:12-15; see generally ibid. at pp. 81:20 to 83:22.

°° Annex C-315.

-124-

date on which such signatory’s written notification is received by the Depository.” The

60-day period expired on 19 October 2009.

339. Furthermore, pursuant to Article 45(3)(b) of the Treaty, investment-related obligations,
including the obligation to arbitrate investment-related disputes under Part V of the
Treaty, remain in force for a period of 20 years following the effective date of
termination of provisional application. In the case of the Russian Federation, this means
that any investments made in Russia prior to 19 October 2009 will continue to benefit

from the Treaty’s protections for a period of 20 years—i.e., until 19 October 2029. Asa

 

result, the Tribunal finds that the provisional application of the ECT, including the
continuing provisional application of Article 26 in this case, does provide a basis for the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the merits of this claim.

340. There remains an issue which, although not controlling in this arbitration, needs
nevertheless to be addressed, in the opinion of the Tribunal, in the present Interim Award.
The Tribunal refers to the temporal aspect of the Limitation Clause: at what moment in
time (or over what period) should a signatory’s domestic legal regime be examined in order

to determine whether the principle of provisional application is consistent with its laws?

341. According to Respondent, which made the argument in relation to its theory of
inconsistency under Article 45(1), there is no temporal restriction in Article 45(1).
Respondent thus argues that “the inconsistency clause in Article 45(1) is not limited to

inconsistencies existing at the time of the signature of the Treaty.”°”

342. Claimant’s argument on the temporal issue was made in paragraph 232 of its

Counter-Memorial:

[T]he coming into existence of the Russian Federation’s international
obligations under the ECT by virtue of its provisional application was
subject to the consistency of such provisional application with Russian
law at the time the Russian Federation signed the Treaty.

[emphasis added]

°7 Hearing Transcript, 26 November 2008, p. 175:5-8.

- 125 -

The Tribunal is of the view that the determination as to whether or not the principle of
provisional application is consistent with the constitution, the laws or the regulations of
the host State in which the Investment is made must be made in the light of the

constitution, laws and regulations at the time of signature of the ECT.

Any other interpretation would allow a State to modify its laws after having signed the
ECT in order to evade an obligation that it has assumed by agreeing to provisional

application of the Treaty. The Tribunal cannot accept such an interpretation.

In connection with this temporal issue, the Tribunal notes the representations of the
Government of the Russian Federation in the Explanatory Note which it submitted to the
State Duma of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation when the ECT was
submitted for ratification (“ECT Explanatory Note”). The following extract from the
Note suggests that the time of signature of the Treaty was also the reference point for the
Government’s assessment of consistency of the “provisions on provisional application”

with the internal legal regime:

Prior to the entry into force of the ECT, the majority of the Contracting
Parties agreed to apply the treaty on a provisional basis. In this respect,
it was decided that such provisional application of the ECT would be
implemented to the extent that it would not be inconsistent with the
constitution, laws and regulations of the country in question.

At the time for the signing of the ECT, its provisions on provisional
application were in conformity with the Russian legal acts. For that

reason, the Russian side did not make declarations as to its inability to
accept provisional application (such declarations were made by 12 of the
49 ECT signatories).

 

[emphasis added]

c) Are the Provisions of the ECT Relating to Dispute Resolution

Inconsistent with Russian Law?
In view of the Tribunal’s conclusion with respect to the interpretation of Article 45(1),
there is no need, in principle, to address Respondent’s submission that the provisions of

the ECT relating to dispute resolution are themselves inconsistent with Russian law.

However, since both sides made extensive submissions to the Tribunal with respect to the

so-called “piecemeal” approach and because, as will be seen, the Tribunal’s analysis and

- 126-

findings with respect to the consistency with Russian laws and Constitution of these
provisions of the ECT relating to dispute resolution lead the Tribunal to the same
conclusion, the Tribunal has nevertheless decided to set out its analysis under this

alternative approach.

At the outset, however, the Tribunal wishes to state that, as established in the previous
section of this Interim Award, Article 45(1) is solely concerned with the consistency of
the principle of provisional application with the constitution, laws or regulations of the
host State at the time of signature. That is the Tribunal’s interpretation of the Limitation
Clause in Article 45(1). Once such consistency is established, the Limitation Clause
cannot be invoked subsequently to argue inconsistency between the host State’s domestic
law and specific elements of the ECT, be it the dispute-resolution provisions in Part V of

the ECT or the material rules for the protection of investments in Part III of the ECT.

With this important clarification in mind, the Tribunal will now analyze the dispute-
resolution mechanism for investment disputes between investors and the host State, as
defined in Articles 1(6), 1(7) and 26 of the ECT, and determine whether or not they are

consistent with the Constitution, laws and regulations of the Russian Federation.

(i) Parties’ Submissions

Under Article 26(1) of the ECT, this Tribunal has jurisdiction over “disputes between a
Contracting Party and an Investor of another Contracting Party relating to an Investment
of the latter in the Area of the former, which concern an alleged breach of an obligation
of the former under Part III [of the Treaty].” Disputes that are not settled amicably may,
at the option of the Investor, be submitted to international arbitration. “Investor” is

defined in Article 1(7). “Investment” is defined in Article 1(6).

In its First Memorial, Respondent submits principally that, in Russia, the power to
provide for mandatory dispute resolution in an international forum is vested in the
Legislature and that applying Article 26 on a provisional basis as a result of the signature
of the ECT by the Executive, before ratification of the Treaty by the Legislature, violates

the fundamental principle of the separation of powers under the Constitution.

-127-

352.

353.

68

In its Skeleton Argument submitted to the Tribunal prior to the hearing, Respondent
summarized its inconsistency argument based on the principle of separation of powers as

follows:

The Russian Constitution is based on the principle of separation of
powers and the rule of law. Each branch of State power exercises its
power independently, and no branch may usurp the power of another
branch. The Russian Constitution specifically preserves the prerogatives
of Russia’s Federal Assembly (parliament) in the treaty-making
process—law-making treaties must be ratified by the adoption of a
federal law by both the Duma and the Federation Council—and prohibits
the Government from legislating through the conclusion and
implementation of international treaties that amend or complement
federal laws. This ratification requirement is an emanation of the
principle of separation of powers established in Article 10 of the
Constitution, and is reflected in Article 15(1)(a) of the Federal Law on
International Treaties. Under the latter Article, all treaties whose
implementation requires “the amendment of existing or the adoption of
new federal laws, and also those establishing rules that are different from
those provided for by law,” are subject to ratification.

Respondent argues that the arbitration of this dispute in an international forum violates
the principle of separation of powers because the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is based on
Article 26 of the ECT—a provision of a treaty that has not been ratified—whereas, under
Russian law, disputes arising from sovereign acts or omissions, including claims for
damages for expropriation, may not be submitted to arbitration absent a legislative

enactment (including ratification of the ECT) that provides for arbitration.

Respondent also argues that, under Russian law, disputes arising from public and
administrative law relationships, such as disputes concerning taxation, enforcement of tax
liens, nationalization or criminal-law matters, are not arbitrable. Finally, Respondent
submits that arbitration without privity (i.e., arbitration with an investor based on an open
offer to arbitrate by the host State, as is the case in Article 26(3)(a) of the ECT) is not

recognized under Russian law.

In its Skeleton Argument, Respondent explained:

See Skeleton Argument, para. 19.

- 128 -

Disputes involving the lawfulness of expropriation, taxation measures,
bankruptcy, and other regulatory matters are within the exclusive
jurisdiction of Russia’s courts, and may not be submitted to arbitration.
The Russian Federation’s Civil Procedure Code, Arbitrazh Procedure
Code and Tax Code confirm the exclusive jurisdiction of Russian courts
over these issues, and prohibit their arbitration. Claimants’ request for
damages is based on allegedly illegal sovereign acts of various Russian
authorities, none of which under Russian law may be submitted to
arbitration, unless a specific law provides otherwise. The Energy Charter
Treaty, an unratified treaty, is not such a law.

356. In response, Claimant submits in its Counter-Memorial that there is no inconsistency
between the provisional application of the ECT, including its dispute-resolution
mechanism, and Russian law. In support of its argument, Claimant cites, in particular,
the ECT Explanatory Note, which includes an unqualified statement that the provisional

application of the ECT was consistent with “Russian legal acts.””

357. Claimant also argues that investor-State arbitration provisions similar to Article 26 of the
ECT can be found in various BITs concluded by the Russian Federation, which have
been deemed consistent with its laws. Finally, Claimant notes that Respondent’s
objection to the arbitrability of the subject-matter of Claimant’s claims under Russian law
is inconsistent with the fact that the Russian Federation has committed itself to
submitting such disputes to arbitration in the 38 BITs to which it is a Party that have

entered into force.

358. In its Second Memorial, Respondent reiterates that many of the ECT’s provisions are

inconsistent with its Constitution, laws or regulations. It refers to:

© investor-State arbitration in the absence of a ratified treaty, noting that the
Russian Federation’s invariable practice is to have every BIT which it signs

subject to ratification;

® See Annex C-143.

- 129 -

359.

70

e the fact that according an EU shell company, such as any one of the three
Claimants, the benefit of Part III of the ECT is not in harmony with Article 30 of
the P&C Agreement;””

e the fact that according standing to Yukos’ shareholders as “investors” is an

inadmissible derivative claim unknown to Russian law; and

e the fact that protecting an “investment” which was made without the injection of
any foreign capital is contrary to Russian law, according to the expert opinion of

Professor Andrey Lisitsyn-Svetlanov.

In its Rejoinder, Claimant notes, in particular, that Respondent’s position in this
arbitration does not accord with the statements made by the Russian Government in the
ECT Explanatory Note and in the explanatory notes submitted to the Duma in the context
of the ratification of other BITs.”! In none of those documents, Claimant avers, does the
Russian Government state that ratification is required because the respective BITs
contradict Russian law. At most, ratification is said to be required for the BITs in
question because the treaties add something different to the Russian legal framework.

Claimant further notes that none of these BITs include a provisional application regime.

During the hearing, Respondent’s counsel argued that the claims in this arbitration were
(a) non-arbitrable under Russian law, (b) within the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts in

Russia, and (c) advanced by parties without standing under Russian law.

There were several arguments advanced by Respondent in relation to inarbitrability. It

asserted that:

¢ arbitration is permissible under Russian law only in private-law relationships;

See Exhibit R-286. Respondent submits that the P&C Agreement applies in the instant case as it provides for a

framework for investment protection and energy cooperation of which the ECT forms part and, by its very terms
(Article 105), prevails over the latter up until the day the ECT has entered into force.

”' See Exhibits R-402 through R-406.

- 130 -

e the subject-matter of arbitration under Russian law is limited to the sphere of
civil-law relationships and therefore cannot extend to disputes arising from

public-law relationships, including tax matters;”” and

ein addition, under Russian law, it is impossible to submit for consideration by an
arbitral tribunal “those disputes for the recovery of damages that arose as a result
of illegal actions of State bodies and officials in their exercise of public-law

functions.””>

362. The following assertions were made by Respondent in relation to the exclusive

competence of Russian courts concerning the matters brought before this Tribunal:

e the Arbitrazh Courts in the Russian Federation have exclusive competence over
cases involving foreign persons which arise from administrative or other public

legal relationships;

e the courts of the Russian Federation have jurisdiction over, among other things,
cases arising from public legal relationships” and cases involving foreign
citizens;”° and

e the Arbitrazh Courts also have jurisdiction over “challenges of individual legal

acts of bodies of State authority of the Russian Federation.”””

” See Civil Procedure Code of the Russian Federation of 14 November 2002, Article 3(3), Exhibit R-173; Arbitrazh
Procedure Code of the Russian Federation of 24 July 2002, Article 4(6), Exhibit R-172; Tax Code of 31 July
1998, Article 138(1), Exhibit R-877.

*8 ©, Yu. Skvortsov, “About Certain Matters Concerning Recovery of Damages in the Arbitration Proceedings,” in
M.A. Rozhkova (ed.), Damages and Practice of their Recovery (2006), pp. 522, 525, Exhibit R-874.

™ See Arbitrazh Procedure Code of the Russian Federation of 14 November 2002, Article 248, Exhibit R-879.
5 See Civil Procedure Code of the Russian Federation of 14 November 2002, Article 22(1)(3), Exhibit R-883.
"© See ibid., Article 22(2).

” Arbitrazh Procedure Code of the Russian Federation of 14 November 2002, Article 29(2), Exhibit R-879.

- 131-

363.

On the issue of standing, Respondent argues that Russian law does not permit a
shareholder to claim for injury to a joint stock company. In support of its argument,

Respondent refers to the expert opinion of Professor Yevgeny Sukhanov, who writes:

[I]nfliction of damages upon the property of a joint stock company
represents infliction of damages upon that particular owner and not its
shareholders, whose property is segregated from the property of the
company. Consequently, the right to bring a judicial claim for the
protection of its interests in such situation is enjoyed only by the joint
stock company itself, as an independent owner of its property, and not by
its shareholders.”*
Respondent also refers to decisions of the European Court of Human Rights, which

establish that a shareholder cannot file a claim for violation of the company’s rights.

Respondent concludes that the Executive Branch of the Russian Government cannot
modify these various arbitrability, jurisdictional or standing norms, by signature of the
ECT, without violating the Constitution. It is Respondent’s position that, because the
ECT’s dispute resolution provisions are inconsistent with these various provisions of
Russian law, the ECT is one of those types of treaties which in accordance with
Article 15(1)(a) of the FLIT must be subject to ratification:

15(1) The following international treaties of the Russian Federation
shall be subject to ratification:

a) treaties whose implementation requires the amendment of
existing or the adoption of new federal laws, as well as those
establishing rules that are different from those provided for by
law.

During the hearing, Claimant argued and sought to demonstrate that the substantive

provisions of the ECT are not inconsistent with Russian law.

In relation to investor-State arbitration under Article 26 of the ECT, Claimant cites
Article 9 of the Russian Federation Law on Foreign Investments of 4 July 1991 and

Article 10 of the Russian Federation Law on Foreign Investment in the Russian

8 Professor Yevgeny Sukhanov, Opinion on the Issue of Possibility of a Shareholder’s Claims against Counter-
Parties of the Joint-Stock Company in Connection with Damage Caused by the Latter to the Company,
22 February 2006, Section IV, para. 6.

- 132 -

367.

Federation of 9 July 1999. Article 9 of the 1991 Law sets out the “procedure for settling
disputes.” It provides, in relevant part, that “disputes of foreign investors and enterprises
with foreign investment with State bodies of the Russian Federation ... are subject to
settlement in courts of the Russian Federation or, on agreement between sides, in a Court
of Arbitration” [emphasis added]. Article 10 of the 1999 Law provides, in turn, as

follows:

Any dispute involving a foreign investor and related to the investment
and business activities of such investor in the Russian Federation shall be
settled_in i with the international treaties _of the Russian
Federation_and federal laws in_a_court, an arbitration court_or

international arbitration (arbitration tribunal).

 

 

 

[emphasis added]

Claimant thus submits that investor-State arbitration such as that provided for in
Article 26 of the ECT is authorized by Russian law, subject only to establishing that the

Russian Federation has consented to the arbitration.

According to Claimant, the 1991 and 1999 Foreign Investment Laws also establish that
the definitions of investor and investment in the ECT are entirely consistent with Russian
law. Claimant cites Articles 1 and 2 of the 1991 Law (defining foreign investor and
foreign investment, respectively) and the definition of both terms in Article 2 of the 1999
Law. Consistency is also confirmed, submits Claimant, by the statement of the
Government in the ECT Explanatory Note to the Duma that the ECT is consistent with
the provisions of the existing law on foreign investment and “does not require the
acknowledgement of any concessions or the adoption of any amendments to the

abovementioned Law.”

On the issue of arbitrability, Claimant refers the Tribunal to Article 16 of the Civil Code
of the Russian Federation, which provides that civil-law rights include the right to seek
compensation for the illegal acts of a State. According to Claimant, therefore, even
assuming Respondent’s argument about the arbitrability issue is correct, the type of claim
before this Tribunal would be considered arbitrable in Russia. Claimant relies primarily,
however, on Article 9 of the 1991 Law on Foreign Investment, under which, it says,

investment disputes are clearly arbitrable. But, arbitrability, Claimant recognizes, does

- 133 -

not automatically allow a claim to be submitted to an arbitral tribunal. Consent of both
parties is required. Consent, Claimant submits, is clearly provided in the present case by
Articles 26(3)(a) and 26(4) of the ECT, which are applied provisionally in the Russian

Federation based on the signature of the Treaty by the Russian Government.

369. Finally, in response to Respondent’s argument that these claims are impermissible
derivative actions, unknown to Russian law, Claimant submits that it is not claiming in
the name of Yukos, but rather is seeking compensation on its own behalf for loss of the

value of the shares it owns in Yukos.

(ii) Tribunal’s Decision

370. After having considered the totality of the Parties’ submissions and having deliberated,
the Tribunal concludes that Article 26 of the ECT is not inconsistent with the
Constitution, laws or regulations of the Russian Federation. The terms of the Russian
Federation’s Law on Foreign Investment (both the 1991 and 1999 versions) are crystal
clear. Investor-State disputes such as the present one are arbitrable under Russian law.
The Tribunal recalls the key provisions of the law which inform its conclusion. Article 9

of the 1991 Law provides, in relevant part, as follows:

Disputes of foreign investors and enterprises with foreign investment
with state bodies of the Russian Federation, enterprises, public
organizations and other juridical persons of the RSFSR, disputes among
investors and enterprises with foreign investment on matters linked with
their economic activities, as well as disputes between participants of an
enterprise with foreign investment and the enterprise itself are subject to
settlement in courts of the Russian Federation or, on agreement between
a Court of Arbitration.”

 

 

[emphasis added]

Article 10 of the 1999 Law provides, in relevant part:

Any dispute involving a foreign investor and related to the investment
and business activities of such investor in the Russian Federation shall be

” During the hearing, Mr. Martynoy explained that the use of “Court of Arbitration” in this English translation of
the law was meant to refer to a non-governmental dispute resolution mechanism, such as a privately constituted
arbitration tribunal, as opposed to the Russian arbitration or arbitrazh courts, which are part of the judiciary. See
Hearing Transcript, 19 November 2008, p. 31:7-21.

-134-

settled_in i with the international treaties _of the Russian
i an arbitration court or

 

[emphasis added]

Furthermore, the definitions of “foreign investor” and “foreign investment” in both the
1991 and 1999 versions of the Law on Foreign Investment are consistent with the
definitions of “Investor” and “Investment” in Article 1 of the ECT. The 1991 Law

defines the terms, in relevant part, as follows:

Article 1
Foreign Investors

Foreign investors in the RSFSR may include:

- foreign juridical persons, including, specifically, any
companies, firms, enterprises, organizations or associations, set
up and entitled to make investments in conformity with the
legislation of the country where they are located;

Article 2
Foreign Investment

All types of property and intellectual assets, invested by foreigners in
business ventures and other types of activity with the aim of deriving
profit (income) shall be deemed foreign investment.

Similar definitions are found in Article 2 of the 1999 Law:

“Foreign investor” shall mean: foreign legal entities, the civil legal
capacity of which shall be determined by the laws of the jurisdiction of
their incorporation and which have the right to invest on the territory of
the Russian Federation under the laws of the jurisdiction of
incorporation; [. . .]

“Foreign investment” shall mean the investment of foreign capital in
objects of business activity on the territory of the Russian Federation in
the form of objects of civil rights belonging to a foreign investor, unless
such objects are excluded from the turnover or are restricted in the
Russian Federation pursuant to federal laws, including money, securities
(denominated in foreign currency or in the currency of the Russian
Federation), other property, property rights, exclusive rights to the results
of intellectual activities (intellectual property) which can be evaluated in
a monetary form, and services and information.

- 135 -

On the issue of standing, the Tribunal concludes that Claimant is claiming for violation of
its own rights under the ECT, not the rights of Yukos. The Tribunal agrees with
Claimant’s characterization of its claim, which is not a derivative action, but an action for

the direct loss by Claimant of its shares and their value.

The Tribunal agrees with Claimant that the definitions in the P&C Agreement are not
relevant to the analysis of the ECT, since the definitions in Article 30 of the P&C
Agreement are expressly limited to be “for the purpose of this agreement [i.e., the P&C

Agreement, not the ECT].”

The Tribunal’s conclusions are confirmed by the representations of the Government of
the Russian Federation in the Explanatory Note which it submitted to the State Duma of
the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation when the ECT was submitted for

ratification. The following extracts from the Note are particularly relevant:

Prior to the entry into force of the ECT, the majority of the Contracting
Parties agreed to apply the treaty on a provisional basis. In this respect,
it was decided that such provisional application of the ECT would be
implemented to the extent that it would not be inconsistent with the
constitution, laws and regulations of the country in question.

At the time for the signing of the ECT, its provisions on provisional
application were in conformity with the Russian legal acts. For that
reason, the Russian side did not make declarations as to its inability to
accept provisional application (such declarations were made by 12 of the
49 ECT signatories).

 

[...]
The provisions of the ECT are consistent with Russian legislation.
[...]

The legal regime of foreign investments envisaged under the ECT is
consistent _with the pro ns of the existing Law of the RSFSR on
Foreign Investments in the RSFSR, as well as with the amended version
of the Law currently being discussed in the State Duma, and does not
require the acknowledgement of any concessions or the adoption of any
amendments to the abovementioned Law. The ECT is also consistent
with the provisions of Russian bilateral international treaties on the
promotion and protection of investment.

[emphasis added]

- 136 -

376.

377.

During his cross-examination, Professor Avakiyan, one of Respondent’s expert
witnesses, confirmed that he agreed with the contents of the Explanatory Note cited in the
previous paragraph.*” The Tribunal’s conclusion on the consistency of Article 26 of the
ECT with Russian law is also supported by the writings of Professor Yershov, who was a
member of the Russian delegation to the ECT negotiations. During parliamentary
hearings concerning the ECT, Professor Yershov submitted a paper in which he noted the
following:

From the standpoint of Russian interests, the compromise achieved in

developing the ECT language guarantees Russia a solution to a critical

foreign trade problem: receipt and codification of a liberal non-

discriminatory trade policy regime for an EMP exporter otherwise

unattainable in such a short time. In exchange for this, under the ECT,

Russia grants foreign investors an energy investment regime acceptable

to them that does not require any concessions on Russia’s part beyond
the framework of current law."

[emphasis added]

As to the BIT practice of the Russian Federation, in the Tribunal’s opinion, it is of little
assistance to either Party. On the one hand, Claimant refers to the many BITs entered
into by the Russian Federation that provide for investor-State arbitration, inviting the
conclusion that investor-State arbitration is not inconsistent with Russian law. As
Respondent has pointed out, however, the BITs in force in the Russian Federation have
all been ratified, thus eliminating any concern with provisions in the BITs that might be
different from the underlying Russian legislation. The ratified BITs therefore do little to

advance Claimant’s position.

On the other hand, Respondent seeks support for its position by pointing out that some of
the explanatory notes submitted to the Duma in connection with the ratification of BITs
have made it explicit that the BIT in question is subject to ratification because it contains

a provision for the settlement of investor-State disputes through international

®° Hearing Transcript, 17 November 2008, p. 12:15-17.

8! Yu. A. Yershov, “Dogovor k Energeticheskoi Khartii [The Energy Charter Treaty],” reproduced in (2001) 1(1)
Ekologiya -- XXI Vek [Ecology -- XXI Century] pp. 23-42 at 25, Annex C-153.

-137-

arbitration.” As Claimant points out, however, none of the BITs in question contains a
provisional application regime such as that found in Article 45(1) of the ECT.
Ratification by the State Duma is thus required in order for the Russian Federation to

express its consent to arbitration.

378. At this point, the Tribunal recalls again its fundamental finding on the meaning and
interpretation of Article 45(1): irrespective of any inconsistencies that might exist
between Article 26 of the ECT and Russian law, Article 26 of the ECT, as well as other
provisions of the Treaty, apply provisionally and the Russian Federation has therefore

consented to international arbitration.

379. Pursuing nevertheless its detailed analysis of Article 26, in particular, through the prism
of the FLIT, the Tribunal will now seek to answer the question whether the signature of a
treaty which contains a provisional application clause is sufficient to establish the consent

of the Russian Federation to international arbitration of disputes arising under the Treaty.

380. Respondent argues that the consent required in order to give Article 26 binding effect can
only be expressed by the legislative branch of the State (i.e., the Duma) through the
mechanism of ratification of the ECT. This was the gist of the testimony of
Mr. Martynov, one of Respondent’s expert witnesses. He testified that consent to
arbitration under the ECT required ratification of the Treaty by the State Duma.
Respondent also argues that, pursuant to Article 39 of the ECT, “the Treaty is expressly
subject to ratification,” and that “States, such as Respondent, that have not ratified the

Treaty have not expressed their consent to be bound by the Treaty.”

381. In response, Claimant asserts that it “never suggested that the Treaty was not ‘subject to
ratification.’” Claimant argues, however, that Article 39 cannot render ineffective the
Treaty’s regime of provisional application, which is set out in Article 45. Claimant refers

to the FLIT in support of its position that consent to be bound by the provisions of a

® See, e.g., Explanatory Note on the Issue of Ratification of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian
Federation and the Government of the Republic of Argentina on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments, Exhibit R-402.

® See Hearing Transcript, 19 November 2008, Day 3, p. 42:18-22.

- 138 -

treaty can be granted by the Government’s signature of a treaty that provides for the
provisional application of its terms. Claimant cites, in particular, Article 6 of the FLIT,

which sets out how “consent” of the Russian Federation to be bound by an international

treaty may be expressed, as well as Article 2, which defines “ratification,” “signature”

and “conclusion.” These key provisions of the FLIT read as follows:

Article 2 Use of terms
For the purposes of this Federal Law:
L..]

b) “ratification,” “approval,” “acceptance,” and “accession” mean in each
case a form whereby the Russian Federation expresses its consent to be
bound by an international treaty;

c) “signature” means either a stage in the conclusion of a treaty, or a
form of expressing consent of the Russian Federation to be bound by an

international treaty, if the treaty provides that signature shall have that
effect, or it is otherwise established that the Russian Federation and the

other negotiating States were agreed that signature should have that
effect, or the intention of the Russian Federation to give that effect to the
signature appears from the full powers of its representative or was
expressed during the negotiation;

d) “conclusion” means the expression of consent of the Russian
Federation to be bound by an international treaty;

d

Article 6 Expression of consent of the Russian Federation to be bound
by an international treaty

 

1. Consent of the Russian Federation to be bound by an international
treaty may be expressed by means of:

signature of the treaty;
exchange of the documents forming the treaty;

ratification of the treaty;

approval of the treaty;

acceptance of the treaty;

accession to the treaty; or

any other manner of expressing consent on which the
contracting parties have agreed.

2. Decisions to grant consent for the Russian Federation to be bound by
an international treaty shall be made by state organs of the Russian
Federation in accordance with their competence as defined by the
Constitution of the Russian Federation, this Federal Law and other
legislative acts of the Russian Federation.

[emphasis added]

- 139 -

384.

These provisions of the FLIT are very clear. There is no room for ambiguity. The
Tribunal therefore concludes that the Russian Federation has consented to be bound—
albeit provisionally—by Article 26 of the ECT by its signature of the ECT. Article 45(1)
of the ECT establishes beyond the shadow of a doubt, and notwithstanding Article 39 of
the ECT, that the Russian Federation and other signatories agreed that their signature of
the Treaty would have the effect of expressing the consent of the Russian Federation (and

each other signatory) to be provisionally bound by its terms.

The Tribunal notes that Article 11 of the FLIT provides that the decision to sign a treaty

is a decision which rests with the Executive:

1. Decisions to negotiate and to sign international treaties of the
Russian Federation shall be made:

a

with respect to treaties to be concluded on behalf of the Russian
Federation, by the President of the Russian Federation, but with
respect to treaties to be concluded on behalf of the Russian
Federation on matters under the jurisdiction of the Government
of the Russian Federation, by the Government of the Russian
Federation;

b

with respect to treaties to be concluded on behalf of the
Government of the Russian Federation, by the Government of
the Russian Federation.

2. Decisions to negotiate and to sign international treaties of the
Russian Federation on matters under the jurisdiction of the
Government of the Russian Federation shall be made by the
President of the Russian Federation if circumstances so require.

Moreover, as we saw earlier, Article 23(1) of the FLIT makes it clear that provisional
application is permissible under the legislation of the Russian Federation. Therefore, the
obligation assumed by the Russian Federation to be bound, prior to ratification, by the
dispute settlement provisions (including international arbitration) of a provisionally
applied treaty such as the ECT, and the consent expressed therein, are not inconsistent
with the Constitution, laws or regulations of the Russian Federation, and the Tribunal so
finds.

Respondent argues that a treaty must be ratified by the Russian Federation, and therefore
be in force, in order to establish the consent of the Russian Federation to an arbitration

provision of the treaty. As shown above, however, under the FLIT, ratification is not the

- 140 -

387.

only means by which the Russian Federation can express its consent to the terms of a
treaty: signature can express consent where the treaty, such as the ECT, so provides, as it
does by specifying in Article 45 the obligations not of a party to the treaty but of a

“signatory.”

That there is a distinction between consenting to be bound provisionally by the treaty
and, on the other hand, the treaty being “in force” for a State is also clear from the
definition of “Contracting Party” in Article 1(2) of the ECT. As used in the ECT,
“Contracting Party” means “a state or Regional Economic Integration Organization
which has consented to be bound by this Treaty and for which the Treaty is in force.”
[emphasis added] The use of the conjunction “and” between the clauses “which has
consented to be bound by this Treaty” and “for which the Treaty is in force” means that
there must be circumstances, in the eyes of the parties to the ECT, including the Russian
Federation, where a State for which the ECT is not “in force,” has nevertheless consented

to be bound by its terms.

There is one last argument of Respondent which the Tribunal finds important to address.
Article 23(2) of the FLIT requires that a treaty subject to provisional application must be
submitted to and ratified by the State Duma within six months from its signature and the
start of its provisional application. It is common ground between the Parties that the ECT
which was signed on 17 December 1994 has never been ratified by the State Duma.
Respondent submits that since the six-month period had long expired, any continued

provisional application of the ECT would have been inconsistent with Russian law.

In the view of the Tribunal, the six-month limit is merely an internal requirement; failure
to respect that procedure does not in and of itself automatically terminate provisional
application. The Tribunal reaches this conclusion based first on the plain meaning of
Articles 23(2) and 23(3) of the FLIT. According to Article 23(2), where a treaty provides
for provisional application, “this treaty shall be submitted to the State Duma within six
months from the start of its provisional application.” Article 23(3) provides, however,
that provisional application of a treaty by the Russian Federation “shall be terminated
upon notification to the other States that apply the treaty provisionally of the intention of

the Russian Federation not to become a party to the treaty.” The Russian Federation gave

-141-

no such notification until 20 August 2009, when it notified the Depository of the ECT,
the Portuguese Republic, pursuant to Article 45(3)(a) of the Treaty, of its intention not to
become a Contracting Party to the Treaty. Article 45(3)(a) provides that “Termination of
provisional application for any signatory shall take effect upon the expiration of 60 days
from the date on which such signatory’s written notification is received by the

Depository.” The 60-day period expired on 19 October 2009.

388. Accordingly, from the date of signature of the ECT on behalf of the Russian Federation,
17 December 1994, until 18 October 2009, the ECT was provisionally binding upon the
Russian Federation. That conclusion is in accord with the terms of Article 25(2) of the
VCLT. Furthermore, as explained above,** pursuant to Article 45(3)(b) of the Treaty,
any investments made in Russia prior to 19 October 2009 will continue to benefit from
the Treaty’s protections for a period of 20 years, i.e., until 19 October 2029. Therefore,
the Russian Federation’s 20 August 2009 notification does not affect the analysis and

conclusion of this Tribunal.

389. The Tribunal’s conclusion is further supported by the following documentary evidence

emanating from Respondent:

¢ The opinion on the draft Federal Law “On Amending and Supplementing the
Federal Law ‘On International Treaties of the Russian Federation’,” attached to
the letter of the President of the Russian Federation dated 28 May 2001
(No. PR-966),*° which states: “The legal limits for the termination of provisional
application are clear (Article 23(3) of the Federal Law and Article 25 of the
VCLT). Provisional application of an international treaty is terminated by
agreement of the parties, or by the coming into force of the treaty, or by the
communication of State to the other States provisionally applying the treaty of its

determination not to become a party to the treaty.”

See paras. 34, 338.

* Annex C-145.

-142-

© The Russian Note dated 8 July 1997,5° which provides expressly that “timely
submission of the treaty to the State Duma (according to the time limits specified
in the Law) has no automatic consequences on its provisional application. If six
months from the beginning of provisional application have expired and the State
Duma has not discussed the issue of this treaty, its provisional application

continues until the relevant decision is taken by State Duma.”*”

¢ The Russian statement to the Energy Charter Conference (RP-3516),°** in which
the Russian delegation informed all delegations that “the Russian Federation has
yet to ratify the Energy Charter Treaty but, as a signatory Country, it implements

the Treaty from the day it entered into force.”

¢ The website of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation which
contains an information bulletin on the ECT dated 25 November 2005 that “the
Russian Federation applies [the ECT] on a provisional basis in accordance with
Part II of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969) and Section II of
the Federal Law on International Treaties of the Russian Federation of June 16,
1995."

390. With respect to Article 23(3) of the FLIT, there is no evidence before the Tribunal that,
before 20 August 2009, the Russian Federation notified the Depositary and the other
States that apply the Treaty, provisionally or otherwise, of its intention not to become a
party to the ECT. The Russian Federation may have made it known earlier that it did not
plan to ratify the ECT, but it nevertheless continued to apply it provisionally while

omitting formally and officially to notify other signatories of its intentions not to ratify

* Annex C-925.

*’ Respondent contests the origin of the Russian Note. See Transcript of Procedural Hearing, 8 May 2008,
pp. 81-95. The Tribunal notes, however, that Respondent has not tendered affidavits or sworn statements from the
persons who attended the meeting of 8 July 1997 on behalf of the Russian Federation, which would support its
position. See Transcript of Procedural Hearing, 8 May 2008, pp. 95-96.

** Annex C-1020.

® Annex C-9. This information bulletin appeared on the website as recently as 23 May 2007. See Annex C-1143.

- 143 -

the Treaty until 20 August 2009. It appears that the Russian Federation remains—or
remained—a Member of the Energy Charter Conference “in which ratification of the

°° and a national of the Russian Federation

Energy Charter Treaty is still pending. .
remains—or remained—Deputy Secretary-General of the Energy Charter Secretariat.
The Russian Federation has participated in the meetings of the Energy Charter
Conference, pursuant to Article 34 of the ECT, and in particular the quinquennial review
of the Treaty provided for in sub-paragraph 7. The Russian Federation cannot be heard,
during the pendency of these proceedings, to claim the benefits of provisional application
of the ECT while disclaiming the obligations which that status imposes. Therefore, the
Russian Federation was bound by the obligation to arbitrate investor-State disputes
pursuant to Part V of the ECT as of the date of the filing of Claimant’s Notice of
Arbitration and remains so bound, despite the fact that, on 20 August 2009, it notified the
ECT Depository of its intention not to become party to the ECT. As set out above,”! this

conclusion is also dictated by Article 45(3)(b) of the Treaty.

391. Finally, the Tribunal notes that its conclusion on the meaning of the concept of
provisional application and the distinction to be drawn between consent to be bound by
the treaty and the treaty being in force, is entirely consistent with the decision on
jurisdiction rendered in the Kardassopoulos case. In the relevant passages of that

decision to which the Tribunal subscribes, that tribunal wrote:

211. It follows that the language used in Article 45(1) is to be
interpreted as meaning that each signatory State is obliged, even before
the ECT has formally entered into force, to apply the whole ECT as if it
had already done so.

212. This interpretation of the significance of Article 45(1) is consistent
with Article 45(3). That provision refers to the possibility that a
signatory may terminate its provisional application of the Treaty by
giving written notification to the Depositary that it does not intend to
become a Contracting Party to the ECT: that provision applies to
provisional application pursuant to Article 45(1). When such notification
is given Article 45(3)(b) provides that

Energy Charter Secretariat, The Energy Charter Treaty and Related Documents: A Legal Framework for
International Energy Cooperation (2004), p. 17.

°! See para. 388.

-144-

392.

“[T]he obligation of the signatory under paragraph (1) to

apply Parts III and V with respect to any investments
made in its Area during such provisional application by
Investors of other signatories shall nevertheless remain in
effect with respect to those Investments for twenty years
following the effective date of termination [...].”

213. This provision confirms that Parts III (concerning investment
promotion and protection) and V (concerning dispute settlement) apply
during the period of provisional application, and that the operation of
those Parts gives rise to an “obligation.”

[...]

219. There is, nevertheless, in the Tribunal’s view a sufficiently well-
established practice of provisional application of treaties to generate a
generally accepted understanding of what is meant by that notion.
Where what is in issue is, as in the present case, the provisional
application of the whole treaty, then such provisional application imports
the application of all its provisions as if they were already in force, even
though the treaty’s proper or definitive entry into force has not yet
occurred.

 

[...]

223. For all the foregoing reasons the Tribunal is satisfied that, properly
interpreted in accordance with international law, the language used in
Article 45(1) is to be interpreted as meaning that each signatory State is
obliged, even before the ECT has formally entered into force, to apply
the whole ECT as if it had already done so, and that the language used in
Article 1(6), particularly its use of the term “entry into force,” is to be
interpreted as meaning the date on which the ECT became provisionally
applicable for Georgia and Greece.

[emphasis added]

The Tribunal’s analysis leads it to conclude that Article 26 of the ECT is not inconsistent
with the Constitution, laws or regulations of the Russian Federation. Although, as noted
at the outset of this section, this analysis was not essential in view of the Tribunal’s

dispositive interpretation of Article 45(1), it does sustain the Tribunal’s decision.

5. Conclusion

As noted at the outset of this chapter of the Tribunal’s Interim Award, the interpretation
of Article 45 of the ECT, concerning the scope of provisional application, is the central

issue before the Tribunal in this phase of the arbitration.

- 145 -

394.

395.

396.

In this chapter, the Tribunal has found that:

a) The regimes of provisional application in Article 45(1) and 45(2) are separate,
and the Russian Federation can benefit from the Limitation Clause in

Article 45(1) even though it made no declaration under Article 45(2);

b) The Russian Federation can invoke the Limitation Clause in Article 45(1)
even though it made no prior declaration nor gave any prior notice to other
signatories that it intended to rely on Article 45(1) to exclude provisional

application;

c

The Limitation Clause of Article 45(1) negates provisional application of the
Treaty only where the principle of provisional application is itself inconsistent

with the constitution, laws or regulations of the signatory State; and

d

In the Russian Federation, there is no inconsistency between the provisional

application of treaties and its Constitution, laws or regulations.

Accordingly, the Tribunal has concluded that the ECT in its entirety applied provisionally
in the Russian Federation until 19 October 2009, and that Parts III and V of the Treaty
(including Article 26 thereof) remain in force until 19 October 2029 for any investments
made prior to 19 October 2009. Respondent is thus bound by the investor-State

arbitration provision invoked by Claimant.

The Tribunal is comforted in its decision by its further finding that, had it been an
essential consideration under the Limitation Clause of Article 45(1)—which it is not—
Article 26 of the ECT itself, as well as Articles 1(6) and 1(7), are consistent with

Respondent’s Constitution, laws and regulations.

The Tribunal therefore has jurisdiction over the merits of this claim, subject to the other

objections addressed in the other chapters of this Interim Award.

The Tribunal emphasizes again that although it considered the question of consistency of

particular provisions of the ECT (notably Article 26) with Respondent’s domestic legal

- 146 -

399.

400.

401.

regime, it will not be admissible for Respondent to argue in any merits phase” of the
present arbitration that certain provisions of the ECT, including the provisions of Part III,
cannot be applied provisionally because they are inconsistent with Respondent’s
Constitution, laws or regulations. The Tribunal’s interpretation of the Limitation Clause
in Article 45(1), coupled with its finding that the principle of provisional application
per se is consistent with the domestic legal regime of the Russian Federation, results
necessarily in the conclusion that each and every provision of the ECT applied

provisionally in the Russian Federation.

B. Is CLAIMANT A PROTECTED INVESTOR WITH AN INVESTMENT UNDER THE

1. Introduction

In the previous chapter, the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that Article 26 of the
Treaty applies provisionally in the Russian Federation, and that the Tribunal therefore has
jurisdiction over the merits of this claim, subject to the other objections raised by
Respondent. The first set of such objections, which the Tribunal now addresses, relates
to the requirements for jurisdiction ratione personae and ratione materiae found in

Article 26.

Article 26 provides, in relevant part, that investor-State arbitration pursuant to sub-
paragraph 4 (including arbitration in accordance with the UNCITRAL Rules, pursuant to
sub-paragraph 4(b)) is available for “[d]isputes between a Contracting Party and an
Investor of another Contracting Party relating to an Investment of the latter in the Area of
the former, which concern an alleged breach of an obligation of the former under Part IIT

LoL?

In the previous chapter of this Interim Award, the Tribunal has found that, for purposes
of Article 26, the Russian Federation is bound as if it were a Contracting Party.

Respondent, however, objects to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal on the grounds that

” Throughout the present Interim Award, and for obvious reason, the Tribunal will continue to refer to “any merits
phase” of this arbitration. In the dispositif of this Interim Award, the Tribunal will use the appropriate description
dictated by its conclusion in respect of jurisdiction and admissibility.

-147-

402.

403.

404.

405.

406.

Claimant is not “an Investor of another Contracting Party” and/or that the dispute does

not relate to “an Investment” of such an Investor.

In the sections that follow, the Tribunal analyzes each one of these issues in turn.

2. Does Claimant Qualify as a Protected “Investor” under Article 1(7)?

In Article 1(7) of the Treaty, “Investor” is defined to mean:
(a) with respect to a Contracting Party:

(i) anatural person having the citizenship or nationality of or who is
permanently residing in that Contracting Party in accordance
with its applicable law;

(ii) a company or other organization organized in accordance with
the law applicable in that Contracting Party;

(b) with respect to a “third state,” a natural person, company or other
organization which fulfils, mutatis mutandis, the conditions
specified in subparagraph (a) for a Contracting Party.
Claimant was incorporated in the Isle of Man on 24 September 1997. The company was
originally named Credof Limited, changing its name to Yukos Universal Limited on
9 January 1998. As certified by the General Registry of the Isle of Man on 4 November
1999 and by the Financial Supervision Commission of the Isle of Man on 23 June 2005,
Claimant was duly incorporated and in existence under the laws of that jurisdiction as at

the date of its Notice of Arbitration (3 February 2005).

The United Kingdom signed the ECT in December 1994 and ratified it on 16 December
1997. The United Kingdom has extended such ratification to the Isle of Man, which is a
Crown Dependency. Claimant is accordingly a company organized in accordance with

the laws applicable in a Contracting Party to the ECT.

a) Parties’ Submissions

Respondent does not dispute these basic facts, which, on their face, lead to the conclusion
that Claimant qualifies as an “Investor” under Article 1(7) of the Treaty. Rather,

Respondent argues that Claimant has failed to meet the burden of demonstrating that the

- 148 -

terms of Article 1(7), as lex specialis, displace consideration of applicable rules and
principles of international law bearing upon the exercise of treaty interpretation. These
general principles of international law, which Respondent submits are applicable, require
the Tribunal to go beyond the facts relating to Claimant’s formal incorporation in order to
determine whether Claimant qualifies as an Investor for purposes of Article 1(7) of the
ECT.

407. Respondent refers in this respect to various instruments of international law, such as
Article 9 of the ILC Draft Articles on Diplomatic Protection or the Draft Articles on
International Responsibility of the State for Injuries Caused in its Territory to the Person
or Property of Aliens, as well as to the P&C Agreement, and argues that on the basis of
these instruments, Claimant does not qualify as an “Investor” for the purposes of
Article 1(7) of the ECT. In particular, Respondent asserts that Claimant does not qualify
for protection under the ECT since it is a shell company beneficially owned and

controlled by Russian nationals and, as such, by nationals of the host State.

408. In response, Claimant submits that Respondent is “engaging ... in a tortuous and
innovative process of re-writing the Treaty.” Claimant asserts that “there is no basis for
interpreting Article 1(7) in any way other than pursuant to its plain, express terms, which

look only to the Claimant’s country of incorporation.” Claimant concludes that general
principles of international law cannot override the “simple, determinative definition” of

Article 1(7) of the Treaty.

409. In support of its position, Claimant refers to the opinion of Professor Crawford, who
writes:
No doubt reference to substantive principles of international law may
have a role in treaty interpretation. But international law does not
prescribe any rule for qualifying entities as investors for the purposes of

treaty arbitration, still less any peremptory rule. The plain meaning of a
treaty’s terms may be taken to reflect the parties’ intentions.”*

° Crawford Opinion of 22 June 2006, at para. 125.

- 149 -

410.

All.

Claimant also refers to the decisions of arbitral tribunals that have considered this issue
and have rejected attempts to introduce limitations or exceptions not provided for in the
language of the Treaty under consideration. Claimant refers specifically to Plama v.
Bulgaria.* Petrobart v. The Kyrgyz Republic,® Saluka Investments BV (the Netherlands)
v. The Czech Republic.® and Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine.”

Finally, Claimant submits that Respondent’s reliance on international instruments other
than the ECT, which contain language different from the ECT, is also unavailing.
Claimant states that “the Respondent cannot rely on the language contained in irrelevant
international instruments to provide for the additional requirements and exceptions that

the Respondent now seeks to insert into the ECT.”

b) Tribunal’s Decision

As noted earlier in the present Interim Award, according to Article 31 of the VCLT, a
treaty must be interpreted first on the basis of its plain language. On its face,
Article 1(7)(a)(ii) of the ECT contains no requirement other than that the claimant
company be duly organized in accordance with the law applicable in a Contracting Party.
The Tribunal agrees with Professor Crawford that in order to qualify as a protected
Investor under Article 1(7) of the ECT, a company is merely required to be organized
under the laws of a Contracting Party. As Professor Crawford rightly points out:
The Treaty imposes no further requirements with respect to shareholding,

management, siége social or location of its business activities (.. .).
Companies incorporated in Contracting Parties are embraced by the

°** Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction of
8 February 2005, (2005) 20:1 ICSID Review 262.

°S Petrobart Limited v. The Kyrgyz Republic, Arbitration No. 126/2003, Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm
Chamber of Commerce, Award of 29 March 2005, available on http://ita.law .uvic.ca.

°° Saluka Investments B.V. (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, Partial Award of 17 March 2006, UNCITRAL,
available at: http://www.pca-cpa.org/upload/files/SAL-CZ%20Partial %20A ward %20170306.pdf.

°” Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction of 29 April 2004, available at:
hitp://icsid.worldbank.org.

- 150 -

definition, regardless of the nationality of shareholders, the origin of
investment capital or the nationality of directors or management.”

412. The Tribunal is not unmindful of Respondent’s assertions concerning ownership and
control of Claimant. The proper context in which to examine these assertions, however,
is in the analysis of Article 17 of the Treaty, according to which ownership or control of a
claiming party by citizens or nationals of a third State may, if certain other conditions are
met, entitle a responding State to deny the benefits of Part III of the Treaty to the
claiming party. The Tribunal will address Respondent’s ownership and control argument

in the next chapter of this Interim Award.

413. Here, however, the Tribunal is dealing not with Article 17 but with Article 1(7). The
Tribunal is bound to interpret the terms of the ECT, including Article 1(7), not as they
might have been written but as they were actually written. Article 1(7) is more
comprehensively and neutrally cast than, for example, Article 21 of the ILC Draft
Articles on International Responsibility of the State for Injuries Caused in its Territory to

the Person or Property of Aliens. Article 1(7) provides that, “Investor” means:

(a) with respect to a Contracting Party:

L..J

(ii) a company or other organization organized in accordance with
the law applicable in that Contracting Party;

Claimant was organized “in accordance with the law applicable” in a Contracting Party.
Claimant accordingly qualifies as a company so organized in the instant case. The

Tribunal is not entitled, by the terms of the ECT, to find otherwise.

414. In so concluding, the Tribunal follows the holding of the Partial Award in Saluka
Investments BV (The Netherlands) v. The Czech Republic, of 17 March 2006. That

tribunal, of which the late Sir Arthur Watts was the distinguished chairman, held:

240.The Tribunal has some sympathy for the argument that a company
which has no real connection with a State party to a BIT, and which

°8 Professor James Crawford, SC, Energy Charter Treaty Arbitration: Jurisdiction Issues, 22 June 2006, para. 126.

-151-

is in reality a mere shell company controlled by another company
which is not constituted under the laws of that State, should not be
entitled to invoke the provisions of that treaty. Such a possibility
lends itself to abuses of the arbitral procedure, and to practices of
‘treaty-shopping’ which can share many of the disadvantages of the
widely criticized practice of ‘forum shopping’.

241.However that may be, the predominant factor which must guide the
Tribunal’s exercise of its functions is the terms in which the parties
to the Treaty now in question have agreed to establish the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. In the present context, that means the terms in which
they have agreed upon who is an investor who may become a
claimant entitled to invoke the Treaty’s arbitration procedures. The
parties had complete freedom of choice in this matter, and they
chose to limit entitled ‘investors’ to those satisfying the definition
set out in Article 1 of the Treaty. The Tribunal cannot in effect
impose upon the parties a definition of ‘investor’ other than that
which they themselves agreed. That agreed definition required only
that the claimant-investor should be constituted under the laws of (in
the present case) The Netherlands, and it is not open to the Tribunal
to add other requirements which the parties could themselves have
added but which they omitted to add.”

415. The Tribunal knows of no general principles of international law that would require
investigating how a company or another organization operates when the applicable treaty
simply requires it to be organized in accordance with the laws of a Contracting Party. The
principles of international law, which have an unquestionable importance in treaty
interpretation, do not allow an arbitral tribunal to write new, additional requirements—
which the drafters did not include—into a treaty, no matter how auspicious or appropriate

they may appear.!°°

416. Indeed, in similar circumstances, other arbitral tribunals have held the opposite: they have

emphasized that the reference to the State of incorporation is the most common method

” See also Petrobart Limited v. The Kyrgyz Republic, Arbitration No. 126/2003, Arbitration Institute of the
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Award of 29 March 2005, available on http://ita.law.uvic.ca.

' See Acquisition of Polish Nationality, Advisory Opinion (1923), PCI ser. B, No.7, p. 20 (“To impose an
additional condition for the acquisition of Polish nationality, a condition not provided for in the Treaty .. ., would
be equivalent not to interpreting the Treaty, but to reconstructing it.”) Exhibit C-144. Respondent argues, in the
alternative, that the general rules and principles of international law are an integral part of Russian domestic law,
pursuant to Article 15(4) of the Constitution, and that an interpretation of Article 1(7) of the Treaty that
“dispense[d]” with such rules would therefore be inconsistent with Russian law, triggering the inconsistency
clause of Article 45(1) of the Treaty. The Tribunal cannot accept this argument, however, in light of its decision
on the proper interpretation of Article 45(1) (See Chapter A, above.)

 

- 152 -

of defining the nationality of a company and that, in any event, once a treaty makes that
choice in specific and unambiguous terms, any other method of assessing the company’s
nationality is ruled out.!°! Specifically with regard to Article 1(7) of the ECT, the arbitral
tribunal held in the case of Plama v. Bulgaria that to qualify as an investor it was
sufficient for a company to be organized in accordance with the law applicable in Cyprus,
irrespective of who might own or control the Investor.!”
417. The Tribunal accordingly holds that Claimant, being a company organized in accordance
with the laws of the Isle of Man, qualifies as an Investor for the purposes of

Article 1(7)(a)(ii) of the ECT.

3. Does Claimant “Own or Control” a Protected “Investment” under
Article 1(6)?

418. In Article 1(6) of the Treaty, “Investment” is defined to mean:

[. . .] every kind of asset, owned or controlled directly or indirectly by an
Investor and includes:

(a) tangible and intangible, and movable and immovable, property,
and any property rights such as leases, mortgages, liens and
pledges;

(b) a company or business enterprise, or shares, stock, or other
forms of equity participation in a company or business
enterprise, and bonds and other debt of a company or business
enterprise;

(Cc

claims to money and claims to performance pursuant to contract
having an economic value and associated with an Investment;

(

&

Intellectual Property;

(e

Returns;

'°! See Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction of 29 April 2004, available
at http://icsid.worldbank.org, paras. 28-29 (with a dissenting opinion by Prosper Weil).

' Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction of
8 February 2005, (2005) 20:1 JCSID Review 262, para. 128.

- 153 -

(f) any right conferred by law or contract or by virtue of any
licences and permits granted pursuant to law to undertake any
Economic Activity in the Energy Sector.

L..]

419. Claimant owns 5,340,995 shares of Yukos, representing 2.25 percent of the share capital

of the company.

a) Parties’ Submissions

420. As in connection with the question of whether Claimant qualifies as an “Investor,”
Respondent does not dispute the basic fact that Claimant is the nominal owner of shares
of Yukos. Rather, Respondent argues that:

In the absence of a specific Treaty provision defining the quality of
ownership and control, the quality of ownership and control needs to be
determined pursuant to the applicable rules and principles of
international law. In addition, under the rules of treaty interpretation,

Article1(6) of the Treaty itself needs to be interpreted in accordance with
general international law.'*

On the basis of this premise, Respondent asserts that:

General international law ignores nominal or record ownership in favour

of real or beneficial ownership in order to determine the nationality of a
«a 104

claim.

421. Because Messrs. Khodorkovsky and Lebedev have admitted that they are the beneficial
owners of Yukos and its assets, argues Respondent, Claimant cannot be the true owner of

the Yukos shares that Claimant claims it owns.

422. Respondent further asserts that the nominal ownership by Claimant of the Yukos shares
does not qualify as an “Investment” because no injection of foreign capital into the
Russian Federation took place as a result of its acquisitions. Respondent submits that
Russian law requires that a foreign investment be acquired with capital of foreign origin,

and that Respondent can rely on Russian law requirements in connection with the

13 Respondent's First Memorial, para. 84.

14 Ibid. at para. 85.

-154-

423.

424,

425.

426.

427.

interpretation of Article 1(6) of the Treaty by operation of the inconsistency clause of

Article 45(1).

Finally, Respondent asserts that Claimant was not the owner of any Yukos shares during
certain periods from 2000 to 2003 and that Claimant failed to show that it paid for the

reacquisition of the Yukos shares it now nominally owns.

Claimant responds, as in the case of whether it qualifies as an “Investor,” that the
determination of whether Claimant holds a qualified “Investment” must begin with an
examination of the language of the ECT. Considering the express terms of Article 1(6) of
the Treaty, Claimant asserts that it holds a qualified “Investment” because it owns Yukos

shares and has done so at all relevant times for purposes of this arbitration.

Pointing to various bank statements, Claimant asserts that it has owned Yukos shares
continuously since early 2000, “long before the events giving rise to this arbitration
began,” and in particular on all dates relevant to this arbitration, including when it
delivered to Respondent the Notification of Claim under the ECT (2 November 2004)
and when Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim was filed (3 February
2005). Thus, Claimant argues, under any measure of the relevant date for purposes of
jurisdiction, “the Claimant was unquestionably a Yukos shareholder as of the relevant

date, and thus holds a qualified ‘Investment’ pursuant to Article 1(6).”

Further, Claimant argues that nothing in the language of the ECT requires a showing of
anything more than legal ownership to establish a qualified “Investment.” Claimant
points out that it is sufficient to show that the asset under consideration is owned or
controlled, making other purported requirements “superfluous and unnecessary” if
ownership is established. As for the type of ownership required, Claimant asserts that
there is no basis for Respondent’s argument that beneficial ownership is necessary.
Claimant argues that this is contrary to the plain language of the ECT, which provides for

a very broad, simple definition of “Investment” that includes legal ownership.

Drawing support from the expansive definition of “Investment,” Claimant asserts that
“how the Claimant acquired its Yukos shares—including the ‘origin of capital’, whether

it made an ‘injection’ of ‘foreign capital’, and whether it paid for the shares with cash or

- 155 -

some other consideration—has no bearing on the Tribunal’s determination whether the

Claimant holds a qualified ‘Investment.’” Claimant argues that no authority exists to
support Respondent’s argument in respect of the necessity for injection of foreign capital,

and cites the decision in Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine in support of its own position.

428. Claimant also points to various public statements by then President Vladimir Putin in
which he stressed that “repatriation” or “return” of Russian capital from countries like

Germany and Cyprus was “a very good sign” and “a good signal.”!°5

429. Finally, although insisting that it is not required by the ECT and not relevant therefore to
the issue of jurisdiction, Claimant asserts, by reference to various agreements regarding
acquisition of Yukos shares, that it did in fact legally acquire and pay for its Yukos shares
in 1999 and 2000. Claimant alleges that it paid more than US$ 142 million in total for
the acquisition of shares in 1999 and 2000. Claimant states that it need not prove that it
paid for each purchase or reacquisition of Yukos shares involved in the hundreds of

further transactions made after 2000.

b) Tribunal’s Decision

430. As an initial matter, the Tribunal finds that the ECT, by its terms, applies to an
“Investment” owned nominally by a qualifying “Investor.” Respondent’s submission that
simple legal ownership of shares does not qualify as an Investment under Article 1(6)(b)
of the ECT finds no support in the text of the Treaty. The breadth of the definition of
Investment in the ECT is emphasized by many eminent legal scholars.'°° As defined in

Article 1(6) of the ECT, an “Investment” includes “every kind of asset” owned or

1°5 President Vladimir Putin, Speech at the Energy Conference, London, 26 June 2003, available at the President of
Russia’s official website at http://www.kremlin.cu, Annex C-1437. President Vladimir Putin, Answers to
Questions from the Participants in the Business Meeting of the APEC Members, Shanghai, 19 October 2001,
available at http://wwwkremlin.ru, Annex C-1436.
16 See Craig Bamberger, “An Overview of the Energy Charter Treaty,” pp. 8-9, in Thomas Wiilde (ed.), The Energy
Charter Treaty: An East-West Gateway for Investment and Trade (1996); Thomas Wiilde, “International
Investment under the 1994 Energy Charter Treaty,” pp. 271-273, in Thomas Wiilde (ed.), The Energy Charter
Treaty: An East-West Gateway for Investment and Trade (1996); Esa Paasivirta, “The Energy Charter Treaty and
Investment Contracts: Towards Security of Contracts,” pp. 356-358, in Thomas Wilde (ed.), The Energy Charter
Treaty: An East-West Gateway for Investment and Trade (1996).

- 156 -

431.

432.

controlled, directly or indirectly, and extends not only to shares of a company but to its
debt (Article 1(6)(b) of the ECT), to monetary claims and contractual performance as
well as “any right conferred by law” (Article 1(6)(f) of the ECT, emphasis added). The
Tribunal recalls again that, according to Article 31 of the VCLT, a treaty is to be
interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning of its terms. The
Tribunal reads Article 1(6)(b) of the ECT as containing the widest possible definition of
an interest in a company, including shares (as in the case at hand), with no indication
whatsoever that the drafters of the Treaty intended to limit ownership to “beneficial”

ownership.

Nor can the Tribunal accept Respondent’s argument based on an alleged gap in
ownership of Yukos shares by Claimant during certain periods from 2000 through 2003.
The record shows that as many as 59,095,252 Yukos shares were held by Claimant from
28 March 2000 to 23 July 2002.'°7 Overlapping with this period, an additional 2,100,000
shares of Yukos were held by Claimant from 8 July 2002 to 9 January 2004.'° The
record also shows that Claimant has owned Yukos shares continuously since that period,
and thus on all dates relevant to this arbitration.' In addition, the record establishes that
the shares were legally acquired and paid for from late 1999 onwards, as evidenced by

documents in the record.'!°

Finally, the Tribunal cannot accept Respondent’s argument that an “Investment,” to
qualify under the ECT, requires an injection of foreign capital. Indeed, as already
explained above, the definition of investment in Article 1(6) of the ECT does not include
any additional requirement with regard to the origin of capital or the necessity of an
injection of foreign capital. Specifically, paragraph 3 of the ECT Understandings,
relating to Article 1(6) of the ECT, is of no assistance to Respondent, as it refers to the

“control” facet of Article 1(6), not “ownership.” The Tribunal refers, again, to the

‘7 Annexes C-1207, C-1162 and C-1163.

108 Annexes C-1208, C-1185 and C-1186.

'® Annexes C-1206 to C-1209; and Annexes C-1211 to C-1212.

"° See Annexes C-1162 to C-1203 and C-1205.

-157-

reasoning of the tribunal in the Saluka Award: “the predominant factor which must guide
the Tribunal’s exercise of its functions is the terms in which the parties to the Treaty now
in question have agreed to establish the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.” The Tribunal cannot in
effect impose upon the parties a definition of “Investment” other than that which the

parties to the ECT, including Respondent, have agreed.

433. Respondent in its written pleadings argued that the ECT is a treaty whose purpose is to
promote foreign investment in the energy sector. The Introduction to the ECT prepared
by the Energy Charter Secretariat provides, under the heading, “Investment,” that “[t]he
Treaty ensures the protection of foreign energy investments .. . By accepting the Treaty,
a state takes on the obligation to extend national treatment, or most-favoured nation
treatment (whichever is more favourable), to nationals and legal entities of other

Signatory states who have invested in its energy sector.”!!!

Various provisions of the
Treaty, such as those of Article 9, which speak of investments in the areas of other
Contracting Parties, particularly those with economies in transition, and Article 10, which
speaks of each Contracting Party encouraging “Investors of other Contracting Parties to

make Investments in its Area,” show that the Treaty was written in contemplation of
international investment, notably of investment by investors of developed States in
economies in transition. It was not written in contemplation of investments by Russian
nationals resident in Russia of capital generated in Russia. (At the same time, as the

"2 Claimant has referred to statements of President Putin

Tribunal has just pointed out,
welcoming the repatriation of capital controlled by Russians which has been placed

abroad.)

434. As the Tribunal noted earlier, these conflicting contentions of the Parties go to the heart
of the present dispute. The Tribunal accepts that the ECT is directed towards the
promotion of foreign investment, especially of investment by Western sources in the

energy resources of the Russian Federation and other successor States of the USSR. The

"! Energy Charter Secretariat, The Energy Charter Treaty and Related Documents: A Legal Framework for
International Energy Cooperation (2004), p. 14.

"? See supra, para. 428.

- 158 -

435.

113

Treaty is meant, as specified in the Secretariat’s Introduction, to ensure “the protection of
foreign energy investments.” If the States that took part in the drafting of the ECT had
been asked in the course of that process whether the ECT was designed to protect—and
should be interpreted and applied to protect—investments in a Contracting State by
nationals of that same Contracting State whose capital derived from the energy resources
of that State, it may well be that the answer would have been in the negative, not only
from the representatives of the Russian Federation but from the generality of the
delegates. The ultimate source of the investments at issue in the instant cases may be
Russian. The fortunes of the “oligarchs’”—a term constantly employed in the pleadings
of Respondent which the Tribunal for its part repeats without pejorative intent—may

derive from investments by Russians in Russian resources.

But, as the Tribunal noted earlier,!'*

the Tribunal is bound to interpret the terms of the
ECT not as they might have been written so as exclusively to apply to foreign investment
but as they were actually written. They are more comprehensively and neutrally cast.
Specifically, Article 1(6) provides that, “‘Investment’ means every kind of asset, owned
or controlled directly or indirectly by an Investor....” Article 1(7) provides that

“Investor” means:
(a) with respect to a Contracting Party:
L..J

(ii) a company or other organization organized in accordance with
the law applicable in that Contracting Party;
Claimant is organized “in accordance with the law applicable” in the Isle of Man and
owns shares of Yukos. Thus, Claimant owns an “Investment” protected by the ECT and
the Tribunal so finds. The Tribunal is not entitled, by the terms of the ECT, to find

otherwise.''

See supra, para. 413.

"4 The Tribunal also notes that the Secretariat’s Introduction to the Treaty was “included for convenience and must
not be read as part of any official document or as an interpretation of any provisions therein.” Energy Charter

- 159 -

436.

437.

438.

The Tribunal is well aware of Respondent’s argument that Claimant in this arbitration has
“unclean hands” and that Claimant’s corporate personality should be disregarded because
it is an instrumentality of a “criminal enterprise.” The Tribunal recalls that it addressed
these issues in its Procedural Orders Nos. 2 and 3 on 8 September and 31 October 2006.
Specifically, the Tribunal then decided to defer consideration of Respondent’s arguments
concerning the “unclean hands” of Claimant or Claimant being an instrumentality of a
“criminal enterprise” to any merits phase of this arbitration. Accordingly, by finding, as
it does, that Claimant qualifies as an Investor owning or controlling an Investment for the
purposes of Articles 1(7) and (6) of the ECT, the Tribunal does not dispose of the issues
argued by Respondent concerning the “unclean hands” of Claimant and Claimant being
an instrumentality of a “criminal enterprise,” which it will address during any merits

phase of this arbitration.

C. ARE THE CLAIMS BARRED BY THE “DENIAL-OF-BENEFITS” PROVISION
(ARTICLE 17) OF THE ECT?

1. Introduction

Having concluded, in the previous chapter, that Claimant is a protected Investor with an
Investment under the ECT, the Tribunal now turns to Respondent’s argument that the
benefits of Part III of the Treaty have been denied to Claimant by operation of Article 17
of the ECT.

Part III of the ECT comprises the Treaty’s substantive articles on “Investment Promotion
and Protection.” Most notably they prescribe, in Article 10, the standards of treatment,
“the conditions,” that each Contracting Party shall accord to “Investors of Other
Contracting Parties to make Investments in its Area.” “Such conditions shall include a
commitment to accord at all times to Investments of Investors of other Contracting
Parties fair and equitable treatment . . . constant protection and security... ,” managerial
control and observance of “any obligations” a Contracting Party has entered into with an

Investor as well other treatment no less favorable than that required by international law.

 

Secretariat, The Energy Charter Treaty and Related Documents: A Legal Framework for International Energy
Cooperation (2004), p. 11 (para. 2 of “Explanatory Note”).

- 160 -

439.

440.

441.

442.

Article 13 provides that Investments shall not be nationalized or expropriated except

under prescribed conditions.

Article 17 of the ECT, the final article of Part III, provides for “Non-Application of Part
Il in Certain Circumstances.” It specifies that:

Each Contracting Party reserves the right to deny the advantages of
this Part to:

(1) a legal entity if citizens or nationals of a third state own or
control such entity and if that entity has no substantial business
activities in the Area of the Contracting Party in which it is
organized. . .

The foregoing “denial-of-benefits” clause has been a focus of conflicting arguments of

the Parties. The Tribunal summarizes and evaluates those arguments in the sections that

follow.

However, insofar as those arguments are deemed to address the question of whether the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to pass upon the merits of the claims of Claimant, they are not
on point. That is because Article 17 specifies—as does the title of that Article—that it
concerns denial of the advantages of “this Part,” i.e., Part III of the ECT. Provision for
dispute settlement under the ECT is not found in “this Part” but in Part V of the Treaty.
Whether or not Claimant is entitled to the advantages of Part III is a question not of
jurisdiction but of the merits. Since Article 17 relates not to the ECT as a whole, or to
Part V, but exclusively to Part III, its interpretation for that reason cannot determine

whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction to entertain the claims of Claimant.
The holding of the tribunal in Plama v. Bulgaria is on point:

Article 26 provides a procedural remedy for a covered investor’s
claims; and it is not physically or juridically part of the ECT’s
substantive advantages enjoyed by that investor under Part III. [. . .]
This limited exclusion from Part III for a covered investor,
dependent on certain specific criteria, requires a procedure to resolve
a dispute as to whether that exclusion applies in any particular case;
and the object and purpose of the ECT, in the Tribunal’s view,

- 161 -

clearly requires Article 26 to be unaffected by the operation of
Article 17(1)."*

443. This Tribunal finds the reasoning of the Plama tribunal on this point convincing and
adopts it. At the same time, the Tribunal takes note of the fact that the Parties have
treated the application of Article 17 as a question of admissibility, not jurisdiction,!'° on
which they differ. Accordingly, the Tribunal will pass upon the arguments of the Parties
and determine the issue of the application of Article 17 definitively in this phase of the

arbitration.

444. First, in Section 2, the Tribunal addresses the general issue of whether there is a
notification requirement in Article 17 and whether Respondent satisfied any such
requirement. Then, in Section 3, the Tribunal considers whether the substantive

conditions for the application of Article 17(1) have been met.

2. Notification Requirement

a) Parties’ Submissions

445. Respondent maintains in this phase of the arbitration that, even if it has any obligations
towards Claimant under the ECT (which Respondent contests) it is entitled to deny the
advantages of them to Claimant by reason of Article 17(1), and that it has done so.
Respondent recalls that the terms of Article 17 derive from the “denial-of-benefits”
clauses of bilateral investment treaties of the United States of America. While some but
not all of these clauses require prior consultation and notification before invocation, as
does NAFTA, Respondent notes that:

[N]o such notification and consultation requirement or other formal
requirements are included in Article 17 of the Treaty. Thus, a company

that is owned or controlled by nationals of a third State, and a fortiori by
nationals of the host State, does not enjoy any benefits under Part III of

"5 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jurisdiction of
8 February 2005, (2005) 20:1 ICSID Review 262, para. 148.

"6 See First Memorial, Section III.C; Counter-Memorial, Section VII.C; Second Memorial, Section XIV; Rejoinder,
Section IV.B.

- 162 -

446.

447.

448.

the Treaty if it lacks substantial business activities in the Contracting
Party in which it is organized.''”

In order to benefit from Treaty protections, Respondent contends, a company that comes
within the scope of Article 17 must obtain a commitment from the host State that it will
be treated as a protected investor. No such commitments have been obtained. On the
contrary, Russia has, contemporaneously with negotiation of the ECT, ratified and
proclaimed the P&C Agreement, which stipulates that companies having only a
registered office in a State Party are not considered companies of that State unless “its
operations possess a real and continuous link” with the latter’s economy. The Russian
Federation was not and is not in a position to know when, if ever, an investment is to be
made within its territory or if a controlling investor even exists outside Russia, says
Respondent, adding: “This is patently so where as here the controlling Russian oligarchs
have employed dozens if not hundreds of offshore tax haven companies and ever shifting
structures specifically designed to disguise ownership and control, evade taxes and

launder money.” 1s

Respondent concludes: “For all the above reasons, Article 17(1) of the Treaty denies, the
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement has denied, and the Russian Federation hereby
denies any and all benefits of Part III of the Treaty to the Russian oligarchs themselves,

and to each and every one of their offshore shell companies and structures.” 9

Claimant replies that Article 17 specifies that each Contracting Party “reserves the right
to deny the advantages” of Part III. Thus the “right to deny” must be exercised “but until
such time as this right has been effectively exercised,” the investor benefits from the
protection of Part III of the Treaty. Claimant disputes the reliance of the Russian
Federation on the P&C Agreement, “a wholly irrelevant instrument in this arbitration.”!”°

It maintains that the purported denial of benefits by the Russian Federation quoted in the

"7 First Memorial, para. 121.

18 pid, at para. 125.

"° Ibid. at para. 126.

2° Counter-Memorial, para. 278.

- 163 -

foregoing paragraph—which is defective, Claimant says, because it does not expressly
identify the particular Claimant companies (but refers just to “Russian oligarchs” and
“offshore shell companies”)—rather demonstrates Respondent’s recognition that
Article 17 requires an exercise of the reserved right. The reason for that exercise is to
ensure legal certainty for investors in the ECT area. It quotes the Expert Opinion of

Professor James Crawford:

To place on an individual investor the task of obtaining express
assurance as to the extension of advantages would change the ECT from
a general framework for investment in the energy sector to an invitation
to establish, case-by-case, bilateral relations between investors and the
host State. This was plainly not the intention.'*!

449. Claimant relies also on the jurisdictional holding of the arbitral tribunal in the case of

Plama v. Bulgaria:

In the Tribunal’s view, the existence of a “right” is distinct from the
exercise of that right. [. . .] [A] Contracting Party has a right under
Article 17(1) ECT to deny a covered investor the advantages of Part III;
but it is not required to exercise that right; and it may never do so. The
language of Article 17(1) is unambiguous; and that meaning is consistent
with the different state practices of the ECT’s Contracting States under
different bilateral investment treaties: certain of them applying a
generous approach to legal entities incorporated in a state with no
significant business presence there (such as the Netherlands) and certain
others applying a more restrictive approach (such as the USA). The ECT
is a multilateral treaty with Article 17(1) drafted in permissive terms, not
surprisingly, in order to accommodate these different state

practices. . . .'”°

450. Moreover:

[A] putative covered investor has legitimate expectations of such
advantages until that right’s exercise. A putative investor therefore
requires reasonable notice before making any investment in the host state
whether or not that host state has exercised its right under Article 17(1)
ECT. [. . .] [T]he object and purpose of the ECT suggest that the right’s
exercise should not have retrospective effect.'”*

"21 Jpid. at para, 28 1 (citing para. 118 of the Expert Opinion).
2 Ibid. at para. 282 (citing para. 155 of the Plama decision).

25 pid. at para. 283 (citing paras. 161-162 of the Plama decision).

- 164 -

451. Respondent counters that the ECT and P&C Agreement, contrary to Claimant’s
contentions, are not independent of each other, but cover much of the same ground. The
P&C Agreement, upon its ratification, was published in the Russian Federation’s Official
Gazette and the official gazettes of the EU Member States. Investors must be deemed to
be on notice of it, argues Respondent. In Article 30(h), the P&C Agreement denies
benefits to companies incorporated in an EU Member State that do not have their
principal place of business or central administration in such State and whose operations
do not “possess a real and continuous link with the economy” of one of the EU Member

States.

452. Respondent also maintains that the Plama case is “weak authority with respect to its

treatment of denial of benefits clauses” and “is suspect in its reasoning.”!™4 It argues that:

The Plama standard, if accepted, would also impose an impossible
standard for States, particularly for States in transition to a free market
economy. The Plama standard converts something that the investor
knows with certainty, whether it has substantial business in the State of
incorporation and whether it is owned or controlled by third or host State
nationals, into a burden to make such a determination with respect to a
potential investor that a host State cannot know or determine.'”*

453. Respondent concludes:

At bottom, this is a domestic dispute involving enforcement of Russian
taxes. [. . .] Accepting the Russian Federation’s interpretation of
Article 17(1) and of the interrelationship between Article 17(1) and
Article 30(h) of the EU-Russia Partnership Agreement would constitute a
principled basis, supported by the language of the two treaties, for
distinguishing essentially domestic disputes from disputes involving
genuine investors of Contracting Parties into the Russian Federation.'”°

454. Claimant contends that the reserved right to deny under Article 17(1) must be exercised.
Article 17(1) could have been otherwise drafted, as is Article VI of the ASEAN
Framework Agreement on Services, to state that the advantages of Part III “shall be

denied” to “a juridical person owned or controlled by persons of a non-Member State

124 Second Memorial, paras. 340, 342.
125 Thid. at para. 343.

126 Thid. at para. 344.

- 165 -

455.

456.

457.

constituted under the laws of a Member State, but not engaged in substantive business
operations in the territory of Member States.” But the drafters of the ECT, submits
Claimant, deliberately chose to provide for a reserved, optional right in Article 17(1), a
right that must be exercised to take effect, and only prospectively. Russia’s reliance on
the P&C Agreement is unavailing, argues Claimant, because it defines a “Community
company” or a “Russian company” for the purpose of that Agreement itself (“for the
purpose of this Agreement”); the ECT makes no reference to that Agreement while it

does refer to other “related instruments.”

Finally, at the stage of oral argument, the above contentions were canvassed anew by

both Parties.

b) Tribunal’s Decision

In the view of the Tribunal, the position of Claimant on the interpretation and application
of Article 17(1) to the instant case is more persuasive than that of Respondent.
Article 17(1) does not deny simpliciter the advantages of Part III of the ECT—as it easily
could have been worded to do—to a legal entity if the citizens or nationals of a third State
own or control such entity and if that entity has no substantial business in the Contracting
Party in which it is organized. It rather “reserves the right” of each Contracting Party to
deny the advantages of that Part to such an entity. This imports that, to effect denial, the
Contracting Party must exercise the right. Has the Russian Federation done so, either by
concluding the P&C Agreement with the EU or by the passage in its pleading quoted at

the end of paragraph 447 above? Not in the Tribunal’s view.

The P&C Agreement makes no reference to the ECT and the ECT makes no reference to
it. They cover some common ground, and the P&C Agreement does require that
benefiting companies have their principal place of business in and possess a real and
continuous link with the economy of an EU State. But the lack of any reference to the
ECT in the P&C Agreement and the lack of any reference to the P&C Agreement in the
ECT defeats reliance upon Article 30(h) of the P&C Agreement as constituting the
required exercise of a right under Article 17(1) of the ECT.

- 166 -

458.

459.

460.

In any event, if the passage in Respondent’s First Memorial quoted above in
paragraph 447 is construed as an exercise of the reserved right of denial, it can only be
prospective in effect from the date of that Memorial. To treat denial as retrospective
would, in the light of the ECT’s “Purpose,” as set out in Article 2 of the Treaty (“The
Treaty establishes a legal framework in order to promote long-term cooperation in the
energy field...”) be incompatible “with the objectives and principles of the Charter.”
Paramount among those objectives and principles is “Promotion, Protection and
Treatment of Investments” as specified by the terms of Article 10 of the Treaty.
Retrospective application of a denial of rights would be inconsistent with such promotion

and protection and constitute treatment at odds with those terms.

In sum, the Tribunal finds, on the basis of the evidence before it, that Respondent has not
denied and cannot now be heard to deny, and will not be able to deny to Claimant in any
merits phase of these proceedings, the advantages and the benefits of Part III of the ECT

on the basis of Article 17.

3. Substantive Conditions

It is convenient here to revisit the text of Article 17(1), which specifies that:

Each Contracting Party reserves the right to deny the advantages of
this Part to:

(1) a legal entity if citizens or nationals of a third state own or
control such entity and if that entity has no substantial business
activities in the Area of the Contracting Party in which it is
organized [. . .]

[emphasis added]

It is apparent from the wording of Article 17(1) that two additional cumulative
substantive conditions must be met before the “denial-of-benefits” clause can be
exercised in respect of any particular legal entity. First, such legal entity must be owned
or controlled by citizens or nationals of a third State; second, the legal entity must have

no substantial business activities in the place in which it is organized.

- 167 -

461. In view of the Tribunal’s conclusion, explained in the previous section, that Respondent
cannot invoke Article 17(1) due to its failure to give notice to Claimant that it was doing
so, there is no need, in principle, to address Respondent’s submissions that these
substantive conditions for the application of Article 17(1) have been satisfied. However,
since the Tribunal was briefed extensively on the issues of ownership and control, and on
the issue of whether Russia is a “third state” for purposes of Article 17(1), the Tribunal
has decided to set out its analysis and conclusions in respect of these issues. The
Tribunal also addresses in this section Respondent’s alternative contention that Claimant
is owned and/or controlled by Israeli nationals, it being undisputed that Israel is a “third
state” for purposes of Article 17(1). Since Claimant has conceded that it conducts no
substantial business activities in the Isle of Man, the Tribunal does not need to address

that issue.

a) Ownership and Control of Claimant

(i) Factual Background
(1) Claimant and its Affiliates

462. The organizational chart in the Appendix to this Interim Award illustrates the ownership

structure of Claimant and its affiliates.'”
463. The following facts, illustrated in the chart in the Appendix, were not contested:

¢ Claimant owns 50,340,995 shares (or 2.25 percent) of Yukos, and is itself wholly-
owned by GML.

e¢ GML was incorporated in September 1997, and was originally named Flaymon
Limited (it changed its name to Group Menatep Limited in December 1997, and
then to GML Limited in November 2005). GML is a company registered in
Gibraltar, whose principal business is to conduct investing activities through

various wholly-owned subsidiaries.

"7 Appendix: Yukos Holding Structure after 20 October 2003 (based on charts submitted by both Parties in
November 2008 as demonstrative exhibits for the Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility).

- 168 -

e The shares of GML are held by the following seven trusts created in Guernsey in
2003 and 2005 (the “Guernsey Trusts’), in stakes ranging from 7.3 percent to
52.3 percent:

o The Auriga Trust established on 20 October 2003 by Mr. Mikhail Brudno,
the former President of the Yukos Refining and Marketing Division.
Mr. Brudno and his family are named Beneficiaries.'"* The Auriga Trust

holds 7.3 percent of GML.

o The Draco Trust, established on 20 October 2003 by Mr. Vladimir Dubov.
Mr. Dubov and his family are named Beneficiaries. The Draco Trust

holds 7.3 percent of GML.

o The Mensa Trust, established on 20 October 2003 by Mr. Platon Lebedev,
a director of Yukos Universal Ltd. Mr. Lebedev and his family are named

Beneficiaries. The Mensa Trust holds 7.3 percent of GML.

o The Tucana Trust, established on 20 October 2003 by Mr. Vasily
Shakhnovksy, the former President of Yukos Moscow. Mr. Shakhnovsky
and his family are named Beneficiaries. The Tucana Trust holds 7.3

percent of GML.

o The Pictor Trust, established on 20 October 2003 by Mr. Leonid Nevzlin.
Mr. Nevzlin and his family are named Beneficiaries. The Pictor Trust

holds 8.6 percent of GML.

o. The Southern Cross Trust, established on 26 March 2005. Its Settlor was
the Pavo Trust (itself established on 20 October 2003). The original
beneficiaries were Mr. Khodorkovsky, Mr. Nevzlin and Mr. Nevzlin’s

issue born before expiry of the trust period. Mr. Khodorkovsky was

'28 Capitalized terms used herein, unless otherwise clear from the context, are defined in the respective constitutive
documents of the Trusts (known as “Settlements” or, in the case of the Southern Cross Trust, the “Declaration of
Discretionary Trust”).

- 169 -

removed as a beneficiary on 3 October 2005. The Southern Cross Trust

holds 9.9 percent of GML.

o The Palmus Trust, established on 5 March 2003. Its Settlor was the
Palmus Foundation of Lichtenstein. | Mr. Khodorkovsky, Deputy
Chairman of Yukos until 2003, was a Beneficiary until 26 April 2005.
The Palmus Trust holds 52.3 percent of GML, and thus the majority stake
in GML.

464. The main issue before the Tribunal in the present section of its Interim Award is whether
this ownership structure leads to the conclusion that citizens or nationals of a “third state”
(i.e., the Settlors/Beneficiaries of the Guernsey Trusts) own or control Claimant. Before
summarizing the Parties’ submissions, a more detailed review of the Guernsey Trusts is
required. This review will make it easier for the Tribunal to then consider the Parties’

submissions, carry out its analysis and draw its conclusions.

(2) The Guernsey Trusts

465. The Auriga Trust, the Draco Trust, the Mensa Trust, the Tucana Trust, and the Pictor
Trust were all constituted on 20 October 2003. They share identical structures and key
features (the “Auriga-type Trusts”). These are distinct from the Southern Cross Trust (a
later-established trust whose assets were appointed out of the Pavo Trust, a trust
originally settled by Mr. Khodorkovsky at the same time as the Auriga-type Trusts)!”

and the Palmus Trust (an earlier-established trust with the majority stake of GML shares).

The Tribunal will now review each “type” of trust in turn.

(a) Auriga-type Trusts

466. The key common features of the Auriga-type Trusts, other than the common date of

settlement, are as follows:

°° No constitutive documents for the Pavo Trust were disclosed, but certain information about the Pavo Trust was
available from documents relating to the Southern Cross Trust.

- 170-

¢ The Trustee is Rysaffe Trustee Company (C.I.) Limited (“Rysaffe”), which is a
fiduciary services trust company in Guernsey (Channel Islands) licensed by the

Guernsey Financial Services Commission.

e The Trustees, in each case, designated a nominee in the British Virgin Islands
(‘BVI’) to be the registered owner of the GML shares in the Trust Fund. The
nominees are, respectively, Auriga Nominees Limited (BVI), Draco Nominees
Limited (BVI), Mensa Nominees Limited (BVI), Pictor Nominees Limited (BVI)

and Tucana Nominees Limited (BVI).
e Each trust was settled by an individual shareholder of GML.'*?

e In each case, the Beneficiaries are defined in the Third Schedule of the Settlement
and include the Settlor and ten other persons, understood to be members of the
Settlor’s family, with the International Committee of the Red Cross (the “Red

Cross”) being named as a residual beneficiary.

e Initially, $1,000 was settled into each Trust, and each Trust expressly

contemplated the further settlement of GML securities into trust.

e In each case, GML shares on which GML itself has a call option were
131

subsequently settled into trust.
e Each trust is constituted as a discretionary trust, but a Protector is required to
consent to important decisions (see next paragraph) and nominate any additional

Beneficiaries.

8° Mr. Brudno in respect of the Auriga Trust; Mr. Dubov in respect of the Draco Trust; Mr. Lebedev in respect of the
Mensa Trust; Mr. Nevzlin in respect of the Pictor Trust; Vasily Shakhnovsky in respect of the Tucana Trust.

 

‘Bach of Messrs. Brudno, Dubov, Lebedev and Shakhnovsky settled 348,101 shares of GML into trust;
Mr. Nevzlin settled 411,393 shares of GML into trust. Each of these individuals, on 24 May 2003, had granted
GML a call option in respect of their respective shareholdings. On 20 October 2003 (i.e., contemporaneously with
the settlement of the Auriga-type Trusts), the call option deeds were novated so that the Trustees and their
nominee companies stepped into the shoes of the individual shareholders. GML consented to the transfer of the
shareholdings to the nominee companies. The call options, which are expressly unconditional, irrevocable and
continue to be capable of being exercised until the dissolution of GML, are expressly governed by English law.

-171-

467.

e  Ineach case, the Settlor is appointed First Protector.

e The First Protector, i.e., the Settlor, is empowered to appoint two Panels, known
as the First Panel and the Second Panel, as well as a Confirmator. The First Panel
is empowered to appoint a new Protector when the existing Protector dies, wishes
to retire or becomes “incapacitated.” The Confirmator is called upon to certify
that the Protector understands the nature of documents he may execute and that he
is acting free from undue influence and not under duress. The Second Panel is
empowered to appoint a new Confirmator in case of death or retirement of the
Confirmator or when the Trustee determines that the Confirmator refuses or is

unable to act.

e In each case, the First Protector nominated GML to be the First and Second

Panels and no further nominations have been made to these positions.

e In each case, the Protector has power to release or, to any extent, restrict the

future exercise of any powers vested in a Protector.

The respective Settlements state that the Trustees have “absolute and uncontrolled”
powers and discretions, subject to exercising them in the “most expedient [way] for the
benefit of all or any of the beneficiaries” (Clause 11). At the same time, prior or
simultaneous Protector consent is required for the exercise of the following powers

(Clause 20 and Seventh Schedule of the Settlement, in each case):

e the power to appoint an expiry date for the Trust (in default of appointment, the

perpetuity period is 100 years);

¢ the overriding power to reappoint the trust assets on new trusts for the benefit of

all or any one or more of the Beneficiaries (Clause 5);

e the power to exclude a Beneficiary from the Beneficiary class (Clause 7);

e the power to add additional beneficiaries (Clause 8), nominations for same being

made by the Protector and certified by the Confirmator;

-172-

e the power to change the proper law of the Settlement (Clause 9);

e¢ the power to delegate the powers or discretions imposed on or given to the

Trustees (Clause 12);

e the power to restrict or release the future exercise of powers by the Trustees

(Clause 13);

e the power to amend the administrative provisions of the Settlement (Clause 24);

and

e the power to deal in or dispose of GML securities (save by way of transfer to
nominees for the Trustee or in response to the exercise by GML of its call option

over the shares transferred into trust).

468. Clause 14 sets out the circumstances under which new and/or additional Trustees may be
appointed, and how Trustees can be removed. By Clause 14 and the Fourth Schedule of
the Settlement, the following have the power to appoint new or additional Trustees (in

descending order of priority):
e the Protector;
e the surviving or continuing Trustees;
¢ the Trustee or Trustees desiring to be discharged;
e the Liquidator or personal representative of the last surviving trustee; and

e the Royal Court of Guernsey (or court of the relevant forum, if it has changed in

accordance with Clause 9).

469. Articles 4 and 5 of the First Schedule, in each case, contain what are commonly known in

trust-law terms as Anti-Bartlett provisions! These provide that:

'32 Tt is the Trustees’ duty where they hold controlling shareholding in a private company to ensure that they have a
sufficiently detailed flow of information concerning the running of the company’s affairs to be able to intervene in

- 173 -

e the Trustee is not bound to interfere in the business of any company in which the

trust is interested; and
e the Trustee is not bound to obtain information regarding any such company.

(b) Southern Cross Trust

470. The structure of the Southern Cross Trust is as follows:

e¢ The Declaration of Discretionary Trust is dated 26 April 2005 (the “Southern

Cross Declaration”).
¢ The Trustee is Rysaffe.'*?
e The initial trust fund was $1,000,000.

e The original Beneficiaries were Mr. Khodorkovsky, Mr. Nevzlin and

Mr. Nevzlin’s issue born before expiry of the trust period.

¢ The trust period is to run until 16 October 2103 or such earlier date as the Trustee

may designate by deed.

¢ The power to appoint new or additional Trustees is vested in the following (in
order of priority): (a) the surviving or continuing Trustees; (b) the Trustee or
Trustees desiring to be discharged; (c) the liquidator or personal representative of
the last surviving Trustee; and (d) the Royal Court of Guernsey (or court of the
relevant forum, if the clause permitting a change in the proper law of the trust has

been operated).

471. By deed dated 26 April 2005 (i.e., on the same day the Southern Cross Trust was
constituted), 474,685 shares in GML (with unpaid dividends thereon), on which GML.

 

its activities if and when considered appropriate. The leading case is Bartlett v. Barclays Bank Ltd. (No. 1) [1980]
Ch. 515, pp. 533-534: hence the reference to the Anti-Bartlett provisions, being provisions modifying the general
law requirements of the Bartlett case.
53 Rysaffe designated Southern Cross Nominees Limited (BVI), a company in the British Virgin Islands, to be the
registered owner of the GML shares in the Trust Fund.

-174-

had a call option, were appointed out of the Pavo Trust'™ and into the Southern Cross

Trust.
472. Mr. Khodorkovsky was removed as a Beneficiary on 3 October 2005.
473. The Southern Cross Trust differs from the Auriga-type Trusts in that:
e there is no Protector;
e there is no Confirmator; and

e the Southern Cross Declaration does not expressly contemplate the future transfer
of GML securities into trust, and thus there are no specific prohibitions or

restrictions on dealing with such securities.

474. On the other hand, the Southern Cross Declaration has Anti-Bartlett provisions identical
to those found in the Auriga-type Trusts. That is to say, the Trustee is not bound to
interfere in the business of any companies in which the Trust invests; nor is it bound to

obtain information relating to such business.

(c) Palmus Trust

475. The original structure and key features of the Palmus Trust are as follows:
e It was created by a Settlement on 5 March 2003 (the “Palmus Settlement’).
¢ The Settlor was the Palmus Foundation of Liechtenstein.

¢ The Trustee is Palmus Trust Company Limited (a Guernsey company).!*>

‘4! The Pavo Trust had been established at the same time as the Auriga-type Trusts (i.., on 20 October 2003) and,
indeed, appears to have been similar if not identical in structure to the Auriga-type Trusts. The settlor of the Pavo
Trust was Mr. Khodorkovsky, and the GML shares that had been settled into the Pavo Trust had originally been
owned by Mr. Khodorkovsky. As was the case with all of the Auriga-type Trusts, prior to the settlement of the
Pavo Trust, GML had been granted an option to purchase these shares by deed dated 24 May 2003; the Call
Option Deed was subsequently novated on 20 October 2003 (to recognize the transfer of the obligations from
Mr. Khodorkovsky to Pavo Trust) and again on 30 September 2005 (to recognize the transfer of the obligations
from the Pavo Trust to the Southern Cross Trust).

85 By contrast to the other Guernsey Trusts, the Palmus Trustees did not designate a nominee.

- 175 -

¢ The trust is for the First Beneficiary (Mr. Khodorkovsky) during the Initial Period
(which was to expire upon death or incapacity of the First Beneficiary, if earlier

than the expiry date of the trust).

e The perpetuity period is 100 years, subject to the Trustee’s power to appoint an

earlier date by deed.

¢ Subject to the trusts in favour of the First Beneficiary, trust assets are to be held
during the trust period for such members of the class of beneficiaries (other than

the First Beneficiary) as the First Beneficiary might appoint (Clause 4.2).

© Upon expiry of the trust, its assets are to be held on trust for the First Beneficiary

if still living (Clause 4.4).
e The residual beneficiary is the Red Cross.

© Initially, $10,000 was settled into the trust, and the trust expressly contemplated
the further settlement of GML securities (Schedule 8(ix)).

2,499,999 shares of GML (unencumbered by any call options) were settled into
the trust by the Palmus Foundation on 8 March 2003.'%°

¢ The trust is constituted as a discretionary trust but, as in the case of Auriga-type
Trusts, Protector consent is required for the exercise of certain powers by the
Trustees and the nomination of additional Beneficiaries has to be done by the

Protector.
e¢ Mr. Khodorkovsky was appointed First Protector.

¢ The First Protector nominates the Panel, whose function is to appoint successor

Protectors.

'3° By contrast to the GML shares settled into the Auriga-type Trusts, the GML shares settled into the Palmus Trust
were not subject to any call option granted to GML.

- 176 -

476.

477.

478.

479.

e Successor Protectors may be appointed only where the existing Protector dies,
wishes to retire or becomes “incapacitated.” “Incapacitated” is a defined term, as
for the Auriga-type Trusts, and the consequences of a return to capacity are the

same.

¢ The First Protector nominates the Confirmator, whose function and powers are the
same as in the Auriga-type Trusts, save that in the case of the Palmus Trust it is

the retiring Confirmator who appoints a successor (there is no Second Panel).

e A BVI company was appointed Confirmator on 3 April 2003; it appointed another

BVI company successor when it retired, on 26 August 2004.

¢ The Protector has the same power as in the Auriga-type Trusts to release or to

restrict the future exercise of any powers vested in a Protector.

The extent of required Protector consent under the Palmus Trust is similar to that existing

under the Auriga-type Trusts, except that:

e in the case of the Palmus Trust, the Trustee is specifically prohibited from
“selling” GML securities without the consent of the Protector (the terms of the

Auriga-type Trusts prohibit dealing in general in such shares); and

¢ there is no exception to this prohibition.

The power to appoint new or additional Trustees under the Palmus Trust is exactly the

same as it is under the Auriga-type Trusts.

The Palmus Trust has Anti-Bartlett provisions identical to those found in the Auriga-type

Trusts.

On 3 April 2003 the First Beneficiary (i.e., Mr. Khodorkovsky) exercised his power of
appointment arising under Clause 4.2 of the Palmus Declaration to appoint a Secondary
Beneficiary, who will have an interest in possession in the trust fund during the

Secondary Period. The Secondary Period runs from the expiry of the Initial Period until:

e death or incapacity of the Secondary Beneficiary;

-177-

480.

481.

482.

483.

¢ return to capacity of the First Beneficiary (in case of his incapacity); or

¢ expiry of the trust period.

The Secondary Beneficiary will be the first person in the following list who is living and

not “incapacitated” on expiry of the Initial Period:

¢ = Mikhail Brudno

e¢ Vladimir Dubov

e Alexey Golubovich

e Leonid Nevzlin

e  Platon Lebedev

e¢ Vasily Shakhnovsky

Upon expiry of the Secondary Period, the trust fund is to be held in trust for the First
Beneficiary (Mr. Khodorkovsky) if he is still living and not “incapacitated” as if the

Initial Period had recommenced.

By two deeds dated 26 April 2005, Mr. Khodorkovsky was removed as a beneficiary and
Mr. Nevzlin was substituted within the terms of the original settlement as First

Beneficiary.

(ii) Parties’ Submissions
(1) Ownership

Respondent submits that ownership of GML (and thus of GML’s wholly-owned
subsidiaries, including Claimant) has remained essentially unchanged over the period
1999 to the present. In particular, Respondent asserts that Mr. Khodorkovsky and/or
Mr. Lebedev have owned, either in person or through the Guernsey Trusts, 59.5 percent
of the shares of GML. In the broader context to which Respondent repeatedly refers, the

trustees of the Guernsey Trusts (or their nominees in the British Virgin Islands) are

- 178 -

nominal owners only, the economic interest of the ownership of GML having always

remained with the “Russian oligarchs.”

484. In its Second Memorial, Respondent impugns the structure of the Guernsey Trusts more
directly, referencing the First Opinion submitted by its expert, Mr. Martin Mann, QC.
Based on the opinion of Mr. Mann, Respondent asserts that the Trustees’ powers are so
circumscribed in the respective Settlements and Declaration, that the trusts were
“incompletely constituted and ineffective” and the Trustees never became “beneficial

owners” of the shares of GML settled into those trusts.

485. In response, Claimant asserts that its parent company, GML, has been owned since
20 October 2003 by the Guernsey Trusts.'57 More particularly, Claimant posits that
GML is owned as follows: 2,499,999 shares (52.3 percent) by Palmus Trust Company
Limited (Guernsey) as trustees of the Palmus Trust; 474,685 shares (9.9 percent) by
Southern Cross Nominees Limited (BVI) as nominee for Rysaffe as trustee of the
Southern Cross Trust; 411,393 shares (8.6 percent) by Pictor Nominees Limited (BVI) as
nominee on trust for Rysaffe as trustee of the Pictor Trust; 348,101 shares (7.3 percent)
by Mensa Nominees Limited (BVI) as nominee on trust for Rysaffe as trustee of the
Mensa Trust; 348,101 shares (7.3 percent) by Auriga Nominees Limited (BVI) as
nominee on trust for Rysaffe as trustee of the Auriga Trust; 348,101 shares (7.3 percent)
by Tucana Nominees Limited (BVI) as nominee on trust for Rysaffe as trustee of the
Tuncana Trust; and 348,101 shares (7.3 percent) by Draco Nominees Limited (BVI) as

nominee on trust for Rysaffe as trustee of the Draco Trust.

486. In support of its position, and in response to the first opinion of Mr. Mann, Claimant
relies on the expert opinion of Mr. Brian Green, QC. In his first opinion, Mr. Green
opines, based on a detailed review of the respective Settlements and of the Southern
Cross Declaration, that the Guernsey Trusts are “routine examples of offshore trusts.”

An analysis of the salient features of each trust demonstrates, he writes, a coherent set of

'57 This shareholding has since been modified only as to the transfer of the shareholding of Pavo Nominees Limited
(BVI) to Southern Cross Nominees Limited (BVI), and the sale of 221,519 shares representing 4.4 percent of the
share capital of GML by Carina Nominees Limited (BVI) to GML. Annex C-195.

- 179 -

trusts operating for the benefit of all or any of the beneficiaries for the duration of the
relevant trust period. He concludes that the trusts in question are real and valid, and that
the restrictions on sale or other disposition of the GML shares held in trust do not affect

the trustees’ ownership of those shares.

As to the issue of “beneficial ownership” within the trust structure, Mr. Green reasons as
follows (at paragraphs 24 and 25 of his First Opinion):

24. (1) Where there is no trust, legal and beneficial ownership tend to go
hand in hand.

(2) Where there is a trust, trustees hold the rights attaching to their
legal ownership of property on trust for their beneficiaries.
“Beneficial ownership” therefore tends to follow “equitable
ownership.”

¢

G

However, where the equitable interests under a trust are limited
to membership of a class of objects of discretionary powers (as
in the present case), so that members of the class are not
“equitable owners” of the trust property, such objects are not the
“beneficial owners” of the trust property either. Particularly so
where (as in the present case) the class of objects is open, there
being powers to add members to the discretionary class.

25.(1) The rights attaching to legal ownership of property will carry
with them the rights to the fruits of, and to the exercise of powers
relating to, the property in question. Thus, to take the example
of shares with which this case is concerned, it is the trustees who
would generally be entitled:

(a) to receive dividends and other distributions in respect of
the shares;
(b) to receive the proceeds of any sale or other disposition of

the shares (and thus to take the benefit of any capital
growth in their value in the meantime); and

(c) to exercise the voting rights attaching to such shares.
A company (e.g. GML) cannot refuse to account to the trustees
in respect of a dividend on the basis that the trustee will hold the
dividend for the benefit of the beneficiaries.

(2) These rights are indicia of what would be described as

“beneficial ownership” if the person holding such rights were not
a trustee.

- 180 -

488.

489.

490.

(3) Whilst the trustees are not as a matter of strict definition
“beneficial owners” (because they are trustees), nevertheless
their “ownership” carries with it the right to assert like
ownership rights to those which would be enjoyed by a
beneficial owner.

 

(4) In a case such as the present, the Trustees are the only persons
having the present right to assert such ownership rights as are
catalogued at paragraph 25(1)(a) to (c) above.

(2) Control

Since either ownership or control of Claimant could meet the requirements of this facet of
Article 17 of the ECT, the Parties and their respective experts also focused their
submissions on “control.” In respect of “control,” the Tribunal notes that, in his Second
Opinion, Mr. Mann states clearly that he was not contesting “the trite and the obvious,
ie., that the trusts are valid, by reference to the general law and the standard forms and
precedents.”!** Mr. Mann then posits that, in his view, the “relevant question” is “how

the trusts impact control over the GML shares.”
In relation to control of Claimant, Respondent stresses the following facts:
¢ Claimant has at all times been 100 percent owned by GML.
¢ Claimant’s Articles of Association require that all decisions be taken by GML.

© Until they were amended on 16 March 2007, GML’s Articles of Association
provided, at Article 42, that key decisions regarding any subsidiary, including
Claimant, could not be taken without the prior written consent of shareholders of
GML holding a majority of the issued shares carrying a right to vote at general

meetings.

Prior to the transfer of the GML shares into the Guernsey Trusts on 20 October 2003,
GML was directly owned by Mr. Khodorkovsky (9.5 percent), Mr. Nevzlin (8 percent),
Mr. Lebedev (7 percent), Mr.Doubov (7 percent), Mr. Brudno (7 percent),

88 Mr, Martin Mann, QC, Second Opinion re Auriga Type Trusts, the Palmus Trust, the Southern Cross Trust and the
Pavo Trust, 21 July 2008 (hereinafter “Mann, Second Opinion”), Section D, para. 1.3.

- 181 -

Mr. Shakhnovsky (7 percent) and by the Palmus Foundation, which GML described as a
“special structure” (50 percent). Respondent asserts that disclosures made on the GML
website (since removed) explained that Mr. Lebedev had the decisive vote in decisions of
GML (at the time known as Group Menatep) as regards voting the controlling block of
shares of Yukos held directly and indirectly by Yukos Universal Limited. Respondent
concludes that “[i]t is indisputable therefore that before the transfer of the GML Limited
shares into Guernsey trusts, the control of Claimant was vested with the Russian

oligarchs.” 40

491. Respondent argues that the transfer of the GML shares into trusts on 20 October 2003,
after the arrest of Mr. Lebedev by Russian authorities on 3 July 2003, demonstrates that
the trusts were used by the “Russian oligarchs” as a way to maintain control over their
GML shares through an opaque ownership structure in an effort to evade the Russian

authorities.

492. In his First Opinion, Mr. Mann concludes that the effect of the provisions in the
Settlements of the Auriga-type Trusts and the Palmus Trust giving the Protector control
over the exercise of certain of the Trustees’ powers and the power to appoint new or
additional trustees, is to render the Trustees’ roles within the trusts “wholly illusory.” On
the basis of this opinion, Respondent submits that the trustees exert no control over the
GML shares, and that the “Russian oligarchs” therefore continue to control Claimant
(through GML) just as they did before the Guernsey Trusts were inserted into the

ownership structure.

493. Claimant does not contest that GML was controlled by Mr. Lebedev and others, as
outlined on the Group Menatep website, prior to the transfer of the GML shares into the

Guernsey Trusts. Rather, relying on the expert opinions of Mr. Green, Claimant submits

8° This was disclosed, at the time, in a document explaining “decision-making process of Group Menatep,” namely a
note authored by Anton Drel and Andrei Dontsov, who were reportedly legal advisors of GML Limited. Group
Menatep Limited, Information for the Management of OAO NK ‘Yukos’ at 4 (2002) (Exhibit R-4).

'° Second Memorial, para. 265.

- 182 -

that within the legitimate trust structure established by Mr. Khodorkovsky, Mr. Lebedev

and other “oligarchs” control resided at all times with the Trustees.

494. As for Respondent’s submission with respect to the timing of the creation of the trusts,
Claimant answers that planning for the trusts was underway well before the events of July
2003. Respondent points to letters of reference of 6 December 2002 from UBS AG to
each of the future settlors of the Auriga-type Trusts.'“’ These letters state that each of the
future settlors had informed UBS prior to that date that he was “in the process of
establishing a trust on the Isle of Guernsey (Channel Islands).” Claimant also notes that
the other Guernsey Trust, the Palmus Trust, was created on 5 March 2003. Claimant
submits that the trusts were not created in pursuance of “treaty shopping” but for

legitimate considerations of wealth preservation.

495. In reply to Mr. Mann’s conclusions on the issue of control, Claimant relies on the expert
opinion of Mr. Green. In his First Opinion, Mr. Green defines his terms of reference with

respect to “control” as follows:

(2) (a) As regards “control,” I understand the question for me to be
“who within any given Trust controls the GML shares?” in the
context of the particular question before this Tribunal of “who
controls GML?”

(b) I understand, therefore, that “control” of the GML shares for
these purposes is concerned with “control” over those rights
attaching to the GML shares that allow “control” to be exercised
over GML.

496. Mr. Green then reaches the following conclusion:

166. In conclusion, recognising that the meaning of Article 17 of the
ECT is a matter of ECT law, I understand that the present enquiry as to
who “controls” the GML shares is concerned with “control” of the voting
(and other rights) attaching to the GML shares that allow “control” to be
exercised over GML.

167. On this basis, it is clear that it is the Trustees who have control
of the GML shares for present purposes, as they have both:

1 See Annex C-1242.

- 183 -

497.

498.

499.

dd) the power (free from any need to obtain Protector
consent); and

(2) the duty to properly consider whether or not
to vote (or otherwise exercise) the rights attaching to the GML shares.

In answer, Mr. Mann states that Mr. Green’s proposition does not answer the “control”
issue “very precisely.” In Mr. Mann’s opinion, the control issue is more accurately
defined by posing the following question:

Do the rights within any given trust give the trustee meaningful power

through its holding of GML shares over the way in which GML’s affairs
including its daily business are conducted?

In his reply, Mr. Green opines that the trustees do have “meaningful control” over the

voting rights attaching to the GML shares. “No other party does,” he says.

The experts deal with several specific issues of trust law in reaching their respective
conclusions. Some of the issues that were thoroughly and exhaustively debated in their

respective written opinions as well as during their oral evidence include:

¢ the proper construction of trust instruments, including what constitutes admissible

context for the interpretation of their provisions;

e the effect of the provisions in the respective Settlements granting significant
powers of consent (and therefore veto) to the Protector over the exercise by the
Trustees of some of their powers under the trust documents, and, in that context,
whether the Protector exercises its powers as a fiduciary or purely in its personal

interest;

e the nature and effect of the Anti-Bartlett provisions on the Trustees’ ability to

control the rights attaching to the GML shares;

e the effect of GML’s call options over the GML shares held in trust (except the

Palmus Trust) on the Trustees’ control over those shares; and

e the Saunders v. Vautier principle, according to which the beneficiaries of any

given trust (if ascertained and of full age and capacity) may all come together and

- 184 -

500.

501.

502.

terminate the trust, and the application of that principle to the trusts in the present

case.

(iii) Tribunal’s Decision
(1) Introduction: Establishing the Framework for
Analysis

As noted earlier, M42

the Tribunal’s decision concerning the notification requirement in
Article 17 renders the “ownership/control” issue moot for purposes of the admissibility
objection raised by Respondent on the basis of the denial-of-benefits provision. The
Tribunal considers that it is nevertheless its duty to set out its decision on
ownership/control of Claimant, not only because of the substantial effort and resources
the Parties expended in order to present the relevant facts, arguments and expert opinions
on this issue, but also because it recognizes that the Guernsey Trusts (and the
ownership/control structure more generally) may well feature in Respondent’s arguments

and allegations in any merits phase of this arbitration.'“?

Thus, the Tribunal will commence its analysis by recalling the framework that Mr. Mann
and Mr. Green each urged on the Tribunal for the determination of a key issue, the power

given to third parties over the exercise by the Trustees of their discretionary powers.

Mr. Mann presents his view of the appropriate framework in his Second Opinion. After
setting out various categories within which powers granted to third parties may fall
(fiduciary power, beneficial or personal power, either of such powers with more or less

constraints attached thereto), Mr. Mann writes as follows:

2.9 Powers given to third parties may fall within any one of these
categories and if they include a cluster of powers some may fall
within all or one or more of these categories. Into which category a
particular power falls depends upon the true construction of the
trust instrument.

122 See supra at para. 461.

143

See Respondent’s First Memorial, Factual Appendix, pp. 103-131.

- 185 -

2.10 Each case is therefore to be decided against the background of its
own circumstances and by reference to the particular terms of the
trust instrument. It is the intention of the settlor at the time of the
settlement which has to be discerned.

Nv

Ascertaining the true construction of a document is not simply a
matter of construing the meaning of words. It is a common sense
process which includes taking into account admissible contextual
background. The context or matrix which, in my opinion, I should
take into account in this case includes that these trusts formed part
of a_series of transactions designed to ensure that the original
owners would be able to retain total control over the shares
transferred into trust despite the existence of those trusts.

 

 

[emphasis added]

503. Tellingly, in the next paragraph of his opinion, Mr. Mann states that the evidence for
“this”—i.e., the evidence for the allegation that the trusts were part of a series of
transactions designed to ensure that the original owners retain control—is to be found in
the witness statement of Mr. Neil McLarnon, which was attached as Appendix 3 to

Mr. Mann’s Second Opinion.

504. The Tribunal recalls, however, its decision in Procedural Order No. 8 of 5 August 2008,
as follows:
14. The Tribunal orders that the McLarnon Witness Statement, including
Exhibit NSP1, be excluded from the evidentiary record and no

reference to or reliance on that Witness Statement be permitted in the
Mann Opinion and in these arbitrations generally.

505. Accordingly, the Tribunal has not considered the evidence in the witness statement of

Mr. McLarnon, nor has Mr. Green seen or considered it.

506. The fact that the first element of Mr. Mann’s contextual background was excluded from
the evidentiary record weakens considerably Mr. Mann’s conclusion on this seminal

issue.

 

'4 Mr. Green states: “I understand that the final sentence of para. 2.11 and para. 2.12 are to be regarded as struck out
of Mr Mann’s Second Opinion. For the record, I have never seen Mr McLarnon’s witness statement, and so have
never been influenced by it.” Mr. Brian Green, QC, Second Opinion re Auriga-Type Trusts, the Palmus Trust, the
Southern Cross Trust and the Pavo Trust, 30 September 2008 (hereinafter “Green, Second Opinion”), para. 67.

- 186 -

507.

508.

509.

145

However, the evidence in the McLarnon Witness Statement is not the only evidence that
Mr. Mann relies on for his interpretation of the effect of the various powers given to third
parties on control of the GML shares held in trust (and thus of Claimant). In the
subsequent paragraph of his Second Opinion, Mr. Mann asserts that:
2.13 There are also a good many solid pointers within the four corners of
the trust deeds to the protectors’ powers of veto under all of the
trust deeds in which protector control is a relevant consideration

having been inserted in order to protect settlors’ selfish interests in
maintaining control over the GML shares.

Among the “pointers” within the “four corners” of the trust deeds to which Mr. Mann
alludes are the Anti-Bartlett provisions, the Protector’s power of veto in relation to
certain powers of the Trustees being expressed to be “absolute and uncontrolled” and

various other elements. These will be discussed in turn below.

Nor does Respondent rely solely on Mr. Mann and an interpretation of the trust
documents to argue that the “Russian oligarchs” maintained de facto control over GML
and its subsidiaries, including Claimant. For example, Respondent quotes from a report
in the Financial Times of an interview with Tim Osborne on 18 June 2004. According to
the Financial Times, Tim Osborne “stressed that he and his fellow directors took their
instructions from the trustees of Menatep—proxies for Mr. Khodorkovsky and his

partners.”

In this jurisdictional phase of the arbitration and with an evidentiary record which is
manifestly less than complete, in part because of the Tribunal’s decision in its Procedural
Orders Nos. 2 and 3, the Tribunal will not today inquire into whether, as alleged by
Respondent,'** Mr. Khodorkovsky, Mr. Lebedev or other former shareholders of GML
may have retained control over the shares transferred into trust as part of a structure they
may have established or used at various points for fraudulent or criminal purposes,
including tax evasion and money laundering, i.e., as the instrumentality of a “criminal

enterprise” or with “unclean hands,” issues which the Tribunal has decided to defer to

Respondent’s First Memorial, Factual Appendix, pp. 105-115.

- 187 -

510.

S11.

512.

any merits phase of this arbitration pursuant to its Procedural Orders Nos. 2 and 3 of

8 September and 31 October 2006, respectively.

The Tribunal will however determine certain issues which arise within the more narrow
framework adopted by Mr. Green in his presentation of the questions of trust law raised
in this case. In his Second Opinion, Mr. Green sets out his view of the appropriate

framework as follows:

66. [...]

(1) The Trust deeds are evidently professionally drafted and (as is
apparently conceded) routine.

(2) As ICS v West Bromwich confirms, whatever the settlors may have
subjectively understood the provisions of the Trust deeds to mean is
neither here nor there.

(3) It is an objective reading of such deeds which is required — it is to be
assumed that the settlors intended them to mean what they say, and their
meaning can only be derived from the words used, construing such
words with a legally literate eye — the background law of trusts clearly
providing admissible context as regards the interpretation of legalistically
framed provisions in a professionally drafted document intended to have
legal effect.

It is thus within this framework of the trust documents themselves, interpreted in
accordance with the applicable law of trusts, that the Tribunal will address the issues of
ownership and control. The Tribunal will first address the validity and effectiveness of
the Guernsey Trusts. The Tribunal will then address the four key issues relating to
ownership and control of the GML shares that the Parties’ experts debated under
Guernsey law: (a) whether the Protectors under the Auriga-type Trusts and the Palmus
Trust are required to exercise their powers as fiduciaries; (b) whether the Anti-Bartlett
provisions in the Guernsey Trusts affect the respective Trustees’ powers; (c) whether the
Call Options encumbering the GML shares settled into the Auriga-type Trusts and the
Southern Cross Trust affect the analysis of ownership or control; and (d) whether the rule

in Saunders v. Vautier affects the Trustees’ ownership and control over the GML shares.

(2) Validity and Effectiveness of the Guernsey Trusts

The first fundamental issue of trust law is whether the Guernsey Trusts are valid and

effective, and therefore invest their respective Trustees with ownership of the assets on

- 188 -

trust. On this crucial point where, initially, Respondent challenged the validity of the
Trusts, it subsequently acknowledged that they were valid and effective under the law
governing such trusts. This shift is well illustrated by reference to the two expert

opinions of Mr. Mann.

513. In his First Opinion, Mr. Mann posits that (a) the trustees of these trusts have no
“control” over the trusts and have, at most, illusory powers over the GML shares, (b) the
trustees did not become beneficial owners of the GML shares, and (c) the trusts in respect
of these shares were incompletely constituted and ineffective. In response to Mr. Mann’s
First Opinion, Mr. Green demonstrates that the Auriga-type Trusts and the Palmus Trust,
albeit in the Protector-consent form, were established by reference to standard trust

6 including with regard to the Protector and his powers.'*’ The form of the

forms,
Southern Cross Trust, which has no office of Protector in its structure, is even less

controversial in the opinion of Mr. Green.

514. In his Second Opinion, Mr. Mann appears to retract from his earlier position and stated
that it was “trite and obvious” that “the trusts are valid, by reference to the general law

and the standard forms and precedents.”!*

515. The Tribunal agrees with Mr. Green and accordingly finds that the Auriga-type Trusts,
the Palmus Trust and the Southern Cross Trust are standard examples of trusts
established in an offshore jurisdiction, Guernsey, and that they are valid and effective

under its laws.

516. The Tribunal also agrees with Mr. Green that the Protector’s powers as defined in the
Auriga-type Trusts and in the Palmus Trust do not create a mechanism which differs in
any meaningful way from the typical Protector consent trust under Jersey and Guernsey

laws.

16 See Form 50 in Volume 40(3), Encyclopaedia of Forms and Precedents (2006).

'” Mr. Brian Green, QC, Opinion re Auriga-Type Trusts, the Palmus Trust, the Southern Cross Trust and the Pavo
Trust, 4 May 2007 (hereinafter “Green, First Opinion), p. 13.

‘48 Mann, Second Opinion, Section D, para. 1.3

- 189 -

517. The Tribunal therefore concludes that the Guernsey Trusts are valid and effective, as a
matter of Guernsey trust law, and vest ownership and control to the Trustees within the
framework of the trust instruments. The Tribunal now proceeds to consider the key
issues that Respondent argued affected ownership and control of the GML shares under

Guernsey law.

(3) Is the Protector a Fiduciary?

518. The Tribunal addresses first the question whether the Protector under the Auriga-type
Trusts and the Palmus Trust must act as a fiduciary. In his First Opinion, Mr. Mann
points out that the Protector may act as he wishes and that “there is no rule of law which
impresses a protector with fiduciary duties.”"” Conversely, he opines that the powers of
the Trustee to interfere with the wishes of the Settlor, the Protector or the Beneficiaries
are illusory as “the protectors can with impunity veto any important decision made by the
trustees, without any fear at all of their conduct being successfully challenged.”! In
response, Mr. Green opines that a Protector’s powers, far from being entirely at his
discretion, must be exercised in a fiduciary manner and for the benefit of the

Beneficiaries.

519. In his Second Opinion, Mr. Mann agrees that the Protectors “are fiduciaries as regards
their duties to the beneficiaries and can be controlled by the court if they act
arbitrarily.”'°' This, however, he adds, does not apply to powers which the Protector can
exercise in his own interests. The issue being “fraught with uncertainty,”! Mr. Mann
concludes that it must be decided on a case by case basis with reference to the particular
terms of the trust instrument. In his view, the Trustee’s lack of power to interfere in the

management of GML and the Protector’s veto powers, as drafted, lead to the conclusion

' Mr. Martin Mann, QC, Opinion re Auriga Type Trusts, the Palmus Trust, the Southern Cross Trust and the Pavo
Trust, 22 January 2007 (hereinafter “Mann, First Opinion”), para. 5.2.2.

159 Thid. at para. 5.3.3.
‘5! Mann, Second Opinion, para. 2.1.

182 Thid. at para. 2.4.

- 190 -

that they were meant to be unfettered, in order to allow the Settlor to retain “control” of

the GML shares.

520. At the hearing, Mr. Green was cross-examined at length on this issue. With regard to the
Protector’s powers in the Auriga-type Trusts (and Palmus Trust) to remove the Trustee,
Mr. Green categorically stated that the power had to be exercised in a fully fiduciary
manner and that it could not be used “for a self-serving or self-seeking purpose. It can’t
be sold. It is there for the protection of the Trust, for the interests of the Trust, which

means for the interests of the beneficiaries of the Trust.”!%

In other words, in
Mr. Green’s view, the extended powers given by the trust instruments (except in the case
of the Southern Cross Trust), particularly the power of appointment and removal of

Beneficiaries need to be exercised single-mindedly in the interests of the

beneficiaries.”'™*

521. Having reviewed the trust instruments and considered the expert opinions as well as the
oral testimony of Mr. Mann and Mr. Green, the Tribunal finds the evidence of Mr. Green
more compelling than Mr. Mann’s. It is clear that the Protector’s powers are not entirely
discretionary: they must be exercised in a fiduciary manner and for the benefit of the

Beneficiaries.

(4) The Anti-Bartlett Provisions
522. All of the Guernsey Trusts contain Anti-Bartlett provisions. As explained above, these
provisions state that the Trustee is not bound to interfere in the business of any company
in which the Trust is interested and the Trustee is not bound to obtain information

regarding any such company.

523. In his First Opinion, Mr. Mann posits that the Trustee, under the Anti-Bartlett provisions,
has no power to appoint, elect or remove the directors of GML. Furthermore, the Trustee
being relieved from any duty to exercise any rights and powers which it would normally

be expected to exercise in a general meeting, such as appointing directors or, more

'53 Hearing Transcript, 20 November 2008, p. 217:19-22.

'S4 Hearing Transcript, 20 November 2008, p. 218:23-25.

- 191 -

524.

525.

526.

527.

importantly, declaring the payment of dividends, Mr. Mann concludes that the
Beneficiaries could not enforce any such duties against the Trustee, and that, therefore,
the power of applying the income of the Trust for the benefit of the Beneficiaries is

illusory.

In response, Mr. Green notes that (a) none of the provisions exclude the exercise by the
Trustees of the powers enjoyed by them as shareholders of GML, and (b) they expressly
recognize that the Trustees retain voting powers. These provisions conform to the “usual
form” Anti-Bartlett clauses. Mr. Green observes that these provisions, exempting the
Trustee from a duty to perform certain actions, must be distinguished from provisions that
would take away from the Trustee the right to do so. Not imposing a duty to act insulates

the Trustee from liability but does not mean he has been deprived of the right to act.

On this issue, the Tribunal finds Claimant’s expert more convincing than Respondent’s.
The Anti-Bartlett provisions are primarily meant to exclude liability in the event that the
Trustee fails to take certain steps with regard to Trust property. When the Trust owns
shares, provisions exempting the Trustee from the duty to interfere with the management
or to seek information in respect of the company’s affairs do not import that the Trustee
loses the right to do so. The Tribunal is of the opinion that the Anti-Bartlett provisions in
the various trust instruments do not support a finding that the Trustee has relinquished

“ownership” or “control” over Trust property.

(5) The Call Options

The Tribunal now turns to the Call Options encumbering the GML shares settled into the
Auriga-type Trusts and the Southern Cross Trust. As a result of these options, states
Mr. Mann, the Trustees of these trusts can only exercise the voting rights attached to the
GML shares in accordance with GML’s directions. Mr. Mann also asserts that it is
probable that a court would hold that a transfer of shares, bereft of all the rights normally

attached to them, does not transfer the beneficial interest.

Mr. Green disagrees. In his opinion, the Call Option Deeds proceed on the explicit basis
that legal and beneficial ownership of the GML shares will remain in the Trustees

pending “Completion.” The security interest created by the Call Option Deed is at most

- 192 -

528.

529.

530.

531.

in the nature of a charge and not a mortgage. A charge does not involve any transfer of
property to the security holder, much less does it involve the chargee becoming the legal

owner of such shares.

Having reviewed and analysed the trust instruments and the related Call Option Deeds,
the Tribunal finds that the Call Options do not in any way alter the fundamental principle
established in the trust instruments that the Trustees of the Trusts are the “owners” of the
GML shares. No transfer of property will have occurred unless and until the option is
exercised, but until it is (and it may never be) all property remains with the grantor of the
option. As to the issue of “control” over the GML shares, the Tribunal finds that the Call
Option Deeds at hand do not justify a conclusion that, for the purposes of Article 17(1) of
the ECT, “control” of the GML shares would lie with the Settlors of the Auriga-type
Trusts or the Southern Cross Trust. Indeed, the Call Option Deeds, as novated, enable
the Directors of GML to remove shares from the “control” of the various Trusts; if

anything, they tend to insulate GML from the Settlors of the relevant Trusts.

The Tribunal therefore concludes that the Call Options do not affect its determination

that, under the trust instruments, the Trustees own and control the GML shares.

(6) The Rule in Saunders vy. Vautier

Finally, in his First Opinion, Mr. Mann refers to the so-called rule in Saunders v. Vautier
in support of the proposition that the trusts can be terminated, even though there exist
“discretionary objects,” and that this affects the Trustees’ ownership and control.
Mr. Green disagrees: he asserts that even if the principle were potentially applicable,
which Mr. Green contests, due to the fact that the class of Beneficiaries is open, it does
not justify the conclusion that the GML shares (or any other trust property) is owned or
controlled by anyone other than the respective Trustees unless and until the principle is

effectively invoked.

When he was cross-examined on this issue, Mr. Green pointed out that in Guernsey, the

rule in Saunders v. Vautier was legislated in Article 48(3) of the 1989 Guernsey Trust

- 193 -

Law.'* This provision of Guernsey law makes it possible for all the beneficiaries of a
Guernsey trust to come together, terminate the trust and distribute the trust property.
Whilst pointing out that if asked to do so, the Trustee could refuse, and that he would
need, strictly speaking, the consent of the Red Cross, Mr. Green opined that the
possibility for the Settlors and their families (if they constitute all the Beneficiaries) to
terminate the Trust “doesn’t in any way entrench on the proposition that you have a valid
and completely constituted trust under which the trustees are the owners of the property

and have all the rights of control which come from their ownership.”!*°

532. In the Tribunal’s view, the determining factor is that the rule in Saunders v. Vautier was
not exercised. Its mere existence does not lead to the conclusion that because
Article 48(3) of the 1989 Guernsey Trust Law may be invoked at some later point in
time, the Trustee is not the “owner” or in “control” of the assets settled into the Trust

under Guernsey law.

533. Ona related point, the existence of letters of wishes, if any, or the expression of desires
by the Settlor, may indeed result in the Trustee doing what he is advised the Settlor
would wish him to do. But both legal experts agree that such letters of wishes or
expressions of desires by the Settlor are precatory in nature and do not bind the Trustee in

any way.

534. The Tribunal therefore concludes that the rule in Saunders v. Vautier, in the
circumstances of this case, does not affect its determination that the Trustees own and

control the GML shares.

(7) Conclusion

535. Finally and before summarizing its conclusion in respect of the trust issues in the instant
case, the Tribunal notes that transferring ownership of assets to a trustee pursuant to a
trust instrument is a centuries-old institution of the English common law. Settling certain

properties into a trust, thus transferring legal ownership to the trustee and adopting

'85 Exhibit R-542.

‘6 Hearing Transcript, 20 November 2008, p. 125:11-14.

-194-

536.

537.

provisions with regard to the beneficiaries—including leaving their establishment at the
trustee’s discretion, subject to the powers of a protector as the case may be—is a
well-established legal institution at common law, which is recognized internationally
today pursuant to the Hague Convention on the Law Applicable to Trusts and their
Recognition of 1 July 1985. The Tribunal sees no reason to unsettle a centuries-old legal
institution when the trust instruments at hand do not depart from standard forms used in
countless other similar settlements. To do so would put into question the validity of the
very concept of trusts at a time when their recognition goes well beyond the common-law
countries. Indeed, in recent years, trusts have found a significant measure of acceptance
in some civil law jurisdictions, although there is no evidence before the Tribunal that they
are accepted instruments in Russian law. This is a question which will remain open for
argument in any merits phase of this case in connection with Respondent’s contentions
about Claimant’s “unclean hands” and about Claimant being the instrumentality of a

“criminal enterprise.”
On the basis of the foregoing, the Tribunal finds as follows in relation to Claimant:

¢ Claimant is wholly-owned by GML (Gibraltar), which in turn is owned by the

seven Guernsey Trusts (i.e., by the respective Trustees of the Guernsey Trusts).

e¢ Each of Southern Cross Trust, Auriga Trust, Draco Trust, Mensa Trust, Pictor
Trust, and Tucana Trust (in each case, through its Trustee, Rysaffe) controls a

minority stake in GML; as such, none of these Trusts can be said to control GML.

¢ The Palmus Trust (i.e., the Palmus Trust Company Limited (Guernsey) as Trustee
of the Palmus Trust) controls a majority stake of 52.3 percent in GML, and
therefore could be said to control GML, as the trust property, in accordance with

the terms of the Palmus Settlement and applicable Guernsey law.

As a result of these findings, the Tribunal concludes that GML (of Gibraltar) and/or the
Palmus Trust Company Limited (of Guernsey) own and control Claimant. Both GML
and Palmus Trust Company are UK nationals, since both Gibraltar and Guernsey are
covered territories by virtue of the UK’s declarations under the ECT. Accordingly, they

are not “nationals of a third state.” Therefore, Article 17(1) does not apply to Claimant.

- 195 -

538.

539.

540.

S41.

b) Is the Russian Federation a Third State?

In the previous section, the Tribunal found that, for purposes of Article 17 of the ECT,
Claimant was owned and controlled by entities that are not nationals or citizens of third
States. That could be the end of the Tribunal’s analysis of different issues which arise
from the wording of Article 17. However, as the Tribunal noted at the outset of the last
section of the present Interim Award, Respondent argued that control of Claimant resided
with individuals of Russian nationality. On this basis, in order to benefit from Article 17,
Respondent argues that the Russian Federation is a “third state” for purposes of
Article 17. Although the Tribunal’s conclusions in the previous section render this issue
moot, the Tribunal nevertheless considers that, in the context of all issues which have
arisen and which may arise later, it should proceed with a review of the Parties’

submissions on this point and thus present its analysis and conclusions.

(i) Parties’ Submissions

The Parties differ over whether, under Article 17(1), the Russian Federation is or can be

treated as a “third state.”

Respondent argues that Claimant is an entity owned or controlled by citizens or nationals
of a “third state” and has no substantial business in the Contracting Party in which it is

organized. What is the “third state’?

Respondent initially argued that it is the Russian Federation. The term, “third state,” is
not defined in the Treaty. However, Article I of the ECT, “Definitions,” provides, in (7):
“Investor” means:
(a) with respect to a Contracting Party:
(i) anatural person having the citizenship or nationality of or who is

permanently residing in that Contracting Party in accordance
with its applicable law;

(ii) a company or other organization organized in accordance with
the law applicable in that Contracting Party;

(b) with respect to a “third state,” a natural person, company or other
organization which fulfils, mutatis mutandis, the conditions
specified in subparagraph (a) for a Contracting Party.

- 196 -

542.

543.

Respondent argues that the term, “third state,” while not defined in the Treaty, is used in
a manner that does not exclude the possibility that a third State may be a Contracting
Party or signatory (Respondent being the latter), and cites in support of this conclusion
the terms of ECT Article 7(10)(a)(i), which, in defining “transit,” specify “so long as
either the other state or the third state is a Contracting Party.” Respondent also argues
that the reference to a third State in Article 17(1) “applies a fortiori to nationals of the
host State.” It observes that the usage of the ECT does not show that the term “third
state” precludes reference to the host State. If it is accepted that a Contracting Party may
be equated with a third State, then, in pursuance of Article 17(1), Respondent may deny
the advantages of Part III to Claimant, since in point of fact—Respondent maintains—
Russian nationals control Claimant, which has no substantial business activities in the

State of its incorporation.

Claimant challenges this reasoning. It argues that it is plain on its face that Article 17(1)
distinguishes between a Contracting Party and a third State, as do other provisions of the
Treaty; there is no equation. The singular transit provision of Article 7(10)(a)(i) is
distinguishable. Article 2(1)(h) of the VCLT defines a third State as “a State not a party
to the treaty.” The Russian Federation, while not a Contracting Party, is a signatory of
the ECT, and applied the Treaty provisionally in accordance with Article 45; it had not
terminated provisional application pursuant to Article 45(3) by the time of the filing of
the Notice of Arbitration in these proceedings. The travaux préparatoires of the ECT
demonstrate that the term “third state” was substituted for the term “non-Contracting
Party” not to change the substance, nor to vary the meaning, but to render it in more
appropriate style. In its Rejoinder, Claimant contends, among other arguments, that, if
the drafters of the ECT intended to apply the optional exclusion of Article 17 to nationals
of the host State and not limit it to nationals of third States, they would have so provided,
but did not. The ECT’s travaux préparatoires show that the term “third state” cannot be
equated with the host State. Respondent itself has recognized that nationals of the host
State are not nationals of a third State by contending that: “If Treaty benefits may be

denied to third State nationals, a fortiori they may be denied to host State nationals.”

-197-

544.

545.

546.

547.

(ii) Tribunal’s Decision
In the view of the Tribunal, Respondent’s contentions on this count are unconvincing.
The Treaty clearly distinguishes between a Contracting Party (and a signatory), on the
one hand, and a third State, which is a non-Contracting Party, on the other. The Tribunal
agrees with Claimant that, on their face, several provisions distinguish between a
Contracting Party and third State (for example, Articles (1)(7), 10(3) and 10(7), and 17)
and that there is no equation in the ECT between a Contracting Party and a third State.
This conclusion is further supported by the travaux préparatoires, which demonstrate

that the term “third state” was substituted for the term “non-Contracting Party.”

The transit provision of Article 7(10)(a)(i) is clearly distinguishable. That provision
defines “transit” as

(i) the carriage through the Area of a Contracting Party, or to or from

port facilities in its Area for loading or unloading, of Energy Materials

and Products originating in the Area of another state and destined for the

Area of a third state, so long as either the other state or the third state is a
Contracting Party;

In this particular context, the term “third state” is used simply to designate the third of the
three States necessarily involved in the transit relationship, and not a category of States
distinct from Contracting Parties. The French version of the Treaty uses the term
“troisiéme Etat” in Article 7(10)(a)(i), but “Etat tiers” elsewhere in the Treaty, clearly

supporting the distinct meaning of the term in the different contexts.

As a result, the Tribunal concludes that the Russian Federation, for purposes of Article 17

of the ECT, is not a third State.

c) Can the Russian Federation Invoke Ownership or Control of
Claimant by Israeli Nationals in Order to Take Advantage of
Article 17(1)?

(i) Parties’ Submissions

Apparently without relinquishing the foregoing line of argument concerning Russia as a
third State, at the oral hearings, Respondent advanced the further argument that it is
entitled to deny the advantages of Part III of the Treaty to Claimant because it is now

controlled by nationals of a third State, Israel (where certain of the former “Russian

- 198 -

oligarchs” now reside) and has no substantial business activities in the Area of the
Contracting Party in which it is organized. Counsel of the Russian Federation observed
that leading “oligarchs” reside in Israel, have done so for some five years, and apparently
have adopted Israeli citizenship as under Israeli law they could easily do. They thus

imputed that the claims of Claimant could be denied pursuant to Article 17(1).
548. Claimant’s counsel strenuously resisted any such imputation.

549. They recalled that Respondent’s pleadings from the outset up to the oral hearings have
repeatedly described Claimant as in reality being owned or controlled by Russian
nationals. They questioned whether Russia’s counsel was authorized to raise this
“moving target” but, if they were, Claimant maintained that Respondent was “stuck” with
its characterization in its written pleadings of Claimant being owned or controlled by

Russian nationals.

550. Claimant further argued that Respondent is estopped from characterizing the “oligarchs”
as Israeli. Claimant points out that the Russian Federation has issued international arrest
warrants for the “oligarchs” that describe them as nationals of the Russian Federation and
has repeatedly described them as Russian nationals in its pleadings. It cannot now be
heard to denominate the “oligarchs” as Israeli nationals in derogation of those
descriptions. Moreover, according to Claimant, if the “oligarchs” have taken refuge in
Israel and assumed Israeli nationality, not only does that not deprive them of Russian
nationality but they have done so only because of the wrongs that they have suffered at
the hands of the Russian Federation. Respondent is not entitled to assert rights springing

from those wrongs.

(ii) Tribunal’s Decision

551. Because the dates on which some of the “oligarchs” moved to Israel were not clearly
established,'°’ this confrontation raises the question of whether the rule of nationality of

claims in international law means that nationality is adjudged as of the date of the filing

'S? See Hearing Transcript, 27 November 2008, pp. 117-129; nor was it agreed which Party would have the burden of
proof on this issue (see Hearing Transcript, 1 December 2008, pp. 114-116).

- 199 -

of the claim, or as of a later date, such as that of the judgment. The Award in the
NAFTA case of Loewen v. United States of America accepted the judgment day
standard.'°* That holding has been the subject of criticism.’ It is not generally sustained
by the study of diplomatic espousal undertaken in recent years by the International Law
Commission of the United Nations, whose Special Rapporteur, Professor John Dugard,
has concluded that the date of the filing of the claim should govern rather than the

judgment day.'° This Tribunal is not disposed to apply the judgment day standard in the

'88 The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/98/3,
Award, 26 June 2003, 42 ILM 811 (2003), 7 ICSID Rep. 442 (2005), para225, available at
http://www. state. gov/documents/organization/22094.pdf (“In international law parlance, there must be continuous
national identity from the date of the events giving rise to the claim, which date is known as the dies a quo,
through the date of the resolution of the claim, which date is known as the dies ad quem.”).

8 See, .¢., J. Paulsson, “Continuous nationality in Loewen,” (2004) 20 Arbitration International pp. 213-216 at 214
(“The tribunals’ treatment of the continuous nationality issue, considering its outcome-determinative effect was
startling in its succinctness . .. The dies ad quem requirement which commended itself to the Loewen arbitrators
was perhaps the least plausible of a long series of alternative candidates . ..”); M.S. Duchesne, “The continuous-
nationality-of-claims principle,” George Washington International Law Review, vol. 36 (2004) 783 at 808. (“there
is good reason to discount the weight [of Loewen] .... Whatever other reaction the Loewen tribunal’s decision
might invite, its discussion on the continuous nationality ‘rule’ was, if not cursory, then at least conclusory. . . the
tribunal’s discussion of the continuous nationality issue simply asserts the existence of a rule without citation or
even discussion... [The Tribunal] approached the issue with a preconceived notion of customary international
law and felt little need to put that notion to the test of careful examination.”); ILC, Fifty-Eight Session, Seventh
report on diplomatic protection by John Dugard, Special Rapporteur, UN Doc. A/CN.4/567, 7 March 2006, para.
41. (The [Loewen decision|—on this aspect of the case—is seriously flawed. While most of the decision is
carefully reasoned and researched . . . the crucial issue before the tribunal, that of the dies ad quem, is disposed of
in a manner which gives no indication that the tribunal applied its mind to the matter at all. It simply asserts,
without any examination whatsoever of authority (despite the fact that counsel referred the tribunal to the relevant
authorities), that under customary international law “there must be continuous national identity from the date of
the events giving rise to the claim . . . through to the date of the resolution of the claim.”).

 

160 See, e.g., ILC, Fifty-fifth session, Fourth report on diplomatic protection by John Dugard, Special Rapporteur,

UN Doc. A/CN.4/530, 13 March 2003 (para 98: “In all the circumstances it seems appropriate to require that a
State which exercises diplomatic protection on behalf of a corporation must prove that the corporation was a
national under its laws both at the time of injury and at the date of the official presentation of the claim.”) See
also: ILC, Fifty-Eight Session, Seventh report on diplomatic protection by John Dugard, Special Rapporteur, UN
Doc. A/CN.4/567, 7 March 2006, paras. 43-45 (“In the light of the uncertainty surrounding the dies ad quem the
Commission is required to make a choice between the date of the official presentation of the claim and the date of
the resolution of the claim. The authorities are inconclusive and the response of States, while small, favours the
date of the presentation of the claim. In these circumstances the Commission must be guided by principle and
policy in the exercise of its choice. Principle supports the date of the presentation of the claims as this most
favours the interests of the individual. So too does policy, if we equate policy with fairness. Many years may pass
between the presentation of a claim and its final resolution and it is unfair to deny the individual the right to
change nationality, through marriage or naturalization, during this period. Moreover, the date of presentation is
significant as it is the date on which the State of nationality shows its clear intention to exercise diplomatic
protection. “Different policy considerations apply where the national on whose behalf the claim is brought
acquires the nationality of the respondent State after the presentation of the claim as occurred in Loewen ... In
such circumstances fairness dictates that the date of the award be selected as dies ad quem, as the contrary
position would, in the words of Loewen, ‘produce a result so unjust that it could be sustained only be irrefutable

- 200 -

light of the authorities and considerations assembled by Dugard, and in view of the fact
that this proceeding in any event is not an exercise in the diplomatic espousal by a State
of the claims of its national but a Treaty-authorized proceeding brought directly against a
State by an entity which qualifies as an Investor of another Contracting Party. Thus the

pertinence of rules of diplomatic protection to these proceedings is not to be assumed.

552. The Tribunal must therefore consider the nationality of the “oligarchs” as of the date of
the filing of the claim, namely February 2005. At the hearing, Respondent referred to
various newspaper clippings which predate February 2005 and which, according to
Respondent, establish that the “oligarchs” who, it alleges, controlled Claimant (notably

Messrs. Nevzlin, Brudno and Dubov) were already citizens of Israel at that time.'*!

553. In response, Claimant argues that Respondent is estopped from arguing that the
“oligarchs” are Israeli because, if they are, their so being results from the wrongs of

Respondent.’

554. The Tribunal cannot, in the present phase of this proceeding, address Claimant’s estoppel
argument, which, as Claimant itself put it, relies on “wrongdoings of Russia which are at

the heart of this arbitration.”"

555. If this issue were not moot (as it is, given the Tribunal’s earlier rulings on notice and
ownership/control), the Tribunal would defer its further consideration to the merits phase.

Since it is moot, the Tribunal’s inquiry on Article 17 ends here.

 

logic or compelling precedent, and neither exists.’ It is therefore proposed that the Commission retain the official
date of presentation of the claim as the dies ad quem for the continuous nationality rule but that an exception be
made for the case in which the national on whose behalf the claim is brought acquires the nationality of the
respondent State after the presentation of the claim. Here the date of the resolution of the claim is the dies ad
quem.”) (See also para. 56, with respect to claims on behalf of corporations). See also Ceskoslovenska Obchodni
Banka, a.s. v. The Slovak Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 24 May
1999, para. 31 (“[I]t is generally recognized that the determination whether a party has standing in an international
judicial forum for purposes of jurisdiction to institute proceedings is made by reference to the date on which such
proceedings are deemed to have been instituted.”)

16! See Hearing Transcript, 27 November 2008, pp. 118-126.
12 See Hearing Transcript, 1 December 2008, pp. 234-236.

163 Thid. at p. 236:8-10.

- 201 -

D. ARE ALL OR SOME OF THE CLAIMS BARRED BY THE “TAXATION MEASURES”
CARVE-OUT (ARTICLE 21) OF THE ECT?

1. Introduction

556. Article 21 of the ECT provides as follows:

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Article, nothing in this Treaty
shall create rights or impose obligations with respect to Taxation
Measures of the Contracting Parties. In the event of any
inconsistency between this Article and any other provision of the
Treaty, this Article shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.

¢

2

Article 7(3) shall apply to Taxation Measures other than those on
income or on capital, except that such provision shall not apply to:

(a) an advantage accorded by a Contracting Party pursuant to the tax
provisions of any convention, agreement or arrangement
described in subparagraph (7)(a)(ii); or

(b) any Taxation Measure aimed at ensuring the effective collection
of taxes, except where the measure of a Contracting Party
arbitrarily discriminates against Energy Materials and Products
originating in, or destined for the Area of another Contracting
Party or arbitrarily restricts benefits accorded under Article 7(3).

¢

¥

Article 10(2) and (7) shall apply to Taxation Measures of the
Contracting Parties other than those on income or on capital, except
that such provisions shall not apply to:

(a) impose most favoured nation obligations with respect to
advantages accorded by a Contracting Party pursuant to the tax
provisions of any convention, agreement or arrangement
described in subparagraph (7)(a)(ii) or resulting from
membership of any Regional Economic Integration
Organization; or

(b) any Taxation Measure aimed at ensuring the effective collection
of taxes, except where the measure arbitrarily discriminates
against an Investor of another Contracting Party or arbitrarily
restricts benefits accorded under the Investment provisions of
this Treaty.

¢

=

Article 29(2) to (6) shall apply to Taxation Measures other than
those on income or on capital.

(5) (a) Article 13 shall apply to taxes.

- 202 -

(b) Whenever an issue arises under Article 13, to the extent it
pertains to whether a tax constitutes an expropriation or whether
a tax alleged to constitute an expropriation is discriminatory, the
following provisions shall apply:

(i) The Investor or the Contracting Party alleging expropriation
shall refer the issue of whether the tax is an expropriation or
whether the tax is discriminatory to the relevant Competent
Tax Authority. Failing such referral by the Investor or the
Contracting Party, bodies called upon to settle disputes
pursuant to Article 26(2)(c) or 27(2) shall make a referral to
the relevant Competent Tax Authorities;

(ii) The Competent Tax Authorities shall, within a period of six
months of such referral, strive to resolve the issues so
referred. Where non-discrimination issues are concerned, the
Competent Tax Authorities shall apply the non-
discrimination provisions of the relevant tax convention or,
if there is no non-discrimination provision in the relevant tax
convention applicable to the tax or no such tax convention is
in force between the Contracting Parties concerned, they
shall apply the non-discrimination principles under the
Model Tax Convention on Income and Capital of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development;

(iii) Bodies called upon to settle disputes pursuant to
Article 26(2)(c) or 27(2) may take into account any
conclusions arrived at by the Competent Tax Authorities
regarding whether the tax is an expropriation. Such bodies
shall take into account any conclusions arrived at within the
six-month period prescribed in subparagraph (b)(ii) by the
Competent Tax Authorities regarding whether the tax is
discriminatory. Such bodies may also take into account any
conclusions arrived at by the Competent Tax Authorities
after the expiry of the six-month period;

(iv) Under no circumstances shall involvement of the Competent
Tax Authorities, beyond the end of the six-month period
referred to in subparagraph (b)(ii), lead to a delay of
proceedings under Articles 26 and 27.

(6) For the avoidance of doubt, Article 14 shall not limit the right of a
Contracting Party to impose or collect a tax by withholding or other
means.

(7) For the purposes of this Article:

(a) The term “Taxation Measure” includes:

- 203 -

(i) any provision relating to taxes of the domestic law of the
Contracting Party or of a political subdivision thereof or a
local authority therein; and

(ii) any provision relating to taxes of any convention for the
avoidance of double taxation or of any other international
agreement or arrangement by which the Contracting Party is
bound.

(b

There shall be regarded as taxes on income or on capital all taxes
imposed on total income, on total capital or on elements of
income or of capital, including taxes on gains from the alienation
of property, taxes on estates, inheritances and gifts, or
substantially similar taxes, taxes on the total amounts of wages
or salaries paid by enterprises, as well as taxes on capital
appreciation.

(c

A “Competent Tax Authority” means the competent authority
pursuant to a double taxation agreement in force between the
Contracting Parties or, when no such agreement is in force, the
minister or ministry responsible for taxes or their authorized
representatives.

 

(d) For the avoidance of doubt, the terms “tax provisions” and
“taxes” do not include customs duties.

557. As set out earlier in this Interim Award, the Parties’ arguments in respect of this

provision raise the following issues:
(a) What is the scope of the carve-out for “Taxation Measures”?
(1) What is the meaning of “Taxation Measures” as set out in Article 21(7)?

(2) Does the carve-out operate to deprive a tribunal of jurisdiction over the
covered matters, or does it merely modulate the obligations that can be

enforced in an arbitration, thus going to admissibility/merits?

(3) If the carve-out goes to jurisdiction, did Respondent timely raise the

issue?
(b) What is the scope of the claw-back for Article 13 (Expropriation)?

(c) How should Claimant’s claims be characterized for purposes of Article 21?

- 204 -

558.

559.

560.

561.

562.

The Tribunal will now review the Parties’ submissions on each one of these issues,

before reaching its decision.

2. Parties’ Submissions

a) What is the Scope of the Carve-out for “Taxation Measures”?

(i) What is the Meaning of “Taxation Measures” as Set Out in

Article 21(7)?
According to Respondent, “Taxation Measures” is not limited to specific provisions of
legislation or tax treaties, but extends also to enforcement and collection measures, for
example. In sum, Respondent submits that the carve-out in Article 21 extends broadly to

all measures relating to taxation.

Respondent submits that its interpretation of “Taxation Measures” is supported by the
plain and ordinary meaning of Article 21(7), where the definition of “Taxation

Measures,” Respondent notes, uses expansive terms such as “includes,” “any” and
“relating to.” Respondent contends that the travaux préparatoires demonstrate that
“includes,” as used in Article 21(7), was meant to introduce an illustrative list not a
closed definition. In support, Respondent invokes the position of France, for example, in

the negotiations of the Treaty.

Respondent also submits that Article 21(7) must be read together with other paragraphs
of the same Article. In particular, Article 21(3) gives preferential treatment to “any
Taxation Measure aimed at ensuring the effective collection of taxes.” The “collection of
taxes,” submits Respondent, must therefore be a subset of the broader class of Taxation
Measures. Further, Article 21(6) confirms, according to Respondent, that Taxation
Measures include not only the collection of taxes, but also their imposition. This
Article provides, “For the avoidance of doubt, Article 14 [dealing with an Investor’s right
to transfer capital, returns and other payments] shall not limit the right of a Contracting

Party to impose or collect a tax by withholding or other means.”

Finally, Respondent argues that a broad carve-out in Article 21, for the full protection of

the sovereign prerogative over taxes, tax collection and tax enforcement, accords with the

- 205 -

563.

564.

566.

567.

object and purpose of the Treaty. It is also supported, notes Respondent, by the

testimony of its witnesses, Messrs. Berman and Knipler.

Claimant holds a different view. According to Claimant, “Taxation Measures” in
Article 21 means the specific provisions in a country’s tax legislation or in its tax treaties.
Invoking, like Respondent, the plain and ordinary meaning of Article 21(7), Claimant
focuses on the use of the words “provision . . . of domestic law” or “convention . . . or

any other international agreement” in the definition.

For Claimant, the travaux préparatoires demonstrate that “includes” was meant to be
inclusive, and interchangeable with “means.” Claimant relies on the position of Norway,
which introduced the language during the negotiation of Article 21, as well as the

position of Canada and France.

As for the evidence of Messrs. Berman and Knipler, Claimant submits that their

respective testimony is irrelevant and unreliable.

Finally, Claimant submits that the Tribunal should resolve any remaining ambiguity
according to the principle that an exception in a treaty, such as the carve-out in

Article 21(1), must be interpreted restrictively.

(ii) Does the Carve-out Operate to Deprive a Tribunal of
Jurisdiction over the Covered Matters, or Does it Merely
Modulate the Obligations that Can Be Enforced in an
Arbitration, thus Going to Admissibility/Merits?

According to Respondent, the carve-out in Article 21(1) deprives the Tribunal of
jurisdiction. Article 21(1) states: “nothing in this Treaty shall create rights or impose
obligations with respect to Taxation Measures of the Contracting Parties”; and “In the
event of any inconsistency between this Article and any other provision of the Treaty,
this Article shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency” [emphasis added]. According
to Respondent, the phrase “nothing in this Treaty” means, inter alia, that Article 26
jurisdiction is not applicable to an arbitration which is grounded in a taxation measure of
the Russian Federation. Article 21 states clearly that it “prevails” over “any other

provision,” which must mean, avers Respondent, that its carve-out in relation to Taxation

- 206 -

568.

569.

570.

S71.

572.

Measures must defeat jurisdiction under Article 26 for any claims related to such

Taxation Measures.

Claimant responds that the carve-out goes to admissibility/merits. Claimant notes that
disputes over the effect of Article 21(1) relate to the existence of rights and obligations
(including under Part III of the Treaty) with respect to alleged Taxation Measures, and
thus must fall within Article 26 of the Treaty (Dispute Settlement), because Article 26
defines arbitral jurisdiction by reference to “an alleged breach of an obligation . . . under

Part IIT’ [emphasis added].

(iii)If the Carve-out Goes to Jurisdiction, Did Respondent

Timely Raise the Issue?
Respondent argues that it satisfied the basic requirement under the UNCITRAL Rules,
namely to state a clear objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction as a general matter.
Respondent contends that it put Claimant on notice that Article 21 was one of its

preliminary concerns, even if initially stated as an admissibility objection.

To the extent the carve-out in Article 21 goes to jurisdiction, Claimant takes the position
that Respondent failed to raise its objection as one pertaining to jurisdiction. As
Respondent has conceded, and as is clear from the record, submits Claimant, Respondent

initially raised Article 21 as an objection to admissibility.

b) What is the Scope of the Claw-back for Article 13
(Expropriation)?

While Article 21(1) creates a carve-out from the protections of the Treaty “with respect to

Taxation Measures,” Article 21(5), on the other hand, reinstates the protection against

alleged expropriation by providing that “Article 13 shall apply to taxes.” What is the

scope of this claw-back in case of an expropriation?

According to Respondent, the scope of the “claw-back” in Article 21(5)—which is
defined by reference to “taxes”—is not co-extensive with the carve-out of Article 21(1),
which is defined by reference to “Taxation Measures.” Respondent submits that the
claw-back extends only to “taxes,” which is a concept that is narrower than “Taxation

Measures,” leaving Claimant unprotected for allegations of expropriation in relation to a

- 207 -

573.

574.

575.

576.

577.

578.

category of measures that can be defined as “Taxation Measures other than taxes.” For
Respondent, this category includes tax collection and enforcement measures, since these

are Taxation Measures, but not taxes per se.

Finally, Respondent submits that, in any event, any claim that falls within the claw-back
for allegedly expropriatory taxes must be submitted to the “Competent Tax Authorities”

in the Russian Federation, pursuant to Article 21(5)(b).

According to Claimant, the distinction drawn by Respondent between “Taxation
Measures” and “taxes” is unavailing. Claimant submits that the claw-back for
expropriation in Article 21(5) extends to any expropriation in relation to “Taxation

Measures,” thus giving back to an Investor, in relation to expropriation, whatever
protection may have been taken away by Article 21(1)—including jurisdiction, if the

carve-out is found by the Tribunal to have been formulated as a jurisdictional objection.

In support of its position, Claimant contends that while different words (‘‘tax” and
“Taxation Measures”) are used in the English version of Article 21 of the ECT, the fact
that they refer to the same concept is demonstrated by the French, German and Italian
versions of Article 21. In those versions, all equally authentic, the words “tax” and
“Taxation Measure” are used interchangeably. The interpretation of Article 21, avers

Claimant, should thus be reconciled with the non-English versions.

Furthermore, Claimant submits, Respondent’s interpretation of Article 21(5) would result
in a huge loophole for States wishing to expropriate assets of investors “under the guise”
of Taxation Measures. Claimant asserts that such an interpretation would defeat the
object and purpose of the Treaty, as it would destabilize the investment climate in host

States.

Finally, Claimant argues that it cannot be required to submit its claims to the local
Russian authorities before proceeding to international arbitration, since such a recourse

would be entirely futile.

In respect of the different language versions of the Treaty, Respondent answers that the
non-English versions of Article 21 should not be given much weight, because Article 21

was negotiated in English. Citing several authorities, Respondent submits that where

- 208 -

579.

580.

581.

582.

583.

multiple language versions of a treaty are being compared for the interpretation of a
particular provision, the version in which the provision was negotiated should be given

primacy.

c) How should the Claims be Characterized for Purposes of

Article 21?
Respondent submits that all of the claims in these proceedings relate to “Taxation
Measures” other than “taxes,” and that therefore none of the exceptions enumerated in

Article 21 is applicable to the claims asserted by Claimant.

Respondent observes that according to Claimant’s own factual matrix underpinning its
allegations against the Russian Federation, the alleged breach of the ECT by Respondent
started with “tax audits” and all of the claims asserted by Claimant are based, initially, on

“massive tax liabilities.”'™

In response, Claimant’s primary position is that since the claw-back of Article 21(5) for
expropriation claims is co-extensive with the carve-out under Article 21(1), it does not
matter how its claims are characterized. In the words of Claimant: “no matter what the
scope of the so-called exclusion in Article 21(1), it does not exclude any expropriation

claims that are not reincorporated by Article 21(5)."

Alternatively, Claimant submits that the claims are not captured by the exclusion in
Article 21(1) because they do not relate to bona fide “Taxation Measures” and/or they
extend to matters beyond “Taxation Measures” such as expropriation through gross

under-valuation, “phoney bankruptcy” and intimidation of management.

3. Tribunal’s Decision
As the Tribunal has just noted, Claimant argues, inter alia, that its claims do not relate to

bona fide “Taxation Measures” and also that its claims extend to matters beyond

“Taxation Measures” and are thus not captured by Article 21, whatever its interpretation.

14 See Hearing Transcript, 1 December 2008, pp. 59:18 to 61:25.

165

Rejoinder, para. 410.

- 209 -

584.

585.

586.

587.

The Tribunal observes that the background to, and motivation behind, the Russian
Federation’s measures that gave rise to the present arbitration, be they “Taxation

Measures” or not, go to the heart of the present dispute.

The Tribunal will not rule on this crucial issue in a vacuum. Therefore, the Tribunal has
decided to defer its definitive interpretation of Article 21, and its characterization of
Claimant’s claims for purposes of Article 21, to the next phase of the arbitration, when it
will have a complete record on the nature of the claims themselves and a fuller

understanding of the facts.

For greater certainty, the Tribunal notes that it is deferring as well the issue of whether
Respondent’s objection based on Article 21 goes to jurisdiction or admissibility and, if it

goes to jurisdiction, whether it was made in a timely manner by Respondent.

E. ARE ALL OR SOME OF THE CLAIMS BARRED BY THE “FORK-IN-THE-ROAD”
PROVISION (ARTICLE 26(3)(B)(1)) OF THE ECT?

1. Parties’ Submissions

Article 26(3)(b)(i) contains the ECT’s “fork-in-the-road” provision. It must be read

together with the preceding paragraphs of Article 26:

(1) Disputes between a Contracting Party and an Investor of another
Contracting Party relating to an Investment of the latter in the Area
of the former, which concern an alleged breach of an obligation of
the former under Part III shall, if possible be settled amicably.

(2) If such disputes cannot be settled according to the provisions of
paragraph (1) within a period of three months from the date on
which either party to the dispute requested amicable settlement, the
Investor party to the dispute may choose to submit it for resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Contracting Party
party to the dispute;

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute
settlement procedure; or

(c) in accordance with the following paragraphs of this Article.

(3) (a) Subject only to subparagraphs (b) and (c), each Contracting
Party hereby gives its unconditional consent to the submission of

-210-

a dispute to international arbitration or conciliation in accordance
with the provisions of this Article.

(b) (i) The Contracting Parties listed in Annex ID do not give such
unconditional consent where the Investor has previously
submitted the dispute under subparagraph (2)(a) or (b).
588. In accordance with Article 26(3)(b)(i), Annex ID lists the Contracting Parties that have
conditioned their consent to the submission of a dispute under the Treaty to international
arbitration on the condition that the Investor has not previously submitted the dispute to

the courts or administrative tribunals of the Contracting Party to the dispute.

589. The Russian Federation, which appears on the list at Annex ID, argues that “Claimant or
persons who control Claimant or who are under common control with Claimant have
previously submitted the matters complained of in the Statement of Claim to the Russian

courts and the European Court of Human Rights.”!

590. Respondent submits that the term “dispute,” which is not a defined term under the Treaty,
“should be interpreted as a dispute between essentially the same parties relating to the
same material facts or injuries that constitute the basis of the dispute before the Arbitral
Tribunal.” Respondent submits that a more restrictive interpretation of “dispute” would

defeat the object and purpose of this “fork-in-the-road” clause.

591. The specific proceedings to which Respondent refers are, first, various proceedings
commenced by Yukos in the Russian courts (including the Moscow Arbitrazh Court, the
Federal Arbitrazh Court for the Moscow region and the Constitutional Court) and,
second, applications submitted to the European Court of Human Rights by Mr. Lebedev,
Mr. Khodorkovsky and Yukos, respectively, in 2004. Respondent submits that the
matters considered in these fora include some of the principal allegations made in the

Statement of Claim in this arbitration.

‘66 First Memorial, para. 88.

‘7 First Memorial, para. 90.

-211-

592.

593.

594.

595.

596.

In response, Claimant asserts that Respondent’s position ignores the clear language of the
ECT. Specifically, Claimant submits that Respondent is “openly attempting to expand
the scope of the exception found in Article 26(3)(b)(i) of the ECT,” as follows:

= ratione personae, to persons or entities not mentioned by the Treaty;

—  ratione materiae, to disputes other than disputes concerning an
alleged violation of Part III of the Treaty;

= ratione temporis, to disputes that would arise after the
commencement of the arbitration.'®*

Claimant argues that, consistent with the guidance of arbitral tribunals in respect of fork-
in-the-road provisions generally, an objection based on Article 26(3)(b)(i) of the ECT
must be based on a prior proceeding that satisfies the so-called “triple identity” test:

identity of parties, cause of action and object of the dispute.!

Addressing the specific legal proceedings invoked by Respondent in order to rely on the
“fork-in-the-road provision,” Claimant asserts that it is not a party in any of the Russian
Court proceedings cited by Respondent, nor in any of the proceedings before the
European Court of Human Rights, and that, in any event, none of them concerns an

alleged breach of Part III of the ECT.

Claimant therefore concludes that Respondent has failed to satisfy the triple identity test,

and that its objection based on Article 26(3)(b)(i) must fail.

Respondent counters that, while substantial authority does exist for the triple identity test,
the “fork-in-the-road” objection should nevertheless be sustained in the context of this
particular dispute, because “Claimant is in effect requesting that this Tribunal sit above

the Russian Supreme Court, the Russian Constitutional Court, and the various Russian

‘8 Counter-Memorial, para. 314.

‘© Claimant relies on the decisions in the following cases: Occidental Exploration and Production Company v.
Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN3467, Final Award, | July 2004, Annex C-247 (available on http://ital.law.uvic.ca);
CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Republic of Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/08, Decision on
Objections to Jurisdiction, 17 July 2003, 42 ILM 788 (2003), para. 80, Annex C-242; Azurix Corp. v. The
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 8 December 2003, 43
ILM 262 (2004), para. 89, Annex C-243; Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, LP v. The Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O01/3, Decision on Jurisdiction, 14 January 2004, para. 98, Annex C-244.

-212-

courts of appeal that have heard and decided claims based on each of the allegations in

the Statement of Claim.”!”

597. In its final submission, Claimant submits that Respondent’s response amounts to “a total
capitulation” on this issue. Moreover, Claimant takes issue with its characterization of
this Tribunal’s mission, asserting that:

The Claimant is not seeking to appeal any decision of the Russian courts,
or asking the Tribunal to determine whether those cases were rightly or
wrongly decided as a matter of Russian law. Rather, the Claimant seeks

compensation with respect to certain actions taken by the Russian State
that violated the Claimant’s rights under the Energy Charter Treaty.'”!

2. Tribunal’s Decision

598. The Tribunal finds that Respondent’s arguments are unconvincing. Indeed, in its written
submissions, Respondent did appear to concede that, as a general matter, there is ample
authority for the application of a “triple identity” test in the context of a “fork-in-the-
road” provision. To that extent, there is no question that the various Russian court
proceedings and applications to the European Court of Human Rights cited by

Respondent fail to trigger the “fork-in-the-road provision” of the ECT.

599. There remains Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal should look beyond the triple
identity test in this particular case, because the effect of the Tribunal accepting
jurisdiction will be to create, in effect, a Tribunal that sits in judgment over the various

Russian courts seized of the proceedings referred to by Respondent.

600. The Tribunal cannot accept this argument. The Tribunal agrees with Claimant that by
virtue of its claim under the ECT it does not appeal from any decision of the Russian
courts or seek to have determined by the present Tribunal whether any of those cases was
rightly or wrongly decided as a matter of Russian law. The purpose of the present claim,
in contradistinction to any of the other proceedings referred to by Respondent, is to

determine whether Respondent breached Claimant’s rights under the ECT, an

™ Second Memorial, para. 333.

"! Rejoinder, para. 301.

- 213 -

601.

international treaty which it applied provisionally and pursuant to which, this Tribunal

has found, Respondent has binding obligations by virtue of the application of Article 45.

DECISION

For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

DISMISSES the objections to jurisdiction and/or admissibility
based on Article 1(6) and 1(7), Article 17, Article 26(3)(b)(i) and
Article 45 of the ECT;

DEFERS its decision on the objection to jurisdiction and/or
admissibility based on Article 21 of the ECT to the merits phase of

the arbitration, consistent with paragraphs 583 to 586, above;

CONFIRMS that its decision on the objections to jurisdiction
and/or admissibility involving the Parties’ contentions concerning
“unclean hands” and Respondent’s contention that “Claimant’s
personality must be disregarded because it is an instrumentality of
a criminal enterprise” is deferred to the merits phase of the

arbitration, consistent with Procedural Order No. 3;

HOLDS that, subject to the preceding two sub-paragraphs, the
present dispute is admissible and within its jurisdiction, and that
the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the Russian Federation in

connection with the merits of the present dispute;

RESERVES all questions concerning costs, fees and expenses,
including the Parties’ costs of legal representation, for subsequent

determination; and

INVITES the Parties to confer regarding the procedural calendar
for the merits phase of the arbitration, and to report to the Tribunal

in this respect within 60 days of receipt of this Interim Award.

-214-

So decided in The Hague, The Netherlands.

Date: 30 November 2009

is. Cali]

Dr. Charles Poncet Judge Stephen M. Schwebel
Co-arbitrator Co-arbitrator

LYves Fortier, CC, QC
Chairman

     
  
 

- 215 -

APPENDIX: YUKOS HOLDING STRUCTURE

- 216 -

Pac

 

Sept 26,2005

(
~] 23.12.05)

 

 

 

     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

  

 

  
 
   

 

——-  Settlor
+ prsicse APPENDIX
Beneficiary
Cae Sas Sf YUKOS HOLDING STRUCTURE AFTER OCTOBER 20, 2003
—— Shareholding aie
oder yp Open class of Open class of Open class of class of
(until 03, 10.05), beneficiaries beneficiaries beneficiaries beneficiaris
Khodorkovsky class of Nevalin aad his including including including including
(until 13.04.05) beneficiaries and ae Doubov Lebedev Brudno Shakhnovsky
Nevzlin lorkovsi 6
13.0410 in Go fron. [7 Pavo Trust Doubov Lebedev Brudno Nevalin Shaknovsky -Golubovieh
26.04.05) as First .
Beneficiary
Carina trust
Trustes
Rysaffe Trustee Company
Pavo / Southern Cross (Cay
Palmus t rst, Tr Mensa Trust, Pictor trust ‘Tueana Trust Guernsey
Trustee: Rysafe Trustee Trustee: Rysaffe Tastee Truste: Rysaffe Trustee ‘Truste: Rysaffe Trustee = Charlotte
Company (C1) Company (C1) pany (C1) Company (C1) ~ Kadora
Guernsey Guernsey Guernse Guernsey Guernsey Guernsey Gibratiar
I I I I I I
Pavo/ Southern Cross Draco Nominees Mensa Auriga Nominees Pictor Nominees Tucana Nominees Carina Nominees
Nominees 8.1 BEL BAD Br BNL BVL
49.99% 93% 6.96% 6.96% 6.96% 6.96%
1 1 1 1 1
52.3% 9.9% 13% 13% Sik 713% 8.6% 73%
Gibraltar
‘Veteran Petroleum Trust Open class of
‘Yukos Universal Trustee : WJB Chiltern / Vistra Trust Company Yukos employees and
Isle of Man verse former employee

‘The Southem Cross Trust isa declaration of trust constituted on April 26, 2005 by the
appointment of the GML shares previously held
The Southem Cross Trust has no Protector.

was the settlor

in the Pavo Trust of which Khodorkovsky

 

 

 

 

 

  

Yukos Oil Company
‘Russian Federation

Mulley Enterprises
Cyprus

     
   

Veteran Petroleum
Copras

 

 
 

 

 

